We've explored how the use of oratory in English has moved away from written or formal
norms.
But in this lecture, what I want to also examine is the fact that this is really a story about
the use of English in general, not just a matter of quote unquote how people talk these
days or how people give a speech, nor even in addition to that how or whether grammar
is taught in schools.
There's something much broader going on.
To wit, in this lecture, what we're going to look at is the fact that how we write has
changed greatly over the past century and in particular over the past half century.
Our sense of what it's appropriate to do in writing in public has changed in the same
way as our expectations of oratory.
One way of putting this is that the expectations that reigned for writing in Anglophone culture
of not so very long ago were so different from the ones of today that it can seem almost
exotic in hindsight.
So I mentioned before that in the novel Time and again, we get a sense of what it would
be like in great detail to go back to 1882 and that one thing that would throw us in
1882 would be the way people spoke in public.
We have the same issue with writing.
The essence of the issue is that there was a time, and it wasn't so very long ago, when
written language in public and then also, as we'll see, even not in public often was
required to be formal, thought out, almost stiff.
But in fact, what that was was a kind of interregnum.
What I mean by that is that there was a period when language was simply spoken and then there
was a period when even writing reflected what speech is like.
So we saw that with sources like the Morte d'Artur or the Epic of Gilgamesh or the Hebrew
Bible which are written in a way that reflects speech.
Then gradually written norms came in, and there was a sense that written language was
different from spoken language.
Now we're going back to what we can think of as a kind of normality in terms of how language
and writing have interacted for most of the time that they've existed, the normality of
cherishing the informal and the spontaneous, or an imitation of the informal and the spontaneous
over the highly planned, and this includes writing.
So what we're seeing is that what would have seen completely normal to somebody in 1882
in terms of what was expected of writing was actually just a rather brief period in which
a certain norm reigned, which we're seeing a reversal of, and there are all sorts of
perspectives we might have on that, and we're going to look at those in this lecture.
But first, let's look at the past to get a sense of how very different today is from
then.
There's a classic example, some of you probably already thought of it, and it's the famous
Civil War soldiers' letters, and what's interesting about the letters is first that they're touching,
and second that if you think about them you imagine a certain kind of music playing on
the soundtrack that's kind of like that sort of Aaron Copeland music that the Ken Burns
special used, but then also think about the language of these letters, and remember that
the letters were written by actual, humble, sweating people.
This is one of them from a surgeon.
It's 1863.
He's in a tent.
He probably was sweating.
This man doesn't know electricity.
He's just some person, and he's sitting there and he's writing a letter, and he's writing
to his wife about their courtship, and part of his letter goes, in a few instances when
she has arrived at about the age of 15, this shyness and reserve seemed to be forgotten,
and I would pass an hour or two in the enjoyment of her company with great pleasure to myself,
and I imagined with at least satisfaction, if not enjoyment, to her.
I began to think that my happiness was identified with hers.
I began to pay her special visits, or at least seek opportunities by which I might be in
her company.
So, this is language that he's writing to somebody who he knows very, very well.
These are people on easy terms with one another, and yet that letter is composed to the teeth.
And what's interesting is that in the beginning, in the first sentence, there's actually an
error he says has rather than had when he's talking about the past.
In other words, he made a mistake.
In other words, it was a real person.
It was an ordinary person, and that's the kind of letter that comes out of him.
Now one might think that this is a surgeon, and so he's rather educated, but no, this
was the norm in terms of what a letter was considered to be in that era.
So imagine it's New York City, it's Jacksonian America, it's the 1830s, and imagine if you
are Richard Robinson, who's that?
You have to know who you're imagining being.
Richard Robinson is a callow, 19-year-old clerk, a mere clerk, and he has an eighth
grade education.
Now, that's as far as most people went back then, but still, he had only been through
eight grades of education.
He was dating a, shall we say, lady of the evening, a very decorous and dainty one.
Her name was Helen Jewett.
Wonderful book about that.
I recommend it, Patricia Klein Cohen.
But Richard Robinson would write his lady letters.
Here he's 19, eighth grade education by all accounts, not much of a person.
He wasn't interesting, he wasn't deep, he wasn't that bright.
This is his letter.
At best we live, but one little hour strut at our own conceit and die, so he's got his
Shakespeare.
How unhappy must those persons be, persons, who cannot enjoy life as it is, sees pleasure
as it comes floating on like a noble ship bound for yonder distant port with all sails
set.
Let her to his girlfriend, come will ye embark, then on we go, gaily, hand in hand, scorning
all petty and trivial troubles eagerly gazing on our rising sun with italics till the warmth
of its beams, i.e. love, he puts in parentheses this clerk, causes our sparkling blood to
overflow, not overflow, overflow, and mingle in holy delight as mind and soul perchance,
some storms arise.
Eighth grade, 19 years old, imagine a young Leonardo DiCaprio.
That's his idea of a letter, and he wasn't even showing off, and no, it wasn't just
that that's the way people behaved in the 19th century, because George Gershwin is a man
of the 20th century.
He's 26 years old, he always seems to need a shave, he's smoking his cigar, it's 1925,
and he's writing a letter to a squeeze of his, she was not a lady of the evening.
And this is just a casual part of one of his letters, but here's what casual is to him
when he writes a letter.
And he's 26 years old, he's barely out of knee pants.
Mr. E. Hutchison has very kindly given me the use of one of his studios every afternoon
and evening.
So every day between two and six, and as an ampersand, and evenings between eight and
ten, you will find me diligently writing notes, playing piano, or praying parentheses.
You've got to pray in Chautauqua, then other parentheses, to the god of melody to please
be kind to me and send me some hair raising a blouse for my second movement.
That's the way Gershwin wrote to a lady.
Now the simple fact is, if you wrote letters like that today to anybody, it would be socially
clumsy, it would be a gaffe.
Basically we write emails in a very informal way, and if we ever write a letter to anyone
in a style that, let's say it's perched somewhere in between the overflowing of Richard Robinson
and maybe even a little bit more structured than what Gershwin did.
If we do it on special occasions, it's not dashing off, wish you were here, letters,
or sending a note somewhere downtown to somebody we're dating.
That's what ordinary people did.
Now as you can imagine, this is the way journalism was as well.
There is nothing odder than going through ancient newspapers, as I'm sure we all do just as
a hobby.
For example, you can look at a review of a musical by Burt Williams and George Walker,
who were a team.
They were a black American musical theater team.
There's a reviewer in Cincinnati newspaper in 1909, notice I'm making it sound like I
was just casually leafing through that, of course I wasn't, but the fact of the matter
is that one of the passages that he says is, there's some pointers in the way of enthusiasm
and conscientious work by which their white confrares in the profession might profit.
Confrare, and as the singing, they are marvels.
They tackle the big finales with a vim, using vim alone, remember vim and vigor and how
vim is a cranberry word, not to this guy, vim, a discretion, a judgment, as to points
and effects, which is a revelation, he's writing about a musical.
Attention was called to this same characteristic in these columns last year, but the effect
of this aptitude for large choral numbers is equally noticeable this year.
There really was a sense that you were supposed to write that way in journalism, or you were,
to put it bluntly, a slob, and so H. L. Menken, when he's young, and he actually was young
at a certain point, he probably already talked like this with a cigar, but he actually, he
was young at a certain point, and it's 1905, and he's writing about George Bernard Shaw,
and he just writes,
In all the history of the English language, no man has exceeded him in technical resources,
nor in nimbleness of wit.
Some of his scenes are fairly irresistible, and throughout his plays, his avoidance of
the old-fashioned machinery of the drama, gives even his wildest extravagances an error reality.
There are two things that are interesting about that quote.
One is that it is gorgeous Menkenese, and part of it being Menkenese is that it is
considered and tight, and even in its sagari vernacular essence, it is quite formal in
a way that we wouldn't expect of a review or an essay today.
But the second thing that's interesting about it is that there was a reviewer at the nation,
the nation of all places, who thought that that prose, that prose that we just heard
from H. L. Menken, was quote, unquote, rather too colloquial for elegance.
In other words, that was too sloppy to be considered something presentable by this perfectly
ordinary reviewer of that era.
So what we're seeing is a culture which, from our perspective, seems quite fussy about
what written language standards were to be.
Of course, these same people are speaking casually just as we do.
There's never been a time when people weren't just talking ordinarily.
But there is a sense that just as if you made a speech, you were supposed to use language
in a very different way, if you wrote something down, especially for public consumption, you
were supposed to shift gears in a much more major way than we're used to.
So you can see it in today's advertising.
There was a DVD set of James Bond movies, and the advertisement was own it, live it,
give it.
And that's pithy.
I couldn't think of anything that chunky if I was trying to advertise a DVD set of anything.
But the fact is that it is quite different from the sorts of things we've been watching
these surgeons and Richard Robinson's writing.
And it's a difference in our times.
It is certainly too colloquial for elegance, but we're not thinking about the elegance.
Subaru, back in 2002, had an ad.
The idea was, when you get it, you get it.
And that's something about that car.
I didn't get it then.
But you notice how very pithy that is compared to the sort of prose that you would see in
the old days.
Servo Tequila had ready, set, let go, that sort of thing.
As opposed to there is an ad is, that's the antiquarian in me, there was an ad for Life
Boy Soap, which smelled wonderful, by the way.
I mean, I don't know if any of you remember it.
It doesn't exist now.
When you order it from England thinking you're going to get Life Boy Soap, it's this different
kind that smells like something dying, but it smelled wonderful.
In 1929, the ad for Life Boy was this little comic strip where a man dressed quite formally
for breakfast is trying to gently tell his wife that there is a certain essence that
she's been emitting lately that Life Boy would presumably tamp down.
And just the title of it is Aquarel Averted.
So you have to know what avert is.
And then the husband is saying things about what his lady might do using, say, the word
perhaps instead of maybe, and he talks about how she used to be so dainty.
And so that was the sort of language that you typically saw in an advertisement.
Now something that's important to realize is that this is not about value judgments
here.
I'm describing something to you because it's the story of how English has come to be used
and structured, particularly over the past 100 years and especially over the past 50.
But the fact of the matter is nowadays we have a written kind of prose for the public
that lets its hair down a lot more than the world that H. L. Menken knew or Richard Robinson
knew.
And of course, this creates a lot of wonderful prose.
So I don't think any of us are waiting for David Sedaris to write in the way that that
surgeon did.
And if he did, we'd tell him to stop.
Tina Fey does not write in the grand old fashion style.
She writes in a much tercer, more direct style.
I think that her book Bossy Pants is one of the funniest things ever written and a highly
articulate kind of writing as well.
So what I'm talking about is a change, but there are all sorts of perspectives we can
have on both what was going on 100 years ago and what's going on now.
And I'll talk a little bit more about that at the end of this lecture.
That's just something that should be clear.
With that said, let's also look at changes in education.
It's 1895.
You're a teacher, an aspiring teacher.
You have that eighth grade education.
That's all you've done.
And in Kansas, there was an examination that you had to be a teacher.
And the examination required, give nine rules for the use of capital letters.
Name the parts of speech and define those that have no modifications.
What?
That wouldn't be a challenge for many of us.
Define verse, stanza, and paragraph.
What are the principal parts of a verb?
Give principal parts of do, lie, lay, wouldn't you know, and run.
Define case, illustrate each case.
What is punctuation?
Give rules for principal marks of punctuation.
And then write a composition of about 150 words and show therein that you understand
the practical use of the rules of grammar.
And that's what you're expected to be able to do as a teacher.
And if you were that teacher, then the kind of reading passages that you would give to
students are the sorts of things that make that era look like Mars to us in many ways.
And so for example, this is from one of the MacGuffey readers.
And they go back to the early mid-1800s, and they included things such as passages from
reflections in Westminster Abbey.
These readers were used as late as the 20s in general.
They're still used by some people who homeschool their children.
But in general use, they were, even as late as the 20s.
And here's a passage that a child, i.e., somebody with pimples, or even before that, who has
other things on their mind, was expected to read from a book and to comment on and to
be able to reproduce the style of.
When I am in a serious humor, I very often walk by myself in Westminster Abbey, where
the gloominess of the place and the use to which it is applied, with the solemnity of
the building and the condition of the people who lie in it, are apt to fill the mind with
a kind of melancholy, or rather, thoughtfulness that is not disagreeable.
Let's think about that.
For one thing, I just read you one sentence, not 18.
That was one sentence.
And you've got words like, solemnity, melancholy, disagreeable.
And notice also, it's very internal.
It's about reflection.
It's about what's going on in your head.
And that's what you're giving to somebody who is really just itching to get outside and
break things, or whatever it is that teenagers do.
And that was just considered the ordinary thing.
Now let's move ahead.
This is 1996.
This is a textbook that was used in many parts of the country.
This was for sixth graders.
And so that last one was for middle schoolers, this was for sixth graders, basically the
same thing.
Now, one thing about it is that it has a Native American theme.
And so one good thing about the readings at this point is that they do try to inculcate
an interest in other cultures.
But the structure of the language has changed quite a bit.
And so, for example, here's a passage from this sixth grade reading textbook.
Takawin had packed the parflesh cases with clothing and food and strapped them to a
travois made of two trailing poles with a skin net stretched between them.
Another travois lay on the ground ready for the new teepee.
Chano was very happy when Tasanagi suggested the three of them ride up to their favorite
hills for the last time.
And that's cute enough, but these are shorter sentences.
And you have unfamiliar words because of the Native American words.
But take those away, make it about Justin and Brianna and what they're dealing with
as a bubble gum wrapper and a tub of lard or something like that.
And you notice that really it's a very simple kind of language.
There's no vocabulary that's unfamiliar within the English language and there's nothing
internal about a bunch of people smiling about running up a hill and building a teepee.
It's much less sophisticated.
And so this is one of my favorite examples of what it would be like to go back to 1882
and deal with the writing culture, except it's 1892.
Let's say you are a young W.E.B. Du Bois.
So you're not yet a black leader.
You're not editing the crisis.
Your name is not yet subject in the early 21st century to French people talking to me
and mentioning somebody named Webb Dubois and me taking five minutes to know who they're
talking about.
It's W.E.B. Du Bois.
And he had had some sort of romantic rejection and so he wrote discreet against women in
his composition class.
And his instructor jotted, jotted on the side of it a comment and it sounds like a Cicero,
just the structure of this marginallium.
The instructor writes, the taste of this is questionable, certainly too such a method
would repel many readers who might, by an ironical and dually restrained expression
of the same line of thought, be brought far towards agreement with you.
It's not that what the instructor said was wrong, but the phraseology, did you ever have
a teacher who wrote something in that kind of language on the back of a paper that you
wrote was bad?
It was a very different time for Webb Dubois and for everybody alive.
What is the roots of all this?
Some of it is a matter of celebration.
It's about culture.
The old writing culture was based on a certain kind of pride in the particularity of English
as opposed to other languages.
And this is when America had until recently been an upstart nation.
So this is a time when America is not astride the world yet when it's an upstart nation,
rather it's trying to prove itself.
And then once we get into the 1890s and beyond, we have America taking its place as a leader
of the world, a new leader of the world, and feeling good about that fact.
This sense that the language of this new empire of mourning needed to be dressed up in public
therefore was a natural one as culture goes.
The new writing culture, the sense that one didn't need to dress up the language so much
in public that we now just live in and think of as normal because we, to go back to an
expression I used in an earlier lecture, are wet fish.
Fish don't know that they're wet.
The culture that we live in, which is a culture, a more dressed-down writing culture, is one
where America does not feel its global supremacy as a novelty.
And in fact, what you might call our intelligentsia and also great many other people have a very
wary stance towards that supremacy.
Patriotism in the United States now is a much more layered affair than it was in the era
of Theodore Roosevelt.
And we've had the Vietnam War.
We've had a lot of other things.
And that more layered sense of what it is to be an American and what it is to be America
has had an effect on how we feel about the presentation of that language to the public.
So here's an example.
Back in the day, it was common for someone to say that someone else had good English.
That was something that people said in English.
They didn't say it was Russian accents.
And you would say, well, your English is good.
Nowadays, we might say that you have good grammar, but we don't name it.
We don't say, wow, your English.
So to go back to H. L. Menken, he said that Warren G. Harding, who was the 29th president
of the United States, and not a rocket scientist by any estimation, including his own, Menken
said he writes the worst English that I have ever encountered.
Now, a lot of us made fun of the syntactical skills of George W. Bush.
But if you think about it, we didn't say that he had bad English.
We talked about his grammar.
Edna St. Vincent Millay, poetess, wrote her sister.
And she said, don't you suppose mother can get a job editing some dumb page in some newspaper
she might?
She writes such beautiful English, and she's so funny.
It's not how we would put it today, and it's because we have less of a sense of English
itself, many of us, as a gem.
For a great many of us, we just talk, and we just write, to an extent that wasn't as
true before.
And so I remember one time when someone invited me over to dinner, and I thought we were going
to have dinner, and they served three frozen pizzas.
And two of them didn't taste any better than the box they came in, and the other one I
don't remember.
And I found it a little rude, if you invite me over to dinner, if you're going to just
heat something up, at least make it something relatively interesting, pot stickers or something.
But that was what they did.
I found it a little odd, because in the culture that I live in, there is a certain basic joy
one takes in preparing food, rather than just throwing it at people, and it depends on the
circumstances, but that's just there.
It used to be that the linguistic culture was kind of like many of our food cultures
are, and so you didn't just write like you talk.
The idea was that to dress it up was to give a certain delight, or to pay respect.
And it's a matter of soul, therefore.
It is not usually a matter of soul.
You don't think of your crab cakes as representing the essence of yourself, but you vent your
heart through language.
It's very hard to break your native accent, teenagers slang, expresses who they decide
to be that day, many of us have trouble listening to our voices on answering machines.
It's our soul.
And to the extent that this attitude towards formality of language has changed, it has
a lot to do with how we feel about ourselves and our place in the world.
And that's something that's very interesting.
That said, there were advantages of the old style.
So though I have no intention of being a nostalgicist here, there's something too, having a McGuffie-esque
sense that there is the word help, and then there's aid, assist, a bet, and then there's
succor, relieve, support, accommodate.
Now it's not that spoken language doesn't have nuance, it's just that we're not taught
to see them.
Help, help out, they're not the same thing.
Can you help me out?
As soon as you hear help out, that it implies first of all that whatever the help is to
be applied to is probably not of massive import.
You don't help somebody out in preventing a world holocaust in terms of a nuclear Armageddon
or something like that.
Getting out involves lifting a box or putting in a shelf or something like that.
Help out also implies that the person doing the helping has some sort of moral responsibility
for doing the helping, and if they don't help, then they have fallen down in that way.
If you don't help out, you're a bad person.
That's the implication who teaches us these things, nobody.
It's an interesting nuance, help and help out in our language.
Written language can handle more of that kind of thing because writing allows the preservation
of any word that happens to make it into the language.
So try a sentence with a bet, with all of the implications that a bet has.
It doesn't just mean to help.
And then try to construct a sentence with a bet and then try to write it again just
using the word help and all sorts of adjectives and adverbs and modifiers.
It's good to know the word a bet.
Somebody like Webb Dubois would have known the word a bet.
To the extent that a person is less likely to be exposed to it in today's written culture,
there is a disadvantage.
But on the other hand, the new style, the style that we have today, as I've said, has
its advantages.
As I'm sure that you've thought during this lecture, the old style could be kind of trickly,
kind of artificial.
It could be downright dishonest.
The fifth McCarthy reader has this passage, which I've always found like, I've always
found like eating corn flakes with a whole lot of sugar on them.
What I really mean is frosted flakes where the machine was broken.
And so there's an inch of sugar on the flakes instead of just that millimeters layer.
The quail is peculiarly a domestic bird and is attached, and who cares about quails, and
is attached to his birthplace, his, and the home of his forefathers, quails don't have
forefathers.
The various members of the aquatic families educate their children in the cool summer
of the far north, and bathe their warm bosoms, please.
In July, in the ice waters of Hudson Bay, there's no indication that it would be pronounced
ice, but you can tell that's what they would have wanted.
But when Boreus, God of the Winds, scatters the rushes where they had builded, builded,
language fashions change, built, was considered a little vulgar back then, just like now,
if somebody says they got bit by a mosquito, bitten.
But so when Boreus scatters the rushes where they had builded their bed chambers, they
desert their fatherland quails and fly to disport in the sunny waters of the south, what
is that?
I mean, why should any poor, pimply tortured child have to read something like that?
About a bird, nobody cares about it, you try to eat it, it has too many bones, there's
all of this mythological analogy that really has very little to do with, for example, if
this was an American exposed to this, a child living in America and trying to live their
life the best that they can.
The fact was that writing, i.e. writing with a capital W, used to be associated with prose
like that, and with being tested, that's what writing meant in a time when you had to write
the way the Civil War surgeon had to.
I would say actually that a good model for a modern kind of writing that isn't as fussy
as what the Civil War surgeon felt necessary, would be Stephen J. Gould, the late Stephen
J. Gould, his writing style is certainly in no sense dumbed down, it is a thinking man's
writing, but in a very accessible and brisk and energetic way.
We live in many ways in a good age for writing, and some of that comes from a particular aspect
that we don't always think about, which is that writing is easier now, it's physically
easier now.
Remember, there used to be something called a pencil, and you would take this object and
you'd press it against paper and it would leave marks.
That took a lot of effort, that was the kind of thing that people were doing when they
were learning to write in the style of a MacGuffey reader.
Or there are people today who call me a writer, and I suppose I am one, I would not be if
I were about a generation older, because I didn't like the physical activity involved
with typewriters, I remember in college with the correcting ribbon and kind of hurt your
fingers, I'm a writer because of word processing technology, but the fact is, writing is much
easier now, and it's always brought me to an interesting observation, at least interesting
to me, which is that if you had told someone 100 years ago that the act of writing was
going to become as physically easy as it is now, that person 100 years ago would think,
quite reasonably, that we would now be people who would express ourselves more readily in
writing, and you can say that we do, but the person 100 years ago would think that we would
be in an age of poetry, the idea would be to many people 100 years ago and not necessarily
intellectuals that we must, if writing is so easy, be a people who are writing poems
all the time to express ourselves, and as I'm sure you're thinking, we're not really,
and I want to address that in the next lecture, there's been a change in our relationship
to speech making, there's been a change in our relationship to writing, and there's
been a very interesting change in our relationship to what actually is a human universal, and
that's poetry.
