Everything is about Bugs Bunny.
And I want you to think about the 1941 Looney Tunes called Hiawatha's Rabbit Hunt.
It has a really beautiful opening in its way where Bugs Bunny is chomping on his carrot
and he's reading Long Fellow's Poem, the song of Hiawatha.
And he starts out, and because I grew up on those cartoons, I have his voice in my head.
This is early Bugs Bunny, and so it's not the classic Bugs Bunny voice, but it's the
early voice, and there's a waterfall going along, and he actually, he's sitting there
saying, you know, there's just music on the soundtrack, on the waters of Gichigumi,
sailing in his birch canoe, toward the cool and silent forest, came to mighty Hiawatha,
and that's what he does.
That is a scene that's more interesting than we often think.
For a very simple reason, why is he reading a poem?
And Bugs Bunny is a pretty casual, I can't say person, but being, he's this vernacular sort,
and so why would he be reading a poem on what looks like a happy little Saturday afternoon?
That, in fact, is an interesting gesture because it reveals a difference between the mainstream
culture of 1941 and today's that we wouldn't often be aware of, and that is quite simply
that the role of poetry in general in our lives has changed greatly since that era,
and that's another part of the history of the English language in our times.
There was a time, and it wasn't that long ago, when poetry had a certain place in society,
and that's not to say that everybody loved poetry, but you had to at least fake it in
more quarters than you do now, and it says something about how people felt about once again
dressing up the language, making the language something more than our casual speech.
It was a profound difference.
Bugs Bunny is one way we can gain an entree into it, in that a cartoon character would be shown
casually reading a poem, which people of that time would be familiar with from having been made
to memorize it in school, whereas today we just think, well, he's reading a poem.
Here's an example. It's the 30s. Edna St. Vincent Millay was a poet, but she wasn't just a poet.
She was a celebrity poet. What in the world is that if you think about it? Major celebrity,
and so she wrote one poem that defended Sacco and Vanzetti, who had been accused of anarchist
violence. Big case, very celebrated. There are people today who still have strong opinions about
it. She wrote a poem about it, and now, of course, you'd think maybe she wrote a poem about it and
mounted it on her desk and looked at it herself. No. It was published in newspapers, not just one of
them either, not just in the New York Times. It was published in newspapers nationwide. It was
considered the mark of a relatively literate person to know what Edna St. Vincent Millay
had poeticized about Sacco and Vanzetti. Edna St. Vincent Millay had her own radio show for eight
weeks, so you turned on the radio and you could have Amos and Andy, you could have Al Jolson,
or you could have Edna St. Vincent Millay reading her poems, and people listened to it.
1931, what were the bestsellers? A lot of it was the same swill that, you know, you would expect
from the bestseller list today, except for 1931. But one of the top 10 bestsellers of 1931 in the
United States of America was an anthology of Edna St. Vincent Millay's poems. That chose, just alone,
how poetry had a different place in society then, among people who were otherwise very much like us
in many ways, a bestseller, or something you read about the early lives of a lot of people
of letters who were most popular in the mid-20th century. How had they put food on the table
before they were famous? Example, Howard Dietz was best known in his life as a Broadway lyricist,
and so he wrote the words to That's Entertainment. He wrote the words to By Myself and Dancing in
the Dark, but he was not always in that place. And one way that he put food on the table was,
for example, in 1918, he would write Doggeroll. Writing Doggeroll, light Dr. Seuss-esque style
poetry, was a way to make a living because newspapers would put it in dead space, just as
entertainment. So everything's about H. L. Menken if it's not about Bugs Bunny. And so Dietz
wrote some Doggeroll about H. L. Menken. H. L. Menken will surprise you with the smartness from
his pen. Read this volume, we advise you, read it once, and then again. What is that? It's Doggeroll,
but you could make a living writing that sort of thing. Imagine opening whatever your local
newspaper is now and seeing that somewhere in between articles about the issues of the day,
or even imagine seeing that on the humor page. You wouldn't get that kind of rhyming Doggeroll.
Nobody could make a living doing that now. It was a cultural difference. Another example,
if you went to see someone performing on stage, and of course in this era, if you're going to see
and hear somebody, there's no such thing as sound film for a long time. That starts officially in
1927. So if you're going to see somebody in their fullness before you, they're on stage,
often one of the things they would do on stage, we probably spontaneously imagine somebody tap
dancing or singing a song rather too loudly or something like that. But one thing people would
do is they would recite poetry. Imagine watching David Letterman's show today, or Leno's show,
and having somebody walk out and recite a poem. Now let's assume that it's happened one and a
half times. Still, there have been an awful lot of episodes of those shows, quite rare. Whereas
Marie Dressler, if it's not about Bugs Bunny, and it's not about H.L. Mencken, it's about Marie
Dressler, that woman who I mentioned in an earlier lecture, who was a huge movie star
in the early 30s during the Twilight era of her life. When she was in more the early
afternoon era of her life, she was a vaudevillian, and she would come out on stage, and in addition
to singing too loud and doing some pratfalls, she would recite a poem. It was called When Baby
Souls Sail Away, and people weren't kind of looking at their watches and wishing she'd stop that.
She would actually bring audiences to tears, reciting a poem. If you hung around with Adolf
Green, another Broadway lyricist, he was born in 1914 and died in 2002. He had a tick. He liked to
recite a poem by Lewis Carroll called You Are Old Father William. So you're with this charming old
man, and you know, after he had had one, he would start saying, you are old Father William,
the young man said, and your hair has become very white, and yet you incessantly stand on your head.
Do you think at your age is it right? That was the sort of thing that he did. Or, talk about
David Letterman. As late as the 1960s, if you were a regular watcher of The Tonight Show,
then not just once, not just once, you could see the poet Marianne Moore sitting on Johnny's couch.
And for the record, Marianne Moore was an advanced poet, nothing Dr. Seussish about her poetry. You
have to work at it. And yet she was considered an interesting enough person, and to have enough
celebrity, shall we say, that she would be on The Tonight Show. So here's Johnny, and then
Marianne Moore. You can't see it, because wouldn't you know that those episodes, there's a stretch of
episodes of The Tonight Show that were accidentally erased, the videotapes were erased by some
troglodyte. And so you can't actually see Marianne Moore, but it is recorded that she was on it
more than once. That was a different America, even as late as the late 60s on a show that was more
of a look back than a look ahead, like Johnny Carson's show. And this is the thing, America,
in that was normal as human cultures go. Call it a civilized culture, quote unquote, call it a
non-sophisticated culture, quote unquote. But as far as human cultures go, poetry has a way
of being central, i.e. poetry that is something different from the way that people speak. And
so for example, if you look at Homer, you see that Homer is clearly oral in terms of its structure.
It's generally agreed now that it was written in order to be memorized and recitable. And yet,
these are not things that people would say casually. There is art to it. You can be artful even orally,
as I'll get to again soon. But that's poetry for people who were listening to Homer. Until recently,
in what used to be known as Yugoslavia, there were bards. And bards were trained to recite
epics very similar in structure and theme to Homer. And this was something that was considered
perfectly ordinary. Russians today, even today, something that you notice about many Russians,
is that a person who may not even be a super book-oriented person will, because of the educational
system, until at least recently, in the Soviet Union, and even when it became Russia, regularly
immersed people in Pushkin. And so I've seen this many times, that a Russian will suddenly just
sprout Pushkin out at you over there, cigarette or whatever they're doing, whereas, for example,
an American is much less likely to be able to spout some Robert Frost. They're people who can do it,
but not as often as Russians can spout their Pushkin. And the reason for this is that
poetry in the past several decades, just as grand old-fashioned oratory, and just as the
fru-fru old writing style, has retreated in our lives. The National Endowment for the Arts Chairman
used to be Dana Joya, and he wrote in 1991, in a very famous article in The Atlantic Magazine,
the proliferation of literary journals and presses over the past 30 years has been a response less
to an increased appetite for poetry among the public than to the desperate need of writing
teachers for professional validation. Like subsidized farming that grows food no one wants,
a poetry industry has been created to serve the interests of the producers and not the consumers.
That was a very galvanizing piece. I remember reading it one sunny day in 1991 and realizing,
and it's important to realize that I am not speaking from anything like above here,
thinking to myself, wow, poetry does not have the place in my life that it would in an equivalent
to me, not in 1991, but in, say, 1941 when Hiawatha's rabbit hunt was made. Dana Joya was
right, and it got one to thinking that, for example, there had been a time, not too long before 1991,
when, as far as poetry went, you might not have been a rabbit fan, but to be somebody who had
had a certain amount of schooling and probably had learned how to eat broccoli, ideally seasoned with
lemon juice and caraway seeds. This is something that no one seems to do except my mother who
learned to do it in the 60s at exactly the time that she also bought the poetry anthology I'm
about to talk about. But whatever you do to broccoli, try lemon juice and caraway seeds,
it's delicious. But another thing about my mother and culture of the early 60s is that she was
somebody who had a very strong sense of what it was to be cultivated in that way that a person
with an education did in the United States in the Camelot era. This was before I was born,
and there were various things that one just had. She didn't think of it this way, but you had
Van Klyburn playing Rachmaninoff. You had that LP sitting on the floor, because you enjoyed that.
You put caraway seeds and lemon juice on your broccoli, because that is what one does. And
on your bookshelf, you had a poetry anthology. Next to your copies of novels by Katherine
Anne Porter and Leon Urus, you had a poetry anthology. My mother did, and I used to go up
on her bookshelf and go through the various books, and I used to look in that poetry anthology. And
the one thing I remember about it, and there is only one, is that it was well-thumbed. She had been
through it. That was what one did. But my mother, strangely enough, was older than me. Now,
Joya has argued that this is changing. But, you know, if it is, and it is somewhat,
the change is ultimately rather small, especially as just written poetry goes. You could say that
poetry in American life was once as staple an element as salt, or if not salt, maybe that's
pushing a little, then pepper. It was as staple as pepper. Today, it's more like marjoram. Marjoram
is a wonderful spice. I use it in a lot of things, but you can't count on people to have it. It's
kind of odd. It's a little reserché, and I just stumbled into it by accident because one person
I dated for about 10 minutes happened to use marjoram in one dish. That's what poetry is like
now. Or if poetry has moved on from marjoram somewhat, it's dill, and that's another one.
You can't count on people to have dill, and if they do, it tends to be stale because they don't
use it enough. Talk about the scrambled eggs in the ketchup. I put dill in my scrambled eggs,
but you can't count on it. Most people would rather have, you know, crushed red pepper flakes or
something. And there's a reason for all of this. Poetry, just like writing in an almost
ridiculously artificial style, is a celebration of language. And the impulse to celebrate
formal language has lessened in the United States, and this affects how language is used
in poetry as well as in oratory and as in writing. And so, for example, Edna St. Vincent
Millay. I mentioned her, but I didn't give you a sense of what the essence of Edna was. She wrote
verse which often was tightly metered and tightly rhymed. In other words, what some of us might think
of as poetry, poetry, although it's in a rather antiquarian sense of it now. So one that she was
famous for, she would read this in bookstores, and she apparently had an interesting voice,
and that's pretty much lost us in terms of history, but she would read it, and this would just knock
everybody to their socks. I shall forget you presently, my dear, so make the most of this your
little day, your little month, your little half a year, ere I forget or die or move away. So
everything scans perfectly, so the words, weights match the rhythm, nothing has to be stretched
awkwardly, and it rhymes. It rhymes precisely, presumably she, as a matter of fact, I happen to
know she did have a rhyming dictionary. Now this is what's important about that kind of poetry.
That kind of tight structure does not necessarily have to come from writing. We're really talking
about language in general, and that's because formal language can be oral just as, and this will
give you a little preview of the next lecture, informal language can be written, but we'll get
to that for now. Formal language can be oral. So for example, Somali is a language. It is not
spoken in Iceland. It is not spoken in Hungary. It is not spoken in Mongolia. It's spoken in,
wait for it, Somalia. And Somalia is a language which was largely oral until the 70s,
and it had a long-standing poetry tradition. And all one has to know is that the poetry tradition
was extremely, almost brutally stringent. And so in one genre of their poetry, the idea was that
every line had to have four packets of five syllables. So you have five syllables, you have
to have four of them. That's on every line. Now then on every line, in addition to that,
there had to be a pause, has to be, this still exists, a pause in the middle of the line. And
yet with the pause, the pause is not in between two of these five syllable packets. One five
syllable packet has to straddle the pause. Then there has to be an alliteration between the two
half lines. You have to have the same consonant used often. So D's or something like that. But
then no two words next to each other can alliterate, i.e. begin with that same consonant. And that was
how this kind of poetry was structured. And this was all just with the mouth. This wasn't written
down. And so if you heard anybody say it, you'd hear somebody saying
i la ba dab kodi o san da hai da na ba do diye. And you think, well, that's just some dialect of
something. But no, it's not only is it a language and very much a language, it is Somali. But that
is a poem. And that what we just heard has meaning. God has put out their fire and has dampened
the valor of their heroes. And so that's the kind of poetry that a human society can have,
where it comes off almost as a word game. Now that contrasts instructively with the kind of poetry
that's now dominant in all of its wonder. Billy Collins today is the closest equivalent we have
to an Edna St. Vincent Malay. One of his book advances was in six figures. He, to my knowledge,
has not had a radio show of his own. But one of the ways he became famous was that he became a
fixture on Garrison Keeler's radio show. And he wasn't around to write about Sacco and Vanzetti,
but he did write a poem about 9-11 that got around. But for one thing, notice his name,
Billy Collins, not William's Tradmore Collins or whatever he would be called back in the day,
just Billy. It's a different era. And then his poetry, which as modern poetry goes,
I've always very much liked the samples of it that have come across my desk. As it goes,
it is very much more spoken than what an Edna St. Vincent Malay would have recognized as poetry.
I think his most famous one is about food. It's called Assobuco. And it goes, part of it.
I love the sound of the bone against the plate and the fortress-like look of it, lying before me
in a mote of risotto, the meat soft as the leg of an angel who has lived a purely airborne existence.
And best of all, the secret marrow, the invaded privacy of the animal, prized out with a knife
and swallowed down with cold exhilarating wine. Now, that's very, very good. Just for example,
the bone on the plate, that is one of the most salient experiences of having that kind of dish.
Who would know to put it in a poem? Then you have to know how to describe it, cold exhilarating
wine. I don't drink wine and think, goodness, this is exhilarating. But actually, it is,
especially if you are enjoying your Assobuco. But the fact is that that is less structured.
That doesn't mean that it didn't take any work, but it is less almost brutally structured than,
for example, that oral poetry, lovely in its own ways, that the Somali were doing,
just sitting down under trees and never writing anything down. It's an interesting point. Now,
over the past decade, as Dana Joya has intimated, there has been a certain reversal in the trend
away from poetry. But interestingly, it's all very oral. So, for example, spoken word contests
are now common in many cities, participated in by many people of many races and classes. Broadway
even had a relatively long running show called Deaf Poetry Jam, which showcased spoken word
poetry. And spoken word is structured. People work on their spoken word poetry,
but the idea of it is it's supposed to summon colloquial speech in a way that, of course,
a Wordsworth, who actually thought of himself as writing for the masses, would never have even
considered to be appropriate. Now, Wordsworth is in a culture that we would now think of
as quite exotic, and I don't think we'd want to go back to it. But it's very different from the
one that we have today, where the notion with most poetry is to approximate the casual rather than to,
as we might say, dress the language up and do something very different from the way that we
speak. The same thing would apply to rap. So to say that there's no poetry today is to ignore
that America's favorite music, below a certain age, is now rap. That's not just black people,
now young white people relate to it as deeply as many black people do. And of course, it's poetry,
it's lyrics rhyme, the people who put rap together, put rap together with great care
and great skill. But once again, it's a spoken form. Rap is a heightened kind of speaking,
but nobody would be concerned with the precise kind of rhyming of Edna St. Vincent
Malay, for example. And in terms of the scansion, there is what you would call a compelling but
loose scansion. It certainly doesn't follow the beat underneath in a precise way. In fact,
that's what it's not supposed to do. And in general, what it is, is a kind of heightened
speaking. So it's much more than just the idle boasting that I think was the default sense of
what rap was when people started thinking about it beyond a small set in the 80s. The work is
anthologized now, Jay-Z is a lead rapper, and there's now a wonderful good smelling coffee table
book of his rap lyrics. But it's an oral and it's an informal form, as opposed to the older kind
of poetry. And after all, modern American people are most likely, in most cases,
to celebrate language that acts against the standard. That's part of the post Mario Savio
get it good you got it kind of culture that we've been looking at. It's very different from a time
when attitudes towards standard English were more conformist, even among people who consider
themselves to be speaking truth to power. And as you would expect, there has been a similar
trend even in the lyrics to music. So rap is poetry. And you could also say that song lyrics
are today's poetry too. People relate to the words of their favorite popular music in the same way
as a young girl may have related to Edna St Vincent Millay's poetry back in the day.
But once again, today's pop song lyrics are less brutally structured than yesterday's. And so
random example would be put on a happy face. This is from the musical Bye Bye Birdie.
And in the middle, there's just this bouncy sequence that Lee Adams who was lyricist put in
the music is Charles Strauss. And it's something if you did Bye Bye Birdie in high school,
this probably went right by you. But think about how much work went into writing something like
take off the gloomy mask of tragedy. It's not your style. You'll look so good that you'll be glad
you decided to smile. Could you do that? I couldn't. That's tight. He worked on that. It probably
took some alcohol. And that was expected of Bye Bye Birdie, a lyric from 1961. That's the tail end
of the era. And it's not only in the famous songs. It's not because that was Bye Bye Birdie. And I
don't think most people would put Bye Bye Birdie at the pinnacle of anything. It just made a lot
of money. And it's fun. There is to take a random obscure song 1930. The movie is whoopee. The soundtrack
sounds like this. And Eddie Canner comes out and he sings a song called The Girlfriend of a Boyfriend
of Mine. And in the middle, you have this business that uses internal rhymes. And so I found that love
was just a joke. And what a broken heart meant. I even started out to get a kitchen at apartment.
Now, kind of dog girl-esque, definitely. But you had to work to do that sort of thing. And it's
easy to forget how much effort went into this sort of thing. For example, Jerome Kern writes some
music and he sends it to Oscar Hammerstein. They're writing for the musical showboat. And so Jerome
Kern sends by mail. They didn't like each other much. They didn't usually work together. Jerome
Kern sends by mail to Oscar Hammerstein a melody. And it goes... Now, you have to put words to it.
And you know that it's supposed to be a love song. And all you've got is...
Now, Kern would literally almost have a stroke if Oscar Hammerstein added one syllable to his
melodies. So you've got to fit it in. So Oscar Hammerstein comes up with... This didn't exist
before Oscar Hammerstein did it. Fish got a swim. Birds got a fly. I'm gonna love one man till I
die. Can't help loving that man of mine. Fits it perfectly. It didn't exist before he wrote it.
That's what one did. Now, take an excellent pop song now, including its lyric, like Kurt Cobain
Smells Like Teen Spirit. Very different. And so, for example, one of its lyrics goes... This is one
of the famous passages. Here we are now, entertain us. I feel stupid and contagious. Now, entertain us
and contagious rhyme. I suppose you can wrap your mind around how they rhyme. It's a modern sense
of rhyme. It comes spontaneously to me at this point. But let's face it, a Wordsworth wouldn't
have considered entertain us and contagious to rhyme. And Kurt Cobain's modus operandi,
shall we say, was quite different from that of Wordsworth. And after I feel stupid and contagious,
the lyric includes famous lyric, a list. And the list involves a mulatto and albino, a mosquito,
and then comes the word libido, which rhymes with mosquito. And then all that is followed by the
word, yeah. And that's a lyric. That is a famous passage. And it really is a good song. I have heard
it arranged for string quartet. It had actually worked. I remember it was the first song by Nirvana
that I already aging registered. And I understood why they were considered important. But that,
as poetry, is quite different in terms of its structure and in terms of its what we could
call brutal constraint from even something like the goofy girlfriend of a boyfriend of mine
in terms of how it was put together and what one's orientation toward one's English, so to speak,
would have been to put something like that together. Now, one last point that many of you might make
if you're either fans of a certain subgenre or if you have children. And that is that modern movie
musicals, especially since Disney is the Little Mermaid, do have songs written in the old fashioned
way. Little mermaid, les poissons, les poissons. That rhymes and that took as much work as girlfriend
of a boyfriend of mine. That's brutally structured. And you see this in Aladdin. It's a whole genre
now. But there's something to note about that. They're for kids. And so as soon as you're an adult,
those songs are either cherished as something you liked when you were a kid, or they are cherished
by a small group of show music fans. And there's an implication there. And the implication there is
that tight rhyming of that kind and brutal scansion, brutally exact scansion of that kind, is less
mature. That it's training wheels in a way. Whereas the idea is that as you become an adult,
you are to open up to something different, which would be more like smells like teen spirit,
which would be more like Billy Collins, where you don't have something, which you could say
is as easy as going for the rhyme and the rhythm, as opposed to being more holistic, more abstract,
and more, and this is the point, individual. And so it's no longer about celebrating English,
certainly not about celebrating America. It's a more internalized form of art. That is the
orientation that we have towards poetry at this point. Now, the fact of the matter is that if
this were a culture where the only language represented in poetry was the Edna St. Vincent
Malay type, then it would be a limitation in the culture. Because as we've seen, spoken language
is not lesser than written language. Casual language is not lesser than formal language. And in
that Edna St. Vincent Malay style focused culture, you wouldn't have that represented in poetry.
The only way that we can say that non-standard or casual language forms are lesser is if,
for example, we condemn modern Israeli Hebrew as lesser language than biblical or modern English
as lesser language than old English. And of course, that doesn't work. On the other hand, though,
it can be bracing to engage the older, highly structured kind of poetry because, for one thing,
it's one way of enriching your vocabulary in a more natural way and more entertaining way
than lists or flashcards or word-a-day calendars. It also gives you a sense of different kinds of
syntax. And in general, it allows you to embrace the standard language for its own sake. And that's
something that we don't do as much as we used to because we have a tendency to cherish non-standard
language, which is good in many ways, but the standard is still there and good in just as
many ways. And so, for example, and I'm serious about this, something that you might do is that
before you go to sleep, you and your spouse or significant other or friend or whatever you have
might read a grand old-fashioned poem to one another to make it realistic. It has to be just
one. You don't want to tire one another out, but read it out loud because you want to savor it in
the mouth and it also helps the memory. And if you do that every night, quote, unquote, and really
it's probably going to be three nights out of seven, but do that every night, you can make your way,
as you're guessing, I'm talking about personal experience, you can make your way through most of
an anthology and not only are you better educated in a superficial fashion, but it really does
allow you to get in touch with a particular layer of the language that it's easy to lose touch with
in our modern society. If you don't happen to have a partner to do that with, do it to yourself,
but it is a very useful thing. In the meantime, in the next lecture, we're going to look at something
else, which is about what I think a lot of people do in bed instead of reading poetry, which is
texting. And the fact is that a lot of people think of texting as a scourge, the idea being
that it is a threat to writing. The real question is, though, whether it's writing at all, and if
it isn't, that's actually a good thing. What am I talking about? Stay tuned for lecture 23.
