I want to take you to ancient Mayan culture for a second.
They had one of the earliest writing systems, absolutely fascinating, and if you wanted
to encode, say, fish, then they had a symbol, and it looked kind of like a fish, and that
meant fish.
Now that, of course, is not terribly interesting, but this system was a combination of pictures
like that, and then ways of indicating syllables, and that's when things got more interesting.
And so often, what would indicate a syllable would be a picture of something whose name
happened to be that syllable, and so for example, in Mayan, fish was ka, and so if you had a
word that happened to have the syllable ka in it, then that same fish picture could just
stand for ka, even if the word itself had nothing to do with fish or fishiness or what
have you.
Now add to that, yes this is leading something, add to that, that because there is chaos in
all lives, hairs out of place, flies in the ointment, often there were several symbols,
they're called glyphs when you're talking about Mayan for the record, there were several
of these symbols for a given syllable, and so there was a collection of these symbols
for the syllable ka, not only the fish, but a bunch of other things.
So what that meant was that if you were going to write something like ka kau, which was
their word for chocolate, yes that's where we got it, if you want to write ka kau, which
is ka, ka, and oo, then the way that you would indicate it in ancient Mayan, this was all
figured out by a strangely young person and not all that long ago, but that's another
story, then what you would write was you would have one of these symbols that stood for
ka, and another symbol that stood for ka, and another symbol that stood for oo, and
they'd all be arranged together in this cute, rough little square, it looked like something
that you would want to eat for breakfast that would have cinnamon on it, and that was how
Mayan worked. Now, what am I getting at? Mayan writing was a kind of code, it was often
based on what we call rebus, and so screwball, and somebody holds up a flag in an old cartoon,
you can see what I do with my spare time, with a screw and a ball, rebus. Mayan writing
was rebus based to a large extent, and really I think if you're alive you cannot help but
find that kind of neat, that doesn't mean that you want to switch from English to Mayan
in your writing system, but it's interesting that code, it'd be fun to kind of figure it
out. You can imagine under-occupied adolescents working out a similar kind of code, or even
trying to figure out Mayan for themselves for about 10 minutes, as I once did with Egyptian
hieroglyphics for about 10 minutes, but that interested me, it was raining that day, and
that's how Mayan worked. Now, here is the kicker. There's Mayan on the one hand, and
now today there's somebody writing a text message, and it says C-U-L-E-H-R, and that's
C-U later with the letter C and the letter U, and then an L, and then the number 8, because
it's pronounced 8, then E-R-C-U later. Now with the Mayans, we think, well, weren't they
exotic with their cinnamon roll cells? With the texting, many people have a very different
opinion, whereas in fact, texting is a miracle that has emerged among us, and I want to give
you a sense of why. What we've seen so far is that there is a difference between spoken
and written language, as I've usually put it, and in modern times, that difference has
usually paralleled the difference between informal and formal, and so basically spoken,
the oral has been our informal, and then writing has been our formal, so we have those two
things, those two dyads, spoken shaggy casual, and then formal uptight written. Now, there
are different ways of looking at this sort of thing. There are different ways that a
society can organize its language. So for example, we've seen that even in earlier English-speaking
societies, such as earlier times in the United States, that there was a formal oral register,
and so one way of being oral was to be casual, so candid microphone. Another way of being
oral was to be formal, so for example, Edward Everett's speech, people listening to somebody
extolling for two hours as a form of entertainment and genuinely not minding, or Somali poetry.
These are people who have no writing at the point when this practice arose, and yet they're
doing a kind of poetry which is highly structured, strictured would be a better way of putting
it, or for us, another example of a living kind of formal orality is Shakespeare, if
you want to be really honest about how Shakespeare works, because Shakespeare, especially late
Shakespeare, is very dense language, and Shakespeare's plays, and so we're supposed to be listening
to people speaking them, but the fact of the matter is that often you can get a lot more
out of Shakespeare if you've read it beforehand, because the way it's structured is such that
you can take in more of it if you have the time and the deliberation and the possibility
of going backwards that the deliberate solitary act of reading involves, so for example, I
recently saw a production of As You Like It, thoroughly enjoyed it, I had had some coffee
beforehand so I was ready to concentrate on this very formal kind of orality, but there
were some things in the play, especially things that Touch Tone said, but various other things
that people said, well I really couldn't quite get them, and I'm someone who loves English
and all of its historical layers, and yet, not having read the play, there were things
I simply couldn't understand, which I have since come to understand by going home and
opening up my musty edition of The Great Books and looking at the written text and seeing,
so what that is is a formal kind of orality, so you can think of it as a kind of four box
structure, and so you have your informal orality, and then you have your formal orality, such
as Edward Everett and Somali and Shakespeare, and then we've seen that there is the formal
written, and so there's an empty box, and the empty box is informal writing.
Now the fact of the matter is that as these things go, you'd expect that something would
fill that box.
Why would there be no widely spread, very informal writing to parallel really informal
orality?
If you think about the periodic table of the elements, you can predict that there will
be an element number four if there's an element number three and an element number five.
Here you would imagine that as these things go, informal writing language would not be
impossible, and in fact, it isn't.
It's being allowed its day in the sun in our modern society by advances in technology.
This informal writing is what email and texting are, so we look at email and we look at texting,
and we often think of them as bad writing, and many people are very worried.
I would say 15 years ago as a linguist I was often asked what is emailing doing to language,
and now much more commonly you hear what is texting doing to language, but in fact what
emailing and texting are is something that's newly possible, written conversation available
to everyone, and so with emailing and texting, as with casual speech, the language largely
consists of brief packets of words, generally seven to ten, and it's less carefully planned
than writing is.
It's much less long-winded than writing can be because it's done on the fly rather than
with careful, largely solitary, and look back-oriented concentration, and like speech, it tolerates
more diversity of structures and more diversity of vocabulary than writing does, and so what
that means is that a sense that email and texting are poor writing is kind of like listening
to the rolling stones and thinking of it as bad classical music, like you're listening
to paint it black or satisfaction, and you're thinking well this is no good because where
Prithee is the viola part, well no they didn't mean to use a viola, it's a completely different
thing, and so emailing and texting aren't bad writing, what they are is a form of speech
that happens to be produced not with the teeth and the lips that were all that were available
to a Viking, but with the fingers, so there's something quite different from what they seem
like, there's a physical similarity to writing, but we have to classify it in a different
way in terms of our four boxes, and they really lend an advantage, this emailing and texting
business, they are warmer and more immediate than letters, so it's very common to say nowadays
that people don't write letters anymore, and I would say most don't, I don't think I've
written a letter since 1917, but the fact of the matter is that as wonderful as letters
were, and there was really something about getting a letter from someone, the fact is
that an email can be more immediate, it doesn't take as much effort, it doesn't cost any money,
and an email in being sent to you and given to your eyes and encouraging a very quick
response can be processed as warmer than a letter often was, and I am saying was, I'm
sorry I know some letters exist, but largely was, but then there's the phone, one used
to be able to call, you didn't have to write a letter, you could call, but the fact is
that a phone call always was, still kind of is, and to younger people as being quite readily
dismissed as, little direct, little intrusive, you're minding your business, you're pouring
over your Edna St. Vincent Malay, or whatever you're doing, and all this, that's something
that we thought of as quite normal, not very long ago, and you've got to pick it up, or
if you don't, you better explain later why you didn't.
E-mailing and texting are much less intrusive than that, and they're more efficient, they
also allow you more flexibility as to when to answer, that's very special, you can also
do them surrounded by noise, very awkward with the phone, no, you're breaking up, you're
breaking up, can you hear me now, can you hear me now, and let's face it, e-mailing
and texting are kind of sexy, really, there's a kind of flirtation that you can accomplish
via that certain intimacy of e-mail and texting that also allows you to wait and come up with
the proper flirty answer rather than doing it right there, which could barely exist technologically
before except via passing notes, which was kind of clumsy and harder and harder to do
as you are an adult, so that's what these things are.
So, what's the big worry?
Often, people under the impression, the very natural impression that e-mailing and texting
are writing are under the impression that there is a dire erosion of language standards
and that that's what the loose and shall we say creative structure of texting and e-mail
signify, but there are different ways of looking at that, and so for example, will e-mailing
and texting affect speech?
For thinking about what these things are going to do to language, we've seen there's talking
and there's writing, let's take talking first, well those things affect speech, probably
not, and that's because something that's been produced with the fingers and looked at with
the eyes is not something that we speak, whether or not we call that thing writing.
What I mean by that is this, take the texting abbreviations, which seem to worry people
as some sort of infection in what spoken language will be.
So, LOL, laugh out loud, BFF, best friend forever, OMG, oh my God, all these little acronyms.
Now people are saying those things, LOL means that you're laughing out loud, BFF, I was
hearing that for years and gleaning that there was best friend in there and always wondering
what the other F was, I think I learned what it was about three years ago.
Those things are definitely said, languages take on new words, a lot of them are acronyms
such as radar and many others.
However, we have to think about it, those little acronyms don't permeate speech as a whole
any more than the little acronyms of the various programs of the New Deal somehow infected
the way people communicated in the 1930s.
We have to think about what language actually is as we've seen often in this course and
a language that barely had any nouns or verbs, for example, wouldn't be adequate to what
we call communication.
There's a certain something that we all want to do when we speak and it involves giving
things names and it involves being able to make reference to actions.
Whereas the texting acronyms are mostly very clever specific vaguely pungent little interjections.
So for example, you can find lists, cute lists of dozens and dozens of these acronyms.
I highly suspect that very few people are actually so we say conversant in all of them.
The ones that really seem to be having an impact on the culture are LOL, laugh out loud, BFF,
best friend forever, I used to really wonder what that other F meant, OMG, FYI, you know
what that means.
I am HO in my humble opinion, BTW, by the way, which I now use all the time, it's nice
not to have to type by the way, I do that now in email, I've written it with my fingers.
And then JK, just kidding, TMI, too much information and I don't have to tell you what WTF means.
Those are the main ones and notice their comments, they're not a code of English itself.
It's not a matter of whether those things threaten to invade speech because those things couldn't
be speech, they're just colorful little signposts.
Now more to the point, will these things affect writing?
And this is an important question because we see people emailing and not using capital
letters where Strunk and White would tell you to use them and aren't misspellings and
the emoticons and all these things happen in texting as well.
And people see this and we think, well, that's writing and that's the way Justin, Justin
is my default young person, that's the way Justin writes, is that the way he's going
to be writing term papers, is that the best that he's going to be able to do when he's
writing a memo at work?
Is he going to be fired?
Is he going to be selling pencils?
Is he to be a statistic?
We worry about these sorts of things and also about Caitlyn, she's my default non-male.
And what's going to happen to her when she is writing a memo and winds up on the street.
But I think we can look at it in a different way, which is, we know that people can speak
casually because no person doesn't, people can speak casually and then maintain an elaborated
oratorical tradition.
And so people in 1882 knew that when you made a speech, you went, ladies and gentlemen,
and you spoke in a certain highly affected way.
And then you went home and you had a conversation over beer that didn't sound anything like
that.
People kept the two separate.
Well, in the same way, we can assume that homo sapiens can maintain separate traditions
for formal writing, which you would do for a term paper or memo.
And then there's other kind of writing that you have with email and texting, which we
can think of as written writing, fingers, written speech.
And one way that we know that this is probably a useful way of looking at it is that any
alarm that we've had about people's language usage skills, and it's not that none of those
things have any validity, but to the extent that we're worried about those things, it
would seem to long predate texting and email.
And so the dialogue that we wet fish think of today about how horrible our nation's schools
are, that starts officially in 1983.
There was the nation at risk report, and the idea was that American education was in trouble.
Well, of course, that's long before anything like email.
If you want to be fancy pants about it, way back in the 19th century, the president of
Harvard, who was of highly influential man nationally, Charles Elliott, complained that
quote unquote bad spelling, incorrectness, as well as inelegance of expression in writing
ignorance of the simplest rules of punctuation, and almost entire want of familiarity with
English literature are far from rare among young men of 18 otherwise well prepared for
college studies.
That's somebody writing at a time when there is no such thing as a shellac record, and
almost nobody is eating broccoli, so that long ago.
Or the National Assessment of Education performance had a rather sunny report that two-thirds
of eighth graders in America were reading at or above basic proficiency, so that's a third
that weren't, but two-thirds that were.
In 1992, and that's before emailing, it was as prevalent as now, and before any ordinary
person had heard of texting, and it hasn't changed much since.
And so emailing and texting have become like mother's milk to a great many people, and
yet you still have that same NAEP statistic.
Or my favorite is a study that was done in 2004.
There was a study done in the UK, as a matter of fact, actually trying to get a sense of
whether texting was something that affected the way people wrote, and notice I'm proposing
that there are different things.
And it looked at 20 students, and so this hardly looked at 200,000, but it looked at
20 students, and it found that among the heavy textors, spelling and grammar were the same
as among the textors, and nobody was perfect, but they were the same, whether they were
heavy textors or not.
And there was no creeping whatsoever, I want to make up a word, encreement, let's create
that word now.
There was no encreement whatsoever of texting abbreviations into the written work, not
at all.
So that's a perspective.
And another perspective, it's always useful to pull the camera back on these things.
We get hung up on things about ourselves, but another perspective on texting is when
we see it done in other places.
And in other places, texting looks as clever as the ancient Mayan writing system.
So in German, the word for eight is Acht, I like our word better, but Acht, and good
night in German is Gute Nacht, with the proper German deep voice.
Now texting for Gute Nacht in German is G, N, and then eight, which for them is Acht,
so Gnacht, that's clever.
Or in French, the letter K is pronounced K, and then there's seven, which is set.
And so if they want to write cassette, videocassette for example, they write K and seven because
en français, in French, that's cassette.
So that's clever as well.
This isn't just one person.
These are widespread texting formulas among people who speak these languages.
What's new?
Quoi de neuf.
And so what of new?
Quoi de neuf.
Well, the way they do that is that two is de, and nine is neuf.
And so they write Quoi de neuf.
And so it looks like in writing Quoi to nine, Quoi de neuf.
And so that's, I'm sure, that most of us suppose that that's adorable, or more adorableness.
This is very cute.
This is Japan.
In Japan, they have numbers, and their numbers have different, different labels than ours.
And so three is San, nine is Q. Now if you say San-Q, then that sounds kind of like,
yeah, see, thank you.
And so many Japanese will text three, nine for thank you, because in Japanese it comes
out as San-Q.
So San-Q.
Thank you.
San-Q.
Thank you.
I think we all like that, and so that's their texting.
And the fact of the matter is that if it's so adorable and vibrant and diverse and up
to the minute in them, we can actually look at it as the same thing here, rather than as
a decline in writing, although of course in those countries some of the same complaints
are made about texting there.
But imagine the kind of what you could call demotic poetry that texting allows.
There was a passage that got around in 2003, nobody to my knowledge identified who wrote
this.
But it captured the spirit of casual texting, as well as the fact that texting lends itself
to a kind of poetry.
So there was a person who wrote that in English, it would be, my summer holidays were a complete
waste of time before we used to go to New York to see my brother, his girlfriend and
their three screaming kids.
Now the way this came out in texting was absolutely interesting.
And so my summer, and summer is spelled S-U-M-M-R because the sound of the letter is the sound
of the sound that it signifies.
And so summer, and then holidays is just halls, H-O-L-S, were, W-R, you know what it means.
A complete waste of time was one of these acronyms that I don't think is general parlance, but
that is known to many textors, C-W-O-T.
So my summer halls were quad, and that's just what it was, before B and four, we used,
and then to go to is the number two, go to, to go to New York and Y, to see, you can guess
how that was written, my brother, my bro, his girlfriend, his G-F, and an ampersand,
cute, antique, poetic, there, T-H-R, three, and then kids was just kids and not spelled
with a Z, although you can imagine somebody doing that, kids.
But three kids, screaming was one of those adorable type faces.
I just made up that pun, let's keep it type face, where you have to imagine this in your
head.
There's a colon, and then there's a dash, and then there's the at symbol, and those
things right next to each other look like on its side a human face with its mouth wide
open screaming.
And so three, ah, kids.
And so that was the text message.
Now as far as I'm concerned, that little text sentence is a force for the good.
All of us can see a beautiful kind of creativity in it, and I don't think most of us suppose
that the person who created that text sentence couldn't write a normal sentence, i.e. couldn't
write as opposed to text, different things, if they wanted to, and ordinary texting, of
course most people aren't that good, but ordinary texting is a less heightened rendition of
that same thing.
What you can call it is a kind of written informality, and that is a good thing.
And what it comes down to is this.
You can imagine an idealized language culture, and you can imagine it, and I imagine it a
lot.
I think of this as something that a culture could strive for, and that therefore by counter
extension a person could strive for.
And that is one where all four boxes of this mental grid that I've been trying to create
would be filled in.
Now in any society you've got your informal orality, and that is just talking.
So anybody has that, because human beings just talk.
We've been doing it since the year one, and before, 150,000 years ago, or at least 80,000
years ago.
Then you have your formal written, and that's something that we were very much used to in
our western slash first world, whatever you want to call it, kind of society.
So that was there.
Then in any society, and in fact in quite a few, including one's less quote on quote
civilization oriented than ours, you have your formal orality.
So you've got the heightened oratory, and remember that they're Native American cultures
with the heightened kind of oral language.
And you have the Somali poetry, and maybe we can say that the place of Shakespeare in
our society fills in that box.
And then of course what you also want is the informal writing.
And the informal writing is something which can be caressed, and heightened, and manufactured
in ever more considered fashion, just like all of these other things.
Which means that somebody who can write a text poem, and there are people who are calling
themselves doing just that, because they are doing just that.
That could be seen as a form of refinement of language.
Every bit as interesting as what Edward Everett was doing, or being somebody who happens
to be a very good casual conversation list, or being somebody who can write Milton's
Areopagitica.
And so the ideal linguistic society would be one where all four boxes were filled in
equally.
And what that means is something that I think about more and more as time goes by, and that
I actually intend to pass on to progeny that comes from me, of which there will be soon.
And that is this.
If you think of yourself as a person who wants to work on language, and to wield it well,
then one thing is to be a good conversation list, very Jane Austen.
One thing is to have great formal written skills, so that you can imagine yourself penning the
Declaration of Independence.
And another is to be able to imagine yourself standing up and making a speech wielding oratory
in a heightened kind of language, in a way that might sway people.
You might want to become a kind of junior Aristotle.
And then on the other hand, with these devices that pretty much all of us have at this point,
one might want to craft oneself as a maximally clever e-mailer, and as an aggressively clever
texture because you have four components to your linguistic ability.
And one of them is your informal but in that not artless writing ability.
So it's just something to think about.
Cultivate your four boxes.
