Based on what we've seen over the past 23 lectures, hopefully we have a brand new perspective
on how to use English, how to hear English, and what this language is that we speak and
that is our birthright.
And one question that we might have is, where is English going?
We've seen where it was, and I've tried to give a sense of what we can think of it as
right now, but what's going to happen as we move along?
Well, the answer is both less dramatic and then more dramatic than we might think.
Less dramatic in that.
The language that we know as written English will not change significantly over time.
Writing is inherently a conservative medium.
It sits on the page.
It's taught the way it is.
A sense that's in that the way you see it on the page and the way you've been exposed
to it in school is the way it's supposed to stay.
And that's natural to all of our perceptions.
That's unlikely to change.
And so, of course, there'll be new vocabulary because there's always new slang, some of
it sticks, there are new objects and concepts, so vocabulary will continue to change.
But the basic grammar of our written language will not undergo unless there's some sort
of massive geopolitical catastrophe, revolutions along the lines of the change from old to
middle English, or even middle, as in Chaucer, to modern English.
So nothing dramatic of that kind.
However, there will be more dramatic developments on the casual level of language.
Spoken language will continue to change in many ways, but more to the point, there will
be very interesting news in terms of the emailing and texting that we just talked about.
What I mean by that is, recall the Sri Lanka situation where there is a colloquial Sinhalese,
which is a very complex language, but practically a different one from the formal literary Sinhalese
that's used on the page.
There's this massive gulf between the two, and that's just the way it is.
There's a sense that there's the language of the page, and then there's the way that
you talk.
In English, that is a kind of difference that we're going to see more of.
And so specifically, what we've seen is that writing has become more and more like speaking
for a great many people over time.
But as time goes by, casual language is going to move further and further from written language,
however casual it's become, especially in terms of what we now know to think of as the
written form of speech.
And what I mean by that is that email and texting, particularly texting, are very vibrant,
they're very personal, and they're ever changing, and a generation is now growing up who will
never know a world in which there was not, not only email, but not texting.
So whatever we think of this variety of speaking or writing, whichever we want to call it,
it's going to be something very natural to them.
That has become an aspect of this thing called language.
And that means that there's going to be this very creative way of using language that is
casual, it's going to be choppy, it's going to be full of emoticons and abbreviations
and playfulness, highly abbreviated, and that is going to be the way it is.
And if anything, come to be more the way it is, and it's going to be ever further from
the more stringent kinds of English that we use in formal situations such as writing.
Now what's important is this texting form, this new kind of casual language that exists
in writing instead of orally, is not something that will eclipse the formal styles.
It will coexist in the same way as colloquial and literary Sinhalese coexist.
And that situation in Sri Lanka is not at all exotic, it's a norm worldwide.
Indonesian is like that, Arabics are like that, that's a very common situation.
One doesn't eat up the other one.
Human beings are almost strangely capable of keeping different tracks going, different
variations on the same kind of language.
So we're seeing the beginning of a new kind of gulf of that kind, a harmless gulf.
It's not, however, a decline in the language in general.
And furthermore, on the level of spoken English, we can see that there will possibly be certain
things which today are considered slang, but which tomorrow will be grammar.
Now these are the sorts of things that probably won't make it onto the page because writing
is very conservative.
But often the way we think of language is different from the way we write it.
And so deep down in the recesses of our minds, for many of us, we might think that there
is could of done it instead of could have done it, it's the way many children write
it, many people who don't have much experience with writing write it that way.
I could have done it, I would have done it because it sounds like that and because of
lends itself semantically to that usage to an extent.
Now we don't write that, but in the heads of many of us that's what it is and sometimes
we need correction when we write it.
Could have is could of in many people's minds in terms of what we call the mental representation
of speech.
In the same way, think about many young people now with their usage of all.
It's used as a kind of a quotation marker and so she was all, you don't even know what
you're doing.
And I was all, yes I do.
That is now standard colloquial American English.
And what's interesting is that that all could create new grammar.
I hereby predict when I do not exist, if this recording exists, I hope I can be heard 300
years from now predicting that this happened in spoken English.
What is probably going to happen is that there's going to be a fusion of the forms of B to all
and it's going to create something.
What I mean by that is that suppose over time people start saying that so often and so quickly
that people start forgetting that it's even all and it shortens to all.
So I'm all, you stop that, I'm all, you stop that.
Very soon somebody, far in the future, somebody thinks oh it's I'm all, you're all, he's
all and they don't know that it's a version of the word all because all can be swallowed
up.
The word alone started out as all one.
Makes sense doesn't it?
Oh I'm all one, I'm all alone.
And so we don't even think of it as all anymore.
Well in this case it could be I'm all, you shouldn't have done that.
You, raw, you shouldn't have done that.
And so that means there'd be this new verb.
It's very cute.
And so instead of I'm all, you're all, he's all, it's I'm all, you, raw, he, zaw.
So I'm all, you don't even know what you're talking about and so it would become this
verb of saying except it would be highly irregular, ma, raw, zaw.
And so B is a highly irregular verb and so I am, you are, he is, well now we would have
I'm all, you, raw, he's all.
And so that would be the beginning of a brand new irregular verb in this English language
that kind of should have more in order to be a normal language as we've talked about the
normal state of language being hideously complex.
So that's something that could happen in the spoken language, however people won't
write that.
In the written language things will stay the way they are but the mental representation,
the spoken language will be something different, call that diversity, it could be a lot of
fun.
Now another question, what will happen to English as a world language?
It's a question that the media grapples with often and in particular the general notion
is that because the Chinese are predicted to be the world's major economic power in
the near future, one naturally supposes that Chinese, specifically the dominant dialect
of Chinese, really the dominant Chinese language because the different Chinese are different
languages, Mandarin Chinese, whether that will become the de facto international language
the way English has become.
And I am also going to expose myself to ridicule 300 years from now when people certainly will
still be following lectures from the teaching company, the great courses, they will still
exist then, of course.
But when people are looking at me doing this they are going to see me saying the following
right now.
I think that English will continue to be the de facto international language no matter
how powerful the Chinese become.
Now the reason that that might be seen as a risky thing to say is because there have
been languages in the past that have straddled the world that have disappeared when the powers
behind those languages evanesced from world affairs.
And so for example, the language of the world, depending on what you call the world, used
to be Aramaic.
There was a time, this is long before the year zero, literally, when the lingua franca
from as far west as Greece and then all the way through the area that is now Uzbekistan
and Afghanistan was Aramaic, which is a relative of Arabic and Hebrew, which is now best known
as the language that Jesus Christ spoke and is now basically a dying language spoken by
people in a few isolated communities in the Middle East.
And believe it or not, some New Jersey towns.
But Aramaic now is a very quiet thing, but it used to be a world language.
The Persian Empire was run in Aramaic.
The king of Persia would send messages to other places in a language that he didn't
speak.
And in the same way, ancient Greek had quite an influence.
The Greek language now, as much as there's a resonance to ancient Greece, is very much
a small language in terms of how many people speak it.
And of course, Latin, well, you know what happened to that.
But it's not as nervy as it may seem to say that it'll be different with English.
And that's because those languages came and went before there was print and before there
was widespread literacy and before there was anything that you could call a media.
English has become the international language of choice in a context where it dominates
in print, visually therefore, and also orally, orally spelled A-U-R, in terms of media.
There's radio.
There's pop music.
It's amazing.
You can go to almost any place in the world, even the remotest place, and then dig yourself
a hole six feet down, pull the dirt in after you curl up, listen closely, and somewhere
down deep underground in New Guinea, you will hear the latest pop hits from the United States.
They are absolutely everywhere.
And people often want to know what those words are.
Next thing you know, they halfway know English.
So English is around because of technology.
Technology is always in a way that an Aramaic or an ancient Greek never could be.
And therefore, it called it, so to speak, like musical chairs.
It's just there.
It happens to be the one.
Nothing superior about English, but it happened to be the one.
And Mandarin Chinese is harder for foreigners to master even the basics of than English.
Mandarin Chinese grammar is not that hideous as grammars go.
It's not like Navajo.
But with Chinese, you've got the tones.
And so ma, there's a syllable.
For us, it's a colloquial word for somebody who's not your father.
But in Chinese, Mandarin Chinese ma means horse, mother, scold, or hemp, based on what
tone you say it on.
And it's not just that word.
It's every word.
That's how the language is spoken.
Now, if you're a kid and you grow up in it, fine.
There's some people who wonder whether tone, death, Chinese people can't talk.
No, if you get it early enough, you can do it even if you don't grow up able to sing
happy birthday.
But if you are an adult, some people are better with tones and music than others.
It's tough to master that aspect of Chinese when you consider that that's every syllable
that you have to do that on.
And in addition, the Chinese writing system is a glorious and beautiful thing.
I wish I had sculptures of many Chinese characters made out of a nice soft wood that I could
put on the floor in my living room.
If they were big enough, I could kind of sit on them.
They're beautiful things.
I'd like to eat them.
But there really are quite a few of them.
Talk about skeuomorphy.
That's a system that originated a long time ago in a very different society when writing
was an elite activity.
And now it burdens a very large population of people who make do, but you have to know
a few thousand of those characters to be even a halfway literate person.
And quite simply, that's harder than an alphabet.
The language with the most sounds by most counts has 148 sounds.
So if you had an alphabet based on that language, it's the click language of Africa whose name
sounds like you're dying.
I've never been able to pronounce it.
It's that's literally close to what it's called.
And that language has 148 sounds, but an alphabet therefore would have 148 symbols.
Chinese you have to learn thousands.
So that's a tough one.
If Chinese weren't written with that system, maybe that would make it a little easier for
it to become a world language, but it's always going to be written with that system.
So English is quite likely, I say to you people 300 years from now who'll be buying the great
courses to serve as an international medium of communication, even if China is ruling the
world.
So people worldwide will be speaking English alongside their native languages.
Multilingualism will remain a norm.
There may actually be people who speak English as an international language.
Then they'll speak Mandarin Chinese as a language for use in business because the Chinese may
well dominate it.
And then they'll speak their native language.
So there'll be a whole lot of try or quadralingualism.
All of those are very important things, but the chance that English is going to be knocked
off of its throne is unlikely because these things happen in steps.
These things don't happen abruptly.
And there's no reason why English would cease to be what is drilled into people's eyes
and ears all the time because it happened to get there first.
Now something else, now that we are at the end of our journey or close to it, we can
hear modern English in a brand new way.
What we can hear it as is not just a matter of what it is now, but as a wild and wonderful
product of the past.
And we've seen a lot of this, but it's important to remember that these things that I've pointed
out about unsystematicities in English and interesting etymologies, these are just a
matter of scattered exoticisms, but this is just all of the language itself.
This is what I'm doing right now.
This is what you're going to do when you get up after this.
So for example, John F. Kennedy's sentence from the 1961 inaugural address, my fellow
Americans ask not what your country can do for you, just that sentence, that alone, which
is just good old fashioned American hamburger English, good hamburger, but hamburger English,
it's just dripping with examples of what we've seen throughout this course.
So think about it, my fellow Americans, my, remember that that's the my that started as
mean and left that in at the head of nicknames like Ned, Nelly and Naby.
So my has a past, it has a story.
My fellow American fellow, what's fellow, what fell?
Well, nothing fell, fellows borrowed.
That's actually a, an old Norse word and we know that borrowing added layers of synonyms
and so we hear about help and then aid from French and assist from Latin.
But actually the borrowing also creates just random sorts of things because words go bit
by bit in terms of how their meanings change.
In old Norse, the word that became fellow was fellagi, fellagi meant fee layer.
And what that meant was someone who laid down a fee with you in some sort of joint venture
and so fellagi.
Now if somebody lays down money with you in a joint venture, chances are that the two
of you don't despise each other and so gradually your fee layer became your comrade.
It was your fellow.
That's where that word came from.
And oddly enough, in terms of gender, fellagi was a feminine word and wouldn't you know
that in English we often say fella and that a seems like a romance language, feminine ending,
you know, stuff happens.
That's called language.
Americans, what is an American?
No, I'm not going to go all civics class on you but America is the first name of the
explorer.
And Amerigo was the pasta way of saying something that was a Germanic word.
And so one of old English's relatives that stayed on the continent instead of crossing
the North Sea, one of those Germanic languages had a word, Amalrich.
That meant work ruler, Reich ruler, so Amalrich.
Now down in Italy, Amerigo, Germanic, Amalrich.
That went across the North Sea with Germanic speakers.
That became Emery in English and so these sorts of things happen.
So Emery or you have from Amerigo becomes in English American.
John F. Kennedy didn't know that history of the word that he was using but didn't come
from on high.
Because these random sorts of things creating this weird beauty, ask, ask not, what's ask?
Most people when they want to know about ask, want to know why various Americans say acts.
So the idea is how come people say acts, always asked in that tone, acts in that tone.
And actually it's old English.
In old English there were people running around with clubs and you know whatever people who
spoke old English did.
You had two alternates.
You had askian and axian.
There were two.
You could use one or the other and nobody got beaten over the head with one of those clubs
for saying axian.
And what it comes down to is that there's a pull in all languages.
People are more comfortable using a stop sound such as that stop before a hissy sound.
So people would rather say x than sk.
You can feel one of them is just a little harder.
An old friend of mine used to say pescetti instead of spaghetti.
I used to want to trip him.
I said it's spaghetti.
We were like six.
But the reason he was doing that is because pss is easier than pss which has to be learned.
A lot of kids say pescetti and that's why.
So that's the whole ax ask and it goes all the way back to good old old English.
And so it's a really rather innocent thing.
If anything, it's a charming archaism.
It's like somebody who shows you an heirloom that has been traced back to their ancestors
in ancient England.
So that's what ask is.
Then let's try not.
Ask not.
Well, what is that?
Ask not.
Well, remember, saying ask not is the way it should be in English, really.
Really the default way is do not ask.
But remember that that do is peculiar and that really that's a Welsh-ism basically in English.
Ask not is what you would say in any self-respecting Germanic language.
But English, we say do not ask only because we're a mixed language.
We all of us are walking around speaking a little bit of Welsh without knowing it.
And so that's a very interesting thing about ask not.
And in addition, 1961 is the tail end of an era when an American politician would say
ask not, which strikes an archaic kind of note.
This is our whole issue with speech becoming less and less formal.
Ask not is a hearkening to the past.
Don't ask is something that we would imagine today a president or presidential candidate
saying much more likely than ask not.
So John F. Kennedy was on the cusp of an era.
Mario Savio made his grand speech four years later.
So there's an awful lot in that little word not, which we generally think of as just a
little word.
Ask not what your can do for you, your, you remember those are odd too.
They are mistakes.
And so Kennedy was using it to refer either to an individual or to a group, but remember
you used to be only plural.
And so thou was for the singular.
So it's very rhetorically effective in Kennedy's speech to say you where you can either take
it as being aimed at exactly you or to the whole audience.
And then there's the synergy of the feeling between you and that audience.
But the fact is that originally that usage of you to possibly refer to one person was
something that grammarians were knocking people on the knees with thin wooden sticks for.
And life goes on.
Pronouns are complicated.
You can't keep them in their cages any more than you can keep a chinchilla in a cage.
I know somebody who has chinchillas and they don't seem to like being in their cages.
Or country.
Think about where country comes from.
What's a country?
It comes from contrata in Latin.
It meant opposite.
And there was an expression, the land opposite, the land over there, terra contrata.
So the land opposite and the land opposite may have been something rolling hills or something.
That gets shortened to contrata and then in French it becomes contray.
We borrow it from French and we have country.
And so country means opposed, opposite.
We don't think of it that way.
We associate it with milking cows and not having something we want such as a signal
that would allow us to text to somebody to get us out of the country.
But that's just us.
It originally starts as terra contrata of all things.
And finally, can.
What your country can do for you?
What's a can?
Not a tin, as a British person might say, but what's a, why can?
Well, it's interesting.
It has left a scattering of a rather Genghis can-esque nature in the English language.
It used to be you had, say, sing, sang, sung, can, could, cooth.
Well, cooth is now not a word by itself unless you're being kind of cute.
There's uncouth, though.
And uncouth is the word that we use, but cooth once meant capable.
It kind of canned in its way.
And it used to be that you could say canning.
And so I'm laughing.
I'm singing.
Well, you don't say that anymore because can has become one of those mood verbs that
we talked about.
It's defective in that way.
But there is the word canning.
The sound changed.
It's cunning.
And if you think about it, cunning is abling in that way.
So that's what the story of can is.
So all of that in President Kennedy's little sentence.
And I didn't choose that specially just to demonstrate those things.
What I certainly chose specially was something that was a resonant phrase.
But I just knew that every single word would have a story like that.
And what that story means is that language is inherently, in terms of how everything
works, the process of an extremely variegated and unpredictable process.
And what all this means is that we can see that English is going to be OK.
Since we see that the whole development of it has been this mixture of below the radar,
less than logical processes like these, we can see that the fact that now people don't
speak the language with what we would think of as strict logic isn't a sign that it's
in eclipse.
Languages fall apart when they cease to be spoken or when they're spoken mostly by people
who are growing up in a different language, such as heritage Russian.
But there has never been discovered a language where people were using it under ordinary
conditions, but the language suddenly just fell apart and there wasn't anything identifiable
as really solid grammar, just because of some sort of inherent laziness among the speakers
or something like that.
Within our language, while we're worrying about passing fashions of English such as
less books versus fewer books, what we can see is that there is very sophisticated grammar
that we often never see because we can't smell the roses because people are so busy
showing us the thorns.
And so here is one more bit of this Acha language.
Acha is that Southeast Asian language where we looked at how to create a sentence in a
language that doesn't actually have prefixes and suffixes.
Acha is also neat in how very works.
This is where we're going to pull the camera back to get a sense of what grammar is and
then go back to English.
So in Acha, if you want to say something is very deep, then the word for very is ha.
Okay, who cares?
But if you want to say that something is very white, then the word for very is d.
Notice, not the word for white, the word for very is d.
So if it's very deep, it's ha-deep.
If it's very white, it's d-white.
If it's very blue, it's d-blue.
If it's very big, it's l-big.
If it's very clean, it's d-clean.
And that little tone of that little vocalism I did, that actually is how it's pronounced.
That's a difference in the vowels, yet clean.
You have to learn that for all of these adjectives, very is a different word.
And one might think, well, how exotic of this language spoken deep into the forest.
But you know what?
You speak one too.
So for example, let's try this.
You have something that is new.
Now, you might well say, well, my darling, that's very new.
But something else that you might say is, well, this is brand new.
Now, what does that even mean, brand what?
So we don't know what any of those little particles in Acha means, neither do with speakers.
You just memorize them.
Well, brand new.
What new is a brand?
Do you own a brand?
I don't.
I don't brand anybody.
Or black.
Boy, it was pitch black.
I think I know what pitch is, but I probably don't.
And really, I just say pitch black.
That means very black.
So brand new, pitch black.
Now what would you do for pink?
You can say something is very pink.
But if you speak English, spontaneously, you might say it's hot pink, right?
If you're a foreigner, you don't know to say hot pink.
You might want to say any number of things.
We say hot pink.
If you're really wet, then you're soaking wet.
If it's really quiet, you can say very quiet, but you can also say dead quiet.
Now a Martian might try solid quiet, but it doesn't work.
What happens if you're really thin?
I mean, you're thin as a pencil.
You're pencil thin.
We don't say wire thin.
We could.
We say pencil thin.
In other words, these things just have to be learned.
So we don't have to worry about whether or not our language's grammar is falling apart
because there's so very much grammar that we use all the time that's right in there,
used by us all the time, that anybody who didn't speak this language would marvel at.
We can think about it.
The only thing that we carry around that is our birthright.
And what all of this means is English is a much happier story than we often suppose.
I hope that I've shown that in these lectures.
What's going to happen to English?
It will diversify into a very creative and democratic spoken form in emails and texting.
And this is something that I think all of us can jump into and participate in because
it is as legitimate and vibrant a form of language as formal writing or formal oratory.
In addition, spoken language, as I've touched on before, will have an increasingly black
or African-American flavor among younger people.
That's more diversity in the way that we'll be speaking.
English language will be spoken by a host of the world's people in a wide array of varieties.
That's something else that's going to happen in English's future.
Another thing that will happen in English's future is that it will continue to morph along.
Notice I didn't say evolve.
It's not going to get better.
I didn't say devolve.
It's not going to get worse.
It's going to morph like the blob in a lava lamp on the basis of stepwise changes and
reinterpretations and confusions.
And yet, it will stay complex in ways that we never have reason to think about, such
as brand new and hot pink.
In other words, English, as it moves into the future, is going to be an ever larger language.
And we can all delight in the varieties that it will exist in and hopefully acquire ability
in those varieties to the extent that we can.
It will be magnificently shambolic.
And what I mean by that is that there is a grand mess that a language is in terms of
how it comes to be and how it is in terms of what the logic of language is as opposed
to the logic of mathematics.
And this is something that we can delight in in the way that all of us delight in all
sorts of disorder as the essence of what life is.
And finally, English will remain an intricate language.
English will remain very complex.
English will remain very subtle.
And we can entertain ourselves by learning the ways in which English is all of those
things by examining English's grammar that's below the radar that we don't think about.
And of course, it doesn't hurt anything and in fact helps a lot of things.
If we burnish our skills in using English on the higher levels, both in speech and in
writing, we must always think of the four boxes.
And in all of those things and the fact that we have this language to exercise these abilities
in, we can rejoice.
