In the universe, which is ours, all phenomena contribute to promote its irreversible evolution
towards a state of complete molecular and thermal disorder.
And if, sometimes, locally, the matter is organising itself spontaneously, as is the
case of cyclones or living organisms, it is only because this facilitates and accelerates
the progression towards the state of generalised disorder.
We rise and fall, so we would first of all be machines to create the global mess.
Explanations.
Here's a glass of water containing ice.
The imbalance in temperature between liquid water and ice water causes a spontaneous flow
of heat between water and ice.
The water cools, and the ice melts.
The heat flow is maintained until the temperature equilibrium.
The disappearance of the ice is irreversible.
It shows us that energy is dissipated when it is transformed.
With each transformation, a part of this energy is degraded as heat.
This deterioration was called entropy.
In fact, any combination of matter and energy far from equilibrium, like the water and ice,
but it is also the case for a solar system, a planet, an ocean, evolves spontaneously
toward a state of disorder, and therefore of maximum entropy.
But under certain conditions, we see the emergence of phenomena that are astonishing, locally
molecules spontaneously organise themselves at the macroscopical scale and create structures
that accelerate the global evolution towards a maximum state of disorder.
Example.
When in summer the tropical ocean is warmer than the atmosphere, the warmth of the water
dissipates into it, and when the imbalance reaches a critical threshold spontaneously,
masses of water vapour will then be organised locally to accelerate the dissipation of heat
from the ocean to the atmosphere.
This corresponds to the occurrence of a hurricane.
The vertical movement of water vapour, combined with the lateral force produced by the rotation
of the earth called the Coriolis force, will cause billions of interactions between water
molecules which leads to the emergence of the highly organised vortex structure of
the hurricane.
The cyclical movement of molecules producing this increased dissipation of heat is what
is called convection.
It is much more efficient than the gradual dissipation through simple conduction that
we observed in the melting of ice.
This is why such heat-dissipating structures emerge spontaneously.
They maintain as long as there is enough heat to dissipate.
This is the major discovery described by Ilya Prigogin.
On another scale, a similar phenomenon occurs in a thin layer of viscous liquid heated from
below, the emergence of so-called Bernard Raleigh cells.
Beyond a critical temperature difference within the liquid, a large number of molecules will
spontaneously organise themselves into mini hurricanes and produce structures that accelerate
the dissipation of heat by convection.
Here again, causing the emergence of these extraordinary structures dissipating energy
honeycomb, we find the coupling of two forces that create cyclic interactions at large scale
between molecules of the liquid.
Firstly, an upward force due to the lower density of the warmer molecules.
Secondly, a downward force due to the molecules cooled in contact with the upper surface layer
and thus become denser again.
If interactions able to create such structures are already occurring between molecules as
simple as water molecules, they occur more easily, with more complex molecules having
more affinities between them, as with molecules based carbon atoms, the so-called organic
molecules.
A simple example of more complex interactions that can generate such energy-dissipative structures
is the chemical reaction described by Belouzov and Zabotinsky.
In this reaction, observed as in the Bernard Raleigh cells in a thin layer of liquid, chemical
compounds are formed and accumulate energy they dissipate, then spontaneously in the
reaction medium.
Again, beyond a critical threshold, interactions will occur between the molecules and accelerate
the dissipation of this energy.
It's again the coupling of two forces within the liquid, here diffusion forces, which will
produce large scale emergence of true cyclical chemical waves.
This phenomenon is materialized within the liquid in the form of a periodic succession
of coloured bands that dissipate the energy of the molecules produced by the chemical
reaction.
These dynamic structures are comparable to the convective motion observed in the Bernard
Raleigh cells.
So, for millions of years, random chemical combinations of molecular assemblies of this
type capable of producing such dissipative energy cycles were formed, in particular in
the wake of geothermal springs on the ocean floor.
Some of these chemical cycles appeared in the small bubbles of lipids and resulted in
the emergence of dissipative structures capable of reproduction, the first living cells.
Later on, molecular complex structures will appear in these primitive cells, which are
able to capture and dissipate solar energy, the chloroplasts.
It will be a new leap in the ability of living cells to dissipate energy and produce entropy.
This will be followed by the emergence of the first algae, then plant life and animal
life.
We will only see the facts.
The emergence of a hurricane, a bacterium, a green alga, a tree, an animal, a human
being are responses to one and the same trend, maximizing the capacity of a medium to dissipate
all the energy available and favor its evolution towards a uniform state of maximum disorder.
And of course, nature has naturally selected structures that are the most dissipative ones.
This is what Eric Cheson has shown, expressed per kilogram of weight.
A human being is 10,000 times more effective at dissipating energy than the sun.
But all this is only the first side of the coin.
While the dissipative structures maximize the production of entropy and disorder in
the community within which they emerge, on the other hand, these structures are inherently
dissipative states of lower disorder, of lower entropy.
This means that specific properties emerge within them, as illustrated by the eye that
is emerging within the hurricane, this extraordinary place of peace and serenity.
The emergence of dissipative structures is thus inseparable from that of more organized
states, which led eventually to the state of human consciousness.
This is the premise for another look at our true nature, an opportunity to look differently
and beyond to consider differently our other social, environmental and political challenges.
But that is another story, the story of the third part.
