These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Notice our catalog or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled, Religion in the Ancient Mediterranean World, Part 1.
The lecturer is Professor Glenn Holland.
Professor Holland is the Bishop James Thaubern Chair of Religious Studies at Allegheny College.
He received his BA from Stanford University, his MA in Theology from the University of
Oxford and his PhD in the Bible and New Testament Studies from the Divinity School of the University
of Chicago.
Professor Holland has written and edited several books including Philodemus and the New Testament
World and Divine Irony, a study of irony as the adoption of the Divine Perspective on
Events in the Human World.
Professor Holland is a contributor and assistant editor for the award-winning journal Common
Knowledge.
Professor Holland is the recipient of several honors and awards including the Thaubern Chair
in Religious Studies in 1992 and the Divisional Professorship in Humanities at Allegheny College
in 2003.
Professor Holland prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, timeline, biographical
modes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 Talking about Ancient Religious Cultures
Hello, I'm Glenn Holland.
This course looks at the variety and the vitality of religious beliefs and practices in the area
surrounding the Mediterranean Sea in the formative years of human civilization.
Back when I was in school they used to call the Mediterranean world the cradle of civilization
and to a certain extent that's true for the West, but of course it means we're overlooking
the origin places of other civilizations such as the civilizations of India or of China,
other parts of Asia, as well as the cultures of South America and North America.
But for the most part, the ancient Mediterranean world is the source of much of our own cultural
heritage.
Now the ancient Mediterranean world, in the sense that we're talking about it here, stretched
from the Persian Gulf in the East to encompass all of the Fertile Crescent.
The Fertile Crescent includes Mesopotamia, the areas of Syria-Palestine, and then down
on into the Fertile Valley of the Nile and Ancient Egypt.
Then we move across the Aegean Sea, and that includes the territory of Greece and Crete.
And finally to the Italian Peninsula, and finally to the western limits of Roman imperial
expansion, the Strait of Gibraltar at the mouth of the Mediterranean.
Now this is a vast area, and it takes in a number of very important ancient civilizations.
It takes in the ancient civilizations of Mesopotamia between the Tigris and Euphrates
rivers, and this includes especially the civilizations of the cities of Sumer and of Babylon and
later in the cities of Oshur and of Nineveh.
It takes in the cultures of Syria-Palestine, including, most famously for us, the ancient
civilization of Israel and Judah, and it includes the ancient kingdom of Egypt that flourished
for centuries along the Nile Valley.
The Mediterranean basin is also home to the civilizations surrounding the Aegean Sea,
including Minoan civilization on the island of Crete, and the successive civilizations
of the Greek mainland.
And then farther to the west we find the Italian Peninsula and the city of Rome, a city destined
to become the capital of an empire that would in time encompass the entire ancient Mediterranean
world.
Now in this course we will begin with the earliest evidence of human religious activity
in the prehistoric era, and then we will continue both chronologically and topically
to the triumph of Christianity as the dominant religion of the Roman Empire in the 4th century
CE, that is the 4th century of the common era, what we usually call the 4th century AD.
Now if we begin with the prehistoric era, that means we will begin with the physical
remains of prehistoric human beings, and look for those that seem to point to some
sort of religious activity and religious belief.
This means we will be focusing on archaeological discoveries, and especially those that are
characteristic of the Mediterranean basin, although to a certain extent there is a continuity
of those physical remains with those of other parts of Europe.
After that, the first religious culture we will discuss that is left literary remains,
that is writings about the religious culture, is that of ancient Egypt, and ancient Egypt
provides with a particularly rich source of information.
It is the primary example in the western world of a sophisticated polytheistic culture, that
is one that has many different gods, and the thing about ancient Egypt is that it developed
in relative cultural isolation from the other civilizations of the ancient Near East, and
so it provides a more or less continuous tradition that remains largely unchanged through the
many, many centuries of ancient Egypt's existence.
Then we will move on to the civilizations of Mesopotamia, again notably in the city of
Sumer and the city of Babylon.
The religion here, unlike that of Egypt, was pretty much at the crossroads of ancient
civilizations, and therefore prey to many different influences from outside.
And so we find that Mesopotamian religion reflects many beliefs that not only came from
outside of Mesopotamia, but were communicated to other parts of the Fertile Crescent, and
so many of those ideas are familiar to us in our own religious heritage.
This includes, of course, the religions of ancient Syria-Palestine.
The most notable culture there for us is that of ancient Israel and ancient Judah.
This is the ancestor of modern Judaism.
But we're also going to reflect a little bit on the religious culture of some of Israel's
and Judah's neighbors.
Most of these are known to us primarily because there are texts in the Bible that condemn
the practices and the religious beliefs of Israel's and Judah's neighbors, but we're
going to try to understand them in their integrity.
Then we'll be discussing Greek religion.
Now Greek religion is probably the most familiar to us from this period because it is expressed
to us through mythology, through the ancient stories of heroes and gods.
But we'll also consider the development of Greek religion over several centuries and
its reevaluation in the light of philosophical speculation in the aftermath of the conquest
of Alexander the Great.
Then Roman religion and its appropriation of Greek mythology and other aspects of Greek
religion, and this has been probably the most direct and the strongest influence on our
own ideas about religion in the ancient world.
So we will consider those elements that made Roman religion distinctive as well as its
development from a city's religion to the religion of an empire that stretched across
the ancient Mediterranean.
Finally, towards the end we will talk about the origins of the early Jesus movement and
the gradual development of the early Christian movement in relation both to Greco-Roman religious
culture and in relation to Christianity's mother faith, the Judaism of the first century
of the common era.
Now although I am going to attempt to be as comprehensive as possible in these lectures,
we will in fact only be able to touch upon the highlights of this very broad and varied
subject.
Each of these ancient cultures that we will consider is an academic discipline in its
own right, and it's the province of Assyriologists, Egyptologists, Anthropologists, Classes, Historians
and all sorts of religious scholars.
So this course is meant as an introduction, an opportunity to learn something about the
religious beliefs and practices that have had such a powerful influence on our own religious
beliefs and practices.
At the same time, I hope to provide a real sense of the feel of the different ancient
religions we will be discussing, their distinctive points of view on the divine world and the
world of human beings.
And I'd like to talk as well about the relationship between the gods and humanity in each of these
systems and see what particular point of view each one provides.
Now we'll draw upon a variety of sources to talk about ancient religious cultures, but
our emphasis will be as much as possible on the narratives produced by the cultures themselves,
the stories they told about the gods and about human beings and about the relationship between
the gods and human beings and the world they both lived in.
Now when it comes to the business of attempting to reconstruct ancient religious cultures,
we have essentially four sources of information available to us.
The first source of information is archaeological evidence, and this provides evidence for worship
practices as well as household religion.
And the sources for this archaeological evidence range from prehistoric burials to the remains
of ancient worship centers and various kinds of cultic figures, that is figures involved
with the practice of worship in certain places.
So here we're talking about places of worship that are rediscovered by archaeologists, we're
talking about objects of worship such as cultic statues, we're talking about temples, we're
talking about altars, we're talking about all the devotional items that are found in
the temple and often in the household.
But here we're also talking about other evidence of religious belief, not only the obviously
religious in connection with particular worship practices.
Here we're also talking about tombs, burial paraphernalia, and collections of what appear
to be sacred objects.
So those are all sorts of archaeological sources of evidence for religion in the ancient world.
Our second source of information is non-literary writings about religious matters.
Now what do I mean by non-literary writings?
Basically I'm talking about records, some sort of written account that indicates that
on a given date a particular ceremony was carried out in honor of a particular god.
Or you might have a festival calendar that lists the different times of years when different
festivals sacred to a particular god were carried out.
Or you might have an account of a particular ceremony that was carried out in response
to a particular occurrence.
And these are non-literary because they're essentially records, they're essentially accounting
or bookkeeping if you will, of religious ceremonies and sometimes actually include information
about how much of what was used in particular religious ceremonies.
So here we have ideas about how particular gods were worshiped, when they were worshiped,
and how much was consumed often in their worship.
So non-literary writing forms a second source of information about religious ritual in the
ancient world.
The third source of information is literary sources, particularly literary reconstructions
of the religious past.
And this is a rather unusual situation, it's effectively similar to what we're doing in
this course.
It is the elite of a particular religious culture talking about its own past, about the past
of that religious culture.
For example, during the Roman Republic, a number of writers wrote about traditional
Roman religion and attempted to reconstruct the past worship of ancient Rome and compared
it with their own time during the years of the Republic.
And of course they did this with a particular intention, not merely did they have an interest
in their own history, but usually they wanted to demonstrate that the religion of their
own time had degenerated seriously from the religion of an earlier time.
So here we have literary accounts of an earlier stage of a given tradition.
Another example would be writings from the Hebrew kingdoms, that is to say after the
time of King David around the year 1000 BCE.
And those writings that reflect earlier religious practices among the Hebrew patriarchs, people
like Abraham, Isaac and Jacob, as well as their wives and their families.
And this is an attempt from a much later perspective to reconstruct the religion of the Hebrew ancestors,
to say something about how their religion stands in continuity with the religion of
the Hebrew kingdoms.
And again, such a reconstruction will inevitably reflect the interests and the points of emphasis
of the later tradition and attempt in some way to impose those or to contrast those with
the practices of the ancestral past.
So these accounts may be more or less accurate depending on the particular situation.
But one thing we do know is that they reflect inevitably the opinions of later members
of a particular religious tradition about the earlier forms of that religious tradition
that they have inherited from their ancestors.
So that is the third source of information about ancient religion that is accessible to
us.
And finally, there are literary representations that really have no direct interest in evoking
a particular religious situation or culture.
Instead, these are works of literature from the ancient world that make many presuppositions
about the religious culture of which they are a part.
And here we can take the example of Homer's Iliad, for example.
Although the Iliad is not specifically a religious work, it includes a great deal of information
about how Homer, or the poets that we know as Homer, felt about the relationship of the
divine world to the world of human beings.
We have gods arguing among themselves.
We have human beings in very direct relationship to the gods.
We have the gods interfering into human affairs to make sure that a particular outcome is
achieved.
And we have a particular attitude between the gods and human beings.
So the Iliad provides indirect literary evidence in the course of unfolding its fascinating
story.
Similarly, a tragedy by Euripides called the Bacchae talks about a religious cult, an enthusiastic
religious group dedicated to the worship of Dionysus that was characterized by frenzied
worship and rather supernatural acts of inspired speech and inspired action.
And although the tragedy is not specifically about the religion of Dionysus, it involves
Dionysus himself as a character.
And it tells us a great deal about how Euripides felt about the relationship between a divine
character like Dionysus and a human character named Pentheus in this case, who works against
the interests of Dionysus and the tragedy that ensues for him and for his family.
So although these literary works are not directly about the religious culture that they represent,
they do provide some very valuable insights into how particular people felt about their
religious culture, how that religious culture determined the way they looked at the world
and determined the kind of literary works that they were able to create.
So these are all sources of information about religious culture in the ancient world.
And they must be interpreted in terms of what we know about religious beliefs in general,
about religious actions in general, about religious phenomena in general.
And what we know arises from long years of study and analysis of world religious communities
over the last century or so by a wide variety of scholars.
Now given the various types of information available to us, we will concentrate in this
course on the stories that are told about the gods, stories told about human beings,
stories told about the nature of creation, and these stories are told by members of
a particular religious culture reflecting the ideas of that religious culture.
I think that stories are often the best illustration of what a given religious culture is about,
what its members thought about the gods and humanity and creation, and what they thought
about the relationships among the gods and humanity and creation.
It is in and through stories that religious beliefs are expressed most directly in many
cases and in other cases indirectly because they are part of a cultural complex that provides
the context for the stories.
And the stories are told in the context of that religious culture and understood in the
context of that religious culture.
Its plots and its characters, both human and divine, make sense within a particular religious
setting.
Now of course all stories are about relationships.
And the stories about relationships in the ancient world often include relationships
not only among human beings but also between the human beings and the gods, or even just
among the gods themselves, or between the divine world and the human world.
And all of these are ideas and stories that are central to religious narrative.
Religious narrative talks about relationships not only between human beings but also among
the gods and among human beings and the gods.
And of course stories create community and stories reflect community.
So we find within the context of a community that stories about the gods and about human
beings are told and retold.
And each time a story is told or retold it influences what people think about their gods,
what people think about the way the gods treat human beings, and how human beings react to
the gods.
And each time a story is retold it influences the beliefs of the community and in turn is
influenced by the beliefs of the community in which it is told.
There is a mutual interaction between the story and the culture, the culture and the
story.
So each to a small extent influences and moderates the other, creating a symbiotic relationship,
by a mutually beneficial, mutually growing relationship between the stories of a religious
culture and the religious culture itself.
So this means that each literary narrative, each story written down in the ancient world
is only a snapshot.
It is taken at a particular point in time, at a particular point in the development of
the story, but also at a particular point in the development of the religious community
to which the story belongs.
So it may be a picture that more or less applies to all time for that religious culture, or
it might be a single person's point of view on that religious culture at a particular
point in that culture's history.
And it's very difficult sometimes to tell the difference.
But with the help of other information available to us about a given religious culture, these
individual snapshots provided by religious narratives can tell us a lot and can give
us a sense of what it was like to be part of a particular community of belief and worship.
Not just an observer, but a participant, and that's what makes these stories so valuable
for us for understanding ancient religious cultures.
So we will consider what aspects of these ancient Mediterranean religious cultures,
the way they relate to each other, the way they relate to the central web of relationships
among the gods and humanity and creation, specifically as they are revealed in stories.
Now we will also pay particular attention to rituals and other religious actions, and
we'll pay attention as well to physical representation of divine figures, to designations of
religious worship space, because all of these are ways of understanding what people did
and what people believed, and the way that what they believed influenced what they did
at particular times and places.
So our course of study is both developmental and comparative.
It is developmental to the extent that we examine different ancient Mediterranean religious
cultures as they grow and change over time, and that means as they grow and change in
themselves and as they grow and change in relation to other ancient cultures.
And our discussion will be comparative to the extent that these ancient religious cultures
represent certain fundamental human needs, certain fundamental human interests, and human
beings tend to always express these needs and interests in relatively similar ways.
So we can compare the way that one religious culture presents these interests with a way
that another culture presents these interests.
At the same time, of course, we will also consider what was unique about each of the
ancient religious cultures we discuss, and what specific original and distinctive facets
of the human spiritual quest they display.
Now when we talk about ideas about the world, ideas about the gods, and the way that they
interact with the human world, we are talking about religious narratives, and that means
we are talking about both myth and metaphor.
Now when we think about stories about gods and humanity, we first think of mythology.
And mythology, as I said before, is that collection of familiar stories of legendary gods and
legendary heroes.
These are stories of the sort that we're interested in.
They're about human lives lived out in the presence of the gods.
They're stories sometimes about the gods themselves without reference to human beings
at all, especially stories that have to do with the creation of the world and the creation
of human beings.
Now some of these mythological stories, the stories that are presented in mythology, some
of them seem to explain how things came to be, creation stories.
But more often they are really meant to depict how things are, how things now stand between
human beings in the divine world, and try to explain the situation in which human beings
now find themselves, which is not always a pleasant situation.
So again, they are like all stories.
They have the intention to entertain, first of all.
But these stories also have the intention to instruct the audience about the world they
live in.
Of course, in the case of mythology, the world the stories talk about includes the divine
realm, the world of the gods, and the pervasive influence over the human world of the gods
who inhabit the divine world.
Now any talk about the gods and the divine realm they inhabit constitute what scholars
call myth.
Whenever one talks about the gods, whenever one talks about the gods' deeds or their
dealings with humanity, one engages in what is called mythic discourse that is talking
about things that are beyond everyday reality and beyond the comprehension of everyday reality.
So one talks about the gods, one is speaking from the narrative realm of myth.
Now myth is different from mythology because mythology, legendary stories of gods and heroes,
are only one type of mythic discourse, one example of the narrative realm of myth.
Myth is about what lies above or behind or beyond history, but relates to human history
in terms of directing it or determining its events or determining its outcome.
So myth not only stands in contrast to mythology, but myth also stands in contrast to history.
The normal process of everyday events that we understand as human beings.
Now history, at least the way that scholars talk about it, is not identical with everything
that has ever happened in the past.
Instead, history in the way that scholars use it usually refers to important and verifiable
events that can be reasonably surmised to have happened according to the rules of historical
inquiry.
Myth by contrast has to do with what is beyond what we call everyday experience and therefore
beyond what we call history, what lies behind, above it, or beyond it, and that includes
of course the supernatural.
Myth includes any ideas about forces, supernatural or otherwise, that may direct or determine
or drive or otherwise control history.
So myth is not only religious in nature.
We can talk about myth in the work of Karl Marx, for example, because he feels there
is an outside force that drives history towards a particular conclusion.
Or we can talk about myth in the work of Friedrich Nietzsche, since he too talks about a force,
the will to power, that drives the direction of history and determines its ultimate outcome.
And then of course we can talk about myth in religious ideas as well.
And I want to emphasize that the use of the word myth or mythic in this sense implies
no judgment about the factual nature of its content.
It instead is merely a designation of the sort of narrative we're talking about, the
sort of talk we're talking about.
By its very nature, the language of myth is symbolic, because language is meant to
express everyday reality, and refers to everyday reality, and so is not adequate to what lies
beyond everyday reality.
So when we move into the realm of mythic discourse, we are talking about symbolic and metaphorical
use of language, taking language that refers to the everyday and using it to refer to what
lies beyond the everyday.
So that means that the symbolic language used by myth only secondarily refers to the things
that are included in mythic discourse.
For example, to refer to a god as a father is to refer to that god anthropomorphically
in human form, and to use the attributes of a human father at the time that the term is
used to refer to attributes of the god.
So it is not an arbitrary designation to talk about a god as a father, but it is a metaphorical
designation, because there are certain characteristics the god has that apparently someone feels can
be compared to the characteristics of a real biological father, because of course a god
is not a real biological father in the normal sense.
Now it's not always clear of the extent to which ancient Mediterranean peoples were
aware they were speaking metaphorically about the gods they worshipped.
It's not always clear if they were aware they were speaking anthropomorphically, because
these may not be terms that made sense to them.
They may not have thought about whether or not they were presenting the gods in human
forms, but merely that the gods had human forms, although it's hard to determine how
much they believed that the gods had human forms.
Everything will be taken up in a later lecture.
What we can say is that the stories told in ancient Mediterranean religions express truths
as those truths were perceived by those who told them.
Truths not only about how things are, but truths about why things are the way they are.
And this is one of the central concerns of all religious discourse, and therefore of
all religion.
Well now that we've considered the scope of our study and the important distinction
between religious narratives and other kinds of discourse, in our next session we will
examine a question that is fundamental to our entire discussion of religion in the ancient
Mediterranean world.
Next what is religion.
