In our last lecture, we reviewed the gods of the Mesopotamian Pantheon and discussed
two stories, Enuma, Elish and Adapa, creation stories that explain how things got to be
the way they are now.
We will devote this lecture to the Mesopotamian goddess known in Sumer as Inanna and later
in Babylon as Ishtar.
She's the goddess of fertility and the power of abundant life.
We'll first consider the different attributes, titles and powers that made Inanna the most
powerful and important goddess in the Mesopotamian religious culture, and then we'll trace the
development and elaboration of her divine attributes and consider some stories that
illustrate why Inanna is called the Lady of Myriad Offices.
Inanna was worshipped in Sumer from the beginning of its civilization, which is to say from
around 4000 BCE until around 1000 BCE.
Later she was worshipped under the name Ishtar from an early period to the turn of the age.
The earliest references to Inanna pair her with the god Demuzi Amma Ushumgal Galana,
a pastoral god who represented ripe clusters of dates, and Inanna was Demuzi's wife.
So Inanna was identified with the storehouse where the date harvest was kept, Demuzi Amma
Ushumgalana representing the dates, Inanna representing the date storehouse, and so naturally
she became to be thought of in terms of material abundance and the plentiful yields of produce.
As a result Inanna was also associated with the fertile earth and with the mysterious powers
of the earth to generate new growth.
So Inanna's presence was believed to bring life and abundance to both plants and to animals.
Now this beneficial power fertility that was inspired by Inanna and Demuzi was celebrated
in a yearly rite of sacred marriage, Hiros Gamos, with the gods represented by a priestess
and the king.
Now the details are not entirely clear, but the ritual apparently involves sexual intercourse
between the priestess and the king of a city, probably on a special bed in Inanna's temple.
The intention of this ritual was to ensure the fertility of the territory through the
symbolic representation of Inanna and Demuzi having sexual intercourse, as their representatives
went through the process of sexual intercourse.
As this ritual the sacred marriage indicates, Inanna's association with fertility, specifically
in association with her consort Demuzi, was expressed primarily in terms of active sexuality
and sexual activity.
So we find in the mythology, Inanna expresses eagerness for sexual activity, especially
with Demuzi, and their sexual activity always retains at least some vestige of fertility
ideas.
In one hymn for example, Inanna begs Demuzi to plow her body just as the farmer plows
the fertile earth, or in her much more explicit words she says, plow my vulva, Demuzi, plow
my vulva.
At the same time, her sexuality has overtones of danger.
She's often sexually voracious, and in one poem Demuzi pleads with Inanna to be set free
after they have had sexual intercourse 50 times in a row.
And she also proves herself to be dangerous to some of her other lovers, often abandoning
them or even punishing them after she is tired of them.
So as we may see, the religious poetry about Inanna and Demuzi in particular is heavily
and frankly erotic, and this illustrates the general connection in the ancient world between
fertility and human sexuality.
Now Inanna is connected with all different aspects of human sexuality, such as the female
beauty that inspires sexual desire in men, or the skills associated with sexual enjoyment,
for example, in the company of a courtesan.
The goddess is therefore noted for her own beauty, that is the physical beauty of her
body, but more especially she is noted for the beauty of her robes and adornments.
And these robes and adornments are important not only as manifestations of divine beauty,
but more especially as symbols of different aspects of Inanna's divine power.
Each of her adornments has an association with specific aspects of Inanna's divine power.
As of her association with active sexuality, Inanna is also associated with prostitutes
and with the evening star, the planet Venus, because the evening star is of course the
main source of light for the nocturnal activities of prostitutes.
Sometimes Inanna is depicted as a prostitute herself, soliciting men in the ale house or
perhaps calling down to them from her bedroom window overlooking the street.
So there are all of these different associations of sexuality with Inanna, and her association
with sexual desire arises from the simple fact that Inanna is sexual desire in all
its forms, without her there could not be human life or animal life.
But to some extent, the power of sexual desire is seen as a threat to civilized life, as
a force of deep churning emotion, and as a force of chaos beyond human control.
It is this chaotic power that makes Inanna dangerous and makes her unpredictable, not
only in regard to her sexuality, but also in association with natural disasters and
the heat of battle.
The Mesopotamians believe the wrath of Inanna was expressed through natural phenomena, things
such as lightning, flood, storm, and wind, all of which are violent eruptions of nature
which to the ancient world had no discernible cause.
These extreme natural phenomena were taken as signs of Inanna's strong emotions, her
restlessness, her impetuosity, all of these attributes rooted in her sexuality.
Mesopotamians were very wary of the power of the gods, as we've seen, because the power
of the gods might lash out at them in unexpected and often violent ways, and they believe that
even the other gods were afraid of Inanna because she was so wild and so unpredictable.
Inanna therefore also loved war and battle, but not for military skill like Athena, nor
did she love it because it provided a means of divine vengeance in the way that Hothor
did.
Instead, Inanna loves war and battles for the deep passions they provoke, anger, revenge,
hate, and fear.
Inanna indulges herself in those strong emotions.
The Sumerians in fact call battle the dance of Inanna, and they believe that she was present
in the thick of the fighting, encouraging the warriors to attack and kill the enemy.
The primary identification for Inanna is her association with fertility, with Dumuzi,
as the god of the date cluster, and then growing out of her association with Dumuzi, a very
clear and pervading association with active sexuality, with fertility overtones, but
primarily focused as human sexual activity, as in the case of the Hiroskamos or the sacred
marriage.
And arising out of this, we have her association with the strong, passionate feelings in nature
in natural disaster, or the strong, passionate feelings of battle and war.
Now Inanna's power grew over the centuries, until she was finally regarded by the Mesopotamians
as supreme, as the queen of heaven and earth.
As such, she was a figure whose power and importance places her at the very top of the
Mesopotamian pantheon.
In this role, Inanna is often depicted as the ruler of the gods in heaven and the director
of human affairs on earth, with, surprisingly, an interest in the welfare of her people.
Inanna's association with the cycle of fertility and the abundance of produce, and as well
her association with heavenly bodies, such as the evening star, the sun and the moon,
gives her the power to regulate the movements of those heavenly bodies and to oversee the
cycle of the agricultural year.
So she, like Marduk, to a certain extent, is a commander of time.
In this connection, Inanna is also a guardian of the social order, and that social order
includes a special attention to kingship and the culture that goes along with civilization.
And she is also, in many cases, the overseer of judgment in legal matters.
So in an odd way, this goddess who is associated with wild, impetuous actions of one kind and
another, is also a guardian of the social actions and activities of civilization, a guardian
of order and even of justice.
On the other hand, it's typical of Inanna that she did not come by her power entirely
honestly.
According to one story, Inanna gained sovereign power over the earth from Enki, the god of
wisdom, and she did it by trickery.
According to the story, one day Inanna put on all her adornments and her robes of power,
this is remember not only symbolic of her divine powers, but also of her dazzling beauty.
And she went to visit Enki, who welcomed her into his home.
While they sit around and talk, and after a while they begin to drink strong beer together,
and a little while after that, they are involved in a drinking bout.
They're matching each other drink for drink, but only Enki becomes drunk.
Very soon, Enki is trying to impress Inanna by offering her gifts, offering her the various
powers that Enki uses to rule over creation, and he keeps piling the gifts up, and eventually
he offers all of his powers to rule over creation to Inanna.
At that point, she takes them and leaves.
After a while, Enki sobers up, and when he's sober again, he tries to regain his various
powers from Inanna, but she refuses to return them to him, and in fact she taunts him with
a little song praising herself and her new powers.
Now there's not a direct connection, but this story does have certain parallels to a similar
story in Egyptian mythology about how ISIS gained powers from the aged sun god Rey by
another kind of trickery.
If there's a moral here, it's probably that old men should not trust attractive young women.
So we can see that Inanna presents us with a series of apparent contradictions.
She represents fertility and the joys of active sexuality, but she's also dangerous.
She's predatory, she's uncontrollable, and she's the source of natural upheavals and
even the clash of armies.
On the one hand, Inanna is the queen of heaven and earth.
She oversees the social order.
She sometimes shows particular concern for the king in an almost maternal way, and yet
she's also fond of grabbing and wielding power.
All of these conflicting attributes of Inanna are in display in the major story we have
about her, the story of Inanna's journey into the underworld.
Now Inanna's journey to the underworld appears to be an attempt to extend her sovereignty
over heaven and earth to include the third realm, the underworld.
Let me explain a couple of things.
In the version of the story that I'm referring to here, Inanna is referred to as Ishtar, the
Babylonian name of Inanna.
I will continue, however, to refer to her as Inanna as I relate the story.
And also, this is at a time before Inanna's sister Ireshkigal has become associated with
Nurgal as her consort.
So at this point, Ireshkigal alone rules over the underworld.
And it is her rule that Inanna attempts to usurp and overthrow.
The underworld, as I've indicated, is the kingdom of Inanna's elder sister, Ireshkigal.
Her name means Lady of the Great Earth.
And the poem begins, To kernurgi, land of no return, Inanna, daughter of sin, was determined
to go.
To the house which those who enter cannot leave on the road where traveling is one
way only.
These lines already hint at Inanna's insatiable ambition.
She is determined to go down into that one realm of creation she does not control.
And it also foreshadows her predicament once she's in the underworld because the road
is one way only.
Inanna prepares to go down into the pit of the underworld by adorning herself as she
did to visit Inki.
She puts on all her adornments and her robes of power, which, again, are physical signs
of her divine sovereignty as well as the source of much of her outer beauty.
When Inanna approaches the gates of the underworld, she shouts out a threat, if you do not open
the gate for me to come in, I shall smash the door and shatter the bolt, I shall smash
the doorpost and overturn the doors, I shall raise up the dead and they shall eat the living.
The dead shall outnumber the living.
Might see some hints here of that fear I've referred to earlier, that fear and awe of
the dead, that they might come back and when they do, they might not be real happy.
This is a threat that Inanna pronounces as she approaches the underworld.
Then she begins to descend into the underworld, but at this point Inanna's sister Ereshkigal
sees her and she vents her anger at Inanna's ambitions and her presumption.
She says, what brings her to me?
What has incited her against me?
Surely not because I drink water with the Anunnaki, I eat clay for bread, I drink muddy
water for beer.
The Anunnaki are the various lower gods of the underworld and the idea of eating clay
and drinking muddy water are typical of the situation of the dead in the underworld.
So Ereshkigal sends her gatekeeper to allow Inanna to enter the gates of the underworld
only if she lays aside one of her adornments at each of the seven gates that lead to Ereshkigal's
kingdom.
And of course when she lays aside an adornment, she is also laying aside one aspect of her
divine power.
So it happens.
At each gate, Inanna must lay aside one of her adornments of power and when she finally
enters the underworld and the presence of Ereshkigal, she is stripped naked of both
authority and power.
So Inanna threatens Ereshkigal, but Ereshkigal summons her vizier to send sixty diseases
against Inanna and although it's not explicit in the poem, Inanna apparently sickenes and
dies in the underworld.
Now of course one cannot have the goddess of life and fertility dead in the underworld
because it means that on earth, all sexual activity, all fertility of the earth will
come to an end.
And this is the situation that gains the attention of Papsukal, the god's vizier.
He sees the earth has become sterile in Inanna's absence and he intercedes with Ia, the chief
god, to bring Inanna back to life and return her to earth.
Ia agrees and so he creates a person to carry out this job and the person is given the name
his appearance is bright, or we might say loosely, good looks the playboy.
And this person is to go down into the underworld and gain Inanna's release.
So his appearance is bright, or good looks the playboy, is to go down into Ereshkigal's
realm and ask for a water's skin.
It's not exactly clear what the meaning of this request is.
But apparently his appearance is bright is a young man whose appearance will please Ereshkigal
with his good looks.
But he also seems to be in some way not human because he is not really subject to Ereshkigal's
power or to the power of the underworld.
In another version of this story the god creates two explicitly inhuman creatures who are neither
of heaven nor of the earth but are made of the dirt under the god's fingernail, sort
of halflings you might say who are not subject to the laws of the heavens, the earth, or
the underworld.
And that seems to be a similar situation with his appearance is bright or good looks.
In any event, when good looks ask Ereshkigal for a water's skin, Ereshkigal becomes angry
and she curses him.
But she also summons Namtar her vizier and orders him to revive Ishtar, that is to say
Inanna.
Namtar sprinkles Inanna with the water of life and so restores her to the living.
She then presents her to Ereshkigal and very soon Inanna departs through the gates of the
underworld and as she goes out of each gate leading downward, as she goes out and up,
at each gate she picks up one of her abandoned adornments and so as she rises out of the
underworld she gradually re-assumes her various divine powers, one adornment and therefore
one power at each of the seven gates.
There's a problem.
Inanna must also find someone to take her place in the underworld.
This is a common motif in stories of the underworld.
It seems to be a general rule in the ancient world that once someone has opened up a place
in the land of the dead, that that place can never again be left vacant.
So either one must remain in the underworld oneself or find a volunteer to take one's
place.
In this case, we're not talking about a volunteer.
In this case, Inanna's replacement is to be her consort Dumuzi.
He will take her place in the underworld.
At Ereshkigal's order, Inanna's replacement in the underworld is to be her lover and consort
Dumuzi.
And in preparation, Dumuzi is prepared for burial and mourned as if he were already
dead.
Now the only one who objects to this arrangement is Dumuzi's sister Belili.
She rebells against what she considers an injustice and pleads that Dumuzi might be
allowed to return to the land of the living periodically.
She says, You shall not rob me forever of my only brother.
On the day when Dumuzi comes back up and the lapis lazuli pipe and the carnelian ring
come up with him, when male and female mourners come up with him, the dead shall come up and
smell the smoke offering.
So Dumuzi, when he goes into the underworld, is mourned and that period of mourning continues.
And during that time, of course, the earth does not produce crops because the god of
agricultural abundance is gone from the world.
And animals at this time do not produce offspring because they too undergo a fallow period.
However, when Dumuzi returns to earth, fertility is restored to both land and animals and
the earth soon produces abundantly.
Both the preparation of Dumuzi for burial and the events that surround his return seem
to suggest some sort of religious ritual that mourns the end of the agricultural year
and another that celebrates the beginning of a new season of growth and harvest.
It seems that this story of Inanna's descent into the underworld is intended to clarify
to a certain extent the balance between the role of the two goddesses, Inanna and Ireshkigal
and also to examine to some extent the nature of each goddess's power.
Although Inanna is queen of heaven and earth, there is a third realm that lies beyond her
control.
This is the underworld where the dead reside ruled over by her sister Ireshkigal and the
fact that the two are sisters is probably significant.
There is a connection between heaven and earth, a connection between earth and the underworld
and even a connection between the underworld and heaven.
So the story may be in part an answer to the question who has dominion over the different
parts of the earth or another question why is there suffering and death?
In that case the answer would be some things are beyond the powers of even the greatest
gods and that's just the way things are, that's the way things are meant to be.
The story also seems to recognize some connection between the power of fertility and the role
of death in allowing opportunities for new life to appear.
Not only is it true that one generation passes and another generation comes to take its place,
but it's also true in the natural world that the growth of organic matter depends on the
previous death of other organic matter.
And also there seems to be perhaps some awareness that sex and death, sexual intercourse and
death are products of the same evolutionary development.
When individual organisms are brought into being through sexual generation this is also
when individual organisms die at a certain point to be replaced by other organisms.
So in the same evolutionary development we have the beginning of sexual intercourse or
sex in some form and the beginning of death.
Both seem to be implicit in the life of each person.
Now it should now be clear why one of Inanna's epithets is the lady of myriad offices.
She is associated with fertility, with human sexuality, with the various aspects of human
sexuality that are represented in the social order and in cultural forms.
For example, singing, dancing, beauty, all of those things that are associated with sexual
pleasure but also with prostitutes and courtesans and even with the evening star.
We have her associations with rule over the world because of her connections with the
passage of time and the cycles of the seasons that reflect the cycle of fertility.
And we also have her association with power exercised in royal government.
So all of these different myriad offices that Inanna represents and holds all seem to be
based on a very few fundamental characteristics.
One of these fundamental characteristics is the impetuosity expressed in the unrestricted
outlet of energy.
And once again we see the idea that the power of the gods is expressed in creative energy,
the controlled directed force of energy.
Inanna is typical of the gods in that way.
Her energy is expressed in very particular ways and brings about very clear observable
results.
She is however also associated with the unrestricted outlet of energy in the threatening power of
battle and the threat of death, in natural calamities such as storms and floods, in sexual
desire, in the power of fertility and the power exercised in royal government.
The double aspect of her impetuosity becomes clearest in her sexual nature because this
is a nature that is both uninhibited and wide ranging.
It focuses primarily on her relationship with her consort Dumuzzi and in that form Inanna's
sexuality is somewhat domesticated.
It is here where her sexuality is aimed at fertility and the birth of animals and of
human beings.
It is here that her sexuality is beneficial to society in its proper place and it is here
where her sexuality is even imitated in the right of the Hiroskamos, the sacred marriage
between the priestess of Inanna and the king of the city.
But that same sexuality outside of the context with Dumuzzi, outside of its domestication
is threatening.
It is dangerous because she is insatiable and as I've said before she is careless towards
her lovers.
Many of those mortals who are associated with Inanna at some point in their lives very soon
suffer tragic fates after she is tired of them.
This is something that Gilgamesh throws in her face in the epic as we will see.
So in some ways one might associate Inanna with the basic force and energy of life.
This is an energy that is sometimes calm and predictable, can be used for the good of human
endeavor but at other times it is chaotic and frightening and destructive to humanity
and the civilizations that humanity attempts to create.
So Inanna's role as queen of heaven and earth appears to arise at least in some part from
the recognition that she embodies within herself the full range of human activity, both constructive
human activity and destructive human activity.
And by encompassing them into herself this full range of human activity she also lifts
human activity up fully into the realm of the divine.
Now in our next session we'll begin a discussion of the epic of Gilgamesh.
We'll start off by considering Gilgamesh as a king on the Mesopotamian model and therefore
Mesopotamian ideas about the nature of kingship, of friendship and of the figure of the hero.
