In our last lecture, we looked at Egyptian creation mythology, and we discovered certain
recurring ideas about the relationships among the gods and the cosmos.
In this lecture, we will consider the results of the creative act, that is the hierarchy
of gods in the Egyptian pantheon, and we'll look towards the end of the lecture, in particular
at the different Egyptian sun gods.
Now, the Egyptian pantheon, or hierarchy of gods, includes a wide variety of deities.
And there's no single obvious way to categorize the gods of ancient Egypt.
The only way to do so is much more a matter of convenience to the modern scholar or the
modern person, and not really a reflection of the way that Egyptians themselves thought
about the divine world.
We seem to have this urge to categorize and systematize that the Egyptians did not necessarily
share.
At the same time, the Egyptians did think of the gods as forming a hierarchy, just as
they themselves lived in a hierarchy with the pharaoh at the top and various other levels
of society under his authority.
Now you'll remember we talked about the Ennead, the nine chief gods who were the first products
of divine creation.
They stood at the head of the divine hierarchy.
But I will remind you, their position in the hierarchy was not dictated by the order of
their creation, but their role in the governing of creation.
So the primary gods who have to do with human society and human welfare are the last in
the line of creation.
The children of Geb and Nut, and those four are Osiris, Isis, Seth, and Nephthys.
Even these gods are not the immediate rulers of humanity.
This is a role that falls to the chief sun god, either the sun god as the initiator of
creation, such as Amun, or the sun god as the final product of creation in the case
of Horus, who is the sun and successor of Osiris.
So we may classify the gods according to the nature of their primary associations, but
when we do so, we should keep in mind that many of the gods transcended those primary
attributes and became involved with a wide range of human activities and concerns, some
of them taking on quite a deal of prominence that went beyond their original attributes
and concerns.
Now the creation stories have already acquainted us with several of the gods associated with
natural phenomena, and these gods also represent the cosmic elements that are brought into
being through the process of creation.
And among this group, for example, are Nun, Nun representing the primordial waters of the
abyss, the principle of chaos.
Another is the eight gods of the Agdoad, the eight gods of the Agdoad that are part of
the process of creation.
Other elemental gods are Shu and Tefnut, the god of air and the goddess of moisture, and
their offspring, Geb and Nut, the god of the earth and the goddess of the sky.
To them, we may also add other elemental gods, such as two different moon gods.
One of these is Toth, who is also the divine scribe of the gods, and the other is Conshu,
who is one of a divine triad in the city of Thebes.
The other two gods were Amun and his consort, Mutt.
Other gods also included aspects of natural phenomenon, and notably this was true of course
of the various chief sun gods, but also it included the goddess Hothor, whose primary
attribute as the goddess of joy and the goddess of divine vengeance would not seem to make
her part of the cosmic setup, the cosmic design.
But in one myth, Hothor, appearing here in the form of a cow, carries the sun god Rey
away into the sky.
The idea is that somehow he is threatened by humanity on earth and he wishes to depart
from the regions of the earth and to enter into the upper regions of the sky.
So he climbs upon Hothor's back and she carries him up into the sky as her legs, which are
firmly planted on the earth, grow longer and longer.
And after a while it is necessary for four gods to hold on to her legs, one assigned
to each leg, in order to make sure that she does not topple.
In this story, it is the underside of Hothor's body which forms the firmament of heaven,
and it is decorated by the stars.
And Rey continues into the story because Hothor is believed to give birth to Rey each
morning and then to swallow him every night, only to give birth to him again the following
morning.
So Hothor, at least in one mythic story, also is involved as a cosmic element.
Now, of course, the personification of natural phenomenon as anthropomorphic gods humanizes
the force that control nature and helps to make sense of the elements that form part
of nature as part of a story, part of a comprehensible understanding of the way the cosmos works.
In addition to the elemental gods of the cosmos, we also have national deities in ancient Egypt.
These national deities appear to have developed from the various local gods of the ancient
gnomes, those Neolithic settlements up and down the length of the Nile Valley.
These distinctively local gods took on additional significance when one gnome conquered another
or one gnome was conquered by another, or sometimes when the separate gods of two different
gnomes became identified with each other.
At the same time, it is possible that some gods were recognized from very early on as
local manifestations, local versions, if you will, of more universal gods.
For example, Amun in the city of Karnak was recognized early on as a universally important
god and not limited in his influence to the city of Karnak.
So a god sacred to all of Egypt might also have a special association with a particular
locality.
So, for example, the god Canum, the ram-headed god Canum, was associated with the cataracts
in Upper Egypt and was believed to control the flow and ebb of the Nile.
Most gods had a particular city that was the center of their worship and to a certain extent
localized those gods.
For example, Ta is identified with the city of Thebes.
One group of gods with significant significance for all Egyptians were the deities of the
underworld, the funerary deities who oversaw the preparation of the dead for burial and
their entrance into the afterlife.
Now the earliest god of the dead and of the underworld seems to have been the god Anubis.
Anubis is familiar to us because he is traditionally represented either as a jackal, that is a
scavenger of dead things, or as a human being with a jackals head.
Additionally, the head of Anubis is black because black was the Egyptian color of death.
So originally, Anubis was the judge of the dead and the ruler of the dead during the
time of the Old Kingdom.
In time, Anubis was succeeded as god of the underworld by Osiris and, if you will, demoted
to the protective god of cemeteries.
And in some cases, it is the god Anubis who conducts the recently deceased soul to the
realm of Osiris for judgment.
Osiris took on the role of king of the dead as the monarch of the afterlife after his
own death at the hands of his brother Seth.
And at that time, Osiris left the earthly realm, left it in the charge of his son Horus,
and descended into the underworld.
Osiris there presided over the realm of the dead with his consort Isis, but also with
their sister Nephys, the wife of Seth.
Osiris became the judge of the souls of the dead and presided over the kingdom of the
dead.
As it happened, the process of judgment also involved other gods, specifically the gods
of the original Egyptian gnomes, and might also include the four sons of Horus, although
the four sons of Horus also had other attributes and concerns.
And we'll be talking about the gods of the Egyptian underworld and the fate of the dead
in greater detail in a future session of this course.
So we have local deities, we have elemental deities, we have funerary deities, and we
also have gods that are associated with particular professions.
These are gods who played a particular role in the assembly of the gods themselves, but
also served as patrons to the profession that represented their form of service in the divine
realm.
So for example, Ta was an artisan and a craftsman in the divine realm, but he also served as
the divine patron, the protective deity of artisans and craftsmen on earth.
Similarly, Toth, the scribe of the gods, was the master, the director of the divine bureaucracy
and kept track of records for the gods.
And he took a similar role as a patron of scribes in the royal bureaucracy in the Pharaoh's
court on earth.
And that royal bureaucracy served the Pharaoh in the same way that Toth served the gods.
The association is very natural and very clear.
A host of different gods served as patrons of doctors, the most interesting among them
was probably Imhotep.
Imhotep himself was an official from the reign of Dozer during the Old Kingdom who was deified
and became a patron god of doctors.
There were other more universal gods who might be invoked by those in need in particular
situations.
For example, the goddess Isis, the consort of Osiris, was often invoked in illness or
after an attack by a poisonous animal, such as a scorpion, because Isis was believed to
have access to magical spells that could cure illnesses.
And as a result, Isis was very commonly invoked by those in need and a special favorite of
the common people in Egypt.
And then there were some minor gods whose primary function seems to have been to serve
as protectors.
One of these was a god named Bess, who was usually depicted as a grotesque dwarf, and
it seems that his primary function was just to scare away evil spirits.
So all of these different gods have particular functions within Egyptian religious culture.
Some of them more universal, some of them more, shall we say, practical of concern to
the average Egyptian who is a scribe, or an artisan, or a doctor, or something else.
Now this general survey, this general overview of the Egyptian pantheon already underscores
several significant points.
First of all, because there are so many gods in the Egyptian pantheon, because of the basic
nature of polytheistic religious culture, that means there is an inevitable overlap
in the functions and concerns and associations of the different gods.
And we will find different gods being credited with different aspects of creation, with different
specializations, and overlapping in some of their attributes and some of their mythology
as well.
And this is one of the things that makes any clear-cut, systematic account of the distinct
powers of the gods and the distinct identification of the gods virtually impossible for the
modern scholar.
Also, we can see that the fortunes of a given god or goddess might wax and wane depending
on a variety of historical factors.
That is, their fortunes might rise and fall depending on conditions within history.
For example, it may have to do with the fortunes of the group that worships the god or goddess.
But also, it might have to do with the importance of the realm of human concern over which the
god presides.
Another is if one profession becomes more important, for example, if the scribes become
more important in the royal bureaucracy, then Toth becomes more important.
And this in fact happens.
Toth's worship grew in importance with the growth of the scribal bureaucracy that administered
the royal government.
Or we can find particular partisans of a god becoming more powerful and therefore making
the god more powerful.
This for example happens in the case of Amun.
Amun grows in importance during the period of the New Kingdom because his core of priests,
his priests that worship and promote Amun, come to greater prominence, gain greater power,
and therefore Amun himself gains greater power as a god.
But the multiplicity of gods, their sheer numbers, also demonstrates gradual evolution
in the human conception of a particular god, or acceptance of the overlapping claims of
one god and another, or the elevation of one god over other traditional gods as a chief
god.
So we have so many gods that we see various forms of development, various forms of evolution
in their relationships, first of all to each other, but also the relationships to humanity.
So we might have the evolution of the conception of a particular god.
We might have again acceptance of the overlapping claims of one god and another, or the elevation
of one god to prominence over other traditional gods as chief god, gaining a new promise that
god did not previously have.
Now let me give you the specific example of this sort of overlapping of concern, overlapping
of power, and almost, but not quite, overlapping of identity in the case of the Egyptian solar
deities.
The duplication and overlapping of functions is very clear among the Egyptian sun gods,
and leads to a great deal of confusion for the modern student.
The primary example of the historical change and development that takes place in the conception
and prominence in all the gods of Egypt, the primary example that stands out the most clearly
is the example of the Egyptian solar deities, the Egyptian sun gods.
First of all, there are a lot of gods in Egypt who are identified as sun gods.
And as we will see, these gods tend to rise in importance and fall in importance as a
result of historical and cultural factors.
And one of those, and not the least important, is the influence of the priests that serve
as the cult of that god, and the favor of the different pharaohs towards one sun god
over another.
Because the sun was a primary reality of life in Egypt, and pretty much unescapable and
present at all times of the day, because the sun was understood as a primary source of
life and fertility, the Egyptian sun gods were most often also identified as chief gods,
as kings of the heavens and kings of the earth, and as a result, as a consequence, they have
a special relationship to the pharaoh, who is after all the king of the earth, the king
of the upper and lower kingdoms.
We have the pharaoh in the same position on the earth as the sun god is in the heavens.
Although we might think of a variety of sun gods as being inconsistent, or at least as
an indication of successive conceptions of the god arising one after another throughout
history, the Egyptians apparently had no trouble of conceiving of these gods as simultaneously,
at the same time, representing a single divine reality.
They represented the sun in all of its different aspects, and each of these gods, like each
of those aspects, was important in its turn, and each was important in its own distinctive
way.
So it is not so much a matter of different sun gods succeeding each other, or coming
to prominence at the expense of each other, but that the idea of the divine meaning of
the sun, the essential divine nature of the sun, became increasingly sophisticated and
was represented by the appearance of these new gods, who represented different aspects
of the divine reality of the sun.
So different aspects of the sun were identified with different solar gods.
Some of these are important not so much for their identification with the sun itself,
but for other aspects of their divinity that are not directly related to the sun.
This is the case with Horus, for example, who is more important as a patron of the royal
throne of the pharaoh than as a sun god, although his identity as sun god is also important.
For example, we also have Atom, who is important primarily as a creator god.
He's the creator god of the Heliopolis cosmogony, and he was identified with the sun specifically
at its setting, and because he's identified with the sun at its setting, he sometimes
was depicted as an old man.
So Atom is one of those gods who shows different stages of life.
See this is also true of Rey and also true of Horus.
The sun god Kepperer was represented by the scarab, the sacred dung beetle, and sometimes
he appears as a human being with a scarab for a head, and that does not mean the head
of a scarab, but the entire scarab as his head.
So he's very easy to identify.
He's the man with a bug for a head.
Kepperer is identified with the sun at its rising, which means that the sun is essentially
the dung ball that the royal scarab Kepperer rolls before him up into the arc of the sky.
So Kepperer rolls the ball of the sun across the sky, particularly at its rising.
Now Horus appears to have been the earliest of the sun gods, and he was also, as you know,
the chief god of lower Egypt.
Later, Horus becomes the patron of the pharaoh of both upper and lower Egypt, the two kingdoms,
and Horus is in general one of the longest lived of the Egyptian gods, not in the sense
that in the divine world he lives millions of years, but in the sense that he appears
very early and continues to have an influence for centuries and centuries.
Now the name Horus is generally believed to mean the distant one, very appropriate for
a god of the sun, and the name Horus appears in many compound forms, notably Horus, uniter
of the two lands, referring to the two kingdoms of upper and lower Egypt.
Horus was traditionally represented as a falcon, whereas a falcon headed human being,
and often the falcon's head is crowned with a sun disk or with the crown of upper and
lower Egypt, and as a falcon the spread wings of Horus formed the canopy of the sky.
Now in the story of Osiris, his combat with Seth and his death, Horus is the son who inherits
the heavenly throne and kingly rule over the gods and over humanity after Osiris has been
murdered by Seth.
In this respect, Horus represents the legitimate succession of the pharaoh as well as the pharaoh's
authority to rule, and I'll be talking about this myth of kingship in Egypt in a later
session.
Although the association between Horus and the royal authority of the pharaoh largely
overshadows Horus' identity as a sun god, the identity of Horus as a sun god is the
primary identity.
It becomes less important over time, but it is still his primary identity.
It appears that the dominant solar deity among the Egyptians was Rey, and this is especially
true during the early dynasties of the Old Kingdom, and we find the name of Rey appearing
in compound forms with the names of other sun gods.
Rey is identified with the sun at its zenith, at its high point, but also Rey apparently
represents the divine essence of the sun, that is, he represents the incomprehensible cosmic
reality, the true source of life that the Egyptians believe existed behind the merely
physical aspect of the sun.
So they do not identify the sun god with the sun itself.
They see the physical sun as a physical representation of the power and divinity of the sun god,
its incomprehensible cosmic reality.
The creative power that was associated with the sun led to the identification of the god
Rey as a creator god, and he, like Taw, was associated with the ben-ben, the mound of
creation, or sometimes he was manifested as Atum, the god who initiated the creative process.
From the time of the fourth dynasty, we find the pharaoh being called the sun of Rey.
This is a sign of the special relationship between the king and the sun.
There during the new kingdom, the queen was priestess of the sun, and the sun fathered
her children through the agency of her husband, the pharaoh.
One of Rey's names, Rey Horati, meaning Rey Horus of the horizon, indicated his relationship
through the dynamic union of Rey with Horus, the god of kingship.
So Rey becomes identified with the pharaoh through association with Horus.
These combination names do not imply that the gods are identical, nor are they names
for new gods.
Instead, they indicate the unity of the divine powers associated with the sun.
Rey traveled across the sky each day in his royal barge, and he was accompanied by other
gods.
Each night he entered the underworld to return to his rising place again in the east.
And sometimes the sun's course across the sky was thought of as mimicking the human
lifespan.
And in some cases, the dawning sun is portrayed as an infant, and in some stories about Rey,
he appears as an old man near the end of the day, an old man who dribbles at the mouth.
Another sun god was Amun, a primeval deity who was originally part of the Ogdoad, but
who later gained supremacy as Amun Rey and became the object of widespread, almost exclusive
worship.
Amun was very early on a god of Thebes, as we've seen, together with the god Mantu,
the god of war.
As Thebes became politically prominent at the end of the first intermediate period,
Amun also became more powerful.
And before 2000 BCE, he was already given the name Amun Rey, a composite name that represented
the two aspects of the god.
The name Amun, meaning hiddenness, indicated the unknowable essence of the god, whose power
and authority were far beyond human understanding.
The name Rey indicated the revealed aspect of the god, who shone over the two kingdoms
and the shining radiance of the sun.
After the establishment of the native dynasty following the expulsion of the Hiksos, the
worship of Amun Rey became an expression of Egyptian power, and two new major shrines
were built for Amun Rey at this time, one at Luxor and the other at Karnak.
During the new kingdom, Amun Rey was designated king of the gods, and the other gods were
often presented as personified facets of his divine being.
So at times, the worship of Amun Rey came close to monotheism in practice, if not in
theory, as his worship became almost exclusive, and the gods, the other gods, that is, were
understood as manifestations of Amun Rey himself.
It was in part the power of the priests of Amun Rey that led to the attempt to replace
his worship with the worship of the god Aten, the sun god identified with the solar disk.
Devotion to Aten began early in the new kingdom, but reached its height during the reign of
Amunophis IV, whose dates are 1353-1336 BCE, who is better known by his later name of Akhenaten.
Amun's reign signaled a break with tradition in religion in many ways.
This was true, particularly in Egyptian art, and also with the establishment of a new royal
capital in Akhenaten, now known as Amarna, but in no way did his reign represent a break
with the past than in his promotion of the worship of Aten.
Aten was not represented in anthropomorphic form like so many of the other Egyptian gods.
Instead, he was represented as light from the sun disk, in depictions of Aten, the rays
emanating from the sun disk, and in human hands in the attitude of blessing.
But in these depictions, the blessings are bestowed exclusively on Akhenaten and his
wife Nefertiti.
So Aten was not identified with other sun gods, and the worship of Amunrei in particular
was suppressed during the reign of Akhenaten, and the depictions of Amunrei and the name
of Amunrei were removed from many of his temples.
Now, whether the royal worship of Aten was truly monotheistic, as many scholars have
claimed, is an open question.
But certainly the elevation of Aten, and so also of his beloved, the Pharaoh Akhenaten,
stands in clear contrast to the rich polytheistic traditions and mythology that is otherwise
typical of Egyptian religion.
And probably those polytheistic traditions remained in force during Atenaten's reign,
even if they are not depicted in the creation of the Pharaoh's own artisans and historians.
Soon after the death of Akhenaten, the worship of the old gods, particularly Amunrei, was
restored.
The capital Akhetaten was abandoned, and the monuments to Akhenaten and to Aten were
defaced.
So Akhenaten's religious innovations reveal the inevitability, we may say, of the sun
god's place at the head of the Egyptian pantheon.
And they also represent the indesolable bond between the chief sun god and his human counterpart,
the divine Pharaoh.
Now in our next session, we will look at this relationship more closely, considering both
the central religious role of the Pharaoh and the central myth of kingship in the story
of Osiris and Horus.
