In our last lecture, we talked about the key part the Pharaoh played in ancient Egyptian
ideas about the cosmos and the relationship between humanity and the gods.
The Pharaoh establishes maat, divine order and justice, and so makes possible the proper
functioning of both the human world and the divine world.
And the Pharaoh's legitimacy and authority is supported in myth by the story of the contest
between Horus and Seth, following Seth's murder of Osiris, the father of Horus.
We will return to Osiris in this session as we consider the beliefs and practices that
surround death in ancient religious culture, especially the spiritual and physical preparation
in Egypt to enter the realm of Osiris.
Ancient Egyptian burial practices in particular reflected and supported ideas about the afterlife.
Despite the Egyptians' concern with the present life, that is, concern with the sun as a source
of life and light, concern with the fertility of the Nile Valley that provided abundant
crops, concern with the divine Pharaoh as the one who maintains order for the cosmos.
Still, the Egyptian civilization showed more concern with the next life than any other
civilization known to us from the ancient world.
Now to some extent, the Egyptians' apparent preoccupation with preparing for death is
a function of the sources we have for reconstructing their ancient religious culture, and of course
that source is primarily tombs.
Tombs not only provide many of the texts that survive from ancient Egypt, but they also
preserve the artifacts of everyday life, which were kept in tombs for use by the deceased.
Though tombs admittedly reflect the concerns and beliefs of only a small segment of the
ancient Egyptian world, that is, they preserve the interests and concerns of the elite.
And especially in the earlier periods of Egyptian history, this is a very small portion of society.
And inevitably, these artifacts, these texts provided from tombs will skew our perspective
especially towards concerns with the afterlife.
However, at the same time, the abundance of material and the continuity of that material
with beliefs represented by widely spread evidence from the Neolithic era argues that
the Egyptian concern with preparation for the afterlife was in fact central to Egyptian
religious culture.
It's not just a matter of our perspective and the sources available to us, but this
does seem to have been a central concern in many ways.
Now of course, the Egyptians do stand out from other ancient religious cultures because
of the very vivid nature of their beliefs about the afterlife and their belief in a
very active and flourishing afterlife, if I may put it that way.
As we've seen, prehistoric religious culture reflects apparent belief in some sort of an
afterlife and the evidence for this is provided by items found in burials and the nature of
the burials themselves.
Prehistoric burials include careful placement of the body, funerary gifts having to do with
the tools and weapons of everyday life, the clothing and the decoration of the body itself,
in some cases there were secondary burials after an exhumation and there seems to have
been a practice of some sort of continued contact with the dead through communion meals,
one of the reasons why prehistoric burials were often placed close to the habitations
of the living.
And the earliest Egyptian burials are very consistent with other Neolithic burials, that
is they include provisions for the deceased and the burial of the body in a contracted
position.
At the same time, in Egypt we see a gradual movement of burials away from village settlements.
This may indicate that the dead are beginning to be thought of as somewhat removed from
the community of the living, still present, still important, but not in the immediate
vicinity and not in immediate contact with the community of the living.
Now some scholars have speculated that the Egyptians believe in a real afterlife, that
is an afterlife that has many of the attributes of this life including real activity and real
consciousness.
They say this may have arisen in part as a result of Egypt's arid climate, the idea
being that the hot dry air that is typical of Egypt and the hot sand of the desert has
natural preservative qualities and this led to a form of natural mummification when bodies
were buried and this in turn led to a belief in some sort of active afterlife like the
life on earth and led to a process of artificial mummification as a careful preparation for
the body after death.
Now it appears that beliefs about the afterlife evolve very slowly in ancient Egypt, meaning
pretty much over the centuries.
An active afterlife like the life on earth was originally believed to be restricted to
the divine pharaoh and this had to do with his distinct identity.
In other words, it was an aspect of his divine status after the divine pharaoh's sojourn
on earth in an earthly body.
He continued his life after his death on earth.
He continued the eternal life he shared with the gods except now he lived it among the
gods.
In the coffin texts that is in texts written on the inside of coffins that I will refer
to in a moment, in these texts nut the sky goddess often admits favored souls into the
heavens but this is primarily the soul of the deceased pharaoh.
She admits his soul into the starry realm, in other words into the realm of her own body
since nut is the goddess of the sky.
Worshipers of the sun god Rey aspired to follow the god after death, to follow in the wake
of his royal sun barge as he traversed the ark of nut's body each day and they would
have miniature boats placed in their tombs to carry them through a series of dangers
to be united with Rey in the heavens and to follow his royal bark continually throughout
the ages.
But after the weakening of the pharaoh's authority at the end of the old kingdom, which is to
say about the year 2000 BCE or so, there was a general opening of access to the afterlife
and the afterlife was believed to be open and accessible to many more people than merely
the divine pharaoh.
Now to a large extent, beliefs about the nature of the afterlife in ancient Egyptian
religious culture depend on ideas about the human person.
In the Egyptian conception of the person, the wholeness of an individual was comprised
of the body, the name, the shadow, the ba and the ka.
Now the body is fairly easy for us to understand.
It is the part of the person that functions in the physical world and it is this part
of the person that is preserved in the process of mummification.
The name was an essential expression of the person both in this life and in the afterlife.
The name expressed the deepest sense of the personality, and this is true not only of
human beings but also of the gods.
The names are the essential expression, the very essence, the core of what we would think
of as the personality and the consciousness of the person.
As a result, if a person's name was written down, for example, on a piece of clay and
then that clay was broken, physical harm could come to the person.
This is the idea behind what are called execration texts, the writing of a name and then destroying
the name and, in theory anyway, also harming the person whose name it is.
The shadow was understood metaphorically as the physical presence of a person distinct
from the body.
And when I try to explain this to my students, I usually make them very uneasy by standing
about a foot away from them.
I'm not actually in contact with them but they have a very clear sense of my physical
presence, and I think this is what the shadow was meant to be.
The shadow is the physical presence distinct from the body.
What we sometimes think of as the personal space in our own culture.
And the shadow was this presence in both life and the afterlife.
Now the Ba is often understood by moderns in the sense of soul, although soul itself
is a very complex idea.
But the Ba is probably better understood as something like an alter ego.
That is, it is the impression that other people receive of the self, on the one hand, that's
what it is towards outsiders.
But it is also the activity or the spiritual presence of a person which is perceivable
in what he or she does.
So it is physical, spiritual and mental activity acted out through the actions of the body.
And the Ba is the primary mode of existence for the dead.
And in graphic representations, the Ba is represented as a bird with a human head, reversing
our usual expectations of a human body with an animal head.
The Ba is believed to reside in the mummy of the deceased.
But it also participates in the afterlife, in the kingdom of the dead.
Finally, the Ka is probably the most complex of these concepts that have to do with the
nature of the person.
The Ka relates to the interaction of the mind and the body that comes into being at the
birth of the individual.
I hesitate to call it the spiritual glue between the mind and the body, but it is a connection
between those two.
It represents the interaction of the mind and the body.
There is both an external Ka and an internal Ka.
The external Ka is any representation of the person in a graphic image.
So any physical representation, any attempt to portray a person is an external Ka.
Two murals were intended to create a Ka of the outside world for the deceased Ka to
enjoy eternally.
The Ka of the world becomes the environment, the living space, if you will, for the Ka of
the deceased.
The internal Ka was a sort of spirit of protection and blessing for a person, rather like what
we would think of as a guardian angel.
It has to do with the spiritual well-being of the deceased for eternity.
So we have these different components of the human person.
The body, the name, the person's essence, the shadow, the physical presence apart from
the body, the Ba, this alter ego, and the Ka, the interaction between the mind and the
body of the person.
Egyptian burial practices from mummification to tomb decoration were determined by these
beliefs about the human person and by the nature of the afterlife and how the deceased
human person exists in the afterlife.
The most familiar procedure having to do with burial customs in ancient Egypt is of course
mummification.
The process of mummification was time-consuming and expensive because it involved an elaborate
procedure carried out over a period of weeks.
The most surprising thing to us perhaps is that the brain was removed from the skull of
the deceased and discarded because they really didn't know what the function of the brain
was except to fill the empty space in the head, I suppose.
The heart, however, was left in place because it was believed the heart was the abode of
the deceased Ba and that would continue to dwell in the mummy, that is, within the heart.
That's the seat of the Ba, so to speak.
The internal organs were removed from the body.
Some of them were dehydrated with natron, that is, with hydrated sobian carbonate.
And then some would be placed back into the body, others would be placed in conoptic jars
decorated with the heads of protective deities.
So some internal organs placed in the conoptic jars, others placed back into the body once
it had been embalmed.
The body itself was washed out with palm wine and filled with spices and then soaked in
natron for two months.
After it was dehydrated, the body was sewn up, the nostrils plugged, and the body coated
with resin before it was finally wrapped in linen bands.
The body was often padded to make the mummy appear more lifelike and decorated in various
ways, the intention being to maintain the physical identity of the deceased.
And the finished mummy was then placed in two or more coffins, and those coffins were
themselves sometimes carved and decorated to resemble the deceased.
There is this concern with maintaining the personal identity of the mummy, both in the
mummy itself and often in the coffins containing the mummy.
Now like the mummy, tomb furniture and decoration were intended to serve the needs of the deceased
as an eternal habitation, although the Ba also traveled to the underworld, to the kingdom
of the dead.
Pyramids, for example, evolved from the early mudbrick tombs that covered a burial.
These were topped by a flat wooden roof, and on top of the flat wooden roof was a mound
of sand.
In time, the mudbrick and the sand mound were replaced by stone blocks, creating tombs
in basically the same shape, in other words, the shape of a pyramid.
And of course, the pyramid was also associated with the benben, the primordial mound of creation
as a source of life.
Since the Ba and the shadow resided in the tomb with the body of the deceased, various
kinds of furniture and decoration were created to accommodate the shadow and the Ba.
For example, a small air vent or passageway would lead from the burial chamber to the
outside world to allow the Ba to travel back and forth between the tombs and the heavens.
The shadow continued to reside in the tomb itself, specifically in the tomb statue of
the deceased.
There it enjoyed depictions of its earthly life in the murals of the tomb walls, the
Ka world that was created there.
Furniture, food and drink were all left in the tomb, along with all the luxuries and
necessities appropriate to the earthly status of the deceased.
Also left in the tomb were hundreds of models of male and female slaves.
These models are called ushebtes, meaning answerers, and these would become servants
for the deceased in the afterlife.
How does that happen, of course, is a reasonable question.
Well, part of the preparation of the tomb, at least from the new kingdom onward, was
a ceremony called the opening of the mouth.
This was a ceremony that enabled various figures within the tomb, such as the ushebtes, but
also the mummy itself, to be restored to life.
The rituals associated with opening the mouth were performed of the ushebtes and other representations
of living things, including the funerary statue of the deceased, but the most important part
of the ritual was performed on the mummy.
These rituals of opening the mouth include a purification with water and animal sacrifice,
and they are accompanied by recitations of spells.
All of this was intended to enable these things to carry out their specific duties as living
creatures in the afterlife by opening the mouth to receive the breath of life.
Once in the tomb, the deceased was also nourished by daily offerings of food that were made
at a sanctuary at the tomb.
Theoretically, these offerings were the duty reserved to the eldest son, although in reality
they were carried out by a priest on the oldest son's behalf.
But at the same time that the tomb was designed as an eternal habitation for the deceased,
it was believed that the real afterlife took place elsewhere, and that elsewhere was in
the kingdom of Osiris.
As we've already seen, there are competing versions of the major Egyptian myths of creation,
and the same is true of Egyptian conceptions of the afterlife.
Egyptian beliefs about the fate of the dead are not systematic, and they're not consistent,
which should come as no surprise by this point.
But different beliefs were dominant at different times.
For the most part, however, they were not meant to be systematic or consistent.
They were meant to be evocative, to express by their very diversity of what were otherwise
inexpressible truths.
There seems to be an awareness that it's very difficult to describe in any kind of clarity
the nature of the divine world.
To some extent, a person's beliefs about the afterlife depended on the chief god that
he or she worshipped, as in the case of Rey, for example, where people after their death
follow Rey in his barge across the Ark of the Sky, but some ideas do appear to be more
or less consistent throughout the centuries.
Amun Rey, on the one hand, and Osiris, on the other, seem to represent two different ideas
or two different aspects of the afterlife.
Amun Rey, as a sun god, is of course associated with the sun, with the solar, we could say.
Osiris, as a god who's connected in some ways with fertility, is connected with the
earth, and therefore we call him a cathonic deity.
Amun Rey, as a solar deity, Osiris, as a cathonic deity.
On the other hand, Amun Rey is in many ways associated with afterlife as rejuvenation,
because Amun Rey himself is rejuvenated each day with the rising of the sun and ages as
he moves across the Ark of the Sky.
Osiris is identified more with the afterlife as eternal life, as he presides over a kingdom
of the deceased who enjoy great benefits and great pleasure in his kingdom.
Now we have three primary textual sources of information about the situation of the dead
in ancient Egyptian religious culture.
There are the pyramid texts.
These were inscribed on the walls of pyramids during the period of the old kingdom.
These include instructions and spells to guide the dead pharaoh safely to the afterlife.
And there he shares the rule of Osiris, who of course presides over the kingdom of the
dead just as the pharaoh had presided over the kingdom of Upper and Lower Egypt on earth.
These pyramid texts apparently were collected and edited during the Middle Kingdom and appear
then as coffin texts.
These texts are called coffin texts because they were inscribed on the interior of the
coffins of members of the upper classes, because members of the upper classes now shared most
of the aspirations for the afterlife that had earlier been reserved for the pharaoh.
During the new kingdom, a collection of texts usually called the Book of the Dead, but more
properly known as the Books of Going Forth by Day, these texts collected a great deal
of information to guide the deceased into a blessed afterlife.
And again, there were magical spells included and descriptions of what to expect.
Among the oldest beliefs about the abode of the dead and the situation of the deceased
after their life were those that conceived of the underworld as the kingdom of Osiris,
the god of the dead.
Now these beliefs, of course, were dependent on the myth of kingship.
You'll remember that Osiris was murdered by his brother Seth and then restored to life
by his wife Isis long enough to conceive their son Horus.
After his death, Osiris left his earthly kingdom to Horus and descended to the underworld,
exchanging dominion over the living for dominion over the dead.
Osiris was also overseer of the judgment of the dead, determining their eternal destiny.
And this was, of course, a typical royal function in the ancient world, but one also was a judge
as well as a king.
In depictions of his kingdom, Osiris is typically depicted with the accoutrements of kingship,
the double crown, the scepter and flail that show royal authority, but his body is sometimes
wrapped in linen cloths like that of a mummy.
Osiris's realm was located in various places in different times and according to different
systems of belief.
Sometimes it was located in the western desert, sometimes Osiris's kingdom was in the Nile
Delta or far away in Syria, or sometimes in the Milky Way, which was thought of as the
heavenly Nile.
Osiris's kingdom, wherever it was, was abundantly fertile, and this is where the deceased would
live at leisure while slaves, that is the Ushebtis, provided for the soul's needs, very
clearly an aristocratic ideal, taking one's ease eternally while others see to your needs
and your pleasures.
Entrance into the kingdom of Osiris was determined by an elaborate process of judgment after
death, and this process includes both confession and judgment, but also a trial by ordeal.
The details are different in different sources, but we can sketch out a general account of
the process.
After death, the deceased is guided by the jackal-headed god Anubis, who is god of the
dead, god of cemeteries.
He escorts the deceased into the kingdom of Osiris and his courtroom.
The courtroom is called the Hall of Truth.
This is where Osiris sits in state, and in the Hall of Truth he is attended by his consort
Isis and their sister Nephthis.
Isis and Nephthis are responsible for mourning and protecting the dead.
The deceased at this point makes a confession before these three gods, but this is a negative
confession.
That is, the soul affirms that he or she has not committed a long list of offenses.
I have not deprived the widow of her rights.
I have not oppressed the poor and things like that.
The deceased then repeats this confession before a series of 42 divine judges, each
of these judges representing one of the ancient gnomes of Upper and Lower Egypt.
Once this process of confession is completed, and it's not clear how this fits into the
later portion of the trial, the deceased is subjected to what amounts to a trial by or
deal, and this seems to be the very center of the situation, as the heart of the deceased
is weighed to judge its virtue.
The heart of the deceased, as the center of its being, is placed in a balance opposite
an ostrich feather, and this process is properly overseen by Toth, who's the scribe of the
gods and therefore a record keeper.
He's also an arbiter of justice, and the balance scale itself represents Maat, the goddess
of truth, the goddess of balance, the goddess of reality, and justice.
In paintings depicting this scene, the waning of the heart takes place in the presence of
Osiris, Isis, and Nephthys, and sometimes with Anubis in attendance as well.
If the heart of the deceased is heavier than the ostrich feather, it is because that heart
has been made heavy by evil deeds.
The fate of an evil heart is to be destroyed.
According to some versions, the destruction of the evil heart takes place when it is eaten
by a composite beast that is called, appropriately enough, she who devours evil hearts.
In other versions, the evil heart is destroyed by being thrown into a fire, but in both cases,
it seems that the intention is to indicate the evil heart ceases to exist, either because
it is digested or because it is consumed by fire.
And apparently the idea of non-existence of that which once did exist was a very difficult
concept for people in the ancient world to grasp.
Non-existence is indicated usually by destruction by fire.
On the other hand, if the heart of the deceased is lighter than the ostrich feather, this
is because it has been made light by virtue, and it is not weighed down with evil.
In this happy event, Toph announces the result of the ritual to Osiris, and the deceased
is welcomed into Osiris' kingdom and may enjoy its benefits for all eternity.
According to the books of going forth by day, the decree of Osiris is as follows, let the
deceased depart victorious, let her go wherever she wishes to mingle freely with the gods
and the spirits of the dead.
Now to some extent, the ideal of the afterlife was to live like a god, enjoying what is provided
by the labor of others, partaking of daily memorial offerings, and living the divine life
that otherwise is restricted to the gods and to the divine pharaoh.
However, even though there is this vivid idea of an active afterlife, very much like life
on earth, except far better.
Even though these offer consolations, these visions, and expectations, generally in ancient
Egypt the greatest good was still believed to be a long life enjoyed on earth.
Although there is expectation of happiness in the afterlife, there is still great virtue
in living in this life for a long time.
And this sentiment was shared by other civilizations of the ancient Mediterranean world who did
not share the Egyptians' hope for a blessed afterlife.
In our next session, we'll give particular attention to the feminine side of the divine
in ancient Egypt and consider the powers and mythology associated with Egyptian goddesses.
Thank you.
