Lecture 16, Mesopotamia, Gilgamesh, the King
In our last lecture, we discussed the goddess Inanna, known in Babylon as Ishtar, whose
original associations with fertility ultimately developed into a role as queen of heaven and
earth.
In this lecture, we'll look at the distinctively masculine world of the Mesopotamian epic poem
The Epic of Gilgamesh, a story of a semi-divine hero and his adventures.
The first part of the poem deals with Gilgamesh's combat within Ketu, a man who subsequently
becomes his close comrade, and their later battle with the monster Humbaba.
We will see this part of the poem also illustrate certain basic concepts about the nature of
man, kingship, combat, and friendship as the ancient Mesopotamians understood them.
The Epic of Gilgamesh is our earlier surviving example of an epic poem.
An epic poem generally presents a hero who undertakes a series of adventures, usually
this takes place as part of a journey, and he lives out these adventures in conscious
relationship to the divine world.
In other words, the hero of the epic poem is a hero who stands in relationship to the
gods.
The most familiar examples of this literary genre are Homer's Iliad, the story of the
wrath of Achilles in the last year of the Trojan War, and Homer's Odyssey, the story
of Odysseus' ten-year voyage home after the fall of Troy to his home in Ithaca.
These are both products of early Greece.
Similarly, we have Virgil's Iliad, the adventures of the Trojan hero Aeneas after the fall
of Troy, an epic written during the period of early imperial Rome.
Now usually the adventures of an epic hero incorporate feats of daring due beyond the
capacity of ordinary human beings.
They have these supernatural or superhuman abilities usually understood in terms of unusual
skill or unusual strength, or perhaps as in the case of Odysseus, unusual cleverness.
Although the epic hero is under the control of the gods to a certain extent, and sometimes
he interacts with the gods directly, his journey and his adventures are primarily an assertion
of human capability and even human free will.
That is, the final result is the accumulation of experience on the human scale and of the
accumulation of something very much like wisdom for the epic hero.
The epic hero almost invariably strains at the limitations of human existence.
He pushes back the barriers between the human and the divine, and he does this while remaining
himself unmistakably human.
Now this is also true of Gilgamesh and the epic of Gilgamesh.
The epic was written down in Akkadian, but the individual incidents circulated in oral
form for generations apparently in both Sumerian and Akkadian versions.
Gilgamesh was apparently an historical figure.
His name appears in a Sumerian king list as a king of the city of Uruk, where he also
appears in the epic, and his dates would then be, if he is an historical figure, somewhere
between 2800 BCE and 2500 BCE.
Now there are many stories about Gilgamesh, and not all stories about Gilgamesh are included
in the epic.
And these stories appear in many different written versions.
And in fact, different versions of the stories of Gilgamesh are found throughout Mesopotamia,
and they range from certain schoolboy copies to carefully collated and copied texts apparently
intended for royal archives.
The definitive text is probably the version found in the Assyrian city of Nineveh, dating
from the 7th century BCE.
And this appears to have been authored by a master scribe at royal command.
But even this text does not include all the stories that there ever were about Gilgamesh.
One problem is that writing down or transcribing a story in the ancient world did not really
affect its continued telling by storytellers, that is, in oral form.
And we find various versions of the Gilgamesh stories reappearing in other oral traditions
and even in other cultures, which testifies to the continuing importance and indeed the
cultural centrality of the storyteller's art, the storyteller taking in ancient culture
very much the role of the author in modern culture.
Now the first part of the epic of Gilgamesh is primarily concerned with Gilgamesh as king
of the city of Uruk and the events that lead up to his friendship with another mighty man
of Valor in Qidu.
The epic begins with a prologue and the prologue essentially is a teaser, you might say, or
an ad for the entire epic.
It extols Gilgamesh's heroic deeds and his accomplishments as king to let you know that
this is somebody who is worth hearing about.
Though Gilgamesh is here presented as a paragon of strength, a paragon of beauty, he was created
by the gods specifically for heroism and for kingship and he combines within himself both
human and divine characteristics.
In fact, we're told that two-thirds of Gilgamesh was divine and only one-third was mortal.
Which doesn't make sense genetically, but they weren't concerned with that.
In any event, this combination of the divine and the human and in fact the fact that Gilgamesh
is two-thirds divine and only one-third mortal foreshadows Gilgamesh's rejection of death
because death is the common fate reserved for humanity and not appropriate to someone
who is two-thirds divine.
Gilgamesh is a hero and also a king.
In other words, he is the sort of mighty warrior, the mighty man of valor who makes civilized
life possible and also a king who presides over the civilization that the mighty man
of valor brings into being.
As a king, Gilgamesh should preside over a city and dispense blessings to its citizens.
But with the beginning of the story proper, it becomes clear that Gilgamesh has his faults
as a king in Uruk, faults that seem to arise from the unbridled appetites that are typical
of the hero, the mighty man of valor.
First of all, he has an appetite for battle and his thirst for warfare and for battle means
constant warfare for the young men of Uruk.
In other words, they have to join his armies and follow him when he leads a campaign against
another city or against another king.
Unfortunately, this means the families of Uruk are left bereft of their male children and
of course their male children are their chief means of support.
So you have elderly couples with no means of support, you have young brides with no
husband because Gilgamesh demands that they all enter into his army and fight with him.
On the other hand, Gilgamesh's sexual appetite apparently has led him to exercise what is
traditionally called the duadus nuir, that is the supposed right of the lord and master
that gives him the right to deflower virgin brides before they marry.
In this case, Gilgamesh leaves no bride to her husband, as the text puts it, because
he is the one who has the initial sexual intercourse with them.
Because Gilgamesh proves to be a threat to both the young men and the young women of
Uruk, his subjects complain to the gods and the gods are the ones who must get together
to find a solution to the problem that is posed by Gilgamesh.
Now this description of Gilgamesh as king, as well as the complaints of his subjects
in the city of Uruk, give us some insight into Mesopotamian ideas about the ideal king.
Apparently the king's primary responsibility was to ensure the welfare of his subjects.
Now that may seem obvious to us, but is not an idea we often find in ancient kingship.
There is the ideal certainly, but not always the fact of ensuring the blessings of his
subjects.
Here, it is very clear that Gilgamesh's first responsibility is to the people of the city
and especially to the poor.
He is to provide them with military protection and with economic security, so that they may
live their lives without worrying about attack or about poverty.
He is to ensure the administration of justice, so there is fairness among the citizens and
that equilibrium and harmony that is necessary for proper social functioning.
And he is also to ensure the proper worship of the gods, so that the spiritual benefits
of the gods may continue to the citizens of the city.
So the complaints of the people of Uruk, the complaints they make to the gods against Gilgamesh,
are primarily a plea for the gods to consider the welfare of the city and its citizens.
And in this case, they seem to demand that Gilgamesh must be removed as king if the city
is to prosper.
So the gods get together and they come up with a solution to the problem posed by Gilgamesh.
And what they decide, in effect, is the only person who could contend with Gilgamesh and
handle Gilgamesh would be essentially another Gilgamesh.
So they decide to create Gilgamesh's equal, the man of the wilderness and Ketu.
A goddess creates in Ketu the warrior out of clay and she places him in the wilderness
that is far away from human habitations and far away from the ideals and the influence
of civilization.
So he is not only like Gilgamesh, but he actually is something like an anti-Gilgamesh, a Gilgamesh
of the wilds rather than a Gilgamesh at the very heart of the city and of civilization.
And Ketu, in other words, is a primitive man.
He is covered with shaggy hair.
He wears long hair on his head like a woman because unlike a civilized man, he doesn't
know enough to cut the hair on his head.
He eats grass.
He drinks from forest pools like an animal.
And he lives in the company of animals who are not afraid of him.
He also is something of a protector to the animals.
And this is in fact how in Ketu first comes to Gilgamesh's attention.
A hunter in the wilderness discovers that in Ketu has been freeing animals from the
hunter's traps.
So he goes to Uruk and he complains to Gilgamesh.
Complaining seems to be a primary pastime of the people in this epic.
In Uruk, Gilgamesh has an idea and he tells the hunter to take back to the wilderness
with him Shamhat the prostitute.
If he takes Shamhat the prostitute to where in Ketu is, she will seduce in Ketu and have
sexual intercourse with him and this will begin to solve the hunter's problem.
This is what the hunter does.
He takes Shamhat the prostitute back with him to the wilderness and encourages her to
go out and display herself before in Ketu and thereby to entice him.
So Shamhat uses her charms to attract in Ketu.
In a duke course he comes to her and in duke course he spends six days and seven nights
in her bed engaged in repeated sexual intercourse with her and somehow in this process he becomes
civilized.
The first result is that in Ketu is cut off from nature.
Now the animals who previously clustered around him flee from him in fear and when he tries
to run after them he finds that his legs are too weak to follow and in fact his separation
from nature is described in two different ways.
It is described as weakness but it is also described in terms of wisdom because now in
Ketu has within him the thoughts of a man and that means specifically the thoughts of a
civilized man, a man of the city and not of the wilderness.
This is what Shamhat the prostitute tells in Ketu.
He has now become wise and he is like a god.
So she begins to give him instruction in the arts of civilization including how to wear
clothing but more important how to eat bread and to drink strong wine.
Now both of these of course are highly symbolic foods in the ancient world mostly because
they are both basic foodstuffs that require a combination of the gifts of nature, wheat
and grapes and the various techniques of human preparation in order to turn the wheat into
bread through preparation of the flour, preparation of the bread loaf and then baking and to turn
the grapes into wine not only by crushing the grapes and gathering the juice but by
allowing it to ferment over time.
Bread and wine are specifically the food of civilization because they require time and
a combination of natural processes and human skills.
So to eat bread and to drink wine is to engage in the essence of civilized human life.
At the same time in Ketu also rubs down his body hair to eliminate the appearance of a
shaggy animal and he anoints himself with oil another civilized human practice.
What this means is that his appearance has now changed and he now appears as a civilized
man and in fact the author makes it clear for us, in Ketu had become a man.
Now that he is a man and Ketu comes into the city of Uruk and challenges Gilgamesh to determine
which of them is the stronger man.
And Ketu confronts Gilgamesh at the door of the house that belongs to Gilgamesh's father
in law and in Ketu will not allow Gilgamesh to pass and I'm always reminded at this point
of the first encounter between Little John and Robin Hood on that log bridge across the
river because there one man will not allow the other to pass and as a result they enter
into combat.
In this case the two men grapple together like wrestlers and wrestle themselves up and down
the street.
What is noticeable in this point in the epic is how evenly matched these two men are Gilgamesh
and Ketu and their struggle sends tremors throughout the city as if a gigantic pinball
was bouncing against the walls of the houses.
Now unfortunately and rather inevitably perhaps this part of the poem that describes the outcome
of the contest between Gilgamesh and Ketu has been lost.
When the text resumes we find in Ketu listening to Gilgamesh and starting to cry and it's
not really clear what has happened between that has Gilgamesh talking to in Ketu rather
than wrestling with him or why what Gilgamesh says would cause in Ketu to cry.
Now the old Babylonian text of the story is complete but it's still not clear.
This may suggest that Gilgamesh in the Babylonian version uses a wrestling trick to subdue in
Ketu throwing him to the ground.
If so that would probably be the advantage of the civilized man when he can't beat you
by force of strength he pulls some sort of sneaky trick on you but it's not at all clear.
But what does happen again as in the story of little John and Robin Hood is the two men
have had a fierce fight, they've come to some sort of resolution between them that ends
the fight and now they are friends.
In fact they are more than friends.
They embrace one another, they hold hands and from this time on they will be the closest
of comrades in great adventures.
It's what you call a fast friendship in both senses of the word.
Now this friendship between Gilgamesh and in Ketu exemplifies an ideal of friendship that
we find not only in ancient Mesopotamia but really elsewhere in the ancient Mediterranean
world.
The ancient ideal of friendship was that the friend was the other self.
In other words someone who mirrors the background, the intelligence, the skills, the interests
and the pleasures of his friend.
A twin if you will.
Now this ideal finds literal fulfillment in the case of Gilgamesh and in Ketu since the
goddess at the god's direction created in Ketu as another Gilgamesh.
They told her we've made Gilgamesh, now make another Gilgamesh.
An emphasis throughout this first part of the poem is on the resemblance between Gilgamesh
and in Ketu.
The only difference between them appears to be that Gilgamesh is as I said at the very
center of civilized life while in Ketu is the primitive man who lives in the wilderness
but once in Ketu becomes civilized and becomes a man he and Gilgamesh are essentially the
same.
So Gilgamesh and in Ketu from this point on are essentially two sides of the same personality.
In other words the hero finds his ideal companion and perfect comrade in the mirror image of
his twin.
So again, like little John at Robin Hood, once in Ketu and Gilgamesh come together, share
combat, resolve it and enter into a close comrade ship they are ready for adventures.
And now Gilgamesh and in Ketu join up in seeking out and fighting an elemental monster named
Humbaba.
Right after their friendship is sealed, at least in the way the epic now appears, in
Ketu tells Gilgamesh about Humbaba.
Humbaba is a monster who guards the forest and the animals of the forest.
And it is Humbaba's job, his duty if you will, to terrorize anyone who attempts to enter
the forest.
Apparently the great god Enlil has made Humbaba guardian of the forest and its animals.
Now we're very quick to think on a symbolic level, especially when we're talking about
this kind of religious literature.
And so we could say perhaps that Humbaba represents all the dangers of the unknown territory of
the forest, dangers both human and animal.
And he represents those dangers that threaten the civilized people who enter the forest in
search of game or in search of lumber.
Now Gilgamesh, once he hears about Humbaba, is determined to destroy him.
But we are never given a clear reason why Gilgamesh wishes to do so.
At one level again, a symbolic level, we can see this as a drive of human beings to gain
conquest over nature, submitting nature to the needs of humanity, especially in the interests
of creating human civilization.
I'm not sure that that is really necessary, that symbolic interpretation.
I think a more basic reality is that it is the role of the hero to fight and overcome
monsters.
So when you tell the hero, there's a monster out there, the hero says, I will go and kill
it.
It is the job of the hero to rid the world of the evil that threatens humanity, or sometimes
the threatened civilization.
And in this sense, Humbaba is something evil, and Gilgamesh is determined to destroy that
something evil, the monster Humbaba.
So once Gilgamesh has decided that this is what he is going to do, he is equipped for
this perilous combat in various ways.
And he gains assurance and assistance for both human beings and from the gods, suiting
his partially divine and partially human character.
First, Gilgamesh must rely upon his human comrade in Qidu, because it is in Qidu who
knows the way to the forest.
It is in Qidu who will give Gilgamesh tactical advice.
It is in Qidu who will help protect Gilgamesh during the fight with Humbaba.
And it is in Qidu who ultimately will guide Gilgamesh back home.
Then Gilgamesh goes to the palace of his mother, Ninsun, for advice.
And Ninsun makes offering to Shamash, the sun god, to protect her son, Gilgamesh.
Because it turns out that it is Shamash, the sun god, who has put a restless spirit into
Gilgamesh and made him a wandering hero.
Finally, Gilgamesh and Qidu together make offerings to the gods.
And apparently they promised the god Enlil a pine door for his temple if they managed
to defeat Humbaba.
Whether this is a gift or a little bit of a bribe or a little consideration for the
god beforehand is not entirely clear.
But the offering is of a new pine door if they defeat the monster of the forest.
Then Gilgamesh and Qidu make the long journey to Lebanon and the great pine forest in a
portion of the poem that I will not describe in any detail, except a tale that is marked
by repeated actions, repeated words, and repeated motifs.
This is a very common feature to the ancient storyteller's art.
To a certain extent, it increases expectation.
It allows the audience to consider and perhaps savor the action that is coming.
And it also gives the storyteller a way of filling time while he thinks of what he's
going to say next.
Finally, Gilgamesh and Qidu enter the pine forest where they soon encounter Humbaba.
And Humbaba, this huge monster, mocks Gilgamesh and Qidu, and he threatens them, thereby initiating
an exchange of taunts between the heroes and the monster.
Again, a common motif not only in the ancient world, but also on into at least as late as
American folklore.
In Mark Twain's stories, we have combatants who threaten each other with praises of themselves
and their deeds before they attack, recurring motifs.
Maybe it's something essential about being male, I don't know.
We're told that Humbaba is a giant with a face like coiled intestines, and he mocks
the hero's small size.
He acts as if it is hardly worth his time or the trouble to kill and eat them.
Gilgamesh is unnerved of the sight of the monster, and it falls to Qidu to rally his
spirits.
And it is in Qidu who encourages Gilgamesh to strike at the monster now that the moment
of decision has come.
Once again, the account of the battle itself is fragmentary.
But we do know that the battle against Humbaba is won by a combination of the hero's efforts
and the work of 13 wins sent by Shamash, the sun god, that prevent Humbaba from making
any kind of effective counter-attack or escaping Gilgamesh's blows.
And here we might be reminded of the role that the wins play in helping Marduk to defeat
Tiamat.
Apparently, when you're at war with a monster, it helps to have the wins on your side, or
at least at your back.
Humbaba is overcome, and now he begs Gilgamesh to let him live, offering promises and bribes.
And it's interesting, Humbaba's promises reveal probably his original identity as a
god of the forest rather than merely its guardian, because Humbaba offers Gilgamesh abundant
growth of trees and luxurious wood for his palace.
But in Qidu warns Gilgamesh to ignore Humbaba's pleas and to destroy him, both to eliminate
the threat Humbaba poses, and also to gain everlasting fame as the conqueror of this
gigantic monster.
So Gilgamesh finally kills Humbaba, and the two heroes cut down pine trees to make a
door for Enlil's temple in Nippur, just as they promised, apparently to compensate him
for the death of his forest guardian, Humbaba.
Now in many ways, this story is a typical tale of how a hero, or in this case two heroes,
overcome an elemental monster, but it also includes touches of irony, and also foreshadowing
of events to come later in the epic poem.
Most intriguing to me is the relationship between Humbaba, the guardian of the pine
forest, and in Qidu, because in Qidu is a former primitive man who has come to embrace
civilization.
After all, Humbaba is essentially a monstrous version of what in Qidu once was, that is
a protector and companion of wild beasts who live far from human habitations.
But it is in Qidu who urges Gilgamesh to kill Humbaba despite his pleas and promises, and
it is in Qidu that Humbaba threatens and curses before his death, maybe as a traitor to his
original nature.
And the story is filled with forebodings of death for in Qidu, who has abandoned the wilderness
and adopted the ways of civilization and humanity, only soon to be cut down in his prime.
At the same time, the recklessness that Gilgamesh displays in this episode shows how Gilgamesh
is already straining at the limits of human destiny, and wishes to become immortal not
only in the sense of becoming famous eternally for his destruction of Humbaba, but becoming
immortal rather in the strict sense by living forever like the gods.
These motifs intertwine in the second half of the epic, which forms a melancholy counterpoint
to the heroic friendship and adventures that fill the first half.
So in our next session, we will continue our discussion of the epic of Gilgamesh by reviewing
the two heroes encountered with Ishtar, which results in in Qidu's death, and Gilgamesh's
quest for eternal life.
