Lecture 8 Egyptian Myths of Kingship
In our last lecture, we surveyed the Egyptian pantheon of the assembly of the gods and considered
the different solar deities, or sun gods, in Egyptian religion in some detail.
In this lecture, we will explore the connection between the chief god and the pharaoh.
We will look at the pharaoh's place in maintaining divine control over the earth, and finally
we will consider the myth of divine kingship, focused on the death of Osiris and the succession
of his son Horus.
Now, as you can imagine, the divine pharaoh took a dominant place in the religious culture
of ancient Egypt.
One of the primary ideas in Egyptian religious culture is the central place of the king in
the divine economy, because the pharaoh provides not only stability and order for his human
subjects, but also for the gods.
From the beginning of the history of the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt, the pharaoh
had been the focus of religious concern, although that religious concern took on different forms
at different times.
For example, the pharaohs of the first dynasty and the second dynasty, which is to say from
about 3000 to 2670 BCE, were believed to be incarnations of Horus, the sun god, who represented
the forces of life and order on the cosmic scale.
Later the pharaohs of the Old Kingdom, from 2670 to about 2200 BCE, were called sons of
Rae.
They were considered to be sons of the god Rae Horati, Rae Horus of the horizon.
As we've seen, Rae represents the sun at its zenith as the source of life for the cosmos,
and so, therefore, Rae is a heavenly parallel to the pharaoh as the master of the earth,
the pharaoh always being thought of at his zenith in his position as ruler over the kingdoms
of Upper and Lower Egypt.
Rae is sometimes also depicted as the divine creator who brings order to the undifferentiated
chaos of primordial matter, just as the pharaoh establishes order, maat, over the earth, and
makes possible both divine and human existence.
Now, the pharaohs of the Old Kingdom established an extensive royal administration to help
them govern their domains, and this meant that the pharaoh's sway over the two kingdoms
was represented not only by his own person, but also in the person of his administrators,
and the royal administration and the royal bureaucracy were in many ways an institutionalization
of the power and authority of the pharaoh.
The pharaohs of the Old Kingdom established an administration that included two chief ministers
who oversaw the economic activity of the two kingdoms.
It included scribes who served the royal bureaucracy, and included local nobility who ruled their
own territories under the authority of the king and his viziers.
Under the power of this ruling elite, the vast majority of Egyptians were subsistence
farmers, some of them were craftsmen and artisans, but for the most part, the vast majority of
Egyptians during the time of the kingdoms lived lives that were very similar to those
of their Neolithic ancestors.
Now, the divine honors that were afforded to the pharaoh reflect his central importance
not only to the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt, but to the entire cosmic order,
the order of gods, creation, and humanity.
The primary role of the pharaoh was to establish ma'at, that is, truth, or order, or cosmic
balance, and the pharaoh's responsibility was to establish ma'at not only on earth,
but in heaven, because ma'at was the basis for all divine activity.
In fact, ma'at was not only a principle of balance and harmony, but also a goddess,
and this goddess represented the ideal state of being among the gods, humanity, and creation.
Ma'at, both the goddess and the principal, are the harmony and the equilibrium necessary
for the proper functioning of the divine world and the human world.
And once again, here, we find the idea of cosmic balance, of cosmic equilibrium as being
the primary goal of human and divine activity.
Back in the prehistoric era, we saw the desire to create harmony and balance between the
human world and the world in which human beings found themselves, and here in Egypt,
we find this cosmic equilibrium and balance as a basic necessity for the proper functioning
of both the divine world and the human world and their work together.
Now the ancient Egyptians were aware of very sharp contrast in the world they lived in.
There was a sharp contrast between the order imposed by the pharaoh and the principle of
chaos, between the land that was kept fertile by the Nile for human use, Kemet, called the
black land, and the no man's land of the desert, Deshret, the red land, very clear distinction,
very sharp line between the fertile land and the desert land.
There was a sharp contrast between the dependable cycle of Nile flooding and the sudden surprises
of storms and droughts.
The king, therefore, was responsible for maintaining order for overseeing the cycle of ebb and flood
of the Nile, for staving off the incursion of the unexpected, either in natural or human
forms, and defeating the forces of chaos that constantly threatened to break into order and
to destroy order.
So the pharaoh becomes something of a divine bulwark, a royal bulwark against the forces
of chaos that constantly batter against the divine order and threaten to destroy it.
So the role of the pharaoh is necessary not only for the good of humanity, but also for
the good of the gods, because the actions, the power, and the very existence of the gods
depend on Maat.
So the pharaoh exists simultaneously in two different worlds.
He exists in the divine world at the same time that he exists in the human world, and
he is necessary as pharaoh to both the divine world and to the human world to make possible
the proper functioning of the cosmos.
Now the concept of Maat also implies decorum, it implies reason as the motivating force in
the pharaoh's actions.
So the pharaoh embodies the divine principle of Maat in much the same way that the god
Horus or the god Rey incorporates the principle of Maat and expresses that principle in their
divine rule.
So to some extent, each of Egypt's kings was understood to be the one divine and eternal
pharaoh, the ever-reigning king.
This means that in some respects each king personified or embodied the eternal pharaoh.
This meant among other things that the deeds of one pharaoh could legitimately be claimed
by another pharaoh because all of these mighty deeds were in fact all the doing of the one
and only divine pharaoh, even though at particular points in history that divine pharaoh is embodied
in different individual pharaohs.
Now the pharaoh's role as an intermediary between the human world and the divine world
as the one who establishes Maat tells us something about the Egyptian ideas about the divine.
The pharaoh, as we've seen, was considered to be an incarnate god during the first and
second dynasties, and then during the old kingdom the pharaohs were called sons of Rey.
But it was the office of the pharaoh, his royal identity that was divine and eternal.
The situation of the individual king who filled the role of the pharaoh varied according to
his individual situation in life.
So an individual king might be deposed in a coup, might die of a terrible disease, might
be an ineffectual bumbler, but the divine pharaoh always remained perfect and in control.
And only incidentally did the individual kings, as part of their functioning, fill the role
of the divine pharaoh, that is only at certain times and certain expressions of their power
where they divine pharaoh, and in others they were individual kings with their own human
failings.
Each pharaoh was identified with Horus, Horus is the falcon-headed sun god, as soon as he
came to the throne, and he ruled the two kingdoms just as the sun god ruled the cosmos.
Over time though, the pharaoh's status was reduced to that of a human being, but he was
a human being in whom the sun god dwelt, and through whom the sun god acted.
The pharaoh manifested the sun god's will on earth, although the pharaoh as king, a
role that was taken over by each king successively, continued to be regarded as divine, that is
as the divine pharaoh.
Now all of this identification between the pharaoh and Horus, between the pharaoh as
a human being and the pharaoh as a manifestation of the divine pharaoh who rules eternally.
All of this receives its basic explanation in the Egyptian myth of kingship.
The divine model for the pharaoh's rule was the myth of the death of Osiris at the hands
of his brother Seth, and then the later contest between Osiris' son Horus and Seth for kingship
over the earth.
Now this story appears in a variety of sources, and it appears in many different variations.
There is one version in the pyramid texts of the Old Kingdom.
There are other versions that seem to be reflected in coffin inscriptions during the Middle Kingdom.
There is a poem, a hymn to Osiris that appears in Dynasty 18, and we have a rather comprehensive
source written by a Greek by Plutarch, the Greek essayist in the first century CE, and
that becomes sort of the standard version of the story.
The Egyptian sources are for the most part fragmentary, and there are some parts of the
story that are only alluded to or just implied by what the text says.
To some extent, this shows a particular reluctance to address certain parts of the story.
For example, there seems to be a great deal of reluctance to talk about the death of Osiris.
In some versions in the Egyptian versions of the story, the death is transferred to Osiris'
enemies, although it is still Osiris who then descends to the underworld.
Although there are these competing versions with different details, and they are very
hard to pull together into a single comprehensive account, but I will try to hit the highlights
in what I have to say here.
The story begins with Osiris.
Osiris is the firstborn son of Gebb, the god of the sky, and not, excuse me, Gebb, the
god of the earth, and not, the goddess of the sky.
Osiris rules over the two kingdoms, but he is murdered by his brother Seth, who is the
god of disorder and violence.
During the time that Osiris ruled over the two kingdoms, his consort was his sister Isis,
and together the two of them reigned over a golden age of peace and prosperity and enjoyed
the acclaim of all the gods.
As usual in human accounts of the ancient past, things used to be great.
They aren't anymore, but at one time, everything was the way it was supposed to be.
And in Egyptian mythology, this was during the reign of Osiris.
However, Osiris' younger brother Seth grew jealous of Osiris and killed him, although
for various reasons that I have indicated, the details of how Osiris is killed are obscure.
But it does appear that after killing Osiris, Seth dismembered Osiris' body, and he scattered
the pieces of Osiris' body over the face of the earth.
And considering what happens later in the story, he may have done this to prevent Isis
from bringing Osiris back to life.
So with Osiris dead and his dismembered body having disappeared into various different
parts of the earth, Seth assumed the rule of the two kingdoms with his consort and sister
Nephthys.
But at the same time that Seth begins his rule, his sister Isis went into deep mourning
for her lost husband.
She wept day and night in her grief, and finally, Nephthys, her sister and the wife
of Seth, agrees to help Isis to help find Osiris.
So the sister goddesses now search throughout the two kingdoms of Egypt for the pieces of
Osiris' body, and eventually they're able to find apparently all, or almost all, of
the pieces of the body of Osiris.
And they then reassemble it at Abidas, which was the site of the God's primary shrine.
Once Osiris' body has been reassembled through her power of magic and also through the power
of her erotic love, Isis is able to revive Osiris, although not entirely.
Let's say that she is able to revive Osiris sufficiently that she is able to have sexual
intercourse with him.
And as a result of the sexual intercourse with the semi-revived Osiris, Isis is able
to conceive a son, the God Horus.
After engendering the son who would eventually avenge his death, Osiris departs his earthly
domain and enters the underworld, where he thereafter rules as king of the dead.
Now this part of the story has some fairly clear symbolic significance.
And most of this mythology that we'll be talking about in this course has fairly clear symbolic
significance.
The story of the death and the new life of Osiris is tied to the fertility of crops.
And in the case of Egypt, these are crops that are provided by the annual flooding of
the Nile.
And in the mythology, the flooding of the Nile is caused by the tears of Isis that she weeps
in mourning over her loss of her beloved husband.
The scattering of the pieces of Osiris' body may also be applied to the idea of the fertility
of crops, because of course you scatter the seed before the crops grow and become replacements
for the plants that were lost in the gathering of the seeds.
It may be intended to justify the very large number of cultic sites that were devoted to
the worship of Osiris, or it may be that the scattering of Osiris' body is a justification
for founding further cultic sites for the worship of Osiris.
But there is some connection, some symbolism behind that part of the story, it appears.
Now it's also important for me to emphasize that Seth, who brings about the death of Osiris,
is a god of disorder and a god of violence, but he is still part of the cosmic order of
creation, and he has a proper place within the cosmic order of creation.
Seth is a part of the cosmic order as much as Osiris is, as much as Isis is, as much
as Nephthys is.
As much as any other god, Seth belongs in the cosmic order.
He forms something of a counterpart to Osiris and Horus, because they are principles of
order, and Seth is a principle of disorder, a principle of the unexpected in a generally
dependable creation.
It is important not to confuse Seth with none, for example, the force of primordial chaos,
the one who surrounds the cosmos like a sea and threatens to destroy it.
That kind of chaos remains a endangered creation and a threat to the gods, but Seth is a principle
of disorder within creation and is always contained within the cosmic order.
He is part of the cosmic order, and to that extent depends on cosmic order in order to
exist and to act.
Now the second part of the myth, after the death of Osiris and the birth of Horus, takes
on a different point of focus, and sometimes is referred to as the contendings of Horus
and Seth.
The second part of the myth of kingship shifts its attention to this intellectual and physical
combat between Seth and Osiris's son Horus.
They are contending for royal authority over the two kingdoms of Egypt and for domain over
the land of the living, which is to say over the cosmos.
This remember is the distant one, a sun god represented as a falcon.
Seth, on the other hand, is represented by a strange composite animal that is now usually
referred to as a Seth animal.
This composite animal has a long curved snout and has long ears that stand up directly from
his head.
He looks something like an anteater, to tell you the truth, at least to me.
In some depictions, Seth has a tail with a forked tip.
In any event, on the one hand you have the handsome flying falcon representing Horus and
on the other hand you have a god of disorder who is represented by a rather disordered
looking creature.
Now Isis initially hides the child Horus from Seth and does this by hiding him in the
papyrus marshes.
And she serves as Horus's protector and advocate throughout his childhood, here complimenting
her earlier role as the loving wife and the erotic lover of Osiris by playing the role
of the loving mother and protector of the child Horus.
Horus in this part of the story is called Har Pa Kered, or Horus the Child.
And he is entirely dependent on his mother Isis and her powerful magic as well as her
powerful wits.
And he's often depicted at this part of the story as a child sitting on the lamp of Isis.
Horus is identified with the pharaoh, so Isis is here also a goddess and protector of the
pharaoh's royal throne.
And often we have the idea that Isis protects the pharaoh much as she protects the child
Horus as a little child on her lap.
And later on we see images of Isis and Horus that recall very closely images of the Madonna
and Child.
Once Horus is grown up, he is hardware, or Horus the Elder.
And now he is ready to approach the assembly of the gods under the authority of Rey and
to ask for his legitimate right of succession.
He wants to assume the throne of his father Osiris as king and have Seth deposed as a usurper.
Now the contest between Horus and his uncle Seth takes on different forms, and these different
forms appear in the different various sources for the story that have come down to us.
As the stories evolve and develop over time, we find the later versions of the story of
combat between Horus and Seth are increasingly detailed and increasingly complex.
And some entire works are devoted exclusively to this contest between Horus and Seth.
This is especially true in the New Kingdom and in later eras, and comes to represent
also a contest between truth and falsehood.
Truth being identified of course with Horus and falsehood with Seth.
So a philosophical interpretation if you will, or a symbolic or metaphorical interpretation
is later imposed on this story after the time of the New Kingdom.
The central contest is really a legal contest because we're talking about the right of succession
to the throne.
Horus appears before the Council of the Gods.
The Council of the Gods is under the authority of the Sun God Rey.
Horus makes a plea to the Council of the Gods to recognize his legal rights as the heir
and son of Osiris.
The Council appears to favor and support Horus's claim, but Horus is opposed by Rey, the head
of the Council.
It appears that Rey believes that Horus is too young in an experience to rule as king.
So there follows a contest between Horus and Seth, and it takes on different aspects.
For example, there is a contest by combat.
Horus has been prepared by his father Osiris for this martial conflict before Osiris departs
into the underworld.
But the combat also has overtones of a contest of skill, magic, and endurance.
So this is also a contest of wits.
Seth and Horus look for ways to outmaneuver each other, ways to outsmart each other, and
sometimes they devise stratagems to bring disrepute on the other God in the eyes of
Rey and the assembly of the Gods.
In this long process of the contending between Seth and Horus, Horus is at one point blinded
in one eye by Seth, and he has to be healed by the God Toth, the scribe of the Gods.
Later on in the contest, Seth loses both testicles, which effectively deprives him of the male
power to rule.
So nobody comes out of this completely unscathed.
But Horus at least has his sight restored, and in fact the blinding and healing of Horus
are the mythic origin of a powerful amulet called the Eye of Horus.
The Eye of Horus appears in the Pyramid text as both a form of sacrifice and as a form
of offering.
But the important thing is the upshot of all of these different contests, all of these
different stories of attempts by Seth to humiliate Horus, and Horus to humiliate Seth, and Isis
gets into the act as we will see later.
The upshot of all of these contests is a series of clear victories for Horus, and a series
of clear losses and humiliations for Seth.
Finally, the Divine Assembly agrees that Horus should have the authority to rule, because
Seth has pretty much shown himself not capable, and now not physically capable to rule at
all.
But Ray, who you'll remember opposed Horus' accession to the throne because of his age,
Ray offers Seth something of a consolation prize.
First of all, he gives Seth his two daughters, and then he gives them a job, probably the
earliest example of a son-in-law getting a job from his father-in-law.
But the job that Seth is given is protecting Ray's barge daily from the threats of the
chaos monster Apophis, who resides in the sea of the sky through which Ray's barge
must travel, and their images of Seth threatening Apophis with his spear ready to defend Ray
and ready to carry out his duty as a dutiful son-in-law.
Now the story of the death of Osiris, and the contest between Horus and Seth for the
kingship, has a complicated web of connections and meaning that are relevant to royal rule
in ancient Egypt.
At the death of a pharaoh, he assumes the role of Osiris, the dead king, the king of
the underworld.
Therefore, he retains his royal identity as he departs into the underworld.
And just as Osiris did, he leaves behind his heir, and the new pharaoh assumes the throne
and the royal identity as Horus.
In this way, the continuity of the rule of the eternal divine pharaoh is maintained,
because as soon as an individual pharaoh dies, he is no longer the divine pharaoh, but is
now identified with Osiris instead of Horus, and the new pharaoh assumes the role of Horus
as the divine pharaoh.
The story also validates the legitimacy of the reigning pharaoh's authority.
The contest between Horus and Seth for supremacy is sometimes understood as a contest between
lower Egypt, which was associated with Horus, and upper Egypt, which was associated with
Seth.
But on a more primary level, the contest is between order and disorder, between the virtues
of autocratic kingly authority and the threat of social chaos.
Although in some late versions of the story, Seth is ultimately destroyed, in most versions
he retains a distinctive role within the order overseen by Horus, and it is a role that is
uniquely suited to his talents as a mighty warrior and a trickster.
We will see that many mighty warriors are tricksters in ancient Mediterranean religious
culture.
Their activities threaten the order of civilized life, even as they maintain it.
And we'll see this is the case, for example, with the Mesopotamian hero Gilgamesh.
At the same time, it's notable that Horus himself is able to outwit and to outmaneuver
Seth, and so Horus is something of a trickster himself.
That is, he incorporates principles of disorder into the order that his rule has established.
Horus becomes the master of all creation, even the power of disorder.
So, through its many variations, the story of Osiris, Seth, and Horus is not only a myth
about kingship, but an explanation and a justification for the way things are now.
In this sense, the story is also a creation myth, because creation myths like this explain
how the world of gods and human beings has assumed its present shape, how the world,
the cosmos, has come to be ordered as it is.
The myth is also the basis for many beliefs about Isis, the most important of the Egyptian
goddesses, as we will see.
In this story, Isis appears as the ideal ice fulfillment of all female roles, the ideal
lover, the ideal wife, the ideal widow, and the ideal mother.
So this is not only a story about the present world, but also the underworld, and explains
the continuity the Egyptians believed existed between the realm of Horus, the land of the
living, and the realm of his father Osiris, the land of the dead.
So in our next session, we'll examine the range of Egyptian beliefs and practices related
to death, and especially the spiritual and physical preparation for the dead to enter
the realm of Osiris.
