Lecture 10, Egypt, the power of goddesses
In our last lecture, we considered beliefs and practices surrounding death in ancient
Egyptian religious culture, especially the spiritual and physical preparation to enter
the realm of Osiris.
In this lecture, we will review some beliefs and stories from Egyptian religion that focus
specifically on the role of goddesses as sources of power in the divine world.
Now some Egyptian goddesses represented different elements of the divine order of creation.
We have already discussed Egyptian creation mythology, and we have seen that goddesses
play major roles in the process of creation and also as part of the created order itself.
Now of course, in a polytheistic religious culture like that of ancient Egypt, the concept
of a feminine deity is almost inevitable because the divine world, as we have seen, is understood
to reflect the natural world, the world of human beings.
So that includes, among other things, the duality and attraction between male and female.
As you'll recall, one of the classical models of creating in creation stories is through
sexual generation, most commonly of course, that involves a male deity and a female deity
who have sexual intercourse and give birth to a new generation of offspring.
And that establishes a divine line of descent from the earliest elemental gods to the later
gods involved with the political order and with human welfare.
In the hermopolis myth of creation, the cosmogony from hermopolis, the origin of the gods and
the elements and human beings and other living creatures was all traced back to an egg produced
by four couples, the eight gods and goddesses of the Agdoad.
Now as you'll recall, these couples were essentially male and female aspects of the same principles.
So there was Amun on Amunet, hiddenness, there was Ha and Hahet, formlessness, Cook and Kaokhet,
darkness and Nun and now Net, representing the Abyss.
In this myth, the gods and goddesses of the Agdoad are more important as couples than
they are as individual males and females, because the emphasis here is on the sexual
generative powers of these divine couples.
In the Heliopolis myth, involving Atum's initial act of creation, the gods Shu and
his consort Tefnut were the first gods created, and these are also the first gods to be sexually
differentiated.
Tefnut, the goddess, represented the moist air of the heavens and the atmosphere of the
underworld in terms of moistness, and this forms a complement to the gods Shu as a god
of dry air and the breath of life.
Tefnut is often depicted as a woman with the head of a lioness, and she's crowned with
the solar disk to represent her divinity, and the Eureus, that is the sacred asp, that symbolizes
supreme power.
So in the myth from Heliopolis, the myth of creation there, Shu and Tefnut are the first
divine couple, and Tefnut, therefore, is the first mother.
The daughter of Tefnut and Shu is Nutt, the sky goddess, and she is sister and consort
to Geb, the god of the earth.
Nutt, however, is separated from her husband by her father Shu.
After Nutt had given birth to the gods of the political order, that is to Osiris, Isis,
Seth, and Nephthys, Shu lifted Nutt off of her husband, Geb, at the command of Atul, and
this is why the earth is prone, representing the god Geb.
This is why, rather, why Nutt is suspended over the earth, and you have Shu, the air
in between separating them.
As a result of this separation, Geb wept tears that created the oceans, and Nutt, in the
graphic portrayals of her and her husband, Nutt is portrayed stretching over the reclining
body of Geb, supported by her hands and feet, looking something like some sort of odd gymnastics
stunt or something from the Kamasutra.
In other depictions, Nutt has wings, and it is her wings that are spread across the sky
that form the sky.
As we've seen, Nutt is sometimes also thought of, rather, sometimes she's thought to be
the mother of Rey, giving birth to the sun god each morning, each dawn, and then swallowing
him again at dusk after his daily voyage across her body.
Now Nutt and Geb, it's worth noting, are a major exception to the general rule in the
ancient world that goddesses are associated with the earth as the sources of life and
fertility while gods are associated with the sky.
So there is not an inviolable rule here.
In this case, it is the goddess who is associated with the sky, Nutt, and Geb, the god who's
associated with the earth.
Now we find a considerably more complex, divine, feminine figure than either Nutt or
Tefnut in the goddess Hawthor.
Hawthor was a popular and very important goddess throughout Egyptian history who filled a number
of different but related functions in Egyptian religious culture.
Hawthor's origins seem to lie in a prehistoric cult of a cow goddess, a cow goddess who represented
nature and the power of fertility, which makes sense, and these are attributes that Hawthor
retained throughout her history.
Because of this origin, Hawthor is usually represented as a cow with the solar disk between
her long horns, or sometimes as a goddess with horns and the solar disk between them,
or sometimes as a goddess with a human face but cow's ears.
Hawthor's name means the house of Horus, and she was identified with various abodes
of the god Horus, including of course the sky.
And as his house, she forms a shelter and protection for Horus, so Hawthor was also
thought of Horus's protector and nurturer, a role that she shares with Isis.
Generally speaking, Hawthor was the goddess of love and the joy that arises from love.
But this means she was also associated with all aspects of erotic love and the various
arts and skills associated with erotic love.
As a result, Hawthor was a patroness of singers and dancers and artists, all of their skills
being aimed in part at producing an atmosphere which is conducive to romantic love.
She was also believed to protect women in childbirth, perhaps as a natural offshoot
of her association with erotic love.
And one of her titles takes in both of those functions, the title Lady of the Volva.
Hawthor was sometimes associated with the god Rae.
She sometimes appeared as his mother, sometimes she appeared as his daughter.
And there is an interesting episode that appears in the story of the contendings of
Horus and Seth.
You may remember that Rae is the judge in the contendings between Horus and Seth, and
at a certain point in the story, he becomes exasperated with having to judge between the
two contenders for the kingship of heaven and earth, and he retires to his private abode.
At this point, Hawthor attempts to humor him into coming back to the court, and she does
this by lifting up the skirt of her dress and exposing herself to him.
For some reason, this makes Rae break out into laughter, lifts his mood, and he returns
to judging the contest.
Again, making that association between what appears to be some aspect of her erotic nature
with Hawthor's association with joy and laughter.
Hawthor, as I've mentioned, also has associations with fertility, and that means she is associated
with the various natural cycles that go along with fertility.
We think primarily of the cycle of the agricultural year, of the period of felonus, followed by
a period of fertility and abundance, followed by the harvest at another period of felonus.
Because of her associations with fertility and the cycles of nature and agriculture,
Hawthor is also a goddess of fate, and a prophetess, because she can see into the future and see
the dictates of fate.
In this capacity, sometimes it is Hawthor, rather than Anubis, who first receives the
souls of the dead into the underworld in accounts of the afterlife.
Hawthor's role as goddess of fate is also connected with another role that otherwise
seems to be somewhat at odds with her primary attribute.
This is Hawthor as a warrior, specifically a warrior goddess who is an instrument of
divine vengeance.
It is Hawthor who inflicts the punishment against those who have offended the gods,
or those who have somehow overstepped the limits of divine prerogatives.
In this aspect, I suppose we can compare Hawthor to the furies in Greek mythology, who are also
instruments of divine vengeance.
In this role, as a warrior goddess of divine vengeance, Hawthor is sometimes identified
with Sekhmet, the lioness goddess known as the powerful one.
Both of them are associated with war, both of them to a certain extent with vengeance.
In another story involving the sun god Rey, Rey orders Hawthor to take vengeance on humanity,
and this is because as Rey has grown older, human beings have begun to plot against him,
and to think, well now that the god is becoming old and feeble, this is our chance to rise
up against him and to topple him from his throne.
Rey becomes aware of the plot and decides to take vengeance against humanity by unleashing
Hawthor against them as an avenger.
Unfortunately Hawthor takes to her work a little bit too readily.
She starts taking vengeance against humanity, separating heads from shoulders and so on,
and by the end of her first day of work, when she finally goes to sleep to rest and gain
her strength for the next day, fully half of humanity has been destroyed and lies dead
across the earth.
This is not exactly what Rey had in mind.
It seems that if Hawthor continues at this rate, having wiped out half of humanity in
one day, in the second day she will destroy the rest of humanity.
So Rey decides it is his responsibility to save the remaining people of the earth, because
it is not his desire to entirely eliminate humanity from the world.
So Rey produces or procures a vast quantity of barley beer, and he mixes it with red ochre
so that it turns bright red, and then he pours the barley beer over the face of the earth
during the night.
When Hawthor awakens the next morning, she mistakes the tinted barley beer for blood,
and since she is blood thirsty in the strictest sense, she drinks as much of the beer as she
possibly can, pretty much finishing it off.
Of course, she becomes thoroughly intoxicated.
She is unable to resume her killing because she is either too drunk to do so or has fallen
to a stupor, and as a result, humanity is saved.
As a result of this story, Hawthor, who is already associated with erotic love and joy,
is also honored as the goddess of drunkenness.
As a result, Hawthor was, as you can imagine, a popular goddess throughout Egyptian history,
because of her primary associations.
And she had worshipers from all levels of society, from the lowest to the highest, and
her rituals and festivals that were celebrated on a regular basis reflected her primary characteristics.
Her rituals would often include music and dance, and the use of her sacred instrument,
the Systrom.
The Systrom was a kind of a musical rattle, and this provided the music for the dancing
that took place in honor of Hawthor, and even the pharaoh would sometimes dance in Hawthor's
honor.
Until New Year's Day, Hawthor's cult statue was taken to the roof of her temple, and there
it was touched by the first rays of the rising sun, symbolically reuniting Hawthor with Rey.
Later in the same month, still in the beginning of the year, Hawthor was happily honored
by a festival of drunkenness.
Of course, in our own tradition, the festival of drunkenness comes just before New Year's
Day.
Hawthor was also sometimes presented as a wife of Horus, and in this case she was honored
during a summer festival at Horus's shrine at Edfu in Upper Egypt.
Essentially, there was a voyage made by the goddess Hawthor to the residence of her husband
Horus.
Hawthor's cult statue was taken from her temple at Dendera by boat, and it made the
long trip to Horus's temple at Edfu, and remained there for 13 days.
So the cult statue was moved from the temple of Hawthor to the temple of her husband Horus.
This represented a sacred marriage between the two, as the gods are united as a harmonious
couple.
At the end of the 13 days, the cult statue of Hawthor would be returned by boat to her
own temple.
The product of the marriage between Hawthor and Horus was two sons, Ihi and Horus Sumatawi.
So Hawthor's many associations and representations grow out of a few primary characteristics,
but the number of associations and representations are fairly typical of the major goddesses
of the ancient Mediterranean religious cultures.
But even in this respect, she is far surpassed by the goddess Isis.
As we've seen, Isis is important primarily as the sister and consort of Osiris, but over
the century, she gains greater importance and eventually comes to represent dominance
over both heaven and earth as the queen of heaven.
Although this happens considerably later than the period of Egyptian history, we are
talking about at the moment.
Now we've already encountered Isis in the myth of kingship.
And in the myth of kingship, Isis plays a significant role as the wife and sister of
Osiris and the mother and protector of Horus.
So Isis, as we've seen, represents a model of the love of a devoted wife, a devoted widow,
and a devoted mother.
She reflects all the roles relevant to Egyptian women at different stages in their lives.
She loves Osiris with a deep, passionate love, and in fact, she loves Osiris from their conception
in the womb of Tefnut, or rather in the womb of Nut.
She loves Osiris from the conception, and they actually embrace in the womb of Nut.
After Osiris dies at the hands of his brother Seth, Isis devotes herself to finding his
body and using her magic and the power of her erotic love to return Osiris to life sufficiently
to conceive Horus as his heir.
Within the context of this story, Isis's tears of mourning for Osiris are believed to cause
the flooding of the Nile, which ensures the fertility Egypt and the continuation of the
agricultural cycle.
Isis is here identified with the land of Egypt, and Osiris is identified with the source of
grain.
So Osiris's death and revival, his death and rebirth, guarantees the cycle of fertility,
the death and rebirth of the agricultural year on an annual cycle.
This guarantees food and continued life for all of Egypt.
Now after Osiris departs to the underworld, Isis continues to figure very prominently
in the myth of kingship as the mother and protector of Horus, because she intrudes herself
repeatedly into the contest between Horus and Seth.
Isis appears repeatedly in the contendings of Horus and Seth, which is a text of these
stories from the New Kingdom.
And each time, of course, Isis's intention is to advance her son's case for the kingship
and to frustrate the schemes of Seth against Horus.
So she appears before the tribunal of the gods, and she argues Horus's case for the
kingship.
The tribunal of the gods, the council there, is generally sympathetic to Horus and to Isis,
but of course they are stymied by Rae, who feels that Horus is too young to take on the
burden of rule.
And Rae becomes exasperated with Isis and bans her from the court proceedings.
Now Isis is not only wise, but clever, and she has knowledge of everything in heaven
and on earth.
And she also possesses cunning and the ability to develop successful schemes, which are all
part of practical wisdom in the ancient world.
Essentially she has the ability to get things done.
At one point, Isis uses her magic to disguise herself, and in disguise she goes to Seth
and presents a hypothetical case to him and tries to determine whether he would judge
one way or the other.
What Seth does is to come back with a judgment that essentially condemns himself in his contendings
with Horus.
And here we find a parallel in Egyptian mythology to the parable that Nathan tells to King David
that leads David to condemn his own behavior in his marriage with Bathsheba.
Again, once the trial between Horus and Seth turns into a physical contest, Isis intercedes
repeatedly, and repeatedly she helps Horus to humiliate Seth in various ways, and thereby
to undermine his case.
Significantly, in one version of the story, the contest between Horus and Seth is finally
resolved by the intervention of Osiris himself after Isis has taken Seth prisoner.
And as a result of Osiris' intervention, Seth finally renounces his claim to the throne.
But these stories, as I say, appear in many different variations.
But as all of these stories make clear, Isis is closely associated with the pharaoh as
the living embodiment of her disabying son Horus, and in fact the name Isis means throne.
So she is basic to the pharaoh as his seat of power, as the basis for his power.
Just as Isis protects Horus against Seth, so also the goddess protects the pharaoh,
acting as his divine patroness and the symbol of his royal sovereignty.
Isis is also the goddess who guides the dead pharaoh, who is now identified with Osiris,
through the dangers of the underworld, and helps him gain immortality.
As protector of the pharaoh, Isis is sometimes identified with the goddess Hothor, so sometimes
Isis too is depicted crowned with a cow's long horns and the solar disk between them.
Like Hothor, Isis is worshiped with the Systrom, the musical rattle, and it's used in rituals
of both music and dance in Isis's honor, and that continues in the later worship of Isis.
Isis is also a goddess of love as Hothor is, but Isis represents the domesticated form
of erotic love, the love of the wife towards the husband, and she represents the love of
the mother towards the son, always in reference to Osiris and to Horus.
Now Isis's role in the myth of kingship already hints at the power of magic and healing that
made her important to the average Egyptian as well as to the pharaoh.
Isis, as I said, had the power to get things done, and she was believed to have this power
also in terms of illness, accident, and various other kinds of ills that befall human beings.
She was believed to have knowledge of elixirs and potions that could confer health and immortality,
leading to her role as the goddess of pharmacology.
Isis was associated with magical spells that could be used as protection against hostile
animals or protection against harmful insects or perhaps turned to in times of crisis and
illness.
Many of these spells are set within the context of particular stories.
Stories about Isis's protection of Horus, and the story tells about the situation in the
life of Isis and Horus that led to the origin of this particular spell, providing a context
for the spell's use.
According to one story preserved in a text from dynasty 19 that is around 1200 BCE, Isis
gained the power to heal and to cast spells as a result of knowing the secret name of
the sun god Rey.
As we've seen, in Egypt the name was the expression of who a person or a god most truly is.
The name is the essence of a person's or a god's deepest hidden being.
As part of her plan to ensure Horus' place on the throne, Isis devises a plan to make
the sun god Rey reveal his secret name so that Isis can gain control over him.
She knows that nothing created can hurt Rey.
The only thing with power over Rey is Rey himself.
So she follows Rey's barge on its daily voyage across the sky, and when the sun god begins
to doze and drool in the middle of the day, she collects some of his saliva.
Using Rey's saliva, Isis uses some earth to create a venomous snake, and then she places
the snake where Rey will pass on his daily voyage across the sky.
When the snake bites Rey, the god suffers intense burning pain, and he cries out to
the other gods to help him and to do something to stop his suffering.
But of course, none of the other gods know what to do.
Only Isis has the power to relieve his torment, and Isis refuses to help him until she learns
the secret of his secret name.
Rey tries various ways to get around this demand, but finally he capitulates on the condition
that Isis places her son Horus under a binding oath not to reveal Rey's secret name to anyone
else.
Isis agrees.
She learns Rey's secret name, and then she heals him.
But she also shares the knowledge of Rey's secret name with Horus and uses the secret
name of the sun god to enhance her own magical power.
This is a common motif in magic that we'll talk about later.
So we may see that to a certain extent, the goddesses of ancient Egypt were envisioned
in ways that were consistent with the feminine role in Egyptian society, and they display
the strength, the initiative, the cleverness, and various other virtues that are traditionally
associated with women.
So the feminine side of the divine in many ways reflects the feminine side of the human.
So we find goddesses acting as Isis does as protective mothers.
We find goddesses as the source of blessings associated with nurturing and the protection
and well-being of their children that is their primary concern.
So mothers as protectors, mothers as nurturers, mothers as guarantors of their children's
well-being.
We find goddesses functioning as wives.
In the case of Nutt and Isis both, these wives are faithful to their husbands even after
separation or death, and their role as protective mothers becomes another expression of their
wifely fidelity.
In the case of Isis, of course, ensuring the well-being of Horus means ensuring the husband's
legacy through the heir.
Osiris' legacy on earth is inherited by Horus as his successor, as king over Upper and Lower
Egypt.
Goddesses also become an expression of the dynamic life of the cosmos and the cycles
of nature in general.
So a goddess may be half of a couple that represents the fundamental power of life such
as shoe and Tefnut, the dry air and the moist air of the atmosphere, or they may represent
the power of fertility such as is the case with Isis and Osiris.
A goddess may be a representative of the power of erotic love.
In part, Isis does that in association with Osiris, but primarily here we're thinking of
Hawthorne, and as a result of her association with erotic love, her power is also tied to
the fundamental cycles that govern the cosmos, the cycles of fertility that bring the earth
from sterility to fertility and abundance, and then back to felonies once again.
Even Hawthorne in her role as a warrior goddess can be understood as a protective deity, one
who protects and nurtures those under her authority, because she ensures that divine
decrees will not be violated.
She does this by punishing those who disobey or otherwise infringe on the province of the
gods.
In all these cases, it is clear that the Egyptians believed the powers and virtues represented
by goddesses were fundamental to the divine order, and that divine order, Ma'at, is of
course herself also represented as a goddess.
In our next session, we will consider religious expression in everyday life in ancient Egypt,
in religious ritual, in magical practices, and in personal piety.
