Lecture 14 Mesopotamia Stories of Creation
In our last lecture, we surveyed the history of ancient Mesopotamia and the interplay between
different ethnic and religious groups on the one hand and a continuing cultural heritage
on the other.
In this lecture, we will consider the Mesopotamian assembly of gods and the different accounts
of the origin of all things in the Babylonian creation stories, Enuma Elish and Adapa.
The Mesopotamian pantheon of gods is difficult to define or to arrange in any kind of systematic
way much as the modern scholar might like to do so.
In fact, there is a basic problem in discussing the gods of Mesopotamia.
We are not exactly sure what the terms used to refer to the gods are supposed to mean.
The terms are Dingar in Sumerian and Illu in Akkadian, and we do not know the etymology
of either one of those words.
Now they do have ideal grams, that is, they have graphic letter representations, and this
seems to identify each of these words, Dingar and Illu, with the heavens.
And this would seem to imply that the idea of the god, or of deity in general, has more
to do with location than it has to do with essential nature.
In other words, the gods are those beings who are up in heaven rather than down on earth.
Although as we'll see, there are gods on earth and under the earth as well.
But in this sense, it would seem that the primary attribute of the gods is superiority, that
is being above humanity.
But of course, that could mean any sort of superiority as well over the human.
That could mean even the superhuman ability of a hero, and yet a hero is not exactly the
same as a god.
The gods also have at their command the mysterious power that is called the may.
The may seems to combine authority with supernatural power.
In other words, what we would think of as the primary attributes of godhead.
So the may seems to combine in essence everything that makes the gods superior to human beings.
So the may appears to be what we might think of as the essence of Mesopotamian divinity,
that authority and supernatural power.
So we will probably not go too far wrong if we think of the Mesopotamian gods as much
like the overlords in an earthly political hierarchy, except that the gods are endowed
with a divine authority and a supernatural power, and this elevates them far above the
capabilities of human beings.
The model of the political hierarchy is particularly suitable for the Mesopotamian gods because
their multitudes fill ranks and offices like those not only of a royal government but an
entire royal administration.
In fact, the earliest surviving list of the Mesopotamian gods comes from about 2600 BCE,
lists 560 gods by their Sumerian names.
Of course the chief gods are listed first, and those are the ones I will mention now.
An, Enlil, Inanna, Enki, Nanna, and Utu, and I'll talk about each of these gods first
referring to them by their Sumerian name and then giving the Akkadian equivalent.
An, known in Akkadian as Anu, his name means sky, so obviously he is God of the sky.
He was the chief god in the Mesopotamian Pantheon at least originally, although later he was
replaced by the chief gods of Assyria and Babylon.
Enlil, known in Akkadian as Bell, is the wind.
More specifically, Enlil is the moist wind that brings air and relief from the water
over the dry land, and he was the chief god of Sumer.
He ruled over human affairs and, very significantly, he carries the tablets of destiny, making
him the master of human fates.
Later on, he too was displaced by other gods of Assyria and Babylon.
Enanna, the goddess, is known in Akkadian as Ishtar, a much more familiar name to us.
Enanna was originally a fertility goddess and she gathered a wide range of associations
because of that primary attribute and, as well, a wide variety of powers.
In fact, Enanna eventually became designated Queen of Heaven and Earth and was one of the
most important deities of ancient Mesopotamia.
There is Enki, known in Akkadian as Ea, meaning manager of the soil.
He was the god of sweet water, that is, the water that is safe to drink.
And he was humanity's primary benefactor among the gods.
He was a source of knowledge and, particularly, a source of magic.
The god of the moon was Nanna, known in Akkadian as Sin.
And since Nanna was god of the moon, he was also associated with the passage of time and
he was the guardian of the night.
Like the Egyptian sun god, Rey, Nanna sailed across the sky in a bark, that is, in a boat,
except he did it at night and his bark was identified with the crescent moon.
Finally, of the chief gods, there is Utu, known in Akkadian by the more familiar name
of Shamash.
He is the sun.
And he drove a chariot across the sky daily, following the course of the sun's path, and
traveled through the underworld each night to return from the west to the east.
Shamash, or Utu, was also the dispenser of justice, presumably because he could see everything
that happened on the earth.
There are other gods of the cosmic and political order that are also prominent in the Mesopotamian
Pantheon.
For example, the goddess Nincor Saga.
She was associated primarily with the stony ground of the foothills and the desert outside
of the inhabited parts of Mesopotamia.
But she was also a goddess midwife, and therefore a protectress of women in childbirth.
The gods of the underworld, well, originally it was a goddess of the underworld, Ireshkigal,
whose name means Lady of the Great Earth.
But later she was joined, or perhaps displaced, by Nurgal, a god who becomes her lover and
husband.
Together, Nurgal and Ireshkigal were the deities of the underworld and guardians over the realm
of the dead.
Another important god is Asur, the war god of Assyria.
Naturally, he gained ascendancy with the rise of Assyria and became identified as both chief
god and creator god, and in this respect he was identified with a pre-mortial god, Anshar,
that I'll refer to in a moment.
Finally, Marduk was the patron god of Babylon, and he became the head of the Pantheon under
Babylonian domination.
When he did so, he displaced and also assumed several attributes of An and Enlil.
The origins of these gods and the relationships among them, and between the gods and their
creation, is the subject of Mesopotamian cosmogonies, in other words, Mesopotamian creation stories.
The Babylonian story of creation reflects its chief god Marduk's dominance as patron
god of Babylon.
Now, as we've seen, cosmogony considers creation in mythic terms, that is, in terms of what
motivates or drives or lies behind the events of the natural world.
So this is in terms not so much of how creation took place, but rather why creation took place,
and who did the work of creating.
Now, like all of these cosmogonies, the stories from Mesopotamia assume some sort of existence
before the creative action begins.
There is some system of being in place, presumably from eternity.
But then there is the act of creation.
What exists before is most often thought of in terms of undifferentiated matter from which
the gods emerge, and we have a direct parallel in Egypt where the sea of Nun is undifferentiated
chaos.
The Mesopotamian stories, like most creation stories, are not just about the origins of
gods and the cosmos, but more broadly the origins of how things got to be the way they
are now, their explanation of the current order of things in the world and for human
beings.
How things are now involves, of course, preeminently, the problem of humanity's status before
the gods, and some sort of explanation of the tribulations of human life in general.
And we see this happening, for example, in the creation story from Babylon, Enuma Elish.
The title, Enuma Elish, is from the Akkadian words, when above, which are the first two
words of the poem.
Enuma Elish is specifically a Babylonian creation narrative, and therefore focuses on the patron
god of Babylon, Marduk.
The story was probably composed around the 12th century BCE, although its dating remains
an open question.
But the divine hero of the poem is Marduk, the chief god of Babylon, and the climax
of the poem, its high point, is the construction of the city of Babylon itself to serve as
a home for Marduk as the chief god of all creation.
Now there is some question among scholars whether or not Marduk was the original hero
of the poem in Enuma Elish, or whether it was an Amorite god.
If that were the case that an Amorite god was the original hero, the poem would reflect
an origin among the Semitic ancestors of the Akkadians, and it would have possibly some
ties to later Israelite creation mythology.
Now it's common for a god to gain the attributes, or the titles, or even the names of other
gods.
We've seen examples of it in Egypt, and we'll see other examples in Greece and Rome.
And it's interesting that in the second part of the poem, which lists the 50 names of Marduk,
the last name listed is Bel Matati, meaning Lord of the World.
But that was a title originally belonging to Enlil, so it is possible that Enlil was
the original hero of Enuma Elish.
But again, of course, this is all speculation.
In its current form, the poem was probably composed to be performed during the New Year's
Festival that celebrated the vernal equinox sometime in late April.
Now the drama of Enuma Elish begins with three uncreated elements that represent the forces
of undifferentiated chaos.
First there is the god Apsu, whose name means depths, the unfathomable depths under the
earth.
He has a divine consort, Tiamat, whose name means waters.
But there is a vizier, or an associate, or a right-hand man, I suppose you could say,
Mumu.
Apsu represents the deep abyss that contains the seas of chaos.
But also, Apsu represents the principle of separation.
In the depths, the idea of distance is what separates one side from the other, one thing
from another.
So Apsu is a principle of separation.
He has divine energy because he is a god, but it is dissipated in unfocused activity.
There is a sort of undulation about Apsu, you might say, but it doesn't accomplish anything.
It is not regular.
It is merely aimless motion.
Tiamat is a body of water, specifically the bitter sea waters that support the earth.
But she is also the waters that threaten the welfare of humanity.
And remember again that Lord Mesopotamia is prey to sudden outbursts of natural catastrophes
arising out of the Persian Gulf.
So Tiamat represents the waters that threaten humanity in the form of storms, but also floods.
So she is essentially a chaos monster represented in terms of water, again, like the sea Nun
in Egyptian creation mythology.
Like the waters of the Abyss, Tiamat is formless.
And again, like Apsu, she exerts power without purpose, dissipating her energy in meaningless
actions.
Mumu is rather difficult to understand.
He seems to be allied to Apsu and Tiamat primarily as a force that opposes the creative
energy exerted by the gods.
He might be seen as a principle of inertia, I suppose, but primarily he is an associate
and effect totem for Apsu and Tiamat and joins with them in opposing the creative energy
of the gods.
Now creation in Enuma Elish initially proceeds without intention or purpose.
What happens is that Apsu and Tiamat slumber.
This is basically what they do all the time from eternity.
And as they slumber, they interact with each other in such a way so that various elements
mingle in the seas of the depths to create new elements, and in the process of creating
new elements, create also the gods associated with them.
So we have the sweet water of the Abyss mingling with the bitter waters of the sea, and this
creates the twin gods, lamu and lahamu, words meaning silt.
So essentially this is a mythic counterpart to a natural action.
When a river meets the ocean, or the ocean meets the river, there is the creation of
silt.
This is the first creation here, a mythic version of a natural process.
The next two appear are the two horizons, Anshar and Kishar.
And they become two separate horizons when they are separated by the birth of Anu, whom
you recall as the god of the sky.
So the sky is what separates the one horizon Anshar from the other horizon Kishar.
And again that principle of separation becomes important.
Anu, one of the primordial gods, in turn engenders ia nu dimud, god of the waters of earth, but
also god of wisdom, and a benefactor later on to humanity.
But the gods Anu and Aya nu dimud, and various other gods that are created in their order,
they are different than the primordial forces of Apsu, Tiamat and Mumu.
They are filled with divine energy, and they assert themselves as individual gods with
their own interests, and their divine energy and their self assertion cannot be contained.
The gods disagree with each other, and they create an uproar, and that uproar is all taking
place within the womb of Tiamat.
So Tiamat is kept awake by the uproar of the gods within her womb, and the noise also
keeps Apsu from sleeping.
So Apsu's reaction, perhaps typical of some fathers early in the morning, is to kill his
children.
But Aya, in his wisdom, casts a spell on Apsu, and, appropriately enough, puts him to sleep.
But now while Apsu sleeps, Aya kills him and steals his crown, claiming dominion over creation.
At the same time, Aya binds Mumu and imprisons him in the depths of the earth.
Now at this point, Enuma Elish describes the birth of Marduk, who will soon be the hero
of the poem.
Marduk is the son of Aya and his consort, Damkina.
Marduk, however, is far superior to all the other gods, an appropriate hero for the story
of creation.
And the poem describes his divinity in multiples, apparently the only way that the poet can
think of to indicate how far Marduk surpasses the powers and attributes of the other gods.
So we are told his godhead was doubled, his limbs are beyond understanding, his height
is enormous, he has four eyes and four ears, I guess that means he sees twice as much and
hears twice as much as any other god.
And he is clothed in the mantle of ten gods, and since the mantle represents to a certain
extent the sovereignty of the May, this represents that his authority and power is tenfold over
that of the other gods.
Now it apparently is the birth of Marduk, which would be quite an event, you'll admit.
This apparently is what awakens Tiamat and leads the lesser gods to prod Tiamat into
action against Anu and Aya, because Marduk, like his divine parents, makes sleep impossible.
Apparently what the lesser gods and Tiamat just as Apsu and Mumu want to do is sleep.
Marduk however, with his divine energy and action, makes sleep impossible, and so the
lesser gods prod Tiamat into acting against Marduk.
So Tiamat takes a new husband, a clumsy laborer called Kingu, clumsy laborer among the gods,
and she makes him general over an army of monstrous creatures that she creates specifically
to make war on the gods.
Neither Aya nor Anu is able to stand against Tiamat and this monstrous army, so Anshar,
the father of the gods, calls all of the gods into council and summons Marduk to be their
champion against Tiamat.
Marduk, who obviously has the upper hand of the situation, accepts on the condition that
all the other gods will acknowledge him as their king.
The gods agree they set up a throne for him and hail him, Marduk is king.
At this point Marduk prepares himself to do battle with Tiamat.
He arms himself and sets out to find Tiamat, to fight against her and destroy her.
Now it's interesting the way he arms himself.
He arms himself first of all with bow and arrow, as one might expect, with a mace and
with a net, because Tiamat is to a certain extent a sea monster.
He also takes with him natural forces, the four winds, for example, and lightning.
And when he mounts his chariot, which is pulled by four monsters, he further arms himself
with a healing plant, in case he should be wounded, and a magic spell.
Once again that idea of magic as an accompaniment to the more practical armament of weapons
and healing herbs.
So Marduk and Tiamat meet, and as tradition dictates, they start by exchanging taunts
with each other, and then they engage in single combat.
At the important moment, Tiamat opens her mouth to devour Marduk, but just as she does,
the tempest winds roar into her belly and blow her up like a balloon.
And at this point, Marduk shoots an arrow into her belly and kills her.
With Tiamat dead, the lesser gods fly into a panic, because Marduk quickly comes after
them and subdues them.
Then he places Tiamat's monster army in chains, and binds Kingu, the clumsy laborer, and takes
from him the tablets of destiny that Tiamat had bound to his chest.
So it is now Marduk, rather than Kingu, who is in charge of human fate.
Finally, Marduk smashes the head of Tiamat, and he splits her body into, like a seashell.
He uses half of it to form the firmament of the heavens, and the other half to form the
dry earth.
So if you ask, where does creation come from in the story Enuma Elish, we're living inside
the dead body of a chaos monster.
What this means is that the forces of chaos are not destroyed, in fact.
Apsu, Tiamat, and Mumu all become part of the order of creation, except now they have
been set in their proper places in the cosmos by Marduk's creative power.
To finish off the work of creation, Marduk brings order to the rest of the divine world.
He builds temples and cult centers on earth, he assigns the gods their places in the firmament
of the heavens, and thereby he creates the calendar and the orderly passage of time.
All the gods, as they agreed, pay homage to Marduk.
And he puts on his kingly robes, fastens the tablets of destiny to his chest, indicating
his sovereignty over human fates, and he assumes all his kingly array.
Now one thing that comes to Marduk's attention is that the gods do not like to do manual
labor, and it's mostly the lesser gods who do that.
So to relieve the gods of manual labor, Marduk kills his captive kingu and uses a clot of
his blood to create humanity.
In the role of humanity, it is to labor for and to serve the gods.
Finally, Marduk builds the city of Babylon as his dwelling place, but it is also the
crown of his creative work as he brings peace and order to all aspects of the creation.
The second half of the poem, as I've indicated, is a recitation and explanation of the fifty
names of Marduk, essentially an act of homage to Marduk as the king of the gods.
As we can see, Marduk in this poem represents in part the power of civilization, and in
part the power of human activity and human reason, because of course Babylon was a creation
of human beings.
And Marduk was patron deity of this city that was built in the face of the forces of chaos
as an assertion of human achievement and human aspiration.
So in Enuma Elish, we find out the human situation arises from our status as creatures made
from the blood of a clumsy labor among the gods, and our fate is to serve the gods without
question.
A somewhat different explanation of the human situation appears in the story of Adapa, Adapa
the sage.
This story also explains the way things are now and how things got to be the way they
are now.
The story of Adapa is an Akkadian story, and Adapa is one of the seven sages sent to humanity
by the god Eya, sent to humanity before the flood with the skills necessary for civilized
life.
So Adapa is a sage who knows how to live in civilization and the skills of civilization.
We have two different versions of the story of Adapa.
One was found in Egypt that dates to the 15th or 14th century BCE, and the other was found
in Osir, the capital of Assyria, and dates to the late 2nd millennium BCE.
Unfortunately they're both fragmentary, and what I'll give you is sort of a collation
of the two.
The poem begins with the description of Adapa and sets up the situation of the story.
Adapa was a priest of Eya.
Makes sense that a sage is a priest of the god of wisdom, and Adapa carries out his
duties as priest in the city of Iridu, which was traditionally the oldest city in Mesopotamia.
As a sage, Adapa is not only clever, but he is super wise.
The term used to refer to him is atrahasis, a word we will find again later in our lectures.
And Adapa is scrupulous in carrying out the offerings and rituals of Eya's temple, which
happens to include fishing.
One day while he is fishing, Adapa is apparently thwarted in his fishing in some way by the
self-wind at this point the text is missing, so we're not really sure what's going on.
But in retaliation, Adapa breaks the self-wind's wing, and this prevents her from blowing.
When Eya finds out what Adapa has done, he summons him and advises him to appear before
Anu, the king of the gods, and tells Adapa how to behave when he appears in Anu's court.
Eya gives Adapa very specific instructions, including the proper replies to give to questions
that Anu will ask him.
And Eya also tells Adapa how to conduct himself in such a way as to win Anu's favor.
But Eya also warns Adapa not to eat the bread of death or drink the water of death that
Anu will offer to him.
So Adapa appears in Anu's court and does just as Eya has told him, but it turns out
that the bread offered to him by Anu is in fact the bread of life, that is, the bread
of immortality.
But following his instructions, he refuses the bread, and as a result, humanity loses
its chance at immortality, and from then on humanity is destined to die.
The key to this story appears to be a play on words in the Akkadian.
On the one hand, the words bread of heaven, Shamuti, and on the other, the words bread
of death, Shamuti.
As you can see, it's very difficult to tell them apart.
But the question of whether or not Eya meant to deceive Adapa is open to question.
Also involved in this story are certain rules for giving and accepting hospitality, and
there are overtones of the appropriate garb and behavior for those who are mourning the
dead.
So there's more going on in this story than just an explanation of the human situation.
But both of these cosmogonies, both of these Mesopotamian creation stories, explain how
things got to be the way they are now.
And in both of them, we find that same sense of unease about the human situation in relation
to the gods that I've referred to earlier.
In Enuma Elish, humanity is made from the blood of a minor god who has been slain, a clumsy
laborer, and human beings are specifically intended to relieve the gods of the burden
of physical labor by providing them with temples, offerings, and clothing in worship.
In the story of Adapa, even the wisest sage is somehow led astray by the explicit directions
of the gods, with the result that all humanity must face death and the shadowy existence
of the afterworld through no fault of its own.
Both stories extol the greatness and incomparability of the gods and their mighty deeds of power,
but both also place humanity at the very bottom of the cosmic hierarchy, with only a remote
possibility that the gods will deal kindly with them.
In our next session, we will look more closely at the goddess Inana, the Lady of Myriad Offices,
and see how her association's titles and powers developed over the centuries.
