These lectures are part of the Great Courses series. They are produced by the Teaching
Company. These lectures are titled, Religion in the Ancient Mediterranean World, Part
2. Lecture 13, Mesopotamia, The Land Between the Rivers.
In our last lecture, we looked at several Egyptian examples of wisdom literature, a phenomenon
typical of some religious cultures in the ancient Mediterranean world. In this lecture,
we will begin our examination of the religious culture of Mesopotamia. As we will see, Mesopotamia
was the home of a succession of related but distinct civilizations. They share a common
religious culture, but it is one that is constantly evolving over the centuries. Mesopotamia
also had a rich literary tradition, which has echoes and parallels among other ancient
Mediterranean cultures. And it is in Mesopotamia that we find the earliest example of epic
poetry, the epic of Gilgamesh, which we will be discussing in a later session.
Now probably the primary factor in the earliest history of Mesopotamia was its geographical
situation. The name Mesopotamia is Greek. It means between the rivers. And this refers
to the land defined by the Tigris and Euphrates rivers, the Tigris River to the north, the
Euphrates to the south. Defining Mesopotamia just as Egypt was defined by the Nile.
Now this is roughly comparable to the territory that makes up the modern nation of Iraq. But
in ancient times, its people simply called it the land. Or in later history, they sometimes
referred to it by the name of the successive kingdoms that dominated the territory of Mesopotamia.
Now the territory of upper Mesopotamia is often referred to in the ancient world as
Assyria. This is in the northern Tigris Valley. Lower Mesopotamia lies to the south. And this
includes the delta formed as the two rivers, Tigris and Euphrates, reach the Persian Gulf.
This is the territory usually known in the ancient world as Babylonia, although it includes
not only the city of Babylon itself, but the cities of the earlier kingdoms of Akkad and
Sumer. This is a very diverse territory, the territory of Mesopotamia. It has a broad
fertile area around the rivers Tigris and Euphrates. But it also has foothills and fairly
arid steppes and desert within close proximity. The overall climate is semi arid, and the
rainfall and inhabited areas of the country usually ranges from about 7 to 15 inches annually.
Now the Tigris and Euphrates rivers flood, just as the Niles does, but the flooding does
not coincide with the growing season. So agriculture in Mesopotamia has almost always
been dependent on a carefully managed system of irrigation to take the water where it is
needed by the farmers in order to produce the crops at the right times.
The history of Mesopotamia as a distinct culture really begins in the 4th millennium BCE. This
is a period that saw the incursion of different kinds of peoples into the area that we now
know as Mesopotamia. There are certain Neolithic settlers that were the region's first identifiable
ethnic group, and this group of Neolithic settlers are called by modern scholars, Ubaidians.
They are named after Tel al-Ubaid, the site where their culture was first discovered and
it proved to be fairly typical of the Neolithic era of Mesopotamia in general. The Ubaidians
settled in the south. They had villages that over a period of time expanded into small
cities. By small, I mean that they would have a population of several thousand, and they
built houses and large, very well constructed temple complexes, similar to the temple complexes
that we find in Egypt. Ubaidian loan words appear in Sumerian, and for the most part
the Ubaidian loan words in Sumerian give us some idea of the kind of life that the Ubaidians
lived. For example, the words refer mostly to the work of farmers, or craftsmen, or of
priests, or of merchants, making it reasonable to assume that the Ubaidians were largely
farmers, craftsmen, priests, and merchants. It gives a good indication of the kind of
life they lived. The Sumerians, that is the people of the city of Sumer, who became dominant
over Mesopotamia for a while in the south, they seem to have entered Mesopotamia around
3100 BCE, and they were followed about two centuries later by Semitic people from the
West known as Amorites. And they settled, that is the Amorites settled, to the north
of the Sumerians, in the area around what is now the city of Baghdad. So Mesopotamian
civilization began in the 4th millennium BCE, and we begin, or find the beginning, of Mesopotamian
civilization with the rise of a series of powerful city states, some of which became
the capitals of what we would call early kingdoms. Now a city state is essentially an autonomous
governmental unit that centers on a walled city. The city state includes the city proper,
and the city is surrounded by a fortified wall for protection, and it is then dominant
over the adjacent countryside that provides its agricultural produce and the support for
its people. The adjacent farmland would be irrigated, and would have individual settlements
for the farmers who supplied the city's needs for food and other goods. The city state itself,
that is the city itself, was a center for crafts and for trade, and it appears the earliest
cities originate as centers of trade. But it was also, in these Mesopotamian city states,
the city was also the political and religious center of the area, and as a result the city's
population was made up to a certain extent with a coterie of functionaries, functionaries
to serve the city administration, to serve the temple, to oversee the business of the
city. It appears that writing first appears in the territory of Sumeria in southern Mesopotamia,
and writing appears to have developed among the Sumerians around 3200 BCE. Of course, it
had an extremely practical function. Originally, writing in what is called cuneiform was used
primarily for accounting purposes. It was a means of keeping track of goods, and to a
certain extent it was used for legal purposes, that is, writing was a means of keeping track
of obligations between different parties. Initially, the government of the Mesopotamian
city states was in the hands of the priests of the temples of that city, or those cities.
They ruled at the direction of the gods in a kind of theocracy. But, as time progressed,
there was recurring warfare between these different cities, and this led to the demand
for military leadership, and over time, the development of city kingships, that is, monarchies
based on kings as military rulers. Each city had its own king, and a city might enter into
a confederation with another city, or one city might become dominant over others. But
for a long time, unity under a single king just did not appear, territorial unity of
many cities under a single dominant king was a fairly late development in Mesopotamia,
unlike in Egypt. Now, once that development occurs, once there is the situation where
one king is dominant over a large territory in Mesopotamia, we find that the territory
is ruled by a succession of dominant kingdoms over its history. The first kings to rule
over larger territories were Akkadian, that is, they were the descendants of the Semitic
Amorites who had settled in Mesopotamia in the early 4th millennium. The first great
king of Mesopotamian is an Akkadian, a king named Sargon the Great, and of course the
designation the Great points to his importance in Mesopotamian history. The dates for Sargon
the Great are 2334 BCE through 2279 BCE, so he is a figure of the 3rd millennium BCE. Sargon
the Great was the first to unite the Mesopotamian city-states under his own rule, creating the
first of the large territorial kingdoms of Mesopotamia. In doing so, he established a
number of precedents that were destined to be followed for centuries by other kings of
other ethnic groups and other nations in Mesopotamia. For example, when Sargon conquered a city,
the first thing he did afterwards was to destroy the city wall. This of course made it very
difficult if not impossible for the city to rebel against Sargon in the future. Once
he had destroyed the wall of the city, he would either compel the loyalty of the local
king to Sargon as his overlord, or if the king refused or had some sort of unfortunate
accident during the period of conquest, Sargon would replace him with the governor of his
own choosing. Sargon was also the first of the Mesopotamian kings to have a standing army
that is a professional military. And he did this instead of depending on a muster of troops
that were brought together on an occasional basis as the need arose from among his subjects.
Instead he had a professional standing army. With this standing army, he established military
outposts throughout his realm and used the military to enforce order. Sargon's kingdom
was established well and lasted for a little more than a century, but at the end of that
time his capital city, Akkad, quickly sank into obscurity and Mesopotamia was left in
a state of near anarchy for some time following. Now the Samarians came to supremacy, or perhaps
I should say return to supremacy because they had earlier been dominant in southern Mesopotamia,
but their supremacy was reestablished by a king named Ur-Namu, and he founded the third
dynasty of Ur around 2111 BCE, shifting the power in Mesopotamia, at least for a time,
from the north to the south. Like Sargon, Ur-Namu appointed governors
for his subject cities, and he was careful to establish an effective centralized administration
to help him govern his territories, and he was apparently the first of any of the kings
of the ancient world to establish a written law code, so Ur-Namu is the first of the royal
law givers. Unfortunately, like Sargon's kingdom, the third dynasty of Ur only lasted about
a century, and it ended in the devastation of the city of Ur by a group of people from
the east called Elamites, and this happened in 2004 BCE.
So first we have the dominant Akkadian kingdom, then the dominant Sumerian kingdom under Ur-Namu.
That process, that process of dominance and decline and the succession of a new dominant
kingdom is entirely typical, as we will see, of the history of Mesopotamia.
One lasting effect of Akkadian dominance was the fact that over the next century, that
is the next century after the fall of Ur, Akkadian displaced Sumerian as the language
of Mesopotamia. The next territory, or the next city, to rise to dominance over Mesopotamia
was the city of Babylon. Babylon at this time was a Semitic state in the area that had formerly
been Akkad, and it first came to prominence in the 18th century BCE under the rule of
its first great king, whose name was Hammurabi. Hammurabi's dates are 1792 to the 18th century,
1752 to 1750 BCE. And Hammurabi is remembered today primarily because of his law code. Although
he was not the first king to have ever written law code, that was Ur-Namu, Hammurabi's law
code is particularly well known. It's written on a stelle, which is topped by a depiction
of Hammurabi himself before the sun god Shamash. Hammurabi's reign established Babylon as the
seat of Mesopotamian kingship, and provided a model of kingship for following generations.
But again, although Hammurabi himself was a great king, his kingdom fell shortly after
his death. The next two centuries in Mesopotamia were a period of widespread political unrest.
At this point, Mesopotamia was invaded by various non-Semitic peoples from the west.
Among the invaders were the Hittites and the Hurrians. But probably the most important of
these western non-Semitic invaders was the Cassites. The Cassites founded a dynasty that
ruled over Mesopotamia for over 400 years, and the Cassites, like those before them, adopted
the customs and language of the Babylonians. So they incorporated their own culture into
Babylonian culture, but of course also changed it in the process. Again, this is something
we'll see happening later, not only in the history of Mesopotamia, but in the history
of the entire ancient Mediterranean world. Now we're at the mid-14th century BCE, and
this is when the Assyrians, another Semitic people, a kingdom in the upper Tigris Valley,
may now come to prominence over Mesopotamia under a king named Tkulti Nenerta I. Tkulti
Nenerta's dates are 1244 BCE to 1208 BCE. And Tkulti Nenerta sacked the city of Babylon
in the year 1235 BCE, thereby asserting his sovereignty over the south. Tkulti Nenerta
gained renown beyond Mesopotamia, and in fact he appears both in references in the Bible
and in references in Greek literature, not as Tkulti Nenerta, of course, but in the Bible
he appears in Genesis chapter 10 under the name of Nimrod, and in Greek legend he appears
under the name of King Ninos. Now the records are fairly scanty for the 12th century BCE
in Mesopotamia. This is a time when the Assyrian kingdom remains dominant, but more generally
it was a period of renewed ethnic migration throughout the Near East. It was in fact a
time of rather convulsive change throughout the eastern Mediterranean world. For one thing,
at this point the Hittite Empire and Asia Minor fell, and about the same time came the
collapse of Mycenaean Greece at the end of the Bronze Age, plunging the Greek area into
a dark age and leading to a great deal of political turmoil in the Near East, including
the appearance of several new small territorial states. And it was around this same time towards
the end of the Bronze Age that a new language became dominant in Mesopotamia, and this time
the language was Aramaic, which is an alphabetic Semitic language which has some affinities
to Hebrew, and it began to replace Akkadian as the primary language in Mesopotamia.
Now Assyrian managed to survive this dark age with its power pretty much intact. The Assyrian
king Tiglath Pelaser I, who ruled from 1115 BCE to 1077 BCE, was able to increase the
size of his kingdom to an unprecedented extent, and by unprecedented I mean unprecedented
for a Mesopotamian kingdom. Further growth of Assyrian power came in the 9th century.
This is when the empire was extended to the Mediterranean under the king Nasser Paul II,
who reigned from 883 to 859 BCE. However, his son, Shalmanazer III, was somewhat more
successful, even than his own father. Shalmanazer III reigned from 858 to 823 BCE and moved
into the territory of Syria-Palestine. It was Shalmanazer III who made Israel a vassal
under Israel's king Jehu, whose dates are 842 to 814 BCE.
The Assyrian empire went on to achieve its greatest size under Tiglath Pelaser III, whose
dates are 744 to 727 BCE. At this point, the Assyrian empire reached from Gaza in the
south to the Persian Gulf in the east and on up into Asia Minor in the north. But there
was still continuing warfare with the Babylonians and the Elamites that kept the Assyrians busy,
mostly to the south and to the east. The last great king of Assyria was Osir Bonapal,
whose dates are 669 BCE to 627 BCE. Osir Bonapal was able to regain control over Babylon and
managed to defeat the Elamites. But in doing so, he overextended his royal power and his
resources as well. And as a result, the Assyrian king and the Assyrian empire fell to the power
of its enemies. And this happened during the reign of Osir Bonapal's son.
Now, during this period of Assyrian hegemony, not only in Mesopotamia but throughout the
ancient Near East, Babylon had come under the control of a new Semitic people known
as the Caldeans. And the Caldeans in time created a new Babylonian empire that would surpass
the size of the Assyrian empire it succeeded. Revolt broke out after the death of Osir Bonapal
and the Assyrian empire was dismantled by the Medians to the northeast and to these Caldeans
or Neo-Babylonians to the south. Under Nebuchadnezzar II, who reigned from 604,
to 562 BCE, the Babylonians moved down through the territory of Syria-Palestine and attacked
Egypt. And in the aftermath, Nebuchadnezzar conquered the state of Judah and sacked Jerusalem,
deporting a good portion of its aristocracy to the city of Babylon.
Nebuchadnezzar's eventual successor was Nabonidus or Nabu-Naid. His dates are 555 to 532.
Nabonidus was a devotee of the Moongod sin and he abandoned the royal city of Babylon
and instead lived in an Arabian oasis called Tima. He left a regent behind the city of
Babylon, this was his son Bel-Shazar or Bel-Shar-User, who presided over a worsening economic and
military situation in Babylon. Basically what happened was the nation of media gained control
over the major trade routes and began to strangle Babylon economically.
The Persians and their king Cyrus, later known as Cyrus the Great, invaded the city of Babylon.
There was a revolt led by the priests of Marduk, the chief god of the city, and their revolt
toppled Nabonidus and Bel-Shazar, who both suddenly disappeared from history.
And in the aftermath, Marduk's priests handed the power over the city of Babylon to the
Persians under Cyrus in the year 539 BCE. From that time on, Mesopotamia came under
the control of a series of world empires, first the Persians, then the Macedonian Greeks,
then the Romans, and remained a subject territory for the rest of the ancient era.
This history of instability and upheaval forms the context for Mesopotamian religious culture.
The whole point of this historical review is to clarify some of the significant differences
between the Egyptian religious culture we've already reviewed and the Mesopotamian religious
culture. Now the histories of both nations are full of internal conflicts and external
conflicts. Each of these nations or territories was ruled by a succession of different dynasties
interspersed with periods of civil unrest. But through it all, Egyptian culture was much
more homogenous than Mesopotamian culture because most of those dynasties were from people of
the same ethnic group, except for a few incursions of Libyans and Semites, the people of the dynasties
were all Egyptians. As we've seen, Mesopotamia, on the other hand, remained open to incursions
of new peoples representing different ethnic and language groups throughout its long history.
The dominant language even changes over the centuries, first Sumerian, then Akkadian,
and finally Aramaic, representing different dominant peoples. And all of the different
groups that came to dominance, the Sumerians, the Akkadians, the Babylonians, the Assyrians,
the Neobabalonians, they all identified themselves with the heritage of Mesopotamian cultures
that preceded them, but of course they also brought change and development. These changes
of course extended into the religious culture of the successive civilizations as they adapted
the practices and mythology of the Mesopotamian religious tradition to suit their own needs,
their own interests, and their own theological ideas. Beyond that, however, a culture's religion
reflects its historical situation, and Mesopotamia's history was full of war, uncertainty, unrest,
and the apparent constant threat of chaos. Now this may have been the inevitable result
of Mesopotamia's geographical situation, because it was placed right in the fertile
plains between two major rivers that linked the east with the west, the mountains of western
Asia with the Mediterranean coast. And lying in valleys between mountains and the desert,
Mesopotamia was the natural pathway for successive waves of different groups of migrating peoples.
Each of its eventual dominant groups was originally merely a collection of wandering migrants.
In addition, lower Mesopotamia is a flat marshy land with no mountains to mark the horizon,
leaving it more or less at the mercy of natural catastrophes that can arise within hours.
Now in this relatively flat land, it's perhaps not surprising that the primary monumental
religious structure was the ziggurat. Ziggurats were massive, pyramid-like brick buildings
that were intended to represent the sacred mountain, the stairway to the heavens, if
you will. They had steep stairways that provided access to the top, and at the top, of course,
you're much closer to where the gods are. So at the pinnacle, and on the terraces of
a ziggurat, there were shrines or temples dedicated to various different gods. This
would, of course, include the chief god of the city where the ziggurat was located. And
there might perhaps be a site for the fertility ritual that is called the Hiros Gamos or
sacred marriage, right we will discuss later. Ziggurats were most often square or rectangular
at the base, and one notable example, which was dedicated to the Sumerian moon god, Nanna,
in the city of Orr, measured 64 meters by 46 meters at the base and stood 12 meters
high, and the remains of that ziggurat still exist in Iraq today. The ziggurat was a physical
manifestation of the intersection between heaven and earth, the place where the people
could approach, nearer at least, to the habitation of the gods they served and to seek their
presence. So compared to the stability of life in Egypt's Nile Valley, Mesopotamia was
in a very different and much more precipitous sort of situation. The Nile Valley was protected
from the desert by the Nile's dependable flooding on an annual basis, leaving behind
the fertile soil the Egyptians used for agriculture. Life between the rivers, on the other hand,
seemed to be overshadowed by the unpredictability both of natural events and human events.
As a result, there seems to be a certain anxiety lying beneath Mesopotamian religious literature,
a sense that the gods may do as they please to human beings without any regard for human
welfare. Instead of being relatively isolated from other cultures and therefore culturally
homogenous like Egypt, Mesopotamia was the crossroads of the ancient civilizations of
the east and west. Western Asia, Asia Minor, the Mediterranean coastlands of Syria and
Lebanon all converge and cross in Mesopotamia. Mesopotamian civilizations also exerted a
substantial influence on these surrounding territories, primarily during the period of
Assyrian dominance and the Neo-Babylonian Empire. This was in the ninth through the
sixth centuries BCE, and we find that this influence includes native religious cultures
and also native languages. Mesopotamian religious culture has many points of contact, many
points of overlap with Egyptian religious culture, especially in the two cultures' official
religious rituals. But there are also very clear points of distinction between Egyptian
religious culture and Mesopotamian religious culture. As we will see, the underlying mythology
and its expression in religious literature in Mesopotamia brings us much closer to the
dominant religious ideas which are familiar to those of us who live in the west today.
Now, in our next session, we will consider this Mesopotamian religious culture in terms
of its pantheon of gods and also some of the ideas basic to Mesopotamian religious culture
by looking first at its creation mythology.
