Lecture 19, Ancient Concepts of the Divine
In our last session, we examined three different versions of the story of the worldwide flood.
The Mesopotamian stories of Utnapishtim and Atrahasis, and the Israelite story of Noah.
As we saw then, the substantial parallels and overlaps among these stories suggest a
common narrative tradition, a basic story behind them all, and that might ultimately
be derived, possibly from some sort of historical event.
But at the same time, there are important differences between the Mesopotamian and the
Israelite stories, derived at least in part from their different concepts about the nature
of the divine.
So in this session, we will consider three different conceptions of the nature of the
divine world, different conceptions that human beings employed in the ancient Mediterranean
world to understand their relationship to the sacred.
And these three ways are polytheism, henotheism, and monotheism, three different conceptions
of the nature of the divine world.
Now certain beliefs about the nature of the sacred seem to be typical of ancient cultures
in the Mediterranean world.
Those of us who live in the Western world need to remember that our ways of thinking
about the divine, what we can loosely identify with what Rudolf Otto calls the sacred, our
ways of thinking about the divine represent a series of choices made over the long course
of Western history.
First, the predominant choice is to think about the sacred in terms of the divine.
That is, the choice was made, and we have inherited this choice, to think about the sacred in
terms of deities, deities as self-conscious controllers of spiritual or numinous power.
Now this is not the only way to think about the sacred, of course.
By contrast, some cultures think about the sacred as something imminent in existence,
something that suffuses and fills all of existence.
But it is not controlled, it is not directed, it is just there.
It's some sort of elemental spiritual force that requires human efforts to maintain that
equilibrium that results in well-being for human beings, for nature, and the cosmos.
I suppose we could take the example of the force in Star Wars, the idea that the force
has both a positive side and a dark side, and human beings affect the way that the force
is imminent throughout the cosmos and the way it's felt in a particular place.
It is an impersonal spiritual force that has no particular direction except by the efforts
of the conscious creatures that place their emphasis on one aspect of the force or the
other.
Now even when the sacred is localized in some way, not thought to be spread or suffused
throughout the cosmos, even when the sacred is localized, it does not have to be localized
in self-conscious actors.
In other words, we can find the sacred present in places, places that demand particular forms
of human behavior, or we can find the sacred in things, things that must be acted upon in
certain ways in order to promote well-being for human beings.
And here we can take the example of fetishes that is human-manufactured objects that have
certain kinds of spiritual power that are unleashed when manipulated in particular ways or approached
in particular ways.
So the sacred may be something impersonal that is eminent in existence.
When it's localized, it can be in places or in things rather than in self-conscious actors.
And there are also ways of thinking about the sacred in terms of conscious or semi-conscious
beings that do exert an influence over human affairs, but who do so in a fairly limited
and stereotyped way.
The actions of these spiritual beings might be more or less automatic, stereotyped responses
to particular human actions.
And this would be thinking of the sacred in terms of, say, spirits or ghosts, especially
ghosts that are confined to particular places and particular behaviors, the spirits of ancestors
perhaps or demons and so on.
They have only a limited choice of how to interact with humanity and many of their actions
are automatic rather than consciously motivated with particular intentions.
But in general, in Western culture, the sacred has usually been thought of in terms of deity
as self-conscious actors who control and focus spiritual power.
The second choice that has been made over the course of Western history is the choice
to think about the divine as something separate from creation and its creatures, which grants
a separate independent existence to the creation.
That is that creation and its creatures have an independent existence from the forms of
deity.
There is on the one hand the deities of the divine world, there is on the other hand the
creation.
They are not mutually interwoven in such a way that the existence of one depends upon
the existence of the other.
Now here we can make a contrast with a system called monism.
This is the assertion that all that exists is based in and is an expression of a single
reality.
Reality in other words, that is expressed in a variety of ways, but everything that exists
is based in that one reality and is merely an expression of that one reality.
Now this reality is manifested in myriad forms, but has as its essential identity the one,
the monad, the one and only thing that truly exists.
Now in the case of monism, this reality may be thought of as sacred in some sense, such
as an idea of a cosmic mind or a cosmic consciousness which is expressed in and through all of creation.
Or one can be a materialist monist and say that all reality is merely a manifestation
of a certain physical reality with no spiritual existence at all.
Now in contrast to monism, which sees a single reality underline all that exists, there is
duality or dualism, the idea that all that exists is an expression of one or the other
of two equal and opposing separate spiritual powers.
There are two equal, opposed and contrasting realities, and these realities interact eternally
in opposition to one another in the flow of cosmic life.
Sometimes one gains the upper hand, sometimes the other gains the upper hand.
In dualism, there is not a single overwhelming reality, as in monism, but two basic realities
which are in opposition to each other.
And although dualism has shown up in various forms in western culture, particularly in
Manichaeanism, which sought to eternally opposed realities in the early years of the common
era, for the most part in western culture, deity and creation have been understood as
separate things, creation being a product of deity, but still existing in relationship
to the divine.
The third choice that has led to the way we think about the divine in the western world
today, the third choice is the choice to think of deity as transcendent over the human world,
and yet involved in the human world by choice rather than by necessity.
This is the idea that the gods exist or deity exists on one level of existence, and humanity
exists on another level of existence, all that is apart from the gods exists on another
level of existence, but that the gods choose to be involved with the human level of existence
and do so by choice because they confer benefits and receive benefits.
In contrast to this idea, we have, for example, pantheism.
This is the idea that deity suffuses the cosmos, and that all creatures are merely extensions
and expressions of the divine.
So what we think of as the relationship between the divine world and the human world in pantheism
is merely a relationship of the deity to itself.
The created world, the divine world are all part of one reality, all expressions of a
single deity that exists in all things and through all things.
Related to this idea of pantheism is what is sometimes called pan-en-theism, and this
is a slightly more complicated concept.
This is the idea that deity is not only present and expressed in all things, but that deity
changes and grows through the process of the history of the created order.
In other words, that all of the history of the cosmos, all of the history of existence,
is the single deity expressing itself and growing in cosmic and spiritual awareness through
the processes of natural and human history.
So not only does the divine exist in all things, but existence is necessary for the divine
to become more fully and more completely itself.
In the western world, this idea finds its fullest expression in the philosophy of George
Wilhelm Friedrich Hegel, G.W.F. Hegel.
He saw this process of the growth and self-realization of the one all-encompassing reality, or divinity,
finding its climax in achieving self-awareness as the world spirit comes to a consciousness
of itself.
And of course, Hegel's philosophy itself, in his mind, represented the self-awareness
of the world spirit.
So Hegel represented the pinnacle of the meaning of existence.
Other philosophers have not necessarily agreed with him.
But again, in western cultures in general, there is an idea that there is a transcendent
deity that exists in voluntary relationship to humanity, which is understood as being
a different order of creation.
Now thinking about the sacred, or the divine, in particular ways unites the religious cultures
of the ancient Mediterranean world that we are considering.
And it also affects the way those cultures understand the cosmos in which they find themselves.
And I'll review.
First, the sacred is thought of in terms of self-conscious controllers of spiritual power,
of numinous power, in other words, thought of in terms of deity.
Second, these controllers of sacred power are separate from creation and its creatures,
usually thought of transcendent over creation.
Third, these controllers of sacred power, the deities, live by choice in relationship
to creation and its creatures, but all the while remaining separate and transcendent
over them.
So to put it in brief, western culture tends to think of the divine world as existing over
against the human world as a separate order of being, but in voluntary relationship with
the created order of being.
Now the religious cultures that we have so far investigated in these lectures, the religious
cultures of Egypt and Mesopotamia, are examples of polytheistic religious cultures, because
they postulate the existence of a large number of gods.
In a polytheistic system, there is the possibility of a virtually unlimited number of gods.
Usually these gods are divided into various sorts of categories or ranks or hierarchies,
but there is really no theoretical limit to them, because each god is identified with
a different function, or a different concern, or a different realm of influence, and as
human beings increase their activities and their fields of expertise and their concerns
in daily life, the number of gods to oversee those activities and concerns also multiplies.
So there is theoretically no limit to the number of gods in a polytheistic religious culture,
because polytheistic systems conceive of the divine world in human terms.
That means not only in terms of the concerns and the activities of human beings, but also
it means on the model of human beings.
In other words, we have certain chief gods who are in charge, and lower gods, and other
supernatural beings who are under their control and have their own range of expertise, their
own range of concern, their own scope for activity.
The gods in a polytheistic system tend to be categorized in various ways, and we've
already seen this to a certain extent in our previous sessions.
For example, the gods in a polytheistic system might be categorized according to their primary
associations.
In other words, we can sort them out as earth gods, or sky gods, or gods of the political
order, or gods of the underworld, or storm gods, or war gods, and so on.
In other words, we can categorize them according to their association with a place or realm
of activity.
We could also categorize the gods in a polytheistic system according to their place in the divine
hierarchy.
In other words, we can divide them into chief gods, or members of the divine council, or
lower gods, or other non-divine supernatural creatures that have a place in the divine
hierarchy as well.
Or we could categorize the gods in a polytheistic system according to their importance in the
daily life of human beings.
In this case, we give a primary place to the gods of the social and the political order
of the gods responsible for human well-being, because these are the gods that are most closely
involved with human existence, and are most often invoked by human beings, receive the
greatest portion of attention.
Then we would have gods who oversee human professions that receive particular attention
from the members of those professions.
And then finally, other gods that are acknowledged to exist, but not particularly important in
everyday life.
These would be, for example, the gods of the underworld, for example, in Mesopotamia,
Nurgol, and Oreshkigol, gods, but not of particular importance in daily life.
For the most part, in a polytheistic religious culture, the elder gods are the gods identified
with the elements of creation.
And as we've seen, the gods identified with the elements of creation who appear first
in the order of creation are less important than their various offspring, because their
offspring are more immediately concerned with the activities and conditions of human life.
And human beings are particularly concerned with the gods who have the most influence
over them on a day-to-day basis.
So the gods are divided in a polytheistic system according to their essential nature
and concerns.
And usually there's some connection between the gods' primary identification and his
or her place in the divine hierarchy.
For example, we've seen in Egypt that a sun god, who is associated with that overwhelming
reality in Egypt, is also a god who wields royal power, the sun god Horus in Egypt, or
Amun Ra, or Amun, a chief god who is also identified with a primary natural element.
We also see that the gods' primary association largely determines his or her character.
The character of the god is a reflection of the primary association.
So we find, for example, that war gods tend to be argumentative and bellicose.
We find that gods of fertility are concerned with human life and abundance.
And the primary associations have a great deal to do with the essential character of
the god.
At the same time, some gods gradually accumulate additional associations, as we've seen,
they accumulate additional roles, and some of these are only tangentially connected with
the gods' original attributes.
So over a period of time, a god or a goddess may become more important and be placed more
highly in the divine hierarchy by virtue of the many roles that god or goddess has accumulated.
And here we've seen the example of Ishtar, for example, Inanna Ishtar, who acquires a
variety of roles that are, in some cases, only tangentially associated with her primary
role as a goddess of fertility.
Some divine associations appear to be traditional across cultures, that is, they recur over
and over again across cultures or even within a given culture.
So for example, sun gods tend to be important gods, although they are not invariably chief
gods or creator gods.
Earth gods tend to be associated with fertility and so on.
Also, in a polytheistic religious culture, we find that the gods have no specific moral
characteristics.
We find they interact with each other much as human beings do.
There is some sense of what is right, there is some sense of what is fair, but it is often
routinely overlooked within the mythology because the gods have competing interests
and in pursuing their competing interests, they have little regard for fairness or what
is right.
So we find that gods in a polytheistic religious culture are often capricious, especially in
their treatment of human beings.
And we find, for example, that a human being might offend one god by giving too much devotion
to another god, or a human being might be taken as a lover by a god or a goddess and
then discarded and treated very shabbily, or we might find that a human being comes to
a god's attention in some other way and may benefit from coming to that god's attention
or may suffer horribly as a result of coming to that god's attention.
So the competing interests among the gods leads to belief in some other factors, something
outside of the gods control.
This may be fate or it may be an impersonal cosmic law, but it is this, not the power of
the gods themselves, that determines the ultimate outcome of a human life or regulates disputes
among the gods, serves to curb divine power or determines the nature of the cosmos.
Now sometimes there is a god whose specific character is tied to the principle of justice,
for example, Ma'at in Egypt, and this is a clear indication that justice is not a unanimous
concern of all the gods.
Instead the gods are part of the created order and they are subject to the limitations of
the created order, although their power and life span is much greater than that of human
beings.
The problem of unjust treatment of human beings does not really arise as such in a polytheistic
system.
Unfairness towards human beings can always be attributed to a good cause of the influence
of a hostile god, or disputes between one god and another, or to the generally lackadaisical
attitude, the uncaring attitude the gods have towards humanity in general.
There's no real need to explain why is this happening, why has this injustice come to
pass, because the common answer to such treatment is, that's the way life is, that's the way
the gods are.
Now sometimes within a polytheistic religious culture, the chief god will assume dominance
over the other gods, sometimes to the extent that the other gods are worshipped only for
special reasons, and we can see this process at work in the Mesopotamian creation narrative
Enuma Elish.
There in its extant version, this is primarily a work of propaganda supporting the worship
of Marduk as the chief god of Babylon.
In the poem, the initial defeat of Apsu, Tiamat and Mumu is accomplished by Eya, the
god of wisdom, but the resurgent armies of Tiamat and Kingu are too much for the older
gods, and Marduk comes forward to serve as their champion.
So in the story, not only does Marduk prove himself mightier than the other gods or their
enemies, but he is declared sovereign by the divine assembly as a reward for slaying their
enemies.
So Marduk becomes the dominant chief god of Babylon by combat, by acclamation, and then
by his action of putting creation in order and assigning the other gods to their appointed
places in the cosmos.
Now standing apart from polytheistic religious culture are henotheistic religious culture
and monotheistic religious culture, both of which are focused on a single god.
Henotheism is essentially a variation on polytheistic systems and it tends to grow out of them.
Henotheistic religious culture is devoted to the worship of one god out of the many gods
that exist.
Like polytheism, henotheism assumes that there is a multitude of gods with different associations
and powers and roles, but it also asserts that only one god out of the many that exist
is worthy of worship and religious loyalty.
Usually the single god worship is assumed to be not only the chief god, but supreme
over the other gods in power, supreme in terms of influence, supreme in terms of moral character,
at least to the extent that the god accepts exclusive worship and then feels an obligation
to reward his worshipers.
This single god worship might be a national god, one that interacts and protects a particular
people who are set apart by a common identity or a common devotion to the god.
For the most part, the favor of this one god worship is what determines how a person or
a nation fares in the world and adverse events can be blamed on improper worship rather than
the influence of another god.
So henotheistic worship differs from the worship of a dominant god such as Marduk,
which is a worship and a polytheistic religion, because in henotheistic systems, the god whose
worship is worshiped exclusively to the exclusion of all other gods.
In fact, in henotheistic systems, other gods means the gods of other people, that is, of
the nation's enemies.
And so these gods are hostile to the god who is worshiped.
There are other lesser gods that might be associated with the one god in a henotheistic
system, but they are strictly subordinate, often to the extent that they are demoted
to lesser spiritual beings, like angels, for example.
So in a henotheistic system, the god's actions are not restricted by the actions of other
gods, and therefore, the one god's actions must be justified as consistent with the god's
power and the god's responsibility for promoting the welfare of his or her worshipers.
Finally, a monotheistic religious culture reflects another kind of devotion.
Devotion to the one and only god believed to exist maintains that all other beings called
gods are not gods, or do not exist.
So a monotheistic religious culture worships one and only one god, the one and only god
who truly exists.
Monotheism seems to grow out of henotheism as the claims for the god that is worshiped
become more absolute, and the distinctions between that god and the other so-called gods
become more stark in contrast.
In a monotheistic system, the one god worshipped is all-powerful and responsible for creating
and maintaining everything that exists, but the god is a different sort of being, distinct
from everything else that exists as its source and creator.
This means that the one god is also the moral arpiter of right and wrong for all that exists,
and so the one god is believed to be of impeccable moral character.
So the distance between this one god worshipped and the creation is not just a physical difference,
but also a moral difference.
The god and the creation are two different things, and one distinction that is most important
is between the morally impeccable god and the creation which is subject to sin and wickedness.
The combination of omnipotence, the quality of being all-powerful, and this absolute moral
rectitude raises a problem, the problem of theodicy, in other words determining whether
the god has done what is right as the god is required to do.
What he shows the god is in the right even when appearances seem to argue the contrary.
The suffering of the community of the faithful, the suffering of individuals may bring either
the god's power or the god's moral character into question, the idea that if god is god
he is not good, if god is good he is not god.
Now it's worth noting that although monotheism is a sophisticated theological position, it
is by no means a natural one because it runs counter to the experience of both nature and
human society.
Nature seems to reflect not a single power at work, but a combination of powers, some
benevolent and some hostile.
Sometimes they work in apparent opposition to each other, water and fire, sun and rain,
day and night.
And human beings on the other hand are social animals, and human cultures depend on work
done by a variety of people working individually or together for the common good.
So the idea that the cosmos is under the direct control of a single deity working alone is
more the product of theological reflection than what we might call direct observation.
Generally speaking, henotheism tends towards monotheism, but the demarcation between the
two is sometimes difficult to identify in any given case.
Generally speaking, absolutist claims made for one god in a polytheistic religious culture
are henotheistic rather than the exclusivist claims of true monotheism.
For example, we find these sorts of absolutist claims being made by Aminophis IV, or Ankenatan,
or the god Aten during dynasty 18 in Egypt.
These are often said to be monotheistic, but his claims were primarily a rejection of similar
claims made by the worshipers of Amun.
Although the other gods were believed to be manifestations of Amun, they also had their
own existence as independent gods, subservient to Amun as king.
Similarly, Aten was the divine power manifested in the light of the sun's disc, but this
was a sovereign power that did not exclude the existence of other gods.
And in any event, the unrelentingly polytheistic nature of Egyptian religious culture would
have made any real appreciation of a monotheistic concept of God very unlikely.
By comparison, we can see a much clearer shift from henotheistic worship of a national god
to a true monotheistic worship of a universal creator without peer in the development of
the worship of the Lord in Israelite religious culture.
So in our next session, we will turn our attention from Mesopotamia to the neighboring
territory of Syria-Palestine and look first at the worship of Baal the Mighty, who combines
in himself many attributes of the chief Mesopotamian gods.
