In our discussion of religion in the prehistoric era, we saw there were some perennial concerns
that were reflected in human religious activities carried out in relation to the sacred or people's
idea of the sacred.
These religious actions were carried out to maintain equilibrium or harmony between the
human community and the world in which the human community finds itself.
And that was a world they believed was controlled by what we would call both natural forces
and supernatural forces.
So there was the need to negotiate both with the natural forces and with the supernatural
forces to maintain harmony.
In this lecture, we will begin our discussion of the religion of ancient Egypt.
Now ancient Egypt reflects many of these same concerns that we have seen in prehistoric
religious culture, although of course ancient Egypt had a highly sophisticated religious
culture that is left, as you know, a wealth of artifacts and monuments.
Most of these artifacts and monuments are very familiar to us over the years, but they
remain hauntingly strange in some ways.
They seem to represent a very different idea of the relationship between the human and
the divine than we are used to.
Egypt provides our most straightforward example of a polytheistic religion, that is one with
many gods, and a state cult, one that supports the royal government.
And this again developed in relative isolation from outside cultural influences.
Now Egyptian civilization began as a series of settlements in the Neolithic era, and these
settlements were established along the length of the Nile River.
Their economy was devoted to agriculture, and they were largely dependent on the Nile as
their source of life.
Now the Nile River flows northward from its headwaters in Lake Victoria, Lake Victoria
is in Central Africa, and as the river flows north it cascades down a number of cataracts
and ultimately spreads out into a broad delta before flowing into the Mediterranean Sea
in the north.
Now the narrow valley that flanks the Nile is one of the most fertile agricultural areas
in the world, and of course it stands in very strong contrast to the surrounding desert.
So the Nile Valley is arid in climate, but the Nile River floods its banks annually in
late summer in a very dependable cycle, and this leaves behind highly fertile land that
can support a wide variety of crops, and during the period of the Roman Empire, Egypt was
known as the bread basket of the Empire.
Now to the south, the part of the Nile that stretches from its first, that is its southernmost
cataracts, to the delta was higher, it was topographically higher than the other area,
so it was known as upper Egypt, higher Egypt.
To the north, the broad delta bordering on the Mediterranean Sea was known as lower Egypt,
that is the north, which of course is higher on our maps, is lower Egypt, and the south,
which is lower on our maps, is upper Egypt.
Now farming techniques improved markedly during the fifth millennium BCE, this is towards
the end of the Neolithic era, and during this time we find first indications of the use
of the plow, and of draft animals to pull plows, and thereby improve the use of agricultural
land.
At this time farmers learned how to irrigate their land, they learned how to drain their
land, thereby controlling the amount of water that they have at their disposal, and they're
able to make far better use of the available river water, and thereby improve the yield
of their crops, which of course leads to a more dependable food supply, and the possibility
of a larger population.
Most people in Egypt in the Neolithic era now lived in homes made of mud bricks, and
there's a change in the nature of burials.
Burials once again become more elaborate, showing more concern and more care for the
dead, but there's also a gradual movement of cemeteries away from homes, away from the
places where people live.
And this may indicate a greater sense of separation from the dead, not so much that the dead no
longer have an influence on the life of a living, but they have their own place, and
their own, if you will, destination.
By the late fourth millennium, we find that these small territories have coalesced under
military leaders in these various Neolithic settlements, and each of these small regional
units is called a gnome in Greek.
So we have the term gnome to refer to these small regional units.
Each gnome had its own god, or sometimes several gods, and these gods were identified
with the different animals that were dependent on the Nile River for their survival.
And these gnomes were in turn gradually united into two kingdoms by a series of military
conquests.
There were 22 southern gnomes, and these made up the kingdom of Upper Egypt.
And there were 20 northern gnomes that comprised the kingdom of Lower Egypt.
Now I have to inject a necessary historical note here.
The different eras of Egyptian history are determined by changes in royal dynasties,
and there is a set way of referring to the various eras in Egyptian history.
The royal dynasties change either when a dynasty has no more male heirs to continue the line
as pharaoh, or when a king is overthrown and replaced by a usurper who establishes a new
royal dynasty.
Now Egyptian history proper begins with the archaic era, and the archaic era is identified
with the first two royal dynasties.
Following this there are the four dynasties of the Old Kingdom, and the Old Kingdom is
followed by what is called the First Intermediate Period.
It's marked off from the Old Kingdom as a time of internal conflict, mostly because
of a lapse in royal power.
Following the First Intermediate Period there was the Middle Kingdom, and the Middle Kingdom
lasted just under 200 years, followed by the Second Intermediate Period.
Now the Second Intermediate Period sees a rather strange incursion into Egyptian history.
For a period of time there was a dynasty made up of peoples from western Asia called the
Hixos.
They ruled over Egypt for a time during the Second Intermediate Period, and it is possible
that this was the time that the people of Israel began their sojourn in the land of
Egypt.
The Second Intermediate Period was followed by the New Kingdom, and the New Kingdom lasted
about 250 years.
The most notable pharaoh of the New Kingdom was probably Ramesses II, who had a very long
reign, and many speculate that his long reign included the Exodus, the Exodus we read about
in the Hebrew Bible, and I would point out that the Egyptians would find it very ironic
that anybody would ever describe parts of their history in relationship to the doings
of a bunch of Hebrew people moving in and out of their territory.
Finally, the New Kingdom concluded in the Third Intermediate Period about 1075 BCE,
and once again I'll date that according to biblical events.
This would be about a half century before the foundations of the Israelite kingdoms
under Saul.
So most of the great events in Egyptian history, as well as the major developments in Egyptian
religion, happened between the 4th and the 1st millennia BCE.
Now according to Egyptian tradition, the kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt were first united
by a pharaoh named Menace, a king of Upper Egypt, and this happened according to tradition
about 3050 BCE.
Now this would have been near the end of the so-called Calculithic Period.
This is the so-called Copper Stone Age, when both copper and stone are primary materials
for tools and other implements.
And this is the archaeological era between the Neolithic era and the later Bronze Age.
Menace is usually identified as one of two early pharaohs, either the pharaoh Narmor or
the pharaoh Ahah.
These are two kings who were known from surviving artifacts.
Ahah founded the first dynasty and established the first royal capital in Memphis, which
is about 200 miles from the Mediterranean coast in Lower Egypt.
Now the kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt retained their identity as two kingdoms throughout
the time of Egyptian history.
And these two kingdoms were united under the power of the pharaoh and the authority of
the pharaoh.
The term pharaoh, by the way, comes from the words pair a'oh, which means great house,
identifying the pharaoh with where he lives, which would be the royal palace.
Now because the Upper Kingdom and the Lower Kingdom, Upper Egypt and Lower Egypt, are
united under the power and authority of the pharaoh, the pharaoh wears a double crown.
This double crown incorporates the tall white crown of Upper Egypt with the red sweeping
cylindrical crown of Lower Egypt.
And befitting his place as a king of two United Kingdoms, the pharaoh had two palaces, one
in each kingdom, and he had two burial places, one in each kingdom, although of course one
of those burial places was a cenotaph, that is a memorial stone rather than obviously
an actual burial place.
Now the earliest forms of ancient Egyptian religious culture, as far as we are able to
reconstruct them, represent a belief in the ubiquity of divine power, the idea that divine
power, spiritual power, is spread throughout all of creation.
But it was manifested most prominently among the gods.
At the same time, there was spiritual power throughout all the things the gods had made,
and it was present especially in the person of the divine pharaoh.
This is a concept very similar to the concept we've talked about earlier of manna or spiritual
power which is suffused throughout creation.
Now the religious beliefs of the Egyptians reflect their dependence on the waters of the
Nile and the fertility it provided.
It reflects their dependence on the sun, and it reflects their dependence on the power
of the divine king.
Because of their dependence on the Nile, the Egyptians spelled a kinship rather with the
various animals that like them depended on the Nile as a source of life.
Spiritual power dwelt not only in human beings, but also in animals, and in varying degrees
of course, but then this was the same spiritual power present in animals, present in human
beings, and present among the gods.
The gods were thought of primarily in anthropomorphic terms as being very much like human beings.
They were believed to carry out such human functions as creating, ruling, things like
that.
In time the gods came to be depicted with a mixture of human images, but also animal
images, because animals too were sites of divine or spiritual power.
So the identity of the god was partially a human identity and partially identified with
an animal by having to do with the specific divine powers that god possessed.
So the function and the identity of the god appears largely through the animal appearance
of the god.
Each of the Neolithic gnomes had had their own divinities, and those divinities are also
identified with the spiritual power of animals, and represented therefore in both human and
animal forms because they have the spiritual power of the animal, but carry out human functions
and human actions.
When the gnomes were united, their gods began to gain more prominence and became associated
with each other in various ways.
For example, there was a local goddess, Necbet, who was represented as a vulture.
She became the protective deity of the entire kingdom of Upper Egypt.
At the same time, there was a Cobra goddess, Wajit, who was the protective deity over Lower
Egypt, and after the uniting of the two kingdoms of Upper and Lower Egypt, the heads of these
two goddesses, the vulture Necbet and the Cobra Wajit, appear on the double crown worn
by the pharaoh at the very front of the double crown, indicating that the two protective
goddesses of Upper and Lower Egypt are also protecting the pharaoh who unites and holds
them together.
Again, this indicates the sovereign power of the pharaoh over both Upper and Lower Egypt.
Now, the gods might also be placed into relationship with each other.
In divine families, for example, we have the husband and wife Osiris and Isis and their
son Horus, or the gods of the various gnomes might be brought together in opposition.
For example, Osiris and the gods Seth, who is his opponent who ultimately kills him,
or they might be brought together both in family and opponent relationships, again in
the example of Osiris and Seth, since Seth is the brother of Osiris as well as his murderer,
or in the opposition between Horus and Seth, who is his own uncle.
Now, over time, the Egyptian gods were subject to change in function, and to some extent
to change in appearance, because they did adapt to suit the changing needs of their
believers, or I should say the believers adapted their ideas of the god to suit their own needs.
And sometimes, even the metaphors used to express the idea of divine power would sometimes
be changed to meet new needs.
But for the most part, there is a very strong sense of continuity, of conservatism, if I
may put it that way, that maintains a more or less homogenous religious culture throughout
Egyptian history.
At the same time, there is an awareness that there is variation in the nature of divinity,
or rather in the way that divine power was conceptualized or expressed within Egyptian
religion.
Both the gods and humanity were part of a created order, that is, they were brought
into being at a certain point in time.
Now there was also a creator god, this might be Atum, or Rey, or Ta, but that creator god
stood outside of the created order, was understood as uncreated, or perhaps self-created, but
all the other gods that sprang from this creator god's initial action of creation were part
of the cosmic order that he brought into being.
So both gods and human beings had a beginning in time, and both gods and human beings would
have an end in time, although of course the lives of the gods were reckoned in millions
of years.
The gods were mostly the product of sexual unions, and they formed their own family units,
although there was no systematic or uniform system of relationship, sometimes you find
one god married to one goddess and sometimes to another, and the relationships are not
always clear over time.
But generally speaking, they do form something very much like human families and a human
social structure.
Moreover, the gods spoke like human beings, and they acted like human beings, doing the
things that human beings do.
So we find the, for example, making love, making war, growing old, they make plans and
they carry them out, they express regret, and they practice trickery on each other to gain
their desired ends.
And the gods could be depicted in a variety of forms, using a variety of symbols of divine
power, and this is because the gods possess a variety of manifestations of their divine
power, and the essential nature of their divine power remains inexpressible.
So the Egyptians come up with a variety of metaphors and a variety of images that suggest
the variety and multiplicity of divine power because it is vast and essentially inexpressible.
So the gods differ from humanity, not only in terms of their variety of forms, not only
in terms of their sacred power, not only in terms of their extended length of life, but
also in their location.
The gods are located, they live far away from the habitations of human beings.
Human beings, for the most part, lived in the two kingdoms, and if they didn't live
in the two kingdoms, they live somewhere among the foreign nations.
But the gods live elsewhere, far away from human beings.
They live in the sky, or they live in the nether world, or they might live somewhere
on earth, but if they do, it is far away from human beings at the very edges of the world.
And there is this very strong sense, not only in Egypt, but in other religious cultures
as well, of a separation between the place where the gods live and the place where human
beings live, and we'll see this as a recurring idea throughout ancient Mediterranean religion.
At the same time that they are separated, the gods remain accessible to their worshipers,
to the people who turn to them for help.
First of all, the gods are accessible at their shrines, or their temples, the places where
they are worshiped, and that worship is usually carried out at the behest of the state.
We're talking here about the royal rituals and practices supported by the government,
by the monarchy, the paraphernalia of priest and temple and royal sanctuary.
On the other hand, the gods were also accessible to individuals, by invocations, by prayers,
and by the kind of power that is mustered up through magic spells.
Now I've mentioned several times that the gods of ancient Egypt are represented in
concrete forms, and these are stylized to a certain extent, and they are conventional.
And the representation of the gods in these concrete forms tends to domesticate them to
a certain extent.
Their representation according to these standard forms made them comprehensible to the people
who worship them.
But there are also a number of traditional symbols of power, and also artistic traditions
that made the divine power of the gods more evident.
So for example, not only would the gods be depicted as animals, or perhaps with animal
heads on human bodies, but they were often doing something that indicated their divine
function, so perhaps their hands are raised in an attitude of blessing.
Or they might be grasping the ankh, the symbol of eternal life.
The ankh is essentially a cross with a loop up at the upper portion of the cross.
And this is a symbol of the eternal life that the gods enjoy and bestow on the dead.
Often the sun god, a sun god such as Horus for example, would be depicted with the solar
disc of the sun over his head, or perhaps wearing the double crown of upper and lower
Egypt, and that he would also hold the royal crook and the flail, the symbols of royal
authority.
Individualized depictions of the gods humanized the divine world, made it accessible to the
imagination, and the Egyptian gods share a sort of fluidity that is characteristic of
human personalities as they encompass different traits at different times, depending on what
trait the worshippers particularly interested in.
Now as I've indicated, Egyptian religious culture developed slowly over a period of centuries,
and did so in response to a number of distinctive factors.
Although the history of ancient Egypt covers about 4,000 years, the relative stability
of life in the Nile Valley and the general conservatism of Egyptian culture ensured that
Egyptian religious beliefs and practices changed very little over the centuries.
We find in fact that developments in Egyptian religion arise primarily from political turmoil.
Since each time a dynasty falls and another rises to replace it, this introduces the possibility
of religious change as well.
For example, a new dynasty might establish a new capital city.
And when a new capital city is founded as the royal seat, that means there needs to
be a major change in cultic centers where the gods are worshipped.
And this also means the construction of a new necropolis, a new cemetery complex for
the kings and queens of the new dynasty.
Sometimes a new dynasty would initiate worship of a new chief god, and this most often meant
a new sun god.
Or the new dynasty might identify two or more gods and combine the rituals of their worship.
Now these changes did not necessarily affect the religious practices and affections of
the average Egyptian, but it did require a new orientation towards the gods among the
elite that were part of the royal administration and bureaucracy.
So we might assume that a change of the chief god worship, or the chief solar deity, might
be a major change.
But in fact they were moderated again by the essential conservatism of Egyptian culture,
so that even religious innovation takes on very much the color of traditional religion.
And we'll see this at work in the case of the religious innovations of Akhenaten, for
example.
Certainly there were some ideas and some metaphors for religious power that became traditional
and stable, and they provide the key concepts for understanding Egyptian religion throughout
its long history.
So for the most part, we can talk about the full range of ancient Egyptian religious
culture as more or less homogenous, more or less a single religious culture throughout
its history.
Although of course we need to remain mindful of the changes and the developments that take
place over time.
And this approach is in keeping with the primary trait that characterizes Egyptian religion
in the minds of modern people, that is its sense of serenity and its sense of the eternal.
This impression of Egyptian culture is fostered by its major monuments, the ones that are
most familiar to us, for example the Great Pyramid of Kofu, or Chiops, as he's more commonly
known, or the Sphinx, or the elaborately decorated and furnished tombs of Egyptian kings, or
the calm expressions and the stylized poses of the figures in Egyptian statuary and tomb
paintings.
But it's important to remember that this impression of serenity, this impression of
eternity as we often think of it, is a deliberate creation of the craftsmen who created these
monuments.
It is a deliberate creation of the art of Egyptian religion.
And it was carried out in service to the king because it was meant to reflect Pharaoh's
imposition of cosmic order, or ma'at, on the forces of chaos.
Once the Pharaoh represented cosmic order, his monuments and his self-presentation also
deliberately reflect the salutary effects of a life lived under the divine authority
of the Pharaoh, a life lived under the divine order that the Pharaoh imposed, and the serenity
that arises from cosmic harmony.
Of course the reality of Egyptian life was quite different.
For the vast majority of its population, ancient Egypt was rife with dark powers of
chaos, the average person felt themselves threatened by chaos that might break into
their lives at any time, and it would do so in the usual ways, in the form of sudden
natural disaster, by accident, by disease, or by sudden death.
So there is a dichotomy in how the world was perceived in ancient Egypt, essentially what
we would call two different stories.
On the one hand, there is the story of the life under the protection of the divine Pharaoh.
The Pharaoh's sway imposes an order that is a mirror of the eternal order and life of
heaven, the life of the gods.
It is joyful and unchanging, serene and eternal.
But the other story, on the other hand, is the story of this world as a realm where the
forces of chaos are barely kept suppressed and still threaten to break out at any time
to threaten the average person, or perhaps the entire nation.
Now, this dichotomy reflects certain conflicts that seem to have been a fundamental part
of the ancient Egyptian way of understanding the world, the created world that lives in
relationship to the divine world.
There seemed to be an eternal conflict between order and chaos, between the fertile valley
of the Nile River and the arid desert that surrounded it, between light and darkness,
between death and life.
The Egyptians saw these dichotomies not so much as conflicts, not so much as polar opposites,
but rather as part of a complementary whole, not conflicts between contending aspects of
creation, but complementary parts of a single creation.
It was the expression of the temporal in the eternal, but also the expression of the eternal
in the temporal.
Now, in our next session, we will consider Egyptian creation stories about how this order
comes into being.
And we'll see what these creation stories have to tell us about different ideas of the
relationships among the gods and humanity and the creation they bring into being.
