Lecture 18, Mesopotamia, The Great Flood
In our last session, we completed our discussion of the Epic of Gilgamesh, with the hero's
quest for the secret of everlasting life in the wake of Enkidu's death.
Now you'll remember, as part of his quest, Gilgamesh sought out Utnapishtim the far
away.
Utnapishtim had gained everlasting life from the gods in the aftermath of a devastating
worldwide flood.
And during the course of the epic, Utnapishtim tells his story to Gilgamesh.
But his story has many echoes with other Mesopotamian flood stories, particularly the story of Atrahasis,
and also with a more familiar biblical story of Noah.
In this session, we will look at these three different versions of the story of the Great
Flood, and give particular attention to their similarities and their very interesting differences.
Utnapishtim's account of the flood stands apart from the rest of the Epic of Gilgamesh,
and there are various reasons for this.
For one thing, the focus of attention changes from Gilgamesh, where it is for most of the
epic, to Utnapishtim himself.
And also, because of the various echoes the story has with other flood stories, both in
Mesopotamia and elsewhere.
Also, Utnapishtim tells the story about himself, and he tells it to a certain extent in the
first person.
But he has a kind of narrative omniscience, a narrative omniscience that enables him to
know everything that is relevant to the story, including what the gods themselves plan in
their divine counsel, and what they say to each other, and their activities up in heaven,
which of course, really, Utnapishtim could know nothing about.
So Utnapishtim, in this part of the epic, speaks more as a traditional storyteller than as
an actual participant in the events that he describes.
And this may be intended to reflect his role as a source of ancestral wisdom.
He describes the story as the secret of the gods, but it's more likely to derive from
the fact that this is a secondary story that has been inserted into the epic of Gilgamesh.
Utnapishtim's story begins in those days, and this is a very familiar narrative device
to place the events that are being described back in another time, not when things are
the way they are now, but a beginning time, an earlier time, when things began to be the
way they are now.
So the story begins in those days in the city of Sharupak, a city on the Euphrates where
Utnapishtim makes his home.
And what happens is that the gods of the city decide among themselves that the great gods,
called the Igigi, should send a flood to the earth.
Now in Utnapishtim's version of the story in the epic of Gilgamesh, no reason is given
why the gods of the city of Sharupak decide there should be a flood, nor do we know whether
the flood was meant to affect only Sharupak or whether it was to affect the entire world,
which is what the rest of the story seems to assume.
And in fact, there is a great deal of information that seems to be omitted.
For example, there's no debate among the Igigi, the gods of the heavens, the great gods.
They don't really debate about whether or not they're going to flood the earth or not.
Instead, the various gods involved just act on their decision.
The gods involved are Father Anu, Enlil, Ninirnta, who is the Divine Chamberlain, and Enugie,
who oversees irrigation canals, and finally Aya, the God of Wisdom.
Aya sits in the council, hears the plan to flood the earth, and he reveals the plan to
Utnapishtim, but he doesn't do so directly.
Aya, like the other gods, has sworn an oath, an oath of secrecy that he will not reveal
the gods' plans to anyone.
So instead, he speaks the words of the plan to the house where Utnapishtim lives.
He speaks to the reed hut of Utnapishtim rather than to Utnapishtim himself, and so it's
just a coincidence, presumably, that Utnapishtim overhears what the god is saying to his house.
This way, Aya keeps his vow, but also manages to warn Utnapishtim.
Now, just as there is no reason given for why the gods decide to destroy the earth with
the flood, there is also no reason given for Aya's decision to reveal the secret to Utnapishtim,
or why Utnapishtim in particular, and the exact nature of the threat to humanity is
not made clear at this point.
And again, these sorts of omissions indicate that the story is secondary, not only that
it has been inserted into the epic of Gilgamesh, but that this is a somewhat derivative version,
where it is assumed that the audience is somewhat familiar with the story and does not need to
have all the details filled in.
And this is because these are details that are really necessary for the integrity of
the story, but they have been here omitted, although they do appear in other more complete
versions of the story, and notably the story of Atrahasis, also from Mesopotamia.
So, Aya gives Utnapishtim the information that a flood is coming by revealing it to
his reed hut, and Aya also gives Utnapishtim a plan of escape from the flood.
Utnapishtim is to build a boat, and Aya gives Utnapishtim all the instructions he needs
to carry out the plan successfully.
Aya gives Utnapishtim the dimensions of the boat and tells him to put aboard the seed
of all living things, presumably so that they too can escape the flood.
This seems to indicate the inclusion of all living animals, possibly also plants, but
at least certainly the animals.
Aya also tells Utnapishtim what he should say to his neighbors.
Utnapishtim, living in a small village, or a small city, I should say, is concerned
about what the neighbors will think when they see him building a boat in Sherupak.
And Aya gives Utnapishtim a truthful answer, or really an ironic answer which is the opposite
in some ways of the truth.
Utnapishtim is told to tell his neighbors, I think that Enlil has rejected me.
I must go down to the Opsu and stay with my master Aya.
Then he will shower abundance upon you, a wealth of fowl, a treasure of fish, prosperity,
a harvest.
Now this is true in its way, but of course it is the neighbors who will end up in the
depths of Opsu, and not Utnapishtim.
And the abundance that is showered down on them is floodwaters.
And of course they will have a treasure of fish, they'll be surrounded by them, because
they'll be swimming in the depths of the deep.
Reminds me a bit of Bill Cosby's old routine about the Lord speaking to Noah, and when
the neighbors ask Noah what he's doing, Noah says, how long can you tread water?
That kind of humor apparently has a long, long tradition behind it.
Now the story devotes a lot of attention to the building of the boat.
Utnapishtim recruits many different workmen to contribute to the construction of the boat.
And Utnapishtim takes good care of them.
He feeds them, for example, like there's no tomorrow, probably because there's not
a tomorrow, really, as far as most people are concerned.
Utnapishtim loads the boat with all his gold and silver, something we don't really expect.
And Aya, in fact, earlier told Utnapishtim to leave possessions, search out living things.
So Utnapishtim is moving a bit beyond his mandate here.
Utnapishtim also brings into the boat all his family members, all the animals on earth,
and we're told all kinds of craftsmen.
That is, he brings on the boat the artisans who know the skills of civilized humanity.
So Utnapishtim is not merely preserving human life, he is also preserving human civilization
by bringing the men who have the skills necessary for civilization.
Finally the storm begins.
And the mechanics of the storm and the flood are described with a wealth of detail in the
story of Utnapishtim.
In fact, the story shows an interest in implicating all the gods in the plot against humanity.
All the gods are implicated in the creation of the flood except for Aya.
For example, Adad, the storm god, makes his contribution.
The Anunnaki, the gods of earth, and the underworld make their contribution.
All the gods except for Aya bear the guilt of their decision to destroy humanity.
And the flood is created not only by a storm, but with the assistance of the other gods.
There is the unleashing of the waters of the abyss.
So once again the forces of chaos are unleashed, and in fact they threaten once again to overwhelm
the earth and to destroy creation.
In fact, the gods themselves are frightened by the flood they have created.
And they ascend up as high into creation as they can.
We find them at the very top of the highest heaven in the heaven of Anu.
And even there they are cowering against the dome of the heavens, against the great firmament.
They have their arms up against it practically as the waters of chaos lap at their feet.
The gods are frightened by what they have done because they are part of the creation
that is now threatening to be undone by the waters of the flood.
Even Ishtar, Ishtar, a god of vengeance and a god of violence in many ways, regrets the
decision to destroy humanity.
She asks herself, how could I have spoken such evil in the gods assembly?
I should have ordered a battle to destroy my people.
I myself gave birth to them.
They are my own people.
Presumably Ishtar gave birth to the people through the energy of sexual generation that
she fosters.
But it's more interesting that she refers to a deadly battle as a good alternative to
the flood.
A deadly battle would have been much more in keeping with Ishtar's attribute as the goddess
of war and of the frenzy, the bloodlust of battle.
And also of course it would have been more practical.
It would have allowed some people to escape and in that way would have preserved the human
race.
The gods apparently have now decided that wiping out all of humanity was not such a good idea.
The flood in this story lasts six days and six nights.
And after that time the water slowly began to recede.
Udnipishtim's boat with his family, all the animals, his possessions, all the artisans
finally runs aground on Mount Nimush.
This apparently was the only mountain high enough not to be covered by the waters of
the flood.
And Udnipishtim's boat remains grounded on Mount Nimush for a week.
Udnipishtim sends out a series of birds, first a dove and then a swallow, and finally
a raven to see if the flood waters have receded sufficiently from the earth to allow the people
on the boat to leave.
Finally, the raven, the third bird sent out, does not return to the boat.
And Udnipishtim puts everything out to the four winds, we are told.
So he opens up all the doors and windows of the boat, louts out all the animals, releases
the human occupants as well, and offers an animal sacrifice of thanksgiving.
The gods, who have been led to believe that no one has survived the calamity, the gods
smell the sweet savor of the sacrifice that Udnipishtim is offering.
We were told they gather like flies around the sacrifice.
But Ishtar is careful to bar Enlil from participating, because it was Enlil, she argues, who instigated
the flood and didn't really consult with the other gods.
And as is usually the case with Ishtar, what she says is not exactly true, but it's certainly
a position that gains the approval of the other gods.
So when Enlil arrives, he is outraged that anyone, any human being, has survived the
flood.
And Ninirnta, the gods' chamberlain, accuses Aya of revealing the gods' plans to Udnipishtim,
because Aya knows everything and must be the source of the man's knowledge.
Aya, however, defends himself before Enlil and Ninirnta.
He argues that the flood was too devastating, the flood was too indiscriminate.
It was not the way to do the job of reducing the number of human beings.
In fact, at this point, Aya introduces the idea of justice in the divine actions, of
proportion in divine actions.
He says, punish the sinner for his sin, punish the criminal for his crime.
Let ease off, let work not cease, apparently referring to the work that human beings do,
both for themselves and for the gods.
Aya, in fact, suggests several more moderate means of ridding the world of its excess human
population.
He said, you could have ravaging lions, ravaging wolves, could tear apart people, or could decrease
the number of people on the earth.
You could send famines, you can send illness, all of these would be more moderate and would
discriminate more and leave some people to survive.
Aya also denies that he revealed the God's secret to Utnipishtim.
He says he only sent Utnipishtim a dream, and Utnipishtim was able to interpret that
dream to understand the God's message.
At the end of the story, as Utnipishtim tells it in the epic of Gilgamesh, Enlil relents,
and he blesses Utnipishtim and his wife, and their reward for surviving the flood and
for being a means of preserving humanity and animal life on earth, their reward is a life
like the life of the gods.
In other words, they are rewarded with everlasting life.
But at the same time, Enlil moves Utnipishtim and his wife far away to the mouths of the
two rivers Tigris and Euphrates, hence the name Utnipishtim the far away, because no
matter where you are, Utnipishtim is far away.
So the story as we have it in the epic of Gilgamesh is somewhat abbreviated, leaves
some questions not really answered for the audience.
And we find the answers to some of these questions in another Mesopotamian version of the story,
the story of Atrahasis.
Now in Atrahasis, the story of the flood is the climax of a much longer story about the
creation of human beings and, as with most creation stories, how things got to be the
way they are now.
In fact, the story has some interesting overlaps and parallels to the creation story in the
Babylonian Enuma Elish.
As in Enuma Elish, there is an account of the ordering of the divine hierarchy, how the
gods found their places in the order of things, and there is an account of the eventual creation
of human beings, who again are created specifically to do work for the gods.
According to the story of Atrahasis, at first there were lower gods who did all the labor
in the world themselves, supporting the superior gods by grueling physical labor.
Finally, the lower gods revolt, and they take up arms against the higher gods.
This happens about 3,600 years after the point of creation.
When the lower gods revolt against the Agigi, Anu, Enlil, and Inerta decide to create a
new kind of being, the human beings, to do the work that the lower gods now find to burdensome.
Also, as in Enuma Elish, when the higher gods go to create human beings, they are made up
in part from the blood and body of a sacrificed god.
You remember, in Enuma Elish, the human beings are made from the clotted blood of the rebellious
god Kingu, who is described as a clumsy laborer.
Here, the gods sacrifice a lower god, named Illawella, Nintu, the goddess of the womb,
Mami, the midwife of the gods, and Enki, mix clay with Illawella's flesh and blood, and
thereby make humanity.
So humanity is in part made up of the flesh and blood of a lower god, as in Enuma Elish,
and in part of the common clay of the earth, presumably introducing the mortal element.
The gods also provide for the continuation of the human species after making the first
human beings.
They provide for the continuation of the human species through sexual intercourse, of course,
and they establish ten months as the period of human gestation.
So all the function of human beings as sexual creatures who continue their own race are
established at the very moment of creation.
Now, as the story of Atrahasis continues, there are a series of attempts by the gods
to decrease the size of the human population.
The flood is only the last of these attempts to decrease the human population.
Although, the way the story is told, the flood seems to be meant to wipe out human beings
entirely.
Now, in the story of Atrahasis, in the beginning, human beings are immortal, and when they reproduce,
they add to the population, and there is no way for the population to decrease.
And soon, there are too many human beings, and they are too noisy.
At this point, when they become too many and too noisy for the gods to tolerate, which
apparently happens about every 600 years, at least in the story, the gods send some
sort of catastrophe to decimate the human population.
Enlil, repeatedly in the story, complains to the other gods that humanity's noise is
keeping him awake, and we can see a parallel here to Enuma Elish, except then it was the
younger gods who caused the uproar, and it was Apsu and Tiamat, the elemental gods, who
wished to destroy the younger gods because they were keeping them awake.
Apparently, the younger generation keeping the older generation awake is a recurring
theme throughout human history.
So, the gods, in order to reduce the number of human beings on earth, send a series of
ills, one every 600 years.
They send a wasting illness, and two drought-induced famines, and then another plague, and then
another six-year-long famine that leaves only two families of human beings on the earth.
But each time the gods send a calamity, the wise man, Atrahasis, whose name means supersage,
Atrahasis besieges his god Enki, the god of wisdom, to tell him how to save humanity.
At each time, Enki replies with a strategy to bring an end to the calamity, and Atrahasis
helps humanity be saved.
Finally, the gods agree to send a great flood to wipe humanity from the earth once and for
all.
Now, the story of Atrahasis' preparation for the flood and the coming of the flood itself
is very much like the story of Utnipishtim as it appears in the epic of Gilgamesh.
In this version, the command to save all the animals is somewhat muted.
Instead, there is an emphasis on Atrahasis' anxiety as he waits for the boat to be completed.
When the gods react to the flood afterwards, it is Nintu, the goddess who created humanity,
who mourns for them in the place of Ishtar in the story of Utnipishtim.
And again, the gods suffer because of the end of sacrifices being offered by human beings.
Once the flood is over, and the gods gather around Atrahasis' animal sacrifice, it is
again Nintu who blames Anu and Enlil for the disaster, and like Ishtar, she promises to
remember what has happened.
At the end of the story, Atrahasis and his wife do not gain immortality as Utnipishtim
and his wife do, but instead Atrahasis and his wife retain the immortality that all human
beings have shared up to that point.
The difference is, now all other human beings are subjected to a limited life span, and
the gods decree other means that might limit the growth of the human population on earth.
Two of these survive in the text that has come down to us.
We're told that the gods may punish with death those who oppose them, that same idea of let
the sinner pay for his sin, and we're also told that one third of women who give birth
will lose their children, a reflection of the truth of infant mortality in the ancient
world.
So we have two different Mesopotamian flood stories, and to a large extent, the story
of Noah stands apart from these two Mesopotamian flood stories, not least in the fact that
it involves only one god instead of a multitude of gods who are at odds with each other.
Now the story of Noah in Genesis chapter 6 through 9 is very familiar to us, at least
in its outlines, and the parallels to the stories of Atrahasis may already have suggested
themselves to you.
In both the Mesopotamian and the Israelite stories, there is the divine intention to
destroy all humanity by means of a flood, with a single person selected to be forewarned
and to build a boat to save himself, his family, and all the animals.
The building of the boat to divine specifications, the gathering of all species of animals, the
flood itself, the series of birds set out to find land once the storm is over, the sacrifice
made afterwards that finds divine favor, these are all common elements in all three stories.
There are differences in the details, and especially differences in points of emphasis,
but the parallels among the stories are enough to suggest reliance on some common tradition
to the entire ancient eastern Mediterranean, and there is of course the possibility that
it is based on some historical occurrence, some sort of devastating flood in the ancient
Near East.
Now in spite of these similarities, there are also notable differences between the Mesopotamian
and the Israelite versions of these stories, particularly in regard to the basic plot elements.
In Genesis, there is no deceptive story for Noah's neighbors, there is no inclusion of
gold and silver as cargo as there is in the storyboot in Epishtim, and the human passengers
here are limited to Noah's own family.
In the Mesopotamian stories, the storm is brief, but extremely violent.
The rain lasts only a few days and the flood begins to recede only a week after the rain
stops.
In Genesis, the rain falls for 40 days and 40 nights according to Genesis chapter 7, verse
12 and 17, and the flood itself lasts for 150 days before it begins to recede according
to Genesis chapter 7, verse 24.
While Epishtim and his wife gain everlasting life, far removed from the human world, Noah
and his family have the responsibility to replenish the human world, and as a result
we're told the three divisions of humanity in the world today are the descendants of
Noah's sons and their wives.
But much more important than the differences among plot elements are the differences that
change the tone and the message of the entire story of Noah in comparison to the Mesopotamian
story.
And these reflect in miniature the differences between these two different religious cultures.
In the Mesopotamian stories, the flood is divine vengeance against human beings, carried
out without consideration of the consequences even for the gods themselves.
In Genesis, the flood is an act of justice, a reaction to the wickedness that has grown
to epic proportions among human beings.
And the same God who provides for the future of the human race is the one who brings the
flood.
He brings the flood that also reveals his intentions to the righteous man, Noah.
In the Mesopotamian stories, the gods squabble among themselves, each seeking personal advantage.
They change their minds, they show fear and short-sightedness.
In general, in the Mesopotamian story, the gods are depicted very much like human beings,
with competing desires and bullheadedness that can lead to disasters for both themselves
and humanity.
In Genesis, the one God is defined by his moral character, and this leads him not only
to destroy the unrighteous people, but also to provide for humanity's survival by warning
Noah.
Although the Mesopotamian gods come to see the flood as a mistake, there is no guarantee
that chaos will not once again break out and threaten humanity.
This seems to reflect the essential uncertainty about the human predicament in the hands of
unreliable gods that we've seen as a hallmark of Mesopotamian religious culture.
In contrast, at the climax of the Genesis account, God makes a covenant with Noah and
promises never again to destroy the earth with a flood.
This introduces a new situation into creation marked by the existence of the rainbow, and
there is a sense of security based on trust in the Word of the one God.
These differences, of course, reflect more fundamental differences between Mesopotamian
and Israelite conceptions of the divine, and the nature of the relationship between the
divine world and creation, that is, the world of human beings.
And in the next session, we will discuss the different concepts of the divine that lie
behind polytheism, belief in many gods, tenotheism, belief in trust in one chief god among many
gods that exist, and monotheism, belief in trust in the one and only God who exists.
Thank you.
