In our last session, we talked about some of the gods of Syria, Palestine, whose religious
culture was influenced by and, as a result, resemble religious culture in Mesopotamia.
In this session, we will look more closely at the historical setting of the religious
culture of Israel's earliest ancestors and the development of Israelite religious culture
in the aftermath of the event we know as the Exodus.
Now there is this interesting combination in the patriarchal and matriarchal narratives
of the Hebrew Bible.
This interesting combination of details that do not seem to fit the historical situation
of the Hebrew ancestors, but stories that do seem to fit the historical situation.
The details, in some ways, in the Genesis account of the patriarchs and matriarchs,
seem to be intended to place the events in the past.
They are details that seem to reflect things as they used to be back before the way things
are now.
Abraham, for example, is said to come into contact with Arabs, Arameans, and Philistines
among other people, but these ethnic groups had not entered Syria-Palestine at the time
when the ancestors of Israel would have been nomadic herders in the region.
These peoples did not enter Palestine before the 12th century BCE, too late for Abraham,
in other words.
Similarly, the ancestors of Israel are associated with several southern cities, cities like
Beersheba, and these cities did not exist before the Kingdom of Israel was established
under Saul around the beginning of the first millennium BCE.
Abraham also is said to come from Ur of the Chaldeans, but in fact the Chaldeans did not
occupy Ur until the 10th century BCE around the turn of the first millennium, and the
term Chaldeans does not really appear, again in the Hebrew Bible, until Nehemiah chapter
9, a much later work.
The patriarchs are also depicted as using domesticated camels, but camels were not domesticated
as far as we can tell, much before the beginning of the first millennium BCE, about the time
the Kingdom of Israel was founded.
So these details suggest that there was an attempt to put the events of the lives of
the patriarchs and matriarchs of Israel into the past, to an earlier age, things as they
were then, but in fact these details did not go back as far as those who wrote the stories
thought they did.
And so it would seem that the stories about the ancestors of the people of Israel were
not written down any earlier than the beginning of the Israelite kingdoms, probably at the
earliest at the time of David, and then written down to give a common identity to the diverse
peoples who made up the nation of Israel.
In other words, giving them a common ancestry and a common identity as the people of Israel.
But at the same time that these historical details are incorrect for the period when
the ancestors of Israel were nomadic wanderers in Palestine, the stories themselves at a
much deeper level do appear to reflect a way of life that was appropriate for nomadic
herders, a way of life we also know from tablets from the city of Mari.
Mari included a royal archive that chronicles the era of the late and middle Bronze Ages,
or I should say the middle and late Bronze Ages, a period from about 2200 to about 1200
BCE.
The tablets from this royal archive are frequent in their mention of nomadic peoples.
This was a Mesopotamian city, Mari was, and there was a frequent reference to those who
were nomadic wanderers in the area.
And as a result, these royal archives provide us with some general idea of the sort of life
lived by nomadic peoples, exactly the sort of people that the Hebrew ancestors were said
to be.
For example, the structure of the family of nomadic herders was patriarchal.
We hear that term a lot, but what it means in this case is, in its strict sense, that
the father's authority over members of his family was absolute.
It was patriarchal in the sense that the father was the ruling authority.
His power included the power of life and death over every single member of his family.
In the patriarchal family, the inheritance fell to the oldest son at the death of his
father, but a son could forfeit his right to inherit, and the patriarch, as part of
the absolute power that he had, was free to choose which son was to be considered the
eldest for the purposes of inheritance.
In the patriarchal family, adoption was practiced, but it was practiced within the family itself
in a direct line, which means that, for example, a grandfather would adopt a grandson and take
that grandson as a son, and this was a way of ensuring the purity of the bloodline and
the easy transference of the inheritance from the father to the adopted son.
For the same reason that is concerned for the purity of the bloodline, we find marriage
among blood relatives, most often cousins.
This was preferred because it ensured the purity of the bloodline and the strength of
the patriarchal family.
Polygamy was practiced.
A man would have many wives in order to ensure a large number of children, a large spreading
of the bloodline for the patriarchal family.
And since one had many wives, there was a system of status among these wives.
The wives had status based on seniority, but primarily on whether or not they had produced
children for the patriarchal father.
The senior wife who had produced children had the highest status, and the lower status
fell to the wives who did not have children, no matter what their place was in the seniority
line otherwise.
An elder wife with no children had a lower status than a younger wife with children.
The patriarchal house, as it was sometimes called, was an extended family.
The extended family included the patriarchal father and his wives, but also included the
unmarried daughters, minor children and servants, and then also the patriarch's sons, his
grown sons and their wives, as well as their children and servants.
So this is a fairly large family unit ruled over by this one patriarchal father.
And it seems that these nomadic patriarchal families lived more or less independently
and autonomously.
In other words, they did not have connections with larger family units such as clans or
tribes, but they existed more or less on their own under the authority of the patriarchal
father.
Now these stories are important for Israel, and their background in the middle and late
Bronze Age is important because all ancestral histories are meant to define who people are.
Every people maintain some sort of oral tradition about its own origins, and that means not
only its origins as human beings, such as the story of Adam and Eve, for example, but
their origins as members of a particular group with a distinctive history.
And we can take the example of the American people, for example.
Although most people who live in the United States are the descendants of people who emigrated
sometime after the Revolutionary War and often after the Civil War, we look back to
the founding events of the nation as the history that defines us as a people tells us who we
are, and we invoke the images of the founding fathers and their intentions and their deeds.
And similarly, the ancestral history was intended to define the people of Israel, a similarly
diverse people, as a single people deriving from a single family with a single common
history.
Now the ancestral history in the book of Genesis and the other early books of the Bible appears
to reflect accurately the life of nomadic herdsmen during the era when Israel's forebears would
have first entered Syria-Palestine, that kind of evidence we have from the royal archives
of Mari, for example.
The stories about the ancestors in Genesis are primarily stories.
That is, they have literary intentions, and those literary intentions are not related
to whatever value the stories may have as historical reminiscences.
They are primarily intended to serve as narratives and not necessarily as accurate reflections
of the people's past.
And the stories are part of the stories of beginnings.
That is, they trace the origins of the people of Israel.
They explain in part how things came to be the way they are now for Israel.
And in fact, many scholars assume the ancestral history, as it now appears in Genesis, was
derived from a variety of stories that were told among several different groups that later
came to be identified as a single nation Israel.
They cite as evidence, for example, the two different names of Isaac's younger son, Jacob,
on the one hand, and Israel, on the other.
Two names from one man.
And they see this as evidence that two distinct traditions have been combined into a single
narrative arc.
But let us consider the ancestral history as it now appears in Genesis.
The ancestral history really begins with the event of the Lord's choice of Abraham.
The Lord chooses Abraham out of all humanity to make a covenantal promise to him.
Now there is no justification given for the Lord's choice of Abraham before the fact.
There really seems to be no particular reason why the Lord chooses Abraham.
But after the fact, the story shows that Abraham does seem to live up to the Lord's expectations.
Initially, Abraham is only told to complete a journey begun by his father, Thera, which
is to leave Ur and to move into the territory of Canaan.
But Abraham's subsequent behavior in response to the Lord's promise seems to justify the
promises that the Lord has made, because Abraham places his trust in the Lord in response
to those promises.
For example, Abraham's trust in the Lord leads him to live as a nomadic herder in Syria-Palestine.
His trust in the Lord leads him to believe the Lord's promise that he will have descendants.
His descendants have not yet appeared, and in fact so far he has been childless.
But he believes the Lord's promise that his as yet non-existent descendants will inherit
the land then occupied by other peoples.
Abraham's trust in the Lord leads him to believe not only that he will have a son with
Sarah, despite the fact that she is past the age of childbearing, but also it leads him
to sacrifice the only son that the Lord has provided at the Lord's command, the so-called
sacrifice of Isaac.
And finally, we find the Lord declaring to Abraham, Now I know that you fear God, seeing
you have not withheld your son, your only son, from me.
That's in Genesis chapter 22 verse 12.
So the Lord's promise does not seem to be contingent on any behavior of Abraham, but
Abraham does in some ways live up to the Lord's promises and show himself to be a righteous
man.
It's interesting that Abraham feels free on the basis of his covenantal relationship
with the Lord to intercede respectfully with the Lord on behalf of the city of Sodom.
The city of Sodom, of course, was notorious for gross violations of the laws of hospitality.
The men of Sodom wanted to abuse and take advantage of the visitors that Lot was having
at his house in violation of all the rules of hospitality.
But Abraham, when he learns the Lord is planning on punishing the city of Sodom, intercedes
with the Lord on the specific grounds that the Lord must show himself to be just.
Abraham says to the Lord, respectfully, it is not right to destroy the just along with
the wicked.
If there are 50 just men in the city of Sodom, you must spare the city.
And the Lord agrees that Abraham works him down to 45, surely would not destroy the city
for the lack of five men.
So the Lord agrees not to destroy Sodom if 45 just men are there.
And that Abraham intercedes again and works the Lord down from 45 to 40 and then to 30
and then to 20 and then to 10.
And then the story tells us at that point the Lord left.
Surely the Lord did not want to be worked down to any fewer than 10.
But the important fact of this story is not that the Lord knew that there were not even
10 righteous men in the city of Sodom.
It is that Abraham feels free to call the Lord to be true to his own nature.
In Genesis chapter 18 verse 25, Abraham makes the point, far be it from you to do such a
thing, to slay the righteous with the wicked so that the righteous fair as the wicked do.
Far be that from you, shall not the judge of the earth do what is right.
So Abraham calls the Lord to be true to his own nature.
And he also emphasizes the welfare of the righteous.
Essentially he says it is better to suspend punishment for the wicked than to unjustly
punish those who have done the right thing along with the wicked, to unjustly punish
the good with the wicked.
As the ancestral history continues, the story of Jacob and Esau, the sons of Isaac, emphasizes
the Lord's freedom to decide whom he will benefit by bestowing his favor upon him.
He chooses Jacob, the younger son, as covenant bearer, the one who receives the benefit of
the promises made to Abraham.
Previously, the Lord had chosen Isaac.
But Isaac was the son of Abraham by his wife, Sarah, and Isaac had been chosen over Ishmael.
Ishmael was Abraham's son by Sarah's maid, Hagar.
Now you have there the choice of the son of the wife over the son of the servant.
But in Genesis chapter 28, the Lord chooses the younger twin Jacob over the older twin
Esau.
Now earlier, Esau had forfeited his inheritance rights.
And as we saw in the patriarchal family, that is a possibility.
The older son can forfeit his rights of inheritance.
And Jacob is able to gain Isaac's blessing by trickery.
He is able to gain the blessing from his father and the inheritance by tricking his father
by attempting to disguise himself as Esau.
This happens when Jacob is prompted by his mother, Rebecca, because Rebecca favors her
younger son and figures out how to deceive Isaac and then sends Jacob away to save him
from his brother's wrath.
So we have not only Jacob as the younger brother, but Jacob as a usurper of his brother's rights.
He usurps the rights of his brother Esau.
One of my old tutors at Oxford said that Jacob means heal, and he spent most of his life
living up to the name.
Now this pattern of fraternal rivalry is echoed in the story of Joseph and his brothers, the
sons of Jacob.
And these conflicts between brothers seem tied to the conflicts between tribes and
nations that the brothers represent.
Now the ancestral history we need to remember is not merely an explanation of the origins
of the Israelites and the family that represents their common identity, but also covers the
origins of many of the other nations among whom the Israelites lived and with whom the
Israelites interacted in many different ways.
And the history most often attempts to explain the relationship among nations in terms of
family relationships of their eponymous ancestors.
So Ishmael, who is a half-brother to Isaac, becomes the ancestor of nomadic Bedouin tribes.
While Esau, who is the twin of Jacob, becomes the ancestor of the nation of Edom, a nation
with whom Israel had a troubled relationship, shall we say.
These sorts of relationships reflect an awareness that some neighboring peoples were much more
like the Israelites than others, and the Israelites tended to favor those nations that were more
like them and to see those nations that they had driven out of the land of Syria, Palestine,
as being only more distantly related, if they were related at all.
So the ancestral history is a history of the Israelite forebears living in relationship
with the Lord and in relationship with their neighbors and relatives.
And the Lord is the one who channels their good behavior and their bad behavior into
the fulfillment of his own intentions.
Now the God of Abraham, who appears in the ancestral narratives, is explicitly identified
as the Lord when he reveals himself later to Moses.
The people of Israel have gone down into the land of Egypt, they have sojourned there for
a while, and now they are suffering oppression, and it is time for them to be delivered from
their bondage in the land of Egypt.
And it is in the Exodus narrative, which begins of course with the story of Moses, that the
God of Abraham, Isaac and Jacob is definitively identified as the Lord when Moses encounters
the Lord in the burning bush.
There, the Lord commands Moses to lead his people out of Egypt, and Moses, perhaps rather
naturally, asked the name of the God that he has encountered, the name of the God of
his ancestors, in case he is asked by the people of Israel, what is the name of the
God who has sent you?
This question of course reflects both the pervasive polytheism of Moses' time, and
also the variety of names by which a particular God might be known.
Moses essentially wants to know what name to use to call upon the God whom he has encountered.
It is a request for permission to call upon the name of this God.
In reply, the Lord gives Moses what amounts to three separate answers, each apparently
originating at a different level of the tradition, behind the narrative.
This appears in Exodus chapter 3, verses 14 and 15.
God first says, in reply to Moses, I am who I am, which is essentially a translation of
the name Yahweh.
God then says, thus you shall say to the Israelites, I am has sent me to you.
And then finally, he says, thus you shall say to the Israelites, the Lord, the God of
your ancestors, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob has sent me
to you.
This is my name forever, and this is my title for all generations.
Now that explanation of the name Yahweh, I am the one who is, or I am who I am, should
not be understood as carrying the Greek idea of being, being as an attribute, if you will,
or being as the source for all being.
Instead, the name indicates that the Lord is the living God, the God who at all times
is, the God who is always present to his people to help and support them.
Now the Lord's appearance in the burning bush in Exodus chapter 3 establishes both a continuity
with the God worshiped by Israel's ancestors and a change in his way of dealing with Israel.
As the third reply to Moses indicates, God is now to be known exclusively as the Lord,
and he is not to be identified with the God's worship by other peoples.
The Lord will now be known in and through his specific actions in history beginning with
the Exodus events, because his relationship with Israel will be based on a covenant formed
after those events take place.
At the same time, Israel's escape from bondage in Egypt and the people's entry later into
the land of Canaan is tied to the Lord's earlier promises made to their common ancestor,
Abraham.
So the religion of Israel, as understood and practiced throughout its history, really
begins not with Abraham, but with the revelation to Moses in the burning bush, where the Lord
establishes his identity as the Lord, as Yahweh, as I am who I am.
Now the account of the Exodus events themselves reflect elements of at least two different
traditions, one apparently a more straightforward account of the escape and the other more supernaturally
enhanced.
For example, the story of the ten plagues has elements of folklore in it, and this includes
the repeated cycle of plague, capitulation, lifting of the plague, renewed oppression.
That kind of repetition is typical of folkloric stories.
The repeated cycle also indicates that the ten so-called plagues should probably be understood
as nine warnings and followed by the tenth plague, the real plague, the illness that
finally convinces Pharaoh to let the people go.
And even so, there are two competing versions of what happens when the people leave.
There is the idea of Exodus as an expulsion when Pharaoh sends the people out of Egypt
in response to the tenth plague, but there is also the motif of Exodus as an escape when
the people flee Egypt by night and are pursued by Pharaoh's army.
There are also two versions of what happens at the Reed Sea, the miracle that takes place
there.
In one, a strong wind exposes the solid ground in a marsh, while in the others, the more
supernatural version, there is this motif of obedient water that rises in walls to allow
the Israelites to pass through dry shod, as the story says, while then the sea comes back
and destroys the Egyptian soldiers and their chariots.
The Exodus becomes the basis for the Lord's covenant with Israel at Sinai.
In this case, the covenant is different than the earlier covenant of Grant made with Abraham.
In this case, at Sinai, we have a covenant with binding stipulations on both parties,
both on the Lord and on the people of Israel.
Apparently, the basic form of this later covenant agreement, as it appears in Exodus 19 verses
3 through 8, the form seems to be based on an ancient Near Eastern Suzerainty Treaty,
a kind of treaty in which a subject people accepts a king as its sovereign, with stipulations
again placed on both sides.
The Lord's covenant with Israel is a similar kind of legal contract.
It is based on the experience of the Exodus as a demonstration of the kind of God that
the Lord is, and establishes a relationship between the Lord and Israel.
In chapter 19 of Exodus, the stipulations were expressed in the form of a conditional
blessing.
If you obey my voice and keep my covenant, you shall be my treasured possession out of
all the peoples.
You shall be for me a priestly kingdom and a holy nation.
Like the stipulations of a Suzerainty Treaty, the responsibilities of the vassal, in this
case Israel, are laid out in imperatives in the second person.
You will do this, you will do that.
And the primary responsibility of the contract is loyalty and obedience to the king, or in
this case the Lord of Israel as its king.
The stipulations of the covenant are assumed to be known in this summary in Exodus 19,
and the people give their solemn ascent to the treaty in the words, everything that the
Lord has spoken, we will do, and thereby they put the covenant into effect by their agreement.
The covenant confirms the Lord's status as Israel's national God.
In other words, this is a henotheistic religious culture that is being exposed here, that is
being demonstrated here.
It makes it clear that Israel has chosen to serve the Lord out of all the gods they believe
to exist.
This fact is confirmed by the first of the Lord's commandments in Exodus chapter 20,
verse 2.
You shall have no other gods before, or besides me.
You shall not make for yourself an idol.
You shall not bow down to them and worship them, for I, the Lord your God, am a jealous
God.
That's in chapter 20 of Exodus, verses 4 through 5.
The Lord's jealousy is the jealousy typical of a henotheistic deity.
This Lord alone is to be worshiped by His people among all the gods that exist.
In other words, Israel makes a contract with Hashem because Hashem has already saved from
the power of Egypt and demonstrated the sort of power that He will exercise on their behalf
to protect them and to keep them safe.
Observance of the covenant in this context is the means by which Israel certifies its
allegiance to the Lord, the God of Abraham, the God of Isaac, and the God of Jacob.
And by showing their loyalty and allegiance to the Lord, they bring themselves under the
protection of His power and blessing.
So while it is true that the Lord chooses Abraham and the Lord chooses Israel, it is
also true that Abraham and later Israel choose the Lord.
This fact is fundamental to a proper understanding of their mutual history because Israel lives
in relationship to the Lord and the Lord lives in relationship to Israel throughout its history.
Just as a wandering nomadic people and then later when Israel becomes a nation and finally
an ethnic and a religious community.
Now in our next session, we will consider the development of Israelite religious culture
as Israel changes from a nomadic people to a nation, a nation that struggles to survive
in the political turmoil of the ancient Near East.
