In our last lecture, we talked about religious practices in ancient Egypt, both those of
the official cult and those that reflect popular religion among the common people.
In this lecture, we will conclude our discussion of ancient Egyptian religious culture by looking
at several Egyptian examples of wisdom literature.
Wisdom literature is reflection on the ways of the world and how best to be happy, and
wisdom literature appears not only in ancient Egypt, but also in ancient Mesopotamia and
Syria-Palestine.
We will begin by discussing the general characteristics of wisdom literature, and then continue with
specific examples within the Egyptian tradition.
Generally speaking, the wisdom tradition, or wisdom literature, grants religious status
to the practical experiences of everyday life.
Proverbial wisdom, that is, wisdom based on common experience that is typically expressed
in brief, pithy form, is part of the cultural heritage of all peoples throughout history.
We're all familiar with various forms of proverbs.
These are little maxims that expose one facet of the truth, and sometimes after you've
heard a few of them, you realize they sometimes contradict each other.
For example, we're told that haste makes waste, but he who hesitates is lost.
On the other hand, fools rush in, where angels fear to tread, but on the other hand, faint
heart, never one fair lady.
So this is not necessarily the best way to conduct one's life, but it does offer some
sort of practical insight to specific instances and specific decisions that one makes in
the course of one's life.
On the other hand, the systematic compilation of this sort of proverbial wisdom is a characteristic
feature of parts of the ancient Near East.
We have collections extant not only from Egypt, but from different Mesopotamian cultures,
and there are several instances of wisdom literature in the Hebrew Bible, for example,
the book of Proverbs.
The most extensive collections of wisdom literature, however, come from Egypt, notably a book
called The Teaching of Amen Amopet, which comes from the 2nd millennium BCE, and there
are striking parallels between this book and the biblical book of Proverbs.
Now all wisdom literature was intended to deal pragmatically with life as it is, teaching
how one might best get along in life, how one might be successful, how one might be
happy, and there is an emphasis on practical advice.
So wisdom literature, in one sense, forms a counterpart to creation mythology.
After all, creation mythology explains how things got to be the way they are now.
And wisdom literature offers advice on how best to get along with things being the way
they are now.
So one mythology sets up how the world now works, and the other offers practical advice
on how to get along considering the way the world now works.
As a result, wisdom teaching is anthropocentric.
That is, it is focused on human life and human beings.
The student learns wisdom to achieve a happy life, a successful life, a life that can be
enjoyed to the full.
And this is accomplished by virtue of both wise action, on the one hand, and restriction
of one's desires to what is actually attainable on the other.
Now not only is wisdom literature anthropocentric centered on human beings in human society,
but it is also based on a conviction that there is order in the cosmos.
In other words, that there is a predictable pattern in the ways of nature and in the ways
of humanity.
And wisdom literature offers advice on how to gain control over one's fortunes by exploiting
those predictable patterns in human behavior and in the natural world.
The basis of proverbial wisdom and therefore of wisdom literature is common experience,
the way that most people have experienced and observed life over long periods of time.
This produces a community-based ethic, a community-based way of life that can be learned.
In other words, you can memorize the proverbs and guide your life on the basis of those
proverbs and other aspects of the wisdom literature.
And so in theory, the wisdom of wisdom literature is accessible to everybody, but in reality,
in practice, in fact, wisdom literature was restricted to the literate elite.
This is because the home of wisdom literature was the scribal school, the school where young
boys were taught to read, write, and to calculate with the intention that they could later fill
a position in the royal bureaucracy.
Some sayings are for the most part meant to be memorized, and in order to aid memorization,
their form is inherently poetic, and not only does the poetic form make it easier to memorize,
but it also enhances the content.
In other words, wisdom proverbs provide a message not only by their content, but by their
form of expression.
So when we're told, for example, that early-to-bed and early-to-rise makes a man healthy, wealthy,
and wise, that is not only a bit of information, but it's formed in such a way as to be easily
memorized and therefore at one's command, which in itself is an aspect of the wisdom
that the one who goes early to bed and rises early is able to command.
We often find wisdom literature presented in the context of a father's teaching to his
son.
The older man shares the benefits of his experience with his son to ease the boy's path through
life, allowing the son to benefit from his experience, as we might put it.
Since wisdom literature has its home in the scribal school, a common feature is a contrast
between the deeds and fate of the wise man on the one hand, and the deeds and fate of
the fool on the other.
Now it's important to realize in this contrast between the wise man and the fool that the
fool here is a particular kind of fool.
In other words, we're not here talking about someone who is ignorant, someone who has never
learned the wisdom, we're not talking about somebody who is mentally deficient and therefore
unable to learn the wisdom.
Here the fool represents the person who has learned the wisdom, who knows what is good,
what is practical, but doesn't do it.
In other words, the fool is the person who fails to act on the wisdom that he has learned.
The wise man, by contrast, is the one who has learned the wisdom and follows its dictates,
who has paid attention to his lessons not merely to memorize, but to put their lessons
into action.
So essentially, all of the members of the school who are the students of the wisdom
literature are either potential wise men or potential fools, and the fool and the wise
men are sitting together in the scribal school.
They are both students of wisdom, but the distinction between them is that the wise
man pays attention to what he learns and the fool ignores it and suffers accordingly.
So wisdom literature is directed specifically to its own students, those who are in the
scribal schools who have the capacity to learn the wisdom and presumably the capacity to
follow its advice or to ignore it, the potential wise man or the potential fool.
But there is no concern with the wider world, with those who are mentally deficient, those
who are ignorant, or those who are God forbid women.
Now wisdom literature takes on religious coloring and is often presented in a religious context
because its foundation is a social and natural order of things that are based on the divine
control over creation.
Wisdom literature and wisdom teaching is generally deterministic.
It says do this and this will be the result.
At the same time, it is optimistic because it grants a person a measure of free will,
that is free will to the extent that a person can choose to act in a certain way and thereby
produce particular results.
Generally the primary example of this kind of optimistic determinism is the idea of
retributive justice.
Retributive justice is the principle that there is a balance between what one does and
the result one gets.
It says essentially do good and good will come to you.
Do evil and evil will come to you.
So it is both retributive, it gives back tit for tat, and it is just because it gives
good to the good and evil to the evil.
Now retributive justice may operate in two different ways.
Sometimes it is understood as the direct action of a God rewarding or punishing specific deeds.
But more often it seems to be thought of as an almost mechanistic principle of balance,
that those who do good deeds bring themselves into the realm of blessing and those who do
evil deeds bring themselves into the realm of condemnation.
But in either case there are strains of wisdom teaching that reflect this generally optimistic
form of determinism, but there are also cases where determinism seems to overwhelm optimism.
In many cases it appears the experience of the wisdom teacher leads to a questioning
of any individual person's ability to control all aspects of his or her life.
Or sometimes questions what humanity can really know about what motivates the gods to act
in the way that they do.
So in some wisdom literature the final position is not optimism but resignation, with the
assertion that one should enjoy what one can in life as long as one is able to do so.
Now the wisdom tradition in Egypt represents these general characteristics of wisdom literature
and has expressed these ideas and preserved them in different forms of literature.
We have examples of wisdom literature in Egypt that fall into several different categories
and this tends to indicate both the importance and the variety of the Egyptian wisdom tradition.
For example we have instances where the wisdom literature is instruction from a king to his
son.
Now on the one hand this seems to be one particular example of a father's advice to a son, but
when it is a king advising his son there is a combination.
There is that combination of fatherly advice for wise living with what we might call a
more ruthless political counsel for rulers that sometimes recalls the writings of Nicolò
Machiavelli from the late 15th century.
Then there are the more usual instances of teachings from a father to a son.
But here the subject matter sometimes is fairly diverse, covering a wide range of possibilities
and subjects, and sometimes is rather narrowly focused to make a particular point.
So the entire work is aimed at reinforcing a particular idea.
And there are also instances of wisdom teaching in unexpected forms, and these usually express
that kind of resigned determinism.
They often express the idea of seizing the day, the injunction carpe diem, to enjoy life
as it comes as long as you are able to do so.
The importance of wisdom literature in the Egyptian tradition is clearly indicated by
the fact that the works are carefully attributed to the work of specific individuals.
May not always be the actual author of the work, but there is a clear attribution to
kings and officials and scribes.
While in the other ancient Mediterranean religious cultures works of wisdom literature
are almost always anonymous, and a few cases pseudonymous being attributed to a king who
is not their actual author.
Let me start with an example of an instruction of a king to his son.
And this is a work called the Testament of Eminemhat, which combines elements of parental
instruction, personal justification, and a few plot lines from Shakespeare's Hamlet.
Eminemhat I was the first king of dynasty 12 at the beginning of the Middle Kingdom.
He ruled from about 1938 to 1909 B.C.E., and this probably included a period of a co-regency
with his son Senwosret.
You may recall Eminemhat I and Senwosret from the tale of Sinuwe, which takes place after
the death of Eminemhat and before the accession of Sinuwe Sret.
Eminemhat appears to his son, Sinuwe Sret, after Eminemhat's death.
He has risen as a god before he takes his place in the afterlife with ray.
And he does this both to explain the circumstances of his own death and to give some good fatherly
and kingly advice to his son.
Eminemhat was killed during a palace coup, and he warns Senwosret to be wary of his
underlings.
He says, fill not your heart with brothers, do not know a friend, nurture no intimates.
There is no good in these things.
At rest, trust in your watching heart alone, for none are there to help a man when the
day of trouble dawns.
And then the king recounts highlights of his reign and encourages his son to emulate him.
But the key seems to be keep your own counsel, trust no one but yourself.
Another example of this kind of kingly instruction is the instruction for Marikari, which is
presented as advice from his royal father Keti III, a king of dynasty 10 in the first
intermediate period, which lasted from about 2200 BCE to 1940 BCE.
So Keti III gives instruction to his son, Marikari.
Now this work offers several different kinds of advice and meditation, and combines the
pious and the practical with the military and what we might call the politically ruthless.
Keti offers some good advice on how his royal son should conduct himself in his speaking
and in his personal matters in order to commend himself to others and to appear as a good
ruler, and also how he should conduct himself in matters of government.
For example, Keti tells Marikari he should promote the best men without partiality, and
he should do so in recognition of their loyalty to him as king.
He must also be benevolent to his subjects, providing for the orphan and the widow and
others in need.
This advice, of course, also has a religious component, a religious component, since Keti
reminds his son that his eternal destiny depends on how he conducts himself during his life,
both as a man and as a king.
And referring to the location of Osiris' kingdom in the west, Keti says,
So make your home fine in the west, they said.
Raise high your seat in the realm under God, but through care in accomplishing justice,
the hearts of the very gods lean on justice.
And of course, justice here has connotations of maat, of divine balance and harmony, of
which justice is one manifestation.
Then there is some very specific advice from Keti to Marikari on how to govern upper and
lower Egypt, and how to deal with the threat of the peoples of Syria-Palestine.
In reference to the people of Syria-Palestine, Keti says he has been fighting since the time
of Horus.
He cannot conquer, nor can he be conquered.
So apparently you don't mess with the people from Syria-Palestine.
And Keti is particularly ruthless when it comes to dealing with a potential traitor.
He tells his son, destroy him, kill his children, obliterate his name, wipe out his associates,
erase the memory of him and those who serve him.
Very good, very practical, very ruthless political advice.
But in spite of this, Marikari lost his throne to Inyotev I of Dynasty XI.
So good advice, but like so much fatherly advice, as I know from my own situation, it
went unregarded.
Now Egypt also provides an excellent example of wisdom teaching presented as instruction
of a father to a son.
And here the preeminent example is the wisdom of Amenem Opet, which was written probably
between 8,000 and 6,000 BCE.
The author describes his work in this way, Meditations on Good Living, The Guide to Health
and Happiness, and this apparently includes the various regulations for gaining entree
to officials to know how to reply to one who speaks to you to help you enter upon the way
of life to keep you safely while on earth.
Life's complete instruction guide is what it sounds like.
Now this book includes a prologue and about 30 chapters of various links, and then of
course an epilogue.
Most of the teachings in the book have to do with the value of wisdom itself.
In other words, practical advice on how to respect the great on the one hand, but also
to show graciousness and mercy to the lowly.
Advice against taking revenge or quarreling.
Advice about not complaining about one's lot in the world.
The primary values promoted by the wisdom of Eminem Opet are honesty, humility, respect
for the gods and rulers, mercy, generosity, a temperate tongue, and good judgment in choosing
one's friends.
All values that are perennial, very difficult to argue with.
A chapter 28 of the book is typical.
Do not misuse a widow if you find her in the fields, nor fail to set aside your work to
speak with her.
Do not let a stranger pass your beer jug thirsty, refill it time and time again before your friends.
Give love to the god of the ruined and the poor, far exceeding your debt to the eminent.
Now remember that the intended audience is the scribe, and we find this in specific admonitions
to the scribe, whose patron god, of course, is the ibis-headed god Toth.
Do good in order to attain a richer life.
Never dip the reed pen to do wrong.
The beak of the ibis is the finger of the scribe.
Take care that you are worthy of it.
The wisdom of Aminon Opet was a highly influential book in the ancient world, and parts of it
are closely paralleled in the biblical book of Proverbs, specifically chapter 22, verse
17, through chapter 24, verse 34.
Significantly, this is a section of the book of Proverbs referred to as the saints of the
sages.
So there's a subtitle there that seems to be extremely appropriate.
The epilogue of the wisdom of Aminon Opet extols writers and the virtues of their work.
It says, they themselves are dead and gone, but their names are immortal in books, recalling
in some ways the very end of the wisdom book of Ecclesiastes in the Bible.
Now we find much the same point of view, this view about the preeminence and the blessedness
of the situation of the scribe in what we might call a schoolboy text from the Middle
Kingdom, that is from the period between about 1940 to about 1760 BCE.
This particular schoolboy text is about a schoolboy.
It is called the instruction for little peppy on his way to school, and sometimes also subtitled
a satire on the trades.
This is a work that more than any other makes clear that wisdom literature has its proper
home in the scribe's world.
The bulk of the instruction for little peppy on his way to school is a satire on the various
trades of the common people, written of course from the perspective of a scribe in the royal
bureaucracy, and he writes this for his young son who is about to enter a school for scribes
as a way of encouraging him to pay close attention to his studies and to be diligent in his work.
The father, whose name here again is Ketti, warns his son peppy to devote himself to his
studies so he may avoid the kinds of woes suffered by artisans and manual laborers as part of
their daily work.
Ketti in a series of sketches reviews the tribulations of carvers, masons, barbers,
reedcutters, potters, wall builders, carpenters, gardeners, farmers, matmakers, fletchers, that
is men who make arrows, porters, stokers, sandal makers, washermen, fowlers, and fishermen.
In other words, pretty much the full range of manual labor in the ancient Egyptian world,
leaving aside of course the professions of slaves.
What Ketti tells peppy is that the work of such men is invariably crippling, dangerous,
degrading, and smelly.
Not only does their workforcemen contortions that corrupt and disfigure their bodies, but
they are involved with all kinds of terrible conditions and dangers.
They come into contact with filth of all sorts, either when they're washing clothes or when
they're making bricks out of mud or building walls or whatever, or cutting reeds.
And they earn at best only a few poultry pennies, and they lose those pennies soon enough in
royal taxes.
And the real litany of woes, it seems like each of the lives of the artisans and craftsmen
is nothing but a prolonged hell on earth.
But of course, that's from the point of view of the scribe who's trying to encourage his
son to be diligent in his studies.
So the litany of woes is followed by instruction for the scribe on how to conduct himself and
praise for the skills of writing and speech that the scribe commands after a proper education.
Kedde's disdain for manual labor, his limited perspective on the real world, as we may put
it, and his advice to Pepe are all based on his pride on being a scribe.
He says of the scribe's profession, it is more distinguished than any other occupation,
there is nothing like it upon earth.
Fortunately, of course, modern academics have absolutely no resemblance to this picture.
Despite the scribal origins of wisdom and the scribe-centered world that is reflected
in works like the instruction for little Pepe on his way to school, we find some of the themes
that are familiar from wisdom literature and some of their ideas echoed in other forms
of literature, for example, some poems that are identified as Harper's songs.
These songs reflect uncertainty about the fate of the dead, or perhaps they show a preference
for the joys of the present life to the uncertain pleasures that may await some after death.
One such song was copied in antiquity from the tomb of Pharaoh Inteph, and it reviews
the various fates of all humanity, including both the great and the wise.
And then it gives this advice to enjoy life while it lasts.
So spend your days joyfully, and do not be worried with living.
No man takes his things with him, and none who go can come back again.
So in the inevitable face of death, it is best to be happy in the present time.
Another Harper's song comes from the tomb of an official from dynasty 20, a fellow named
in Herkwaki from about 1160 BCE.
And this Harper's song reflects the and reviews the austere facts of life in a way reminiscent
of the biblical book of Ecclesiastes.
It says, all who come into being as flesh pass on and have since God walked the earth
and young blood mounts to their places.
And the advice too is familiar.
So seize the day, hold holiday, be unwirried, unceasing, alive, you and your own true love.
Let not your heart be troubled during your sojourn on earth, but seize the day as it passes.
These poems that form something of a counterpart, a resigned counterpart to much of wisdom literature,
provide some sense of how wisdom literature coheres with the religious beliefs of ancient
Egypt and then the other religious cultures of the Near East.
Wisdom literature tells the story of an orderly hierarchical creation with the gods above
and humanity in their places below.
Within this divine harmony, this divine economy, integrity and diligence on a part of a human
being can lead to a happy life, but of course that refers specifically to the situation
of the scribe.
The ultimate fate of all human beings, however, lies in the hands of the inscrutable gods.
That may be an occasion for optimism, if you believe in a determinism where one can control
one's own fate to a certain extent by the proper behavior, as the scribal tradition
seems to indicate, or it can lead to a kind of resignation and fatalism, as if all is
in the hands of the gods and all that one has is the present moment to embrace life,
to be in the embrace of one's lover, to enjoy the pleasures that life has to offer.
This is a story that is certainly not unique to Egypt, a story about life and the way it
is for human beings under the command of the gods.
We will see other examples of this same wisdom tradition, and many other aspects of Egyptian
religious culture are parallel to some extent and in different ways in other religious cultures
throughout the ancient Mediterranean world, and as we progress, there will be echoes of
Egyptian religious culture and specifically Egyptian wisdom literature in our ears when
we read and hear the other examples.
So in our next session, we will begin our investigation of the religious culture of
the civilizations of ancient Mesopotamia, the land between the rivers.
