I recently found one of these seeds in my garden which was kind of interesting because it hadn't
come off a tree anywhere nearby but what I love about these seeds is that when you drop them
they spin like a helicopter and float down slowly to the ground. But why do they? Now when I ask
this question I'm not looking for the reason why they spin but instead why does the spinning of the
seed cause it to fall slower than if it wasn't spinning? Here I have a three bladed rotor head,
it's 3d printed and each blade is angled down at five degrees to cause it to spin when dropped
from a high altitude. Now this has a diameter of 60 centimeters and I also have a parachute
with a diameter of 60 centimeters. Now the surface area of this parachute is 10 times
the surface area of those three blades so I also have one more parachute which has the same surface
area as the three blades and what we're going to do is we're going to drop them from this large drone
and see how fast they fall. So let's first give the large parachute a test.
So I do actually get an altitude readout on my transmitter here so here we go test number one
of the large parachute. There we go.
Landing all by itself. So now let's remove the large parachute and bolt on the rotor head and
then we'll drop it from the same height. Oh the parachute's lifted. Okay so it's now at 41 meters
which is basically the same as before. Releasing in three two one.
Hey that's working excellent. Right now I turn to home. The drone is flying itself back
whilst I go and get the rotor head. Right so it seems like we have some damage. That must have hit
the ground at quite a high rpm and obviously just broke at the hub which is where the weakest
point is. Cool so that was a successful test apart from the break of the blade but it floated
down nice and slowly. I have a small feeling that this thing is going to drop like a rock
but I suppose that's what we're here to test out. Why does the spinning of the rotor blade
cause it to fall slower than if it were just a parachute? In three two one.
So the large parachute had the slowest descent rate at about 3.5 meters per second
and the rotor blade hit the ground about six seconds earlier giving an average descent rate of
about 5.5 meters per second. However it did also take almost two seconds for the rotor head to spin
out. Therefore I've done some quick calculations to work out the actual descent rate to be about
four meters per second. So it's faster than the large parachute with the same diameter
however it did fall a lot slower than the smaller parachute with the same surface area
which fell at just over 10 meters per second. So why does the spinning of the rotor blade
cause it to fall slower than if it wasn't spinning? At first it might seem intuitive to assume that
the spinning causes it to act like a disc as if the world of fluid dynamics worked like a long
exposure camera shot but unfortunately fluid dynamics aren't that simple. As the blade rotates
the tip of the blades are traveling a lot faster than the blade part near the hub
due to it traveling a greater distance in the same amount of time. Now because the blade is
falling downwards there is an oncoming air hitting it from underneath but there is also a horizontal
direction to the airflow due to the rotation of the blade. This results in an oncoming airflow
angle looking something like this. Now if we look at the airflow hitting the tip of the blade
it reveals a greater horizontal velocity airflow due to its greater rotational speed which not only
means it's experiencing a greater air speed but also a reduced angle to the oncoming air.
If we label what the lift and drag forces look like we get a resultant force close to
vertically upwards and if we do the same for the center of the blade we get a force angled
slightly forwards. This is essentially how auto gyros work where a center section of the rotor blade
is acting like a wind turbine causing the whole thing to spin and this drives the
outermost section of the rotor blade which is basically a fast moving wing and produces lift.
Okay so that's all well and good but why would you pick a rotor head over a parachute?
Parachutes are far simpler, far lighter and can be packed into a small space before deployment.
Well I'm glad you asked because so did NASA. I found this archive of old footage on the NASA
Langley YouTube channel which I highly recommend you check out if you're interested in all sorts
experimental testing and I found this footage of what looks like a space capsule with an
auto rotating rotor head attached to it. In that same video they were also testing an
interesting parachute known as a vortex ring parachute which is designed to spin once deployed.
I then found this Apogee newsletter which contained information on how to build your own
spinning parachute which apparently has almost twice the coefficient of drag as a regular shoot.
So let's build one. The instructions didn't have exact dimensions but more of a guide to
build your own sized parachute. So I scaled this one to have the exact same surface area
as the large parachute I tested earlier. That way I can test both parachutes to get a comparison.
Right so I now have the conventional parachute with a diameter of 60 centimeters
and I also have the rotary parachute with the same surface area. Okay we're going to start with
the conventional parachute and because it's slightly windier today I've got a slightly heavier
weight to drop from it. Okay that's about 40 meters dropping in three two one
That failed very fast. Right so next up we have the rotary parachute if it doesn't get tangled
itself. Three two one I mean that kind of spins
so it kind of works but I think we need to run the test a few more times
whilst we're here a word from our sponsor. Skillshare offers thousands of inspiring classes
for creative and curious people on topics including design, video, freelancing and more.
Membership gets you unlimited access to thousands of online classes with hands-on projects and
feedback from a large community of other creators. So how about making 2020 a year where you explore
new skills and get lost in the creativity with Skillshare's online classes. I highly recommend
this introduction to aerial videography class as it runs through all the essentials when starting
with drone videography such as safe and legal practices, understanding how to operate a camera
and also how to pre-plan drone flights to get the best shots possible once at location.
Skillshare is also incredibly affordable with an annual subscription working out at less than
$10 per month. Skillshare is supporting this project by offering a two-month free premium
membership so check out the link in the description down below if you want to become a member today.
So this was the best test of the vortex ring parachute that I was able to capture.
Falling with a descent rate of 3.7 meters per second which was less than half the speed of the
regular shoot with the same weight falling at 7.5 meters per second. I think the regular shoot may
have fared better in low winds as it did swing pretty violently probably increased the descent
rate by quite a bit. I really wanted to test the vortex ring parachute a bit more but then this happened.
But I decided to release the weight anyway. Oh that didn't work.
That could have easily taken out this drone. Good job I had a low quality string.
Right I'm covered in mud, the drone's covered in mud and so is the weight.
Also the parachute is destroyed so let's go back inside. In conclusion I think the
vortex ring parachute is a really interesting concept but I also think that there's a reason why
NASA aren't using on their space capsules today. Yes the coefficient of drag is greater for the
same amount of material used however in the end a recovery system has to be reliable. If you enjoyed
this video it'd be great if you could leave a thumbs up down below if you're new to my channel
and want to see other projects similar to this please click subscribe down below and a huge
thanks to all of my supporters over on patreon.com for making these videos possible. Also a quick
update if you're already subscribed to me you'll notice that this video isn't uploaded on Friday
like they usually are and that's just because I'm switching things up a little. Also I've created
a second channel which thanks to everyone over on Twitter was voted the highest name to be Tim
Station which may be subject to change and on that channel I'm just going to upload slightly less
effort content. I'm probably going to make some short videos and very soon actually I want to
make a video on this drone because I built this drone from scratch it's all CNC cut on my CNC mill
and quite a few people have been asking after my Dan Buster's video where I got the drone from
so I may make a short video on more information about this so if you want to go check out my
second channel click the icon either here or here wherever and yeah thanks once again for
watching I'll see you in the next video goodbye
