.
This man, even though using a hammer and chisel, is working carefully to free several large
leg bones from the rock-like material around them.
He's being careful because these are not just any bones.
They are the fossilized remains of a dinosaur that lived more than 200 million years ago.
In the United States, this kind of work usually takes place in the western deserts, where
many dinosaur fossils can be found.
But this is Manhattan.
They are removing bones from the concrete base of an exhibit at the American Museum
of Natural History.
In fact, workers are dismantling all the skeletons in the hall, and scientists who study fossils
called paleontologists will soon put them back together in different ways.
Why is the museum going to all this trouble?
Is it just to set up old bones in newer, more fashionable displays?
Hardly.
These exhibits were first assembled at the turn of the century, soon after many of these
fossils were discovered.
The bones were put together according to the best information paleontologists had at the
time.
But since then, researchers have learned a great deal more about extinct plants and animals.
The new information has led to surprising changes in the way we think about these ancient
creatures.
This fellow, called Apatosaurus, will have his skull removed so a different one can be
mounted in its place.
The skull mix-up goes back to 1879, when the first complete fossil of this dinosaur was
found.
Complete that is, except for its skull.
Searching for a likely skull to complete the specimen, paleontologists mistakenly chose
the head of a different type of dinosaur.
Only when new fossils were found did they realize their mistake.
Now the head must be changed.
New discoveries are always shaking up scientists' ideas, and they're always looking back at
old theories to rethink them in the light of new information.
No matter how much work scientists have done in the past, they always have more to do as
our knowledge of the world expands.
Major museums frequently update their exhibits to keep up with changing views.
But where do these new ideas in science come from?
Sometimes they're the result of fresh discoveries, but often they come from scientists who take
a new look at old information.
Niles Eldridge is one such scientist.
His work has led to major changes in the way most researchers think about evolution.
To understand why Eldridge's work is so important, we need to glance back at the history of evolutionary
theory.
Modern views of evolution date back to Charles Darwin.
During his studies, he saw how animal breeders, such as those who worked with fancy pigeons,
could produce a wide variety of different-looking animals through selective breeding.
After years of studying both fossils and living organisms, Darwin proposed that a similar
process was responsible for the incredible diversity of plants and animals in the natural
world, like the hundreds of beetle species he discovered in South America.
That process he called natural selection.
According to Darwin and most biologists since his time, today's plants and animals have
all come about through a long, slow process.
This illustration of horse evolution, for example, represents the traditional view that
slow, steady change through time gradually transformed the ancient dawn horse into the
creature we know today.
Niles Eldridge decided to look for evidence of this gradual change in the fossil record,
but he decided not to study fossils of large extinct animals, such as horses and dinosaurs,
for two reasons.
First, complete fossils of large extinct animals are rare.
And second, those fossils are often found in jumbled bone piles, such as this one.
As the Apatosaurus story tells us, it's often difficult to piece these jigsaw puzzles together
properly.
Eldridge decided to work with extinct relatives of crabs and shrimp called trilobites.
They lived in the ancient seas that once covered most of the central and southern United States.
For each complete dinosaur unearthed, researchers can uncover thousands of these smaller fossils.
This allows them to study populations in great detail.
With so many complete fossils to study, it's more likely that researchers will be able
to spot small changes.
By comparing a great many fossils in this way, Eldridge hoped to uncover evidence of
gradual evolutionary change over time.
So I set out, I went out with my brother, I went out with my wife at various times and
drove all over the Midwest, it was an education unto itself, and collected fossils wherever
we could using guidebooks and so forth, finding our own places.
And I started to realize that all of the fossils I was collecting, whether it was in New York
or in Iowa or wherever, and whatever part of time I was in the lowest, earliest parts
of time or six million years later, up near the end of the history of the species, they
all looked the same to me.
And at first I put that down to inexperience.
I thought, well, I'm not working actually under a trilobite expert, maybe I just am
not good enough to see the obvious changes that are here.
And I remember one day it was particularly horrible because I was back at the museum
and I saw some specimens from Germany, and I couldn't tell them apart from my specimens
from the American Midwest, so I said, oh, this is awful, and maybe if I can make lots of measurements
and use the computer, we did a lot of mathematical treatment of these things, I'll find out some
results, I'll get some positive results.
I was desperate to get positive results because I was doing a PhD thesis.
The whole objective of a PhD thesis is to demonstrate that you know how to frame a scientific
study and to carry it out successfully, and here I was a failure because after collecting
for one summer coming back and looking at the fossils for a whole year and then going
out in the summer again and finding no evidence of change whatsoever, I could only see that
as a failure.
Finally, Eldridge spotted an important clue.
He discovered two different patterns in the eyes of his specimens.
One pattern he found in some parts of the country, and the second pattern in other places,
and in a cow pasture in upstate New York, he found specimens that bridged the gap.
I got a pattern of change and a pattern of distribution, I could see that they were acting
as though they were different species, closely related species, but they were different, and
that there had been some change, finally, you know, in this eight million year period
of time.
Finally, there was something to talk about, and I realized, though, that the pattern did
not conform to what I was initially looking for, which was what Darwin told us we ought
to find, which was that as you go through time, you're going to get this progressive
change very slowly accumulating through time.
Evolutionary biologist Stephen J. Gould explains why these data were so puzzling.
One was that evolution was defined by most paleontologists, at least in terms of what
you might see in the fossil record, as finding a series of fossils arranged in a time sequence
that is up a hillside, for example, through a set of sediments where you would get imperceptibly
gradual change, little by little, that you'd find a brachyopod or a clam or some kind of
animal in the oldest rocks, and then as you went to younger and younger rocks, they'd
get a little bit bigger or a little bit ribbier, gradually and imperceptibly, a tiny bit by
a tiny bit in each younger rock, paleontologists also knew that you never found that or hardly
ever found it.
In fact, what you'd usually find in the fossil record is one form that was pretty stable,
and it would have a range that often existed for millions of years, and then you'd get
another form that you could say was its descendant that had evolved from it, and it would be
different, and it would be different immediately when you first found it, and its difference
from its ancestor wouldn't increase, it would also be stable up the sequence of rocks.
The big signal here is that once a species appears, it tends to persist for millions
of years without showing much change, or maybe a little variation here and there, but not
a great deal of change, it's a tremendous amount of stability, so I had grown up thinking
that evolution, given eight million years and a complex anatomy, would be inevitable
that you'd find change, and what I was finding out was there was almost no change at all,
and such change that there was was fairly trivial, so that's tremendous stability.
That was interesting.
Not predicted either by Darwin, although he knew about the phenomenon, but he sort of
brushed it aside, but certainly not predicted by modern genetics, which is the core of modern
evolutionary theory.
Working together, Eldridge and Gould called their new pattern punctuated equilibria.
Punctuated equilibria refers to this pattern that we have of tremendous stability, of non-change
of species once they first appear, they tend to go on with these invertebrates for five
or ten, even fifteen million years without showing much evolutionary change, that's the
equilibrium part of it, and when you do get evolutionary change, it tends to be concentrated
in these splitting events when one species will diverge off from another, and that will
happen perhaps in five or fifty thousand or even a hundred thousand years of time, it
doesn't take a great deal of time for that divergence to happen, so that's the punctuation.
The traditional picture of horse evolution helps us see how thinking about evolution
has changed.
The old view assumes that each ancient horse species evolved into a later one slowly and
gradually, forming this simple evolutionary tree.
This more recent view shows that species are now thought to stay the same for longer periods
of time.
Also, when new species are produced, they tend to be produced by sudden branching, making
more of a bush than a tree.
Professor Gould explains why this is important.
People say if humans evolved from apes, why are apes still around?
So that's a disproof of evolution, now that's a perfectly ridiculous statement because evolution
is a branching process, of course apes can still be around and humans evolved from some
kind of ape, because apes didn't turn all over the world into humans, one population
of apes branched off from others, the others survived and that branch eventually evolves
into humans.
As these researchers all know, science is always changing.
It's important to understand that change doesn't make science wrong and that debate
about how evolution works does not question the fact that evolution has occurred.
After all, if scientists decide to debate the meaning of gravity, which happened when
Einstein developed a theory different from Newton's, apples didn't stop falling while
that debate was going on, pending the outcome, the facts of the world keep going, the explanations
are widely debated.
Now science is at its healthiest when it's engaged in good, fruitful and exciting debates
about theories, especially when those debates are based upon the common understanding and
acceptance of the factual information, that's what's happened with evolution, all scientists
are perfectly content with the factual character of evolution and we're struggling to understand
how it happens.
So the apples fall but we're arguing about why.
But we are always trying to sharpen up our connection, our pictures that we're drawing,
trying to relate the history of life or pictures or images of what the patterns of the history
of life were like with our notions of what causes these patterns, how life actually evolves
and naturally we have learned more things and we have changed our perspective.
We see that Darwin wasn't entirely right about everything but that would be terrible
because we would have nothing to do.
Science is a constant learning process of new ideas and discoveries.
Our knowledge of how the world works improves.
We know that plants and animals evolved and we have a number of ideas about how this happened.
The theory of punctuated equilibria suggests that rather than changing gradually and slowly,
things change rapidly after remaining stable for long periods of time.
Our understanding of the past has deepened even though new surprises will always await.
