Listen, it's wonderful to see you all, all 334 and rising. I'm Jonathan Rison. I'm chief
executive and co-founder of Perspectiva, who are putting on tonight's event. We're also
very proud publishers of Ian's most recent book, The Matter With Things. I'm going to
work on the assumption that you know Ian pretty well, but he is as well as a now quite famous
author and I use quite there more in the North American sense of very rather than the sort
of British sense of not so much. Really, you know, very much famous and celebrated writer
and thinker with an increasingly international reputation. So it's no wonder that so many
of you are here to see him.
Tonight we're going to carry on our series called Attention as a Moral Act. And we've
spoken already in the first session about what we meant by that. We might sort of reiterate
it a little bit tonight. Some of you may know the first session was between Ian and I. We
were sort of trying to reassert, reaffirm, reestablish the nature of Ian's most fundamental
argument. We spoke a little bit about my own take on it, calling it the McGilchrist manoeuvre.
And we tried to establish what that was. And we just more generally sort of updated ourselves
prior to the plunge into the more specific aspects of the book. In the second session,
we spoke with Zachary Stein, who had an amazing conversation with Ian about value as a fundamental
feature of the cosmos. It was a very richly metaphysical, somewhat spiritual, fundamental
conversation about the nature of reality. And we've had a great deal of positive feedback
about it since. As some of you may know, in between our sessions, we also have bi-weekly
connection and inquiry sessions, which are run by Michael and Lee, my colleagues. And
so if you have questions or you want to have further conversations, you're welcome to just
go to those events. And they're quite informal and you have a chance to reflect and do some
practices and get to know the work a bit more deeply. Tonight we have an unusual situation,
which is that earlier today, I was in touch with Benita Roy, whom I've known for quite
some time. And she gave me chapter and verse on how she's prepared for this evening's event.
And she will be joining us very shortly. For some reason, we can't currently contact her.
And we're waiting for her to arrive. So I'm going to briefly introduce her. I hope that
she shows up. And if she doesn't show up, I'm going to begin speaking to Ian myself, partly
based on Benita's notes. But it's just a matter of time until she shows up, because we have
now reminded her. And my only assumption is that she may have got the time zone conversion
mixed up because of some daylight saving time change, which we thought we were on top of,
but evidently not. So give us a few minutes as she manifests herself. Benita, many of you
will know already, but many of you may not. And she's really a rather extraordinary human
being with a multitude of different character traits, skills, assets, interests. It's quite rare
for someone to get deeply into metaphysical philosophy. And by that, I don't mean so much
the metaphysical and the sort of new age sort of irrational kind of philosophy. I mean, more
profoundly in engagement with metaphysics as it's studied in classical philosophy and in
analytic philosophy. And she's written papers on why metaphysics matters. She wrote one of the
one of the most profound chapters in a book released by Perspectiva Press called Dispatches
from a Time Between Worlds. And it was about the idea of metamorphosis. And a lot of Benita's work
is about emphasizing not just the kind of how we have to improve things, but also a little bit
of how we have to allow things to end. Michael, are you showing me signs of life there? Or am I
imagining it? I'm imagining it. Okay. So Benita is also a horse trainer, a farmer. And like Ian,
she describes herself as a Taoist. One of my favorite conversations with her was when she
spoke about the enormous tomatoes that she had in her farm after using some new unsuspecting
variety of manures to make them grow. But she'll switch from that to speaking about
whitehead and heart short and so on. So Benita is a rather extraordinary person and I'm very
much hoping she'll join us in just a second. I'm just noticing I have a problem with my battery.
So if I disappear too, Michael, you'll have to take it up. I think I've got it covered,
but just a second. So I want to start Ian with a question that Bonnie was going to ask you.
She had something else to say first, but I'll let her say that because it's very personal to her.
She was very interested in your subtitle. She wants to understand a little bit more about
after the matter with things, which you might want to remind us why you chose that title.
More precisely the subtitle, our brains, our delusions, and the unmaking of the world. And I
know it took you quite a while to come up with that. But if you can share anything about why exactly
those words and what you're getting at, I know that's one thing Bonnie wanted to ask you.
Well, of course, in choosing the title in the matter with things, I was addressing myself
to the idea that we often have problems understanding elements of our experience because
we thingify them. We see them as things and in essence, many of the things that we think of in
this way, I think a better thought of as adverbs probably, in other words, they are not elements
that we have to pin down or we can find in certain places, but they are ways in which we relate
to everything else that exists. And so the idea would be that you don't look for an entity,
but a web of relationships that allows what this entity is thought to refer to to become real.
It's always a reverberative relationship. And why I chose the subtitle is, of course, it has a
kind of glancing nod towards the subtitle of the master and his emissary. But what I'm talking
about there is that I believe that we've started to use our brains in a particularly limited way.
When I say started, I think we've been doing it now for a couple of hundred years at least,
in which we disattend to whatever it is the right hemisphere is able to tell us and instead
focus on what the left hemisphere would have us believe. And the delusions comes from, as I
demonstrate in the first nine chapters of the book, which are all dedicated to neuroscience.
And it's more fascinating, I hope, than that makes it sound. It's not abstract. It's looking
at what actually happens to people and their lives and their world and their whole way of being
when part of their brain is not functioning correctly. And this may be because of an injury
to the right hemisphere or a stroke in the right hemisphere. But it may also be because of
developing a disease such as schizophrenia, which has many, many, many parallels with a
right hemisphere deficit state. And I go into all of that in that chapter. And the left hemisphere
is literally deluded. And that's not just me who says that. I mean, I'm very happy to quote
other, and I do other neuroscientists who say, yes, the left hemisphere is on its own deluded.
Sorry, Jonathan, are you just just for a point of clarification, because the word delusion is
used a lot. And I know you're very precise with your words. It's one of the reasons people love
your words much. And what exactly is a delusion? I mean, as opposed to an unreality and illusion
and lots of other concepts around it, what makes a delusion a delusion as such?
Well, I think that the standard definition is something like an incorrigible false belief
that is not explained by the person's culture or other context. So, you know, there are things
that we would call unexplained false beliefs, but they're part of somebody's religion. And
it doesn't mean that they've become crazy. It means that because of belonging to that religion,
that's the way they think, for example. And so it's got to be something, and it's not just
false, but it is in this sense incorrigible. Because there are false beliefs, which can be
corrected. But in the case of a delusion, it is pointless arguing with somebody about it, because
you're relying on a shared way of seeing the world, that is, as it were yours and mine,
and the patient's in order to explain to the patient that this cannot be the case.
But you've got to remember that for the patient, the whole world that they are experiencing is
based on this certain way of, that certain disposition towards it, this way of experiencing it.
And so it's a very obvious and common observation that however bizarre a delusion is,
it is absolutely fruitless trying to argue with the patient about whether this is evidentially
likely. And also, there's a sort of gray area where, for example, you may believe that your
spouse is unfaithful to you, and your spouse may be being unfaithful to you. But there is
still a delusional way of believing it, because you believe it not in the way that somebody would
normally frame this, but you believe it with a sort of determination and on the basis of evidence
that other people would not consider a reasonable basis for making decisions. So there's no very,
very clear way of putting it. But when you meet somebody who's deluded, you sure know what you're
encountering. And I believe that we as a society have started to believe obviously false things
about ourselves that experience, intuition, the business of living, would tell us must be false
and have always been seen by people as false, but we now believe them to be the case. So that's
that bit about the delusions and the unmaking. Joe, before you get to the unmaking, I just want to
get the delusions very clear, because again, as with last week, or two weeks ago, when we had the
necessary, but sometimes confusing, a lesion between value and values.
With delusion and delusions, I'm just curious, you're speaking in the subtitle about
particular delusions that you outline in those chapters that you mentioned. But there's also
something you say about shared reality here. So I'm just wondering the relationship between
particular delusions, which might make it difficult for people to interact in a shared
reality, and the idea that the whole perception that shared is somehow deluded. And what it's
like, are we living in both of those kinds of delusion? Or, and if so, what's the relationship
between them? And if you don't mind while you answer that, I have to go and get another charger
for my computer or they will disappear. So I'm still with you and I'm turning off my video,
and I'll be back. So make it a long, good answer. I'll be back in two minutes.
Okay, I'll do my best. Yes, I see the distinction that Jonathan's making there.
And, you know, for example, if we are as a whole society seeing things in a certain way,
is this still delusional since part of the idea of delusion is believing something that cannot be
explained by your societal beliefs? And I suppose this is a very new situation. I don't think there's
been an example in the past, where a whole society has been in the grip of ways of thinking that are
frankly delusional, and like those that are held by patients with major psychoses who are
out of touch with reality. And so this, this is a new era that we've entered where,
as it were, there is a mass psychosis. And I don't think I'm the only person actually who's used
that conception of a mass psychosis. But what we see is that, for example, people with delusions
based on the fact that they have got a psychotic illness will find many things
apparent that we would not think apparent and make things that we do see apparent as completely
probable or impossible. And I could go back to chapter nine, which is the chapter in which I do
look at schizophrenia, but just illuminate the, I don't know, possibly I would say about 30 different
ways in which people with schizophrenia demonstrate the same sorts of aberrational thinking that we do.
And one thing that's interesting about this is that it, I mean, a lot of it, one might think
is because we're interacting with machines. People with schizophrenia see themselves as machines
often and call themselves machines and have been known to do things like cut open their
wrists to see whether there's blood or engine oil in their veins. So they can often have this very
disturbing feeling that nothing is right. It's all mechanical. It's all abstracted engineering
rather than anything embodied. Sorry. I put my hand up because I've got an email notification
from our esteemed guest that she's waiting to be let in. Yeah. Oh, good. Yeah, I just want to say
Hey, so here we go. You've managed to bring fabulous. Yeah. And I'm just gonna bring it up
to speed then and let you take over from there. Hi, Bonnie. Nice to see you. Are you with us?
I am. Sorry. I'm so sorry about my tardiness. No, that's okay. That's okay.
Good to have you with us. You may not, I know you've been in touch with Ian by email, but
nice to introduce you. I'll be in front of 300 odd people. So, you know, I've spoken with many
times and I think you'll know, Bonnie, I've already introduced you to some extent to the audience.
What I didn't mention is that over the last year or so, you've maybe more than a year now, you've
created something with a lovely fetching straightforward title, a pop-up school. And
just briefly tell us what a pop-up, what your pop-up school is so that before we get into the
discussion, people get a better sense of where you're coming from. Well, hi, Ian. Nice to see you.
Hello, Bonnie. So, for almost 15 years, I taught a master's course in consciousness studies and
transpersonal psychology or transformational psychology, which we called it at the end.
And COVID pretty much was the straw that broke the back for that program, which was always kind
of an off-broadway struggling private program. And so, I graduated my last cohort in August of 2022
and in August of 2021, kind of anticipating the end of that, I wanted to offer something similar
that was equally robust that could speak to what people were starving for, but had a much lower
onboarding threshold. So, instead of paying $17,000 a year, you could pay like $40 a month. And I
kind of modified sub-stack so people could enroll on and off or enroll on a yearly basis. And I
called it the pop-up school because in Zach Stein, whom you met a couple of weeks ago, Ian, in his
book, he predicted that schools might be these little pop-up initiatives. And I wanted to give
it this sense of like serial learning, like you could pop in and pop out. And yeah, so it's been
almost two years now and it's quite a growing, growing community. And I suspect there's several
of the students or our community on this call today. Okay, great. Well, I'm glad to hear it.
And, Bonnie, while you're getting settled, just as far as I understand it, where we were in the
conversation was, I didn't say anything about your observations about the book, but I did use your
email from this morning to ask Ian about the subtitle. And so, we spoke a little bit about
why the matter with things. We spoke a little bit about brains, which could be somewhat self-evident.
We spoke a little bit about delusions and the difference between delusion sort of
singular and delusions plural and individual and collective delusions, but only really
scratched the surface of that. And Ian was just about to come on to the unmaking of the world
when various things kicked off, including my computer running out of battery. So, Ian, if you
want to finish that thought on why the unmaking of the world allowed me to get settled and once
you finish that, I'm happy to disappear until the Q&A. So, if you can go on the unmaking of the
world, Michael, you can allow me to disappear. Yes. And then you carry on talking together
and I'll be back with the Q&A in about 50 minutes.
Yes, what I wanted to indicate by the phrase the unmaking of the world is that the various habits
of mind that I believe are toxic, which we've adopted more in the last few decades, but certainly
going back further than that, the last century or two, lead to us no longer having a world. And
a world is a very special thing. If you like to put it that way, it's an experience really,
like all the things I talk about, that it's not really a thing. But it's a place in which we
dwell. It's a home. It's a living thing. And therefore, in schematizing, mechanizing, abstracting,
decontextualizing, ignoring the uniqueness of individual cases, in ordering, ignoring the
individual uniqueness of people, we have come to inhabit an enormously impoverished version
of what that world should be. We're in a sort of lost place, which has none of the
feel of a living, vibrant world in which we are committed, orientated, and find a place of being.
That's really what I was getting at. Yeah, so thank you. When I read that, I was struck by,
I just had this impression, you put a lot of thought into the subtitle, and that it was very,
it was a more poignant message, maybe, than a lot of people might think about at first. And
something that strikes me as being of grave concern, I think there's a lot at stake. I think you
would agree that there's a lot at stake. And I think sometimes people think, they take you
seriously, but they think it's like a metaphor. And I think that it's more than a metaphor. It's
more than a passing concern. It's more than almost a sci-fi movie, let's say. Some people with all
these crises go into their consciousness like it's almost a sci-fi movie. It makes us nervous, but
I think that, like for me, a lot of what you're talking about, I see every day. I've seen the
erosion of the adult mind through the 15 years that I've been doing teaching. And, you know, of
course, my course selects some people who have maybe a little bit of spiritual emergencies and
stuff, but the nature of the question of whether reality is real is extraordinary now. And these
programs that people go to, that question whether we share the same world or we all have different
worlds, you know? There's this, and I know the sense in which we all live in our own perspective,
but the emphasis is always on that the world is a simulation, that we share different worlds,
like the sense that the humanities and the science are teaching this extraordinary
fragmentation, I call it locked-in syndrome, that we can't perceive the world really.
And my question for you is where is the fever? Why are we so feverishly trying to convince ourselves
that we live in a simulation? I mean, where is that pain coming from? That we don't want to live in,
let's say, the natural world?
Gosh, there's so many things to say about that. Well, one is that the natural world imposes limits
on us, like we die and we have bodies that have certain inclinations and so on. We're busy trying
to pretend that none of this is true and we can remake everything according to our whim,
but that is not the case. And in fact, the limits that are imposed by life are extremely healthful
and important. It's a mistake to think that we ought to be railing against them and trying to
get rid of them in my view. But of course, like everything, it's a matter of degree. Nature is
something that medicine has always interfered with. Nature tries to overcome some of the
unnecessarily adverse effects of disease and so forth. So we are always juggling these things.
I think another reason why we're addicted to this idea of a representation is because
the left hemisphere is a representation of the world. The right hemisphere has
a presencing of the world. It allows the world to presence to us. That is a vibrant two-way
experience. But once it is taken up by the left hemisphere, it is dislocated, dismembered,
analyzed, categorized, and turned into something abstract, a map of the world. And you cannot
live in a map. You've unmade the world once you do that. But the left hemisphere can only trust
the things that itself has made. Heidegger actually said that he was, of course, not talking about
hemispheres at all. But he did say that modern man needs to be able to tell himself that he is the
giver to himself of everything that he has. And that is part of this problem that we have,
that we must be the all-powerful and we must be the one that can do anything. This is extraordinary
in a way because, you know, for decades I've been puzzled by the kind of paradox that at the same
time we believe ourselves to be capable of doing almost anything we want to,
and believe ourselves to be basically pointless, worthless. So the dignity of humanity has hugely
plummeted, and so is its happiness and its sense of longing and everything else, at the same time
that our hubris about humanity has gone through the roof. So adopting a certain degree of
modesty and a sense of proper limits to what we can do and what we can know would actually
perhaps help us to regain a sense of respect for what we in fact are and what we can do. But
those would be some of the thoughts I'd have about why that is so promoted. And I'm afraid it
is very much promoted, and I just like to say that there are a number of philosophers quite
amongst the foremost at the moment is Donald Hoffman, who says that what we see is a readout
of an instrument panel. This is an idea that has been offered many times in the past and was really
in Damasio's early work as well, for which I criticised him and for which he hasn't forgiven me.
But this idea that actually what we're doing is reading out something,
which is what the left hemisphere does, but in fact we're experiencing something real. There are
things in the cosmos that correspond to all those things that we perceive and value.
Now I'm not saying that there's only one way of seeing them, but once again in our culture what
we've done is we've taken a partial truth and made it the whole story. So it is true that everyone
to some extent sees the world differently and that's an important and beautiful fact. But
it is also a very important and beautiful fact that generally speaking we see things in a common
world. We don't all live in so vastly different worlds that we have no common ground. And at
the moment there's a general tendency to say that if something is the case up to a degree,
which wasn't thought to be so perhaps recently, then it's true to the max across the board. We go
to extremes. We have black and white positions and I'd like to present myself as a photo of
black and white positions. It's very important that there are masses of degree and things that are
implicit and not fully made explicit.
You know so you said that you know we kind of have this hubris that we imagine ourselves
are all powerful, that all the gifts we have we've made ourselves. And it seems to me that
there's a pickle in this because somehow deep down inside we do know that we haven't made the
earth and we haven't made the trees and we haven't made ourselves and everything that we actually are
has been given to us freely by nature through no account of our own. I mean this is more it's
you know people will when I say that they say oh that's very spiritual and I say no it's just a
strong naturalism. It's just actually the case it's rather mundane and for me there's something that
if I thought I was responsible for booting up my enthusiasm every morning I would be overwhelmed
you know. It's like so much of who we are that gives us the possibility to pretend we're all
powerful comes to us through this intelligence that we don't we we don't maybe you know we don't have
you know it's not it's not been it's all given to us and and so it seems to me like the thing I
can't understand is that and I don't know this is seem off topic to you or is this kind of interesting
to talk about. Yeah so I went to a conference the other day and this young man was presenting an
argument that that the world is intelligible and that communication between people is possible
and to do that he took this huge journey through theoretical cognitive science and
opponent processing and and free energy principle and I thought something very odd he's a very nice
man and I thought something very odd is happening here like if if people had to understand all that
to understand that the world is intelligible it's a possibility of communication then most people
would be lost and I thought like I told my dog you have absolutely no no chance at all for being
in the world you know and so this question this crisis of how so this is an example of something
that looked like a well presented presentation but it really was to me a sense of collective madness
and and yeah no well this kind of thing goes on all the time it's just that we've completely lost
any kind of contact with the the live intuitive reverberative business of experiencing the world
in which the world approaches us becomes available to us and we to it and it's in this encounter
that whatever it is that we we we know comes about so what you're describing is this unnecessarily
complex way of approaching it and there's a lot of this in science in which frankly the
extraordinarily opposite is sorry obvious I meant to say extraordinary obvious is is demonstrated
at costly and great length where at the same time oddly there are things that are completely
obvious that are wholly denied and people go around believing them because they think oh well
people say this so I better believe it but I want a bit of the touch of the the little boy who
said the emperor's wearing no clothes yeah I mean I'm sorry guys he's nude
and there's just so much rubbish talk these days and it's very confusing disorientating
to agreeable and leads them to a sense of desperation they don't know what to believe who
to believe what to believe in the intuitive spirituality has been dead and by the way
they've been brought up and by everything they experience in the world their capacity to pay
um continuous sustained vigilant attention open attention respectful attention the sort
of attention that leads to real sense of meaning and or is has been undermined and they've been
told they have thousands of choices that in reality are not helpful and it it's a well-known
fact in in psychological research that beyond a few choices too many choices make people less happy
more stressed than they would have been content with fewer choices so it's not as I'm always saying
it's not an argument for having no choice but it's an argument for saying that choice doesn't
get better and better if you try and say well you can be anything you want you can't I mean
get real it's a horrible fantasy that creates enormous stress and the fear of missing out
and the fear of having failed and the need to do all kinds of incompatible things at once
in order to prove that you're okay it's a horrible world to bring up young people in I mean I I just
feel for young people whose rates of mental illness I was just zooming through the roof
yeah so we do live live in a mad world my master's when you think of young people it's really very
sad and and I've read a statistics that one out of very 16 kids in the United States is diagnosed
with a severe mental illness and whether it's because the DSM has gone mad or the children
gone mad it doesn't really matter it's an alarming alarming fact and you know I talked to sometimes
I coach some young parents and we we we try to teach parents how to have unstructured time with
their children and and I often get the response you know I I blocked out time she she was playing
I was there nothing was happening but I got bored I don't know what to do with my body I don't know
how to put my body in a in play I don't I'm just stiff and I pretend and and and this is all by
way of trying to say to the listeners like it's not a joke and it's not science fiction
and something really disturbing is happening right in front of our eyes
but I thought you know I have this this note here and there's this beautiful word that you use
if I don't know how to say it city if city if say it if say it and you have a quote from sass
in his book about this crucial self sense of self sameness a fundamental and therefore nearly
indescribable experience of existing as a vital and self identity identical subject of experience
and action and and I thought um this is one of these experiences that we can no longer take
for granted that people have any intuition of and so I thought maybe you could if you were talking
to aliens who had had had not this experience what what what is what is that experience
the trouble is that it's not something that's improved by being put into words it's something
that has to be experienced and I take the word it say it largely from louis sass um a very great
mind I think um and what he's talking about there is the natural um unselfconscious awareness of a
continuous functioning self we've so eroded our intuition and we've been encouraged to attack
our intuitions to reject our intuitions that we can no longer act unselfconsciously and this happens
in schizophrenia people say I don't know how to walk I have to think put one foot in front of the
other and so on I don't know how to sit down um or whatever it may be so they've become paralyzed
by a kind of gorgon stare of the intellect on everything they're doing and the beauty of life
is that things work well only when it's not like that imagine um how bad the performance
of a piece of music would be if the pianist was thinking all the time consciously about what he
was doing with his fingers imagine how um how diminished an act of sexual love would be if it
was entirely contrived according to a plan an algorithm or a worked out schema it's this way
of thinking that is absolutely crazy and a huge affliction and makes life impossibly difficult
for us the trouble is that if we adopt a legalistic frame of mind I mean a lot of this comes back to
a sort of legalistic um incorporation of um the redress in the the redress for any kind of
wrong that happens to you is to accuse somebody so nowadays we we we have this sort of idea or
some people seem to have this idea that we're owed a pain-free life and if there's pain there's
suffering things are not good in it there's somebody to blame for that and they must be
brought to account preferably through the law this has a deleterious effect on whole sways
of life where in fact we need to trust and to accept that there will be ups and downs and
things but not to become um you know reaching for our handy attorney at every turn in events
this is the problem and this is why schools find teachers harder to recruit hospitals are finding
doctors harder to recruit because first of all they've been told that unless they follow certain
written procedures they will be vulnerable to being sued and that will completely destroy their
career and and that's you know nothing any longer can be done according to the wonderful way in which
I was taught and it was taught medicine too which was from experience from people who'd had you
know 40 years of experience of whatever it was talking to me from that base of what goes well
and what doesn't and and you know the teachers at school were people who had had an enormous
enthusiasm for things that they had learned to love and they communicated that to me and that's
in itself worth a thousand hours of just following rules and procedures it's this
awful business of rules procedures theories that have overtaken our ability to be naturally responsive
creatures and when we can try to recover that we may be able to get back some of our moral self
because that's also a very important thing isn't it I mean since we have rules about absolutely
everything now I think back to when I was was young and one I mean it's a it's a cliche but one
didn't need to have the same numbers of locks and the cameras watching everything and so on
but on the whole although certainly crime existed it didn't seem to exist on the level that it would
if we now took away all the the locks and the and the cameras that we've since instituted and
there's a sort of belief that if you can get away with it then you're entitled to do so there's no
kind of strong innocence of I would never do this because I'm not that kind of person and I don't
want to live in a world where human beings do this kind of thing that seems to me one of the most
important moral act um stimuli to action I don't want to do this because I don't want to be in a
world where we can assume that people will do this unless some law restrains them from doing it
so we've moved such a terrifically long way from anything intrinsic and spontaneous and intuitive
um to the world of somebody who is unable to stand unless they've got
scaffolding all around them a support and of course such a person is a feeble version of a
healthy living individual yeah and of course that's what you think about that yeah and of
course that scaffolding is actually fragmented right just like this so I was thinking of the
other day we were talking about wisdom like what is it to cultivate wisdom and I was saying that
years ago both of us will use that phrase quite a bit I think um doctor for example could grow
wise in his career right so he would give birth to children he'd watch them grow he put their
help their parents in the dying process he'd be in the community and this kind of embedded
in the community in the local with his expertise um having what I call a voluntary obligation to
his practice um through the thick and thin and the difficulties this is a formula for having wise
people embedded in relationships but a doctor's career is not a formula for wisdom today not at
all it's completely fragmented and they're systematically standardizing things so all the
doctor does is go on the computer and tell you some things are pretty soon you don't need the doctor
and we feel we we've we've slowly redefined intelligence as something machines are good
at and so you see the standardizing of teaching the standards of this is what machines are good at
and now we have you know chat gpt is going to be our teachers because it's better at that than we
are but we've been we've redefined intelligence is what people are good at well we need to redefine
intelligence I mean yeah yes I I mean I I always say AI is not artificial intelligence
it's artificial information processing and that's what it does but intelligence involves
a full understanding and that can only come if you if you are embodied if you have emotions if you
form um relations on the basis of that and if you're aware that you were only here for a while
and are going to die the all these things are very important to making us what we are we need all
these elements including the element of death which is not our foe but in many ways our friend
that's a whole other topic but but I what I'm really saying is that
intelligence isn't is is at risk and I think you're saying this as well um have been replaced
by just very rapidly and mechanically following every kind of pathway that a computer can find
but having no sense of a context in which to properly evaluate these things and and will
fill in things which are absolutely not true on the basis that it looks like in this pattern
this ought to be happening so it actually states that certain things have happened in a person's
life for example based on a probability but they didn't and that person rather specifically
didn't do those things so I mean not only have you got the problem of telling true from false in
educating children and and students who may waste their time and their teacher's time by
using chat gpt to write their essays um but it will also make the the sphere of the law very
difficult our is the evidence fabricated what do we really believe here um can we believe
something we see our politicians saying when you can't believe and you can't trust the civilization
collapses and you know that's this wonderful saying uh Chinese third century is saying um
one of the emperors that for a society for a civilization to thrive you need guns food and
trust and if you have to do away with one of them do away with guns and if you have to do
another one do away with food but the one you cannot do away with this trust and we've done away with it
sorry I hope I haven't depressed you too badly don't you think of something
no no no I I see something good for the end um um and no I think that I what I'm trying to
collaborate with you on is it's really to open people's eyes we know we get so habituated to
the way things are and open people's eyes to see how extraordinarily unmade the world is
I mean we we think we think we have to encounter people who are paranoid schizophrenics to
understand what you're talking about and yet this kind of unmaking of the world
is the world that is being unmade right right in front of our right in front of our very eyes
and um it's the world is an organism it's not a machine and the trouble with the way we think
is that we think it's just a machine and can therefore be reduced to parts and all we find
after you've done this is a lot of of material elements that have been broken out of a hole
and the hole cannot conceivably be reconstructed from these bits these inanimate bits and what I
mean by the unmaking of the world is all that structure all these relationships that enable
things or people and the feelings that they have experiences they have to interrelate with one
another are being shorn away the world view is becoming simpler and simpler and simpler
not because it's approaching truth but because it's moving away from truth it's it's running away to
a blatant falsehood which it feels it can't escape because of a certain way of thinking
which is that the only thing that matters is that we should be able to be in control
and amass material goods those are the values of the left hemisphere and all the other important
values are better served by the right and it's anyway that was what I talked about last week so
we won't go there now I think that another thing that the way to another way to look at it and of
course you've done incredible detail on this is people a lot of times people are let's say their
teachers or educators or their psychiatrists or their spiritual teachers they assume that the
kinds of minds we have is the nature of mind and then they try to work with that or or you know
people will say because our minds are constructing reality and and I always say no that's the kind
of mind we have thinks it's a simulation but what I hear you saying is that this integrated mind
and of course we have to we're off balance so we're going to emphasize what the what we've lost
with the right brain a contribution this kind of mind looks at nature and sees home and and and
moves around the world and sees that every act of life is a gift from nature from my home from
where I've become this kind of mind trusts that there's such a larger intelligence that an envelopes
envelopes all of us and that's like a tissue from which we dialogue is possible you know the left
hemisphere like the difference between concepts as you know you hold your baby like this and it's
right hemisphere to right hemisphere and yet we're talking at odds like we think that if we can come
to some conceptually agreed upon solution then there's a possibility of a communication and I'm
saying that like because we our bodies are inhabit the tissue of the living world then this is why
this communication is possible not because it's an effort in this direction it should be a joy in
this direction and and yeah I I totally agree with that and I think you know the phrase constructing
the world is very important because it's a fashionable conception has been since the 60s
that effectively we make up the world according to you know who we are then what we what we want
but I reject this idea that we fabricate it because that is dependent on this idea that
we are cut off from any kind of reality and that all we have are the bits that come to us in our
in our mind and we put together a world out of those but that is not in my view the case because
we do have contact with something beyond ourselves and unless you tell yourself that that cannot be
and cut yourself off from it in which case of course you won't find that there is anything
beyond yourself if you don't do that but cultivate a kind of humble awareness of things that are far
beyond what we know right now you start to feel experience those things they start to to give
something with which to build the world and so it's not a fabrication or a construction of the
world it's a helping to bring into being something that is there to bring it more into being and
we play a part in that and so the world comes about for each of us in a slightly different way
because if each of us brings something different to it but this is wonderful it's not a negation
of the idea that there is a common core to the world it's the idea that each person's contribution
brings a slightly different uniqueness to an aspect of the world we still have something
that is vibrant living evolving it's not a finished product it's a thing that is in process
as we ourselves are in process and that process is a resonant thing between our consciousness
and whatever the rest of the conscious cosmos gives that's my my view of it so instead of
saying that we construct the world we make it up in some mechanistic engineering way which
is exactly how the left hemisphere we would think was the only possible way we are in fact
if you like midwifing into existence helping to burst something that is natural something
that is nature which is that which is always about to be yeah so i want to move on a little bit and
um there's this notion this philosophical notion which i think is is true and that is that
reason i'm going to use the word reason because rationality is is associated with just like left
brain typically that reason is isomorphic to reality in the sense that there's something about
human reasoning and i'm not just talking about the brain but you can unpack this that is
isomorphic to reality such that there is the possibility for a direct attunement let's say
yes and um
and so that's the first question and if you can speak to that then there's a question just to
build after after that to kind of yes i think that's a wonderful observation and i certainly
believe this and i think i've made it myself and in a way it was what einstein was saying when he
said what is so wonderful and so unexpected is that the world is understandable why should the
world be understandable by our minds and the idea that our minds um
would evolve naturally to understand the world is not necessarily correct it might have adopted
various kind of um entirely false positions for a while um in order to deal with a certain situation
but over time our understanding of the world has increased i mean we i'm not saying that we
most of us in in the modern world are making the best of that fact but there is something heroic
about the degree to which over thousands of years we have come to understand more and more of the world
and the world is um as david deutch says speaking to us in english i mean he means if english is your
natural language why is it that when you approach the world the world speaks to in your own language
which is another way of putting einstein's remark about extraordinary fact and i think what this
gives us is the opportunity to trust what reason tells us not as you say i make this distinction
between it's not really one that's a core english distinction but we have to have two different
words for it one is for simply the following of rules and procedures in the way that computer
would and the other is tempering all that with the wisdom that comes from experience
the understanding of context and so on and so forth in fact what a wise judge would do you know
you're talking about wisdom and wisdom and interestingly judges are being more and more
constrained by mechanical sets of rules and procedures so that they're no longer free
to use um wisdom that they've acquired over an arduous training and and decades of experience
so that's what i say is that these things are naturally resonant and i do also believe the
imagination is like this and unfortunately we haven't got time to go into that enormous topic
of what is imagination but with courage and with shelling and so forth i take the imagination to
be a faculty which enables us to be in touch with reality beyond the things that we can reason about
it's not fantasy which takes us away from reality he makes a very strong distinction
between fantasy and imagination and imagination on the other hand is our one chance of actually
feeling our way into the inside of the world and experiencing it yeah that's that's beautiful
so my last question actually somebody asked me to tag on and that is so we have this notion that
reason is isomorphic with the world so there's a possibility for not only attunement but
yeah for deep mutuality um so the question and then is what is the relationship between
goodness and reason because it's a little hard tricky to say they're isomorphic
um well we're talking in a different way than we were about whether reason is isomorphic with
reality or perhaps even with truth i i distinguish between different kinds of meaning of truth
one being something abstract that we have an analytic past towards and we get closer and
finally we get it and a different one which is a form of attunement of coming together of meeting
of resonating a completely different kind of sense of truth and of course the word truth has
as a core this idea of being true to something of surfaces being true to one another as a carpenter
says or a couple being true to one another if they love one another so it is about a relationship
that is that is truthful and real and goodness um well all i would say is that reason is obviously
another tool that we can use in helping work out what is good but it shouldn't be the only
or the limiting tool because there is very much more to goodness than calculation and one of the
things that um i i write about in chapter 26 i think is the way in which in academe in the west
the philosophy of utilitarianism has more or less ousted every other kind of way of thinking about
what is naturally good and the odd thing is that what is being praised is a way of thinking which
is archetypally not good in moral to always calculate about things is is immoral and often
leads you to um horrible conclusions that it's okay to kill one person in order to um harvest
their organs and give them to five other people awaiting transplants for example so um reason
has a dual aspect as it's there often that it can be extremely helpful but if used in a rigid
fashion it approximates what people who are mentally ill do with it people who have frontal
they've damaged right hemisphere damage who are psychopaths and who have schizophrenia all have
in common that their idea of morality is based on rationalizing calculations whereas i hope that most
of the rest of us see it in a broader sense yeah that was the trick i think now that i now i
understand it thank you very much because what what what was the tension in his question was
in the assumption that goodness is utility right so that he it was like well when i'm
reason when i reason i don't always get the good but i but that was more like he yeah so now i
understand what that tension was but when i reason and i don't get what i want it may be
the good and so then you start to see that there is the potential for more attunement between reason
and the good versus reason and then thinking of the good as a utility especially an ego
referential utility so that was that was very helpful thank you very much i knew there was a
thank you that kind of tension where there's an assumption that is yeah yeah creating the
tension in the question so yeah thank you very much thank you bonnie and um i hope you mind
if i come in yes you could you can uh i'm aware of bonnie that another question might come to you
as you're um you know watching the questions that follow um but i want to give a chance for
the audience to come in now um before that i just want to i want to ask you one question
um about something bonnie alluded to earlier vis-a-vis what's at stake here
um because we don't often flesh this out you know the source of the sense of mattering
um because you know there's a certain intuition about moral acts and our proximity about good
behavior with our peers and then our society and then you get into the health of the planet
you might think about the cosmos you might think about the ultimate nature of reality
you might even wonder about life on other planets and other forms of intelligent life as many do
and i say all of that because i've noticed between the two of you a sort of difference in tenor
um if i can if it's i think it's reasonable to say that in you um although there's you you
offer a great deal of uh emphasis on beauty and love and goodness and there's a great deal of
positivity in your work it's also true that you lament a great deal about the world and there's a
a certain um spirit of let's say melancholy about about how things are turning out and a sort of
urgency to to redirect things and we perceive them as the premise of your work bonnie with us
sense something altogether more chipper at something altogether more kind of lively and
playful and i don't know i don't want to sort of make this too personal but i am just trying to
get at this idea of you know when we what's at stake are we talking about the end of human
habitation on planet earth are we talking about um the capacity to destroy ourselves with
exponential technology are we talking about the intrinsic value of things that will be destroyed
pointlessly can you give me some sense when you this question of what's at stake both of you please
like what's your sense of um why we should care about any of this if i can ask such a
big context question like ultimately at the end of these searches what are we trying to protect
what are we trying to safeguard what is it that actually matters to you both and i think even
years will be more more familiar to people so i'm going to come to bonnie first
it's a great question um so for me i'm trying to say i'm trying to
say don't think what's at stake in the future don't worry about what's coming don't take what
we're saying and and draw it out in a narrative arc and figure out what's going to be left right
we just be with reality right now every single person alive is going to die is that a crisis
it's just just you know what i'm saying if i put it within all the middle crisis and everybody
will die you have a different reality to it if we put it in right here now what's at stake
is every person in this call could be deeply wedded with reality deeply feel belonging to the earth
feel the generosity of having been given a life experience the beauty of the perceptual world
um when you listen to read ian's writing on music
that people don't have those experiences anymore they completely robbed of who people are
the fantastic joy and voyage of being a human being is not present in people's lives
they don't know how to get to it this is what's at stake and in young people
there's a struggle because they haven't yet forgotten something
and um you know used to be when i worked with young adults going through the individuation
stage let's say their problems were like problems with the intergenerational change
between their families different how societies conventions like change now they say things like
when i was seven i felt like i was hooked up to a machine that was sucking out my blood
this is like the the metaphors that seven year olds use like it's so bad now that young people
who are still kind of like organisms and then they don't blame their parents because they're like
their parents are sucked into the machine you know they use these metaphors it's extraordinary how
poignant the lack of world living world is for them and so for me what i think what's at stake is
you know trying to connect with young people make a world for them but right here and now
all the things that you may imagine were possible are possible
as long as you're still a living breathing organism and people don't believe that anymore
thank you bonnie and um it's lovely to hear you say that i've heard you say similar things but
great to hear it again um you know makes me think of the unmaking of the world again are we to
understand that the world is inevitably being unmade that it has to be unmade for it to be
remade or that we're called in some sense to protect what is already made
well i think what i'm saying is is that we are in the process of unmaking the world not
that it has to and not that it can't be reversed or but that we are we're simply unmaking it
and and that's the the predicament we find ourselves in and that's not i can't just to
be clear there's some people who the reason i asked that question in that way is there are
some people who want to tear it all down you know i have met people of persuasion and are they
entirely wrong i mean how how do you see this quite simply anybody who wants to just tear down
a civilization or tear down a world is is crazy foolish arrogant and what we need to do is to
work with what is in fact as i say not a machine but an organism to change the parts that we feel
need to be changed and to respect the wholeness of it and i find myself um after your um perfectly
accurate portrayal of me as a miserable old git i find myself i find myself curiously more um
optimistic perhaps than um bonita in that uh i don't think that people lack all these things
i mean i'm i'm sure she's right that the world is a much less hospitable place than it was for
finding these things for being encouraged to to to nourish oneself on them and we're offering
children a diet of gruel and which is a great shame but but there'll always be people who
will gravitate towards the magnificence of what the you know what there is and who will see life
as you and i i think both see it as an awe-inspiring gift and and that this is a very important
way to be i i often think you know if you say what do we do and this is a famously difficult
question to answer but i was thinking that there would be some value in saying pray
and what i wouldn't mean by that is well the only thing that's left open to us now is to pray
and hope that there's some divine being that will change it all that's not at all what i mean
what i mean is by adopting a devout and awe-filled compassionate vision of the world not striving
to know alter take and all the rest but actually so first of all to understand is in all its awe
inspiring complexity and that if we did that a lot of things would start happening differently
because so much of what's wrong is due to simple hubris the pronouncements of people who
think we can do it all and only a few more tweaks and we'll be able to achieve this that and the
other well this is this is how things get destroyed it's in all the old mythologies
the the arrogant know-it-all upstart who doesn't realize what he's destroying and becomes that
demi-edge that that brings the cosmos to ruin so that that's that's my thinking about that
i'm not surprised though that you ask jonathan so what is it that is worth saving or what is it
that we're trying to save because surely the answer to that is everything that inspires in us love
and beauty and and it speaks to us of all these things that are so life-enhancing i mean you can
live in a world in which everything is is is bleak meaningless pointless i mean you can create
that for yourself but don't kid yourself that that's necessarily the reality you can also live in a
world where you are maximally responsive to what is what is good beautiful and true and and worthy
of our love and respect and and that don't get me wrong good beautiful and true there's a reason
we have three different words they're not interchangeable with one another they sometimes
conflict with one another but nonetheless they have this family relationship with one another
in which all these positives come together they don't have to be mechanically related they don't
they hasn't doesn't have to be an algorithm saying go to beauty then if this then go to good or it
just doesn't work like that i got a lot out of that answer because um you know to be maximally
responsive to the possibility of love or those weren't your words but but but paraphrasing the
idea of being maximally responsive to what is good beautiful and true um is what's at stake in some
sense and also reminds me in one back in the day at one at some seminar or event you were at
i once remember writing something down quickly because the turn of phrase was so beautiful when
you put it you said that life is life is a superfluous gift calling for gratitude and tenderness
and you said it off the bat as if it was one of many lines but i'd love that particular formulation
a superfluous gift calling for gratitude and tenderness with that thought i want to bring in
the others now the the technicalities of what's about to follow are not altogether trivial so
please pay attention and if you have a question you'd like to answer ask and please type it in the
chat while also putting your hand up it's a double whammy we're asking you to do both because it
helps us to find you you might think it's just self-evident but we are we do have a 380 participants
and we can only see them on a relatively small screen a certain number at a time so if you raise
your hand through the reactions icon i believe um or at least one of the icons down below while
simultaneously typing your question um in some cases we'll ask you to speak it in some cases we'll
read it out um also let me say this quite important point um we're very keen to hear from all kinds of
people um that i mean men and women i mean young and old um and so if if you're in any doubt about
answering asking a question um can i particularly encourage you to do so if you're feeling that
you're somewhat uncomfortable or not too sure if you should um we're very keen to get from here from
a wider variety of people as possible and we'll do everything we can to make that happen okay with
that thought in mind i'm going to look at the google doc that michael has helpfully prepared for me
um and i'll take a take one and while you're asked while you're answering i'll look for others
okay um
um the questions so far are very technical um but actually there's one here from jane's van
leuwen which i think is a good one it's a direct message he says um and this comes to the premise
of tonight's talk is there a root mass delusion um is there something is there some i think that
it's i understand the question he's trying to get a um is there something inherent like a premise
or an axiom or a fundamental part of the delusion that we need to take stock of collectively
and if so what is it and that's initially a question for ian while i look through the other questions
well i i suppose that um i would say inevitably that the there is a core
mass delusion which is indoctrination into the vision of the world which is delivered to us by
the left hemisphere untempered or relatively untempered by the right and so which is one
orientated towards um greed gain power i mean effectively it's about power and control
and it's lost intellectual subtlety because the left hemisphere doesn't have much intellectual
subtlety and is literally less intelligent than the right it also has no nowhere near
the understanding of social and emotional matters of intelligence and so inevitably once this
this way of thinking becomes the standard way in which all discourses is carried on in the public
sphere and children are brought up no longer to believe in or take pleasure in all the the beautiful
things that are now associated with the past because we've now moved into this brave new world
where we we have technical machines we don't need to read literature and look at painting and listen
to music and do drama and all the other things or for goodness sake develop some kind of spiritual
sense of something beyond you know that's if we're like that then that is it is a mass delusion
which will lead to great unhappiness conflict and and destruction the destruction of the valuable
that's what i see around me people at loggerheads much more than they were um 30 years ago interestingly
the relationships between all the societal groups that are now so strictly policed and and and
boundaryed and so on have become worse rather than better through this process so anyway there we are
okay thank you bonnie do you have a direct answer to that question or should we take some more
questions i think that um if you want to think of root um causes or or the root problem i think
it's one of fragmentation in alienation at all scales so um the the left hemisphere wants to
analytical analytically reduce something to study it and so it feels fragmented and separated
we feel that matter is different than life and in a kind of alienated way we feel that humans
are separate from nature we feel individualistic we feel our countries are separate and sovereign
so this whole notion i guess the left brain thinks it's separate from the right brain i would say
that the lack and loss of any kind of sense of understanding a deep continuity at all levels
vertical and um vertical dimensions and horizontal dimensions uh could characterize the
the sum total of the problem okay thank you bonnie i'd like to see a question from lisa
maros maroski if i said that correctly lisa you're welcome to ask it yourself but yeah there you go
hi uh thank you for hosting these wonderful talks i've really enjoyed them um the context
for my question um to to both of you is imagine is the imagination so i'm not really looking for
a factual response um but given uh as you've said that the world is an organism
and yet is being unmade uh are there models such as uh the caterpillar becoming butterfly that
uh barbremark's hubbert refers to um that uh you know show us um or could help us understand what is
what is happening to us um help us get through this process of unmaking and remaking um and
and then second to that what might be we what might we be remade into like as the next phase
of evolution um my my own hunch is that endosymbiosis might give us a clue um but not the answer
so so this is an imaginative question thank you very much and bonnie i know you might have an
angle on the butterfly uh caterpillar metaphor from a piece of writing that i'm familiar with
um ian if you have any thoughts initially
well um the the caterpillar butterfly flightings is is extraordinary in in nature and as we know
the butterfly actually has a completely different genome from the caterpillar so what one's seeing
there is a transmogrification what um what i think i'm being asked to do is to say what this
butterfly is going to be like and um how we can bring about its release and and i first of all
what it what it is like i will be extremely cautious in predicting because i do believe
that one of the glories of existence is that things are not determined fully and that we when
we predict the future we are very often wrong so i i i would resist being asked to make any
prediction about that i mean although i have my own hunches which are limited by my imagination
which are that probably some people will survive and will survive by leading much more simple
modest lives closer to nature and closer to one another than our human lives have become
um so i i i don't know quite how to exercise the imagination that you are asking me to exercise
except that i guess that my books are i hope works of an imagination and that i appeal
to many great works of art and literature to illustrate my my drift but i i think i'm not
entirely in tune with the the drift behind that there's a little thrust behind that question
thank you ian and bonnie i want you to answer this because i know you've got a great take on
this but while i'm doing that if celeste flavan could put her hand up please because i want to
take your question but we can't find you um after this but bonnie first of all on uh
caterpillar butterfly and what lies between yeah i'll start with that but i wanted to answer
the question also in a larger context so um we and i think this is a little bit
building on what ian said is that we can't we we shouldn't imagine that the caterpillar
imagines itself to be a butterfly it's much more scary than that right like if we if we
had to voluntarily go through the metamorphosis process without understanding it um that would
truly be an act of imagination um to be to be open and welcome and inviting surprise um but you
said something beautiful you talked about endo i think endo symbiosis and what i wanted to say
is there's many places where people are using their imaginations to thread a different story
through the scientific facts so ian uses scientific facts any any threads a beautiful
story and other people can use the same facts and they'll thread a different story um and so we need
all all science is based on what are called interaction metaphors they're deep metaphorical
um assumptions about the way things are and what we need are people who are uh understand the science
and using it to thread a different story um and so that actually separates i think imagination
from fantasy so that's that's one thing and the work on counterfactuals is very important so
you might say but what if what if the Darwinian attitude of the survival of the fittest
and complex adaptive systems is not true is there a story that threads the same evidence
that is more aligned with goodness truth and beauty so i've done that in writing speculative
philosophy on complex potential states it takes into account everything that the Darwinian attitude
takes into account but it tells a different story so endosymbiosis is one of those great
imaginative things that are emerging in our culture that want to be true to the science
but understand that there's a different story that can thread it and that's a power the
imagination and the other thing i'm going to say that is something that i think is
we should do i see there's a question of education um there's something called empathic projection
and kids do it really well when they're young and that is they imagine what it might be like
to be a pencil and they imagine what it might be like to be an ant and they imagine and in this
experience it's not like fantasy where you go away from the world you enter the spaces in
between the world that you don't understand and this is a valuable exercise in um in becoming
attuned to the reality of things and nature and animals so it's the process of the imagination
it's called empathic projection thank you bonnie i'm just going to get other questions in um
celeste you're welcome to ask it yourself if you're happy to do that i think we find you now
can we hear you i'm not sure we can hear you i can see you but maybe your volume's not on or
what's the shall i just ask it for you are you ready to go yeah okay thumbs up okay i can ask
it for you well thank you celeste it was really a question about poetry i'll i'll it's to do with
precision of language being a kind of antidote i'm going to get the exact wording here um
what celeste asked here we go can language especially that which is used with extraordinary
deliberation and care i.e poetry be an antidote to this wide-scale delusion can we use the tool
that makes us feel tethered to our humaneness to combat feelings of robotic or uninsuitive
existence so you can already see the poet in the question um i'm assuming the answer might be yes
but what's the what's the sort of bigger answer it's very much yes i i would say um
and it's interesting this idea of the carefully considered uh or precise because of course
both here and in science there is this interplay between the the precise and the imaginative which
which means that although in science you're working with something that seems very strict
in its structure in fact the discoveries come through the exercise of intuition and imagination
there's just so many examples of this in the history of mathematics and science and something similar
um could be said of course about poetry but what i was alerted to by your question was the idea
there's a certain sort of precision involved as well and that we need to be precise
as the situation will allow us to be but not a wit more than that
otherwise there is a word that is precisely right because it opens itself to a number of
possibilities being experienced or felt at the same time so the great thing about poetic language
is its ability to be single and multiple at once this is really a theme that should be throughout
everything we've talked about this evening that i feel at some points there was a tendency to say
that you know it's bad that there are individuals um but i'm sure that wasn't what was was was meant
by bonita um but but individuals are terrifically important what's important is that the distinction
and the um um the differences don't imply a severance in fact they imply a something bigger
out of which they come and to which they contribute in turn so it's always this alliance of division
with union of the individuation with togetherness and integration and so i would say that poetry is
an example of this because in poetry we are trying to bring together or not trying but
allowing things that are multiple to come together in our minds in a very clear and
precise way that if you've changed a little bit of it would ruin it so it has a very individual
existence but it arises from a process which is unconscious and which is about the coming together
of the many into the one thank you ian bonita don't have to add to that if you don't want to
but you're welcome to okay i am i know it's a beautiful answer but there's a lot of questions
thank you bonita i'm madalina machado a great question you're welcome to ask it yourself
or give me a thumbs up if you're happy for me to ask it but you're welcome to you i'd rather you
asked it much rather you asked it you can do it yeah so you're unmuted now you're welcome to go ahead
well um i'm i'm actually quoting gregory baitson he says this question what have we here um 400
plus people on a zoom call is this not radically new what sense does it make to speak of what we've
lost does this mostly apply to accidentals and a cosmo vision of domination which is now
eroding is it not about time we learn planetary interdependency for the first time together
as online ancestors because we're all online ancestors this is basically 10 years old
this duality of technology versus life is manachistic nothing on this planet is not natural
there's nothing not natural as spinoza said the 24 years old 400 years ago with the printing press
we began propaganda propaganda pd that was the Vatican now we are in a participatory age for
the first time ever can we give ourselves permission not to know and honestly this is what
i feel bonita is teaching at the pop-up school which i've joined and it has for me for example
i'll just add one little footnote in the two p language in the amazon there's no word for sin
there's no word for temptation there's no word for kingdom i mean what would our language
be languaging had those concepts not you know abducted our capacity to think differently
thank you wow well i would love to ask you some questions medelina another time maybe
but for now ian do you want to respond to that
bonnie you ian if you want to pause for some thought bonnie do you have a more immediate
response yeah because i i think it ties into the previous question on poesis so she so medelina
is saying what would our language be like and i think um you know there's poetic language
is a contemplation on ideas or things that language seems to contradict right so how can
everything already be nature and is nature then destroying itself is nature unmaking the world
is like the question if everything's nature then isn't this just make nature unmaking the world
and i think this kind of tension if you sit with it in a certain way so you so you have
both trust and doubt and belief and skepticism and confidence in the in the intellect the
intelligence of the world and humility then something like poetry comes out and we might
imagine that that's something that shares with earlier languages so i would say that
that's that's how it seemed to me that as the question came up right after the last question
ian i wasn't really quite sure what the question was i i heard that we that we were in a more
positive way we could communicate with one another and so on then there was a sudden remark about
the word sin which by the way not only in the toupee language but also across many parts of
the world there isn't such a word um but what am i supposed to okay if i if i dare give my own
interpretation the reason i chose medellina's question it it actually was it was it reminded
me of a colleague and friend idra adnan who was on a zoom call a bit like this one with several
hundred people from across the world and one of the speakers was lamenting how disconnected we
all are all were how how we've lost connection with each other and she's saying what the hell
are you talking about look at this extraordinary process that we're part of who knows where this
might lead this is the beginning of something amazing and we should all get over ourselves and
stop complaining and start using the technology we have to you know reckon with the no doubt
profound problems we have um but also to trust that something is emerging that's of great value
and promise um and as i understand medellina's question i think she's just using that as a
counterweight to the sense that the things are inevitably collapsing something is also arising
that that is right and if we could find a way of using the interconnecting capacity sparingly
when it is really important and not allowing all the dross that comes with it to drown out the good
then that would be a marvelous thing but i remember when i went to johns hopkins in in 1922
1922 1992 i'm not that in 1992 um we were i was in a in a in a lab um looking at scans
of brains and the head of the department came in and said you guys are great you know work you're
doing is great but you know what we need is more communication and i was already aware that in
england had started this sort of over communicative style and in america it was already a huge problem
people spent so much time um recording communicating and so on that the actual business of what they
were doing got somehow left behind and i said actually what we need is to communicate less
but to communicate when it's really important so i do think this is a i'm not saying this just to be
sort of a bit flippant um there is a huge problem with what technology is doing to our attention
it is it is fighting for our attention which has been monetized and destroying our attention
is destroying our intelligence destroying our capacity to imagine it is degrading at the level
of our experience and the being so this is a worry to me i i love the fact that we're all
here on this call and so it's best to focus on the good bits and um but but there are mighty
problems as well and and and also i'd just like to say in the way that the coincidence of opposites
works is that if there is too much cacophony and too much actually people fall out with one another
and don't actually become closer to one another it's a really difficult one to to call that life
is complex it's not just a simple question of there being more or less communication what is
the quality of that communication is a very important question can i just follow up i think
i think to put it short i think um i think communication like this is neither necessary
nor sufficient for to to stop the unmaking of the world and so when but it can be helpful or it
can be harmful but to think that it's either necessary or sufficient i think is is both of
those are a mistake um and i agree with you and the the the the cost in general is currently
out outweighing the benefit the new the new chipper non-hyperaclitian ian says um well it's
it's not um uh sufficient but it might might be necessary to have these sorts of conversations
but i mean technology technology yeah okay well i i do like the i do like the chipper ian as you
know um listen um there were i can i encourage everyone here to please take a look at the chat
um because there are some mind-blowingly good questions in there and i'm really very grateful
for all of them um back in the day when i worked at the rsa i um i chaired quite a lot of events
and before i started doing that matthew taylor who was the chief executive at the time taught me
that it's always better to end an event leaving people wanting more rather than drag on with
further questions even though there are great questions to come so i'm going to leave leave
you with that thought and end now um i'm very grateful for all the questions that haven't been
aired but they are there in the chat you can write them down we will take note of them they
may come up again i notice some about education about parenting about love great stuff there will
be more there will be another of these events um in two weeks and another two weeks after that and
another two weeks after that watch this space for more information um there's also a connection
and inquiry session as i say um those of those of you on this event will now be signed up the
perspective as mailing list so you will hear from us about all of those things very shortly
but i really want to just thank you all for being there it's been a great attendance
and some lovely questions um and i'm very well particularly grateful to bonita roy for beaming
in from kinetic it to in the go chris of course for beaming in from sky um and i just want to
thank you all for coming and i hope you'll come back and bring your friends so uh with that thought
enjoy the rest of your day or evening and see you again soon take care thank you
