Welcome. Good to be here. Thank you for coming. My name is Jonathan Rousson. I am Director
of Perspectiva and I have known Ian for 12 years, I realized today, and in that time
come to understand his work, I hope, and certainly enjoyed his work and found a great
deal of importance in it, and we're the very proud publishers of The Matter with Things,
which is an extraordinary book over two volumes, and the paperback has just come out officially
today. So tonight's event is partly a way of marking the, I don't know if it's still a launch
when it happens the second time, but the kind of re-enchantment of the book through the act,
let's say, and Perspectiva, for those who don't know, we think that based on the
data we could receive from who's joining tonight, roughly a third of you are familiar with
Perspectiva, and maybe roughly two-thirds not so much. We are a charity based in London,
although our reach is quite global because of the digital world, and we have staff that are
outside of London as well, and we are funded primarily by the Fetzer Institute in the USA,
and I say that now because that's what makes tonight's event being free possible,
that and an additional funding that we've received, particularly for this event, and
Perspectiva, it's worth just saying a few things about it to contextualize why we're
interested in Ian's book and what the series is about. So we sometimes call ourselves an urgent
100-year project, and it's interesting when you say that. Some people hear the 100 years and think
that's far too long, and the point of saying urgent 100-year project is deliberately to get that
problem of sort of playful paradox being somehow the reality of things, that we think that we do
urgently need to rethink the world, reimagine the world, we conceive the world, but at the same
time, it's not something that is in kind of action panic mode, we're not in the business of
trying to put fires out as such, we're trying to reconceive the world from first principles and
give intellectual permission and social permission to people who want to try to reimagine how the
world might be, not just next year, but in 10 years or in 100 years, and that kind of work often
takes quite a philosophical dimension, but a lot of our work is also applied, we do a lot of
sort of social innovation of various kinds, and of course a publisher, so there's more to say,
but if you'd like to understand perspective a better, someone can put in the chat our website
and do have a look around. Although tonight's event is free, you are very welcome to make a
donation, if you're interested in the work we do already, or if you're becoming interested,
and later after this event, we'll be asking if you want to sign up to our
work and get to know us better, so first of all welcome, and I'm very grateful to Ian for making
it possible to have so many of you here. So this series is called Attention as a Moral Act,
and I want to just draw your attention to a line in the first book here, The Big Tomes,
so it just takes a second to come to it, but Ian, for those of you who don't know Ian's work,
and I'm assuming we're working on the assumption that you mostly do, and he says here, we'll just
find it, yeah, it's not a small claim, Ian says this right at the beginning of the introduction,
I believe we have systematically misunderstood the nature of reality, I believe we have systematically
misunderstood the nature of reality and chosen to ignore or silence the minority of voices
that have ensured it as much and consistently maintained that this is the case.
Now we have reached the point where there is an urgent need to transform
both how we think of the world and what we make of ourselves, attempting to convey such a richer
insight is the ambition of this book, so he sets himself a very high bar that we're systematically
misunderstood, misrepresented reality, and what's interesting for me as a civil society,
leader of a civil society organization is, many people ask how to make Ian's work relevant,
and this is a non-trivial task, as someone who's been alongside it in some way for 12 years,
it's not as simple as because Ian says X, the policy should be Y, it's never that simple,
but Ian's comment there does point to this quality of kind of the need to reconceive
who we are and what we're living for at a very fundamental level, to have a chance of surviving
and thriving in the 21st century and beyond, so the stakes are kind of high, so the combination
of the really high stakes, but often the quite deeply philosophical content makes it a particular
kind of discussion, it's important for me, our job here in this series, is to try to move the
conversation towards people beginning to perceive it and experience it and understand
the view of the world presented in these books in a way that allows them to act differently,
not as kind of premise to conclusion, but as a shift to perception, a kind of metanoia,
sort of completely new frame of mind that allows them to live differently, to prioritize
differently, and so on, so that's what this series is about, and we call it attention as a moral act
to get to that feeling of it matters how you attend to the world, and these books help to explain
both what that means and why, and we're going to have, we already have scheduled for two weeks
time Zach Stein, and then laterally, soon after that, we have Phoebe, Zach Stein will be speaking
about value, value-ception, the notion of value as being something that you can actually perceive,
a very profound notion in Ian's work, Phoebe Tekel will be grappling with imagination,
she's an imagination activist she calls herself, so she'll be interested in the kind of theoretical
basis of her work, Bonito Roy will be speaking about the notion of what it means for a society to be
insane, whether we are in some meaningful sense insane, the book's subtitle, as you may know,
is our brains, our delusions, delusions, sorry, delusions, and the unmaking of the world, so
this notion of what it means to be deluded at scale will be that focus, and then we also have a
discussion on the physics in Ian's book with a physicist, Philip, can you remind me of his second
name? Philip Goyle. Philip Goyle, sorry, Philip Goyle, who will get into the sort of the depth
of the physics that underlies some of Ian's theorizing, so that's ahead, and then we have
another six or so after that, and we want this conversation to go on to try and really tease
out from unusual places what to make of Ian's work, like how does it help us reorient to the
situation of the world at the moment, so that's all going on, and I think I've mentioned everything
essential, so the first question really, I want to speak to Ian tonight about something I call
the McGillchrist manoeuvre, half and jet, totally an earnest, but we're going to come to that a
little bit later, the first thing I want to do really is most people here know Ian as a talking
head, perhaps from Channel McGillchrist, perhaps from a lecture, and they'll know his writings
from his books, but there is an intellectual formation story, you know, Ian sometimes gives
the impression of being a polymath, but it wasn't always thus, and so I'm interested in if you could
please, slowly but surely, yet somewhat quickly, talk us through the key turns of your intellectual
formation, because you appear to have this sort of polymathic erudition, and I suppose I mentioned
doesn't know where it came from. Well, as with all polymathic erudition, it's probably not as
exciting as it looks, but it started in childhood, I was a very, I was kind of a curious child,
and that's probably true as well, and I was interested in many things, my father was a doctor,
but it was mainly my mother's father, my grandfather's interest in science that fired my
imagination as a child, he used to love going to stay with him and being, he showed me many
fascinating things in science, in the workshop, in the garden, and so on, and that made me think,
wow, this is something I really need to know more about, and I suppose that was the general drift
of my intellectual life, until I, at the age of 12, which is of course a very important turning
point for everybody, I got to be at a school where I could explore many things, and I've really
always been philosophically minded, there were a number of things that occurred to me and seemed
terribly important that were different from what everyone taught me, or what everyone seemed to imply
at any rate, and these were things like, that the whole is never the same as the sum of the part,
you know, when I used to say this to people, they'd say, well what is this magical something extra
that goes in there, and at the time I felt, you know, well, that's all very well, but it's not
quite right, but I couldn't articulate it at the time, I can't now I think, and I thought that the
world was not a sort of unresponsive lump of matter, it was a deeply responsive, vibrant,
living, reverberative experience in that whatever it was was a two-way process between
the world around me, particularly the natural world and me, I thought that opposites were not
necessarily as far apart as people seem to think, in fact I started to think that opposites often
seem to coincide and that the further you push something, the more you approach the very thing
you're fleeing from, I thought that history generally seemed to move in spirals, not in a
sort of linear trajectory, and I thought that the general tendency of the analytic mind that
was very much prized in my education, was to take things, abstract them,
decontextualize them, and render them no longer unique and alive, and this was an odd thing,
because doing this was important, it was definitely what we did, and I seem to be good at it,
but I also thought this is not enough, and then, I ultimately-
Your thoughts are arising when you're 12, or is that rather when they began to?
No, I would say probably about 13 or 14, and what happened at the school I was at,
Winchester College, was that you did your own levels in the first term, or at least by the end
of the third term, the end of the first year, so at age 12, when I got one's own levels out of the
way, and the rest of the time was free to really explore many things, and there were three strands
to it, one was a science ladder, one was a humanities, i.e. the history and languages,
and the other was the classics, and everybody had to, whatever they chose as their special area,
they all had to do a hard core that never drops things like mathematics, history,
English, and so forth, and I started off, in short, by jumping onto the science ladder,
because that seemed to me the thing that was most interesting, and I very quickly found as my
mind unfolded in this, and as I became slightly more of a mature person than I was at 12,
that things like history and literature were vastly important, so I hopped at that one,
and then finally I hopped to the classics, so that rather unusually, I managed to straddle
all three of these things, I've never been able to seem to make up my mind about what it is I
particularly want to specialize in, and then I wanted to go to Oxford to study philosophy,
and particularly the kind of philosophy that was not the terrifically dry splitting of hairs,
but the kind of philosophy that saw into the depths of things and had a place in it for the
idea of a god, because I came from a god, I can put it this way, from a godless household,
I mean one in which we never went to church, my parents didn't talk about that kind of thing,
to being in my teens struck by the force of what one can only call the sacred in nature,
in music, in art, and in the fellowship and community in which I lived, so I was changing
at that point, but I'd always wanted to do philosophy, and as I say I was excited because
in Oxford there was a course called philosophy and theology, which was just what I wanted to do,
so I did the exam and I went up for interviews, and I had to do the exam in some school subject
which just happened to be English literature, and the people who interviewed me said, oh you can't
do philosophy and theology, it's not an honours degree, so in 1971 philosophy and theology was
not even an honours degree at Oxford, there's a simple reason it had only just been founded,
and I don't think it had had time to acquire that status, but they said instead you must do PPE,
philosophy, politics, and economics, and I'm sorry to say this to somebody like Hugh Jonathan
who's learned and excited by both philosophy and by both politics and economics, I'm not
particularly, and I wanted the other thing, and they said well look, I don't want to do that,
so they said well come and do literature because it's quite philosophical if you want it to be,
and so I did, I read English literature, after I got my degree I was then
encouraged to sit the exam for Old Souls College which is an odd college, it doesn't have any
students, not graduates, not any kind of students, it's really just a kind of an intellectual
hot house for people who can be assumed to be somewhere near the head of their game,
and it was a very exciting seven years I had there, when I arrived there.
I was thinking before the seven, before you got admission, I want to pause there because I happen
to know something that's of interest to the audience maybe, I took the exam myself I believe
in 2001 and did not pass, but I do remember the, at that time had one of the five papers being a
single word essay question, and the one was diversity which is quite curious given the
current world, but what's also curious is I believe yours was on evil, and do you remember
what you said about evil that got you admission to Old Souls?
Well I wouldn't have remembered, but a philosopher Derek Parfit was a colleague who was so
taken with that essay that I wrote that he photocopied it, and when I became a fellow he gave
it to me, so somewhere in a box in the attic if I could ever find it, there is that essay.
I was alarmed because I sat in this room with I suppose 20 people,
we were competing for at maximum two fellowships, and very often one or none were appointed,
and in the room people started to write after five or ten minutes, and I sat there and I was sort of
thinking half an hour went by, I could see everyone scribbling, I still wasn't writing,
three quarters of an hour went by, and finally at two hours I was just so, if you like wired,
I just thought I've got to write, and I just did in that hot fire of the pressure of time.
Anyway that was that, it's an extraordinary exam, I hope it's not too different these days,
it seems to me to be able to try and take in people who are not just very good at their
special thing, but actually can think broadly about many topics, say there were general papers.
It was you who told me and that they did away with the one word question in the exam.
I think they have done, I think they have.
The quality had decreased so much that they weren't sure it was worthwhile.
I don't know if that's the case, I think that was the case with the language, there was a language
where you just had to translate as many pieces as you could in three hours from Greek, Latin,
German, Spanish, French, Russian, and Italian, I think it was. Anyway, I think they stopped doing
that, I'm sorry about the essay because I think it was a real test of something,
a kind of ability to think broadly and differently. But they do still have, I think,
the special subject papers alongside general papers, so you could, it doesn't matter what
subjects you're taking the exam in, you have to answer some general questions. Anyway,
there it was. And when I got to all servers, I had planned to do a thesis on 18th century
literature and ideas, the transition from the Enlightenment to Romanticism.
But a number of people, but most vocally, again, Derek Parfit, a very, very considerable
philosopher, I think by most people considered the greatest philosopher of his generation,
had started as a historian. And he said to me, you don't know where you may want to go,
don't do that, you've been given something very special, you can do a doctorate at any college,
but you've been given seven years in which you can do anything and there'll be no questions asked,
you can read what you like. So I did, I spent that time doing a lot of things, I read a lot of
science, of course, but I also read philosophy, went to philosophy seminars and other things,
I found myself a Russian teacher and so on. So that just generally broadened my horizons.
But I began to think at the end of this, what am I going to do next? I don't want to just
to go into some sort of normal academic rut. There's something wrong with the way we studied
literature. And I wrote a book called Against Criticism, published by Faber in 1982, in which
I laid out the philosophical basis for why the academic study of literature is somehow
vitiated, it destroys the very thing it's trying to get hold of. Anyway, I won't go into that,
except to say that in brief, I thought there were three important things about, say, a poem,
was that somebody in the past wrote something that they thought was very meaningful and
important, so important that they poured some very, you know, they suffered in order to produce
this thing. And along we came with our clever, sneering attitudes from the 20th century and sort
of encouraged to deconstruct it in a certain way. But more importantly, what happened was that we
abstracted something that was deeply contextual and embodied. We generalized something that was
unique. And we lost the sense of the living thing that we were looking at that is unique,
embodied, and implicit. And in the process of analyzing it, we'd taken this importantly implicit
material out and made it explicit. And that's as deadly as explaining a joke, explaining a poem
is, you know, death to the poem. So I wanted to move on and I got very interested in this
issue, what was wrong, and it struck me that it was to do with the mind body problem that we
neglected the body. And I was familiar with the philosophers, I went to their seminars and
heard what they had to say about the mind body problem. But it seemed to me they were just too
disembodied in their approach. And so I thought I not to do something more embodied about this.
And at that time, Oliver Sacks had just published Awakenings, which was one of the many sort of
real milestones in my intellectual development. Because here was somebody who related illness to
an analysis of what we are when we are well and healthy, who related what was going on for an
individual person, beautifully realized in his text. And he was able to see in it,
general truth, general philosophical truths through that highly individual vignette.
And that most of what he was saying was actually in the footnotes, it was as implicit as it could
be. So anyway, I thought, well, I want to be somebody like Oliver Sacks. And that meant going
to medical school and learning neurology and going into psychology in the overlap area between
neurology and psychology. So I did that. I became a doctor.
So still down to some words for a second, just because you seem to be saying two things there.
One is, in a very real sense, your first book on literary criticism prefigured the master
in his emissary that came much later. There was a sort of very clear overlap and the kind of
concerns you had. Yes. Which even went back to my my adolescence at school. Yes.
Right. And the second thing is that there's a very clear figure of admiration that sort of
propelled you forward into a way of looking at the person scientifically and philosophically.
I want to make sure we've been a number of days. Yes. Now, I'm worried about just taking up too
much time. It's worthwhile because people don't know these my senses. They don't know these things.
And it's good to work in the land. So then you go to medical school and later become a psychiatrist
and particularly Baltimore, right? And their brain scan things happen.
That's right. But perhaps just before that, I should say that I was at the Maudsley Hospital
in London, the Bethelman Maudsley Hospital, which is a great British teaching hospital.
They would like to think the greatest British teaching hospital in that area.
And I heard a lecture there one day by a man called John Cutting, who became another
influential figure for me. He'd just published a book called The Right Hemisphere and Psychiatric
Disorders with O.P. Oxford. And anyway, I almost didn't go to this lecture, but thank God I did.
Because in it, he talked about the differences between the hemispheres, which are nothing like
what I'd heard in the pop psychology stuff that is all too widely or used to be all too widely
believed. I think I've done something to erode that now. But what he was saying was that the
left hemisphere doesn't seem to be able to understand what is implicit. It understands what is explicit.
So it doesn't get tone of voice, humor, metaphor, irony, sarcasm, facial expression, bodily posture,
all the ways in which we communicate meaning. Secondly, it tends to categorize. So it takes
the unique thing and it categorizes it so that the uniqueness is lost. It becomes a representative
of a type. And the third thing that I remember, but so relevant, was of saying the right hemisphere
is literally more in touch with our embodied being for a number of reasons. I don't need to
mention, but to do with its more rich connections to the limbic system and its relationships to the
hypothalamic, pituitary, adrenal axis. Anyway, that fascinated me. I went to talk to John afterwards,
and I then began some research on hemisphere differences. And then I went to Baltimore,
and I was able to join a research group in which people were looking at hemisphere differences.
This was very exciting for me. And I became involved in researching into the abnormal
symmetry or asymmetry in the brains of people with schizophrenia. So in the normal brain,
there is a reliable finding that the left hemisphere is broader and bigger towards
the back and the right hemisphere broader and bigger towards the front. But in schizophrenia,
this is often either absent or actually reversed. And interestingly, the very parts that get
affected by this are the parts that underwrite some of our most important capacities for making
sense of the world. They're what's called hetermodal association cortex, particularly the
dorsal lateral prefrontal cortex, the inferior parietal lobule, and parts of the cingulate.
So these things are very important, and they are abnormal in this condition. And that was
terribly exciting. I was able to map these things and take part in research into it.
But I also, at the same time, received an excited message from John Cutting saying,
you must read a certain book. It's absolutely essential to everything you and I are concerned
about. And it was Louis Sass's book Madness and Modernism. And its subtitle is Insanity in the
Light of Modern Art, Literature and Thought. And this extraordinary book, extraordinarily clearly
and beautifully written, is the product of a mind that was able to range over many things,
over literature, over philosophy, obviously, over psychology, and over the visual arts.
And what he seemed to show was about 20 to 25 aspects of modernism, if you like, the culture
of the 20th century, mainly, and postmodernism that overlapped with elements in the experience
of subjects with schizophrenia. And I kind of knew this, as soon as I read, of course, of course,
it was really the most beautiful moment at which something happened to me that people say happens
when they tell me now, when they read my work, which is kind of, of course, I've sort of realized
this, but had no way of articulating it. Anyway, I mean, obviously, it couldn't be that we'd all
suddenly got schizophrenia, we haven't. But what seems to have happened is that we have ignored
the input of the left hemisphere, people with left hemisphere overdrive or right hemisphere
deficits, look at the world very much in the way that people with schizophrenia do, they become
frankly deluded. And that's why the word delusions is important in the subtitle of the book, The
Matterway Things, because I really believe that we are now in a world in which we have lost touch
with what the right hemisphere could have told us, and we are becoming deluded about what we are,
what the world is like, and so on. So that is some of my intellectual evolution. All these
influences were very important. And I spent the next, I suppose, 20 years writing The Master and
His Emistry. So that really takes you up to the beginning of that one.
So okay, great. Thank you. Well, I hope that was useful for people. It certainly is for me.
And like you said, that takes you up to the publication of The Master and His Emistry,
which I believe it took about 20 years to write, although you were working at the same time, I
suppose. I was working about 55, 60 hours a week at the time. And it only took me 10 years
to write the longer book The Matterway Things, but I was writing full time.
You also, yeah, okay. And so then The Master and His Emistry came out to mostly
critical acclaim, although some critical, some critical aspects of that too, but mostly acclaim.
And then a documentary was made about your work by Vanessa Dillon. And you've been on shows with,
I don't know, John Cleese and, you know, various other people that are very well known household
names. How do you, you feel fulfilled in? Do you feel like you're like at a personal level,
you've done your work in this world?
That's an interesting thing. I think the answer is I can't help being
delighted, touched, and filled with a sense of, yes, of something having gone right. When people
tell me what my work means to them, that is the important thing. And it's not,
yes, I've been on all the chat shows and I've met the various people, but it's,
it's actually when people, individual people that I didn't know, write to me
in the loveliest terms, saying what a difference it has made to their life, not just to their
intellectual life, their thinking, but also to their, to their relationships, to their work,
to everything. And that is, I think is the thing that fulfills me. That is the moment,
that is when I say, okay, it's, it's all worthwhile.
Okay. So I can tell you why, what it means to me. Now, it's a good segue to get to what I felt
recently. So as you know, Ian, I read the entire manuscript of the matter with things,
including all of the appendices and notes, which all inclusive, I believe, comes to,
quite close to a million words, if not actually there, when you factor in absolutely everything.
And I read quite a lot of it on train journeys. I think I said in the launch party of the event that
it was a time when I knew I had to interview you about the book. And I was struggling to read with
my job and family, just finding the time to, to read it. So I actually created excuses to go up
and down to Scotland a few times to meet extended family and made it sound like it was all about
them. And it was, I was also getting myself chunks of five hours each way to read the book.
Anyway, while, while reading it, I noticed something that kept recurring. And it was as if
it was a musical note that you hear come into a song every so often. And at the time, I couldn't
quite place it, but we spoke a bit about it when I was on Sky. And it had a certain kind of pattern
to it that I've laterally called the McGillchrist maneuver. And since then, I've been reading the
book more closely. And I think the heart of the McGillchrist maneuver in so far as it means something
is, is the primary hypothesis of the, what you call the hemispheric hypothesis,
which is broadly the, the brain functioning well, presencing, allowing the world to presence
itself to our own kind of appraisal and perception, then a kind of imperceptible shift towards left
to sort of make sense, categorize, and understand, then I sort of shift back to the right, no longer
quite the same for having received the input of the left. So the first McGillchrist maneuver is a
kind of right, left, right of that form. But then there's a more subtle one, which is a little bit
more analytical sounding, but it's very useful for public conversations, because you hear a lot of
people saying, you know, you're thinking in a two binary manner, it's not either or it's both and,
right? There's a very common refrain, you hear it a lot in sort of popular culture even. And,
what your argument suggests, and you're not probably the first to say this, but you say it
particularly well, and it falls out of the hypothesis as well, is that it's not so much that it's
either or or both and it's in some meaningful sense, either or and both and, but not to the same
extent, right? And that's the kind of like it's many layers of subtlety on that. But you begin to
see this in several different parts of the book. And where the heartland of that maneuver lies,
the kind of source code of it is in chapter 20. Chapter 20 of the book, I can say to people
watching this is the business. If you want to read one chapter of your fundamental work,
honestly, and you think if you've got a glimpse of the argument in general terms already is most
of you have, either from the prior book or just watching a video or whatever, I think you can
understand chapter 20 by itself without much other information. You need to know something
about the hypothesis, but not that much. Chapter 20 for me is like the hinges on the door between
the sort of scientific and philosophical appraisal and the sort of cultural implications.
And for those who don't know, chapter 20 is rendered into simple English as the coincidence
of opposites. But the word coincidence, as Ian points out in the book, has somewhat been tainted.
But nonetheless, so you use the Latin, I guess, coincidence. How do you say it? Coincidence
here? That's the one, right? Thank you. And this is really a beautiful, beautiful chapter.
Because I think that if people who are on a slightly more applied side of things, working in
stable society organizations concerned about climate change, interested in how the arts can
influence culture and thereby influence behavior or whatever. In chapter 20, I think we see
a shift in perception that is really generative of a different way of viewing the world and acting
in it. And I say this, knowing that earlier in the book, in the first volume, you begin the
book by targeting reductionism. Reductionism is kind of the public enemy number one in the first
part of the book. And I think more precisely, reductive materialism. And you make a very strong
case on that, and that stands on its own terms, and it has its own validity and so on. But I think
actually for people in the public realm, trying to fight against reductionism with something more
holistic of the kind you offer, is not necessarily as powerful as
recognising this McGilchrist maneuver in chapter 20. Because what happens there is, the enemy there is
not so much reductionism. It's actually the law of non-contradiction. And the law of non-contradiction
basically says, you know, it can't be night and day, that you can't be right and wrong, it can't
be black and white. And this chapter basically says, actually it can. And in many, many meaningful
senses, not only can it be this, but this is the beating heart of reality. These opposites that
are in some kind of meaningful relationship with each other actually are closer to the heart of
things than the law of non-contradiction would ever be. And if I could just read a few of the
statements you make, for example, you speak about the non-duality of duality and non-duality.
I'll just get my notebook which fell under the table, one second. You speak about, yeah, you
speak about the non-duality of duality and non-duality. You speak about the
unity of unity and multiplicity. And you also speak somewhere very profoundly, this is the
thing I want to ask you about now, because it relates back to your also's essay on evil indirectly,
is you speak about the equal necessity but unequal status of spiritual opposites.
And this is where you're getting at, it comes from the myth that you begin the second volume with,
but it also speaks to the perennial battle between good and evil. And again, the McGillchrist maneuver
here is very valuable, because what you seem to be saying is it's not that it's the world's either
good or bad, it's not either or, it's not that it's simply that it's good and bad, that's not
quite right either, it's that it's good and bad and it's somewhat more good than bad for particular
reasons. That's how I, at least that's how I read it, so please stop. How do you see it?
Well, I suppose the first thing to say is to anybody who hasn't read the book, I'm not sure,
apart from really in that opening myth, which is just absolutely staggering, which is
something I learned about, comes from an Iroquois people called the Onondaga.
And it's unfortunately too long to go into now, but it is the most stunning introspective
understanding of how the right and left hemispheres work together, that's the way I would look at it.
I don't really talk about the spiritual much. I address that in the last chapter,
28, because I don't want to lose my audience along the way, and I know how all the misconceptions
that surround the idea of the spiritual, the divine and the sacred will lose people,
but I want very strongly to show them that if they follow where I've been and you see the world in
a different way, there's nothing that's irrational or unintelligent about embracing
this idea. There's something very important about it. And I do, yes, I do in that chapter,
chapter 28, at the end of the book, I do briefly talk about the nature of evil, but it's just a
very personal thing. I can't believe the idea that evil is simply a kind of
lessening or falling away of good. I think it has its own dynamism. I think it's real and to be
reckoned with. And I think that this is part of the whole picture of the cosmos, which is that
there are different drives, if you like, that are both needed. And the intellect may try and get rid
of one or diminish one, but actually, that's just cheating. And so when I talk about the
coincidence of opposites, and I use the Latin term coincidentiopositorum simply because it was
the way in which it was first talked about by Nicholas of Cusa, a very interesting philosophical,
scientific-minded cardinal in the 15th century, and by Jung, who I think is enormously important here.
And as a psychiatrist, I can vouch that, you know, however good you think you are,
there is a dark side. And that dark side is very important and recognizing it is enormously
important. The failure to recognize it and understand it leads to damage, destruction,
and disease. And so it's a hugely important thing for each of us individually, but also
for a society as a whole, to realize that in pursuing headlongs, a very simple goal that
looks you perfectly good, you're destroying all kinds of other things that may be very important.
And if you push it too far, you may actually achieve the very opposite of what you intend.
I mean, a very obvious case of this is that anarchy leads to tyranny. So we need, what I'm
definitely not saying is, and people might say, oh, well, if he's saying something about the
coincidence of opposites, doesn't that leave us unable to say anything about anything? Because
really, anything and its opposites are true. No, I'm not saying that. I'm saying that context
greatly matters. And that these things share in some important way, their qualities.
So we need not, in fact, to reach, we must essentially never reach the position where we've
abolished both of these and just substituted some warm mediocre soup somewhere in the middle.
My point is, we need to hold both of these realities maximally, and yet hold them together.
And this is beautifully imaged in a whole range of ways in the philosophy of Heraclitus,
pre-Socratic philosopher, for me, most important philosopher in the West anyway,
that ever lived. And he has this image of a loop string or a lyre string,
and also the string of a bow that shoots an arrow. And his point is that it needs to be
pulled in opposite directions. And it's very nature, it's very power to do anything at all,
to give a note, to let the arrow fly comes from that tension being held. Now, that is what we,
that is one of the many things we don't perceive. We also don't perceive that reality has this
circular spiral like me, I prefer spiral light, because in fact, it doesn't circle back to where
it was. It circles back to somewhere that seems rather like it, but is now higher up the spiral
because things have happened, time has moved on. But that is an ancient image too, you know,
empedically, it's thought that love and strife are the two elements that cause the world.
And it's there in many philosophies around the world. We can't do away with one and just have
the other as Alan Watts said, we can't just have the peaks and not have the valleys.
Right. So we don't get that right. We don't understand that progress is never linear,
that you're curving back towards the very thing that you fear. And unless you watch out for it,
you will go to the place you really don't want to go to, that everything needs to be seen in
context. And the way in which we talk now is to take things out of context. So all that could in
a way, if you like, be implicit in that chapter on the current sense of opposites and you found it.
Yeah, but also the other thing that I was struck by when I read this by you earlier,
you say very amusingly, but very perturently here, that in your many talks, and you've got
lots of audience feedback and lots of questions, and you say there is a way you put it to me was
there are two things people want, and they can't have either of them. And as I understand it,
you can correct me on this. But the first is that they want one thing to be better than the other,
first of all, so they want the left hemisphere to be bad and the right hemisphere to be good.
And that's not right. We really want the goodie and the baddie. They want the kind of manikin,
right hemisphere, let's all create a right hemisphere world and forget about the left
hemisphere. I'm kind of bitch. It's not that at all. But they also struggle with the idea that
if there's two things that matter, that they necessarily matter equally.
Right. And these things like these two points, I know that for you, they're self evident now.
But I guess what I'm trying to say is that when I read this thinking, how can how can this book
be translated into some form of praxis in the community that I feel as though this kind of
this kind of capacity to see that you can have two things that are both really important.
But one is more important than the other. And yet the other, they need each other.
It's actually counter cultural. It's not actually there as one of our sort of memes of operation.
All the things I'm saying are counter cultural because I believe our culture is founded on
simplistic falsehoods. We've mistaken the nature of reality. That's what I'm saying. And in the
first seven pages or so of the matter of things, I lay out all kinds of things that must strike
people as very improbable. That for example, relations are prior to the things that are related.
Get that. But I stand by that throughout the book. So and just for one, but it's in the
master, it's in the image of the master and his emissary. The master needs the emissary and
knows it. The emissary needs the master but doesn't know it. There's an imbalance in this
relationship. And the emissary is good as long as it remains the emissary. The master is good
as long as the master remains the master. But when the emissary tries to be the master,
it falls apart. Now that image, I didn't know that. I only found out about it afterwards and in the
writing of the matter with things is central to many cultures. There are examples in Chinese
mythology, in Indian mythology, in North American native people's mythologies and so on.
Of this usurping force. And it's actually the subject of what is arguably
the greatest epic poem in the English language, Paradise Lost. It's precisely the story. So
this is a very important one. There's nothing wrong with the left hemisphere as long as it
knows its limitations. But unfortunately, one of the features of being limited is that you are
limited in your knowledge of your limitations. I mean, it's not just that it's limited and
it has to find its proper place in relationship. It's wonderful. It's glorious. It's an extraordinary
capacity, right? And with all due respect, I mean, people have said of your two volumes and
almost million words, it looks like the left hemisphere has won. But I think you would counter,
I think, that this is in the service of the right, which is also quite a valid contention.
Absolutely. I've spent my life struggling to bring the left hemisphere into service to what
the right hemisphere knows. So it is quite true. The book is absolutely stuffed with real science,
with hard science. So 5,600 references in the new book, it goes much further than the master in
his hemisphere and exploring this difference between the hemispheres and nobody can say I
haven't researched this properly. I don't think there are very few people alive in the world who
would be in a position to have read more about it than I have. So there it is. And I use reason.
Reason is my friend, not an enemy. It's just that not everything can be encompassed by reason.
Reason can't explain why a wonderful piece of music is as wonderful as it is.
There are, intuition and reason are both important. And again, when I chose the master
in his hemisphere as the metaphor, I didn't know that quote that is attributed to Einstein, that,
you know, the rational mind is a faithful servant, and the intuitive mind is a precious gift.
We live in a world which honors the servant but has forgotten the gift. Well, in the second part,
the middle part, as you know, of the matter of things, I look at reason, science, intuition,
and imagination and basically suggest that all of these are very important in their different
ways and we need to be able to make use of them appropriately. Okay, all well taken. And as always
with your book, there's a kind of hermeneutic kind of process going on in which you have to go over
many different aspects of your argument again and again until the full picture becomes clearer.
And one of the things I was struck by, again, just focusing on chapter 20 for a second,
it is the case, and sorry, not if, it clearly is the case. You argue it well, it's very compelling,
I believe it, that we live in a world of the coincidence of opposites, a world in which resistance
is a critical feature of life, opposition is necessary, movement or primary and all of the
things that you argue in the second volume. If that's the case, it's natural that we'll
struggle to perceive that without the language forms to perceive it. So on the one hand, what
you're getting is a lot of people broadly of the right hemisphere perspective, insuiting that you're
right. Of course Ian's right, this is why your book's so successful. Have you read Ian's book?
Yeah, yeah, yeah. And yet when it comes to trying to put it to work, without the language forms to
actually render this back to the right hemisphere in a way that gives a fuller picture of context,
we'll struggle. In that respect, I was very struck that there are at least three words
in chapter 20, big words, and there's no lack of them in the books, that I feel people don't
really know, I know they do not know them, but the fact that they don't know them means they
can't really perceive what they're pointing towards as well. So the first is hormesis,
the second is syllapsis, tell me about the finesse there, and the other, and I always struggle to
say this, but the enantiodromia is another. Can you talk us through what these three words mean
and why they matter? Because I think we sort of need to know to get a sense of what we're talking about.
Hormesis is a term from physical chemistry, originally, and it refers to the fact that
something that is toxic in substantial doses may actually be helpful and health-promoting
in small doses. There are certain very obvious examples of this, one is digitalist derived
from the Fox Club, which is extraordinarily poisonous, but has been used since the 18th century and is
still the basis of the most effective treatments for heart failure. Arsenic, which has also been
used for 2,000 years, in very small doses can be extremely helpful, they're obviously large doses
and atropine, which is derived from deadly nightshade, can restore function to people with
certain neurological diseases. But it really was first described and probably is still most used
in describing the effects of radiation, where large doses of radiation can obviously be damaging
and cause cancers, but small doses of radiation can in fact be health-promoting and can in fact
prevent the development of cancers in laboratory animals. It's all to do with the scale. Now that
is so important, because what was I saying earlier, if you push and push something, you lose it.
And actually it says this in the book of changes, in the Yi Qing, he who doesn't know when he has
achieved enough, but pushes further, loses it. So that is very important. And there's an interesting
observation that makes it vivid here. When people were looking at the biosphere 2, which is an
enormous protected environment, which was erected to see how plants and even animals would respond
to being in this protected environment, they were puzzled by the fact that healthy trees
tended to fall over before reaching maturity. And what they discovered in brief was for a tree
to grow, it needs wind, it needs the stress of the wind to develop what is in fact called stress
wood, which is the core strength of that tree. And this is something that, funnily enough, although
not presumably known in that form to Nietzsche, Nietzsche actually says this in 1870, something
that in relation to human beings, that we need adversity. In a very simple way, we need adversity
because, as you know, I think that everything is in motion. And contrary to the Newtonian image
that rest is the normal state and that motion is an aberration, motion is the normal state and
rest would be an aberration if it could ever be achieved. But to achieve that, we need friction.
Friction is the thing that stops motion, that's how you would describe it. But it is also the thing
that enables something to get started in moving. So that is Hormesis. One more thought on Hormesis
here before you get to syllapses. For those of you who remember, there's a film called Dances
with Rules with Kevin Costner, just to bring it to popular culture for a second. And the premise
of this movie is basically a sort of white frontier pioneer person getting lost within a sort
of Native American tribe and at some point he's captured and there's a kind of meeting around
the fire to discuss what to do with him, what to kill him, what to send him back and so on.
And I'll never forget watching this because one of the Native Americans is particularly aggressive
and being for blood. He says, we must kill him, we must kill him. And I remember thinking all
the others are like passing the peace pipes and kind of, you know, looking very quintessentially
wise indigenous knowledge kind of picture. And yet this one guy is like a warrior saying we need
to take him out now. And I remember feeling at the time, it's really important that he's there.
It's not that he's right, but there was something about that energy being in the room as a kind of
counterweight to the, it's not exactly Hormesis, don't get me wrong, but it's a similar spirit
of this thing that's in a small dose valuable. If they were all like that, you'd have a different
problem. And similarly, Ian, just to nail this point, you said that you prefer your dark chocolate
at 70%, is that right? Yes, correct. Yes, I do. Can you please tell me why is it because
because as you increase the percentage to 85 or 90, it becomes less pleasing. It's simply,
this is why all the really best dark chocolate is 70% or 70 something percent.
The others are used for cooking because they're a pure chocolate essence, if you like.
There are many things that are like this. For example, in Scotland,
you know, putting a lot of water in whiskey is considered a sacrilege. But a very tiny bit of
water in the whiskey is necessary to enable it actually to unfurl, unfold. It's in a richness.
And there's a joke I like, perhaps I may be indulged in it, in Scotland. In Scotland,
if you ask somebody, will you have water in the whiskey? The reply is, will there be room?
Anyway, perhaps I could talk about. In credulity, there will be space for the water.
For the water. So let's move on to
salapsis. Salapsis is, in fact, the Ionian or Ionic form of the word salipsis in Attic Greek,
which is the one that's best known to philosophers. But it's the one that Heraclitus used. And he has
a fragment, which is extraordinarily dense in my view. And it goes like this.
Salapsis, and the word is grasping in English, grasping, holds and not holds convergent,
divergent, consonant, dissonant from all things one and from one thing all. And I think that is
just extraordinarily rich. I mean, first of all, this idea of the word salapsis or salipsis is
something to do with a sudden comprehension, grasping in that sense, it brings things together,
the other idea of, you know, coincidence. And it also signifies fertility, which comes about
through the coming together of the gametes of the two sexes. So it says many things at once about
this deep nature of reality, that it comes in glimpses or grasping moments of insight,
and that in that insight, it's neither simply single nor simply manifold, neither simply hold
or simply not hold, neither simply like nor simply unlike. Each thing, as I say, working with and
by the same token working against the others, the one and the many may bring things into reality,
they bring one another forth into being generating a reality that has this structure of its core.
And that despite or in the light of all this, perhaps because of the nature of this multiplicity,
all is held together in a salipsis, the only word here that's not paired with an antithesis.
So I think that that idea is very rich. And I know what you're saying is so how do we get that into
into dialogues in places where people are making decisions? I think the first thing
is that we need to, we need to emphasize that while we are busily pursuing a single goal,
we're neglecting all kinds of other things that are disappearing as fast as we're achieving that
goal, that we need therefore to be very measured and see how far we should go and not go further
unless we destroy that we need to respect the fact that when we bring things together,
they remain unique and individual. This is not an abolition so that when a society is cohesive,
it doesn't somehow destroy the individual, but actually enhances the individual. The individual
can only be fully an individual with the background of an integrated society. That for example,
when we move towards the future, we need to remember where we've come from in the past.
We need not to jettison the knowledge that was painfully acquired by thousands of years across
the world. People now, without even knowing what they're rejecting are too quick to say,
well, we can make something new. Yes, we can. Things are always new. A river is always new.
A plant is always growing. Everything is growing and changing. Everything flows,
as Eric Leiter said, but you don't just cut it off from its roots.
All of these things are things that are worth saying. I think rehabilitating intuition is
important. We haven't got time to go into all of that, but I have three whole chapters on intuition.
But this constant dismissing of intuition is a mistake, I believe. Sorry, you were going to say
something. I wanted to hear also before making sense of what these things mean together,
but a little bit on an anti-odromia. Why is it important for us to use this concept as well?
Well, an anti-odromia is the easiest one to deal with. It's a term invented by Yong,
and it really refers to the fact that roads go in two directions. And this was first again
commented on, at least in the West, by Heraclitus, when he said the road up is the road down.
And so this is really the essence of an anti-odromia. We don't need to spend much time on it,
but I think that it is very beautifully, deeply, and with great imagination, and I mean that in
the best sense, unfolded by Yong in his looking at what a human being is. It's a very important
element, as I say, in the practice of anyone trying to help a human being with their suffering,
their mental suffering. And I'm just struck by these three terms when I was reading, because
they're not the kinds of things we bring to bear, right? We use language of systems change,
and we speak about regenerative economics, and we speak about a new narrative and all this kind
of stuff. But these things cut much more deeply into the need to perceive reality. We live in
arguably a reality avoidant culture, much of reality we don't want to attend to in a certain way,
and some would say it's also a kind of post-truth culture. But in order to sort of reach towards
the truth and reach towards reality, it feels like our conceptual maps are not fit for purpose.
There's a kind of, there's a linguistic drought of some kind that prevents us from seeing. I'm not
seeing that we should resuscitate these fairly scholastic terms as the only way. But it does
feel to me a little bit like part of the public education is to bring such terminology to bear
so that people can actually make sense again of what's actually real and true, rather than
believing they can't actually articulate their intuitions.
Well, yes, I mean, whether or not these particular terms are the right ones, I wouldn't
like to say, although there's nothing wrong with them, I suppose. But I think that the perception
from which they stem is, is explicable in terms that are not so strange. And I suppose that's what
I've tried to do in my writing, which is why one of the communist things people say is,
you gave me the words for things that I knew to be the case, but I had no language. I had no way
of saying these things. And I felt I'd be dismissed if I said them, but I've given
good groundings, reasons, and science behind why these things are important. And we need to
make this shift. We need to change our perspective on what we're doing here and who we are and what
the business of being alive is about before it's too late. Anyway, there we are.
Well, just a related example is, if you watch the news and the clamour on social media and the
main forms of debates in public life, there's ubiquitous partial truth, right? People say things,
and then there's a kind of watchable tree that's partially true, and there's a watchable tree
response that's also partially true. But there's very little sort of shared endeavor to get to the
kind of fuller vision of the truth. Now, there's a whitehead quotation somewhere in your book
about there are no whole truths or only partial truths. But I feel this is quite fundamental.
Again, it's something to do with realizing that to actually have a partial truth is,
in some sense, the truth. There is a meaningful way in which not to know everything is to know
everything. And you're getting towards that in your book, but in a way that is maddeningly elusive
at a cultural level. Well, I mean, I do, I do talk about the importance of not knowing,
which of course is not the same as ignorance. Ignorance is what you have before you know,
not knowing is what you have after you've gone through the process of knowledge.
So all that is very true. And what Chinese call Wu Wei, non-action, is as important.
And that is really in a very practical sense, people always saying, what do we do? And one of
the things that comes out of experience as a psychiatrist is the first thing is to see what
it is that you're doing that's wrong and stop doing it. So before you can actually have room to
do something new, you've got to get out of the picture, the thing you're doing, which is wrong.
So, you know, all this has very practical meaning in my view. It's not just some strange
insight into the structure of being. But if we are to survive, and if we're to understand
what we're doing, we do need to have some insight into the structure of being. And at the moment,
our image of a reductionist materialist mechanism is wrong on so many counts. And I give a lot
of them in the book. I mean, you've quoted Wu Wei, you mentioned Wu Wei there, the principle. In
the book you quote the Tauti Qing a few times, you mentioned the Yi Qing. I mean, many things,
but you're also a kind of Taoist, right? One way to understand. I am a Taoist. I'm precisely a
Taoist, yes. That's good to know. And I could be a Christian. And if I was, I'm probably a very
bad one. But I find the Christian mythos and the Christian tradition phenomenally rich. And it's
very, you know, I couldn't say whether, whether I am a Christian or not, but it's not incompatible
with being a Taoist at all. Or a Buddhist for that matter. And Thomas Murphy famously was
Catholic. I wanted to end by just briefly, for those who are curious, today I wrote a little
piece trying to get my head around what I meant by the McGillchrist maneuver a bit more clearly.
And I just, I've said here just a short definition for those who are interested.
I say the McGillchrist maneuver entails the combined perceptual and conceptual capacity
that transcends contradictions, disclosing the coincidence of opposites as generative of reality,
thereby re-enchanting aspects of lifelong, of, of, of life, re-enchanting aspects of life,
long considered problematic, including tension and paradox. So there's a kind of, you know,
I think there's a real thing going on here in the structure, the underlying structure that
is principally in chapter 20, but pervades to the entire work. And we will go now to something
else. But I suppose I want to say the whole series is called attention as a moral act. Now,
as a whole point of discussion, but just to end, please, why is attention a moral act?
What, if it's not obvious already, how would you describe it?
Well, I don't think it is entirely obvious. And when I discovered that
almost the foundational difference, probably the foundational difference between the two hemispheres
is the very well-known fact that they pay attention in different ways to the world,
it didn't altogether immediately strike me that I'd struck gold. You know,
this was an incredibly important thing, because part of my training was, you know,
attention is a cognitive function, you know, with memory and, you know, other things. And it
therefore gets reduced to a sort of mechanism of a kind. And I didn't realize how fundamental
this is to being the world that we know is the product of our attention. We cannot know a world
that is not part of our attention. I must say, first of all, that I don't mean by attention,
the scrutinizing self-conscious attention. But if it hasn't come to our attention at even an
unconscious level, if we haven't imbibed it, then it can't be part of our experiential world.
So I steer an important course, I think, which is, I say important because at the moment, yet again,
there is a polarization going on in which either people believe the world is simply
something that's made up in the individual mind. So this is post-modernism at its worst,
it's certain kinds of philosophy, a kind of naive idealism. And the other is a naive realism,
that the world is just stuff out there and our knowing it makes no difference to what it is.
Well, again, we don't have time for this, but how we attend something, whether we attend to it,
even within the world of physics, never mind in the world of philosophy and psychology,
makes a difference to what we are experiencing. And it's a moral act because it means that we
are not simply observers in this universe, we are creators in this universe. We co-create along with
the universe and along with that divine logos or Lee or Tao or whatever it is, that is the ground of
being. We are not just passive consumers. Once again, it is always a reverberative relationship.
I realize in my very early teens that everything has this structure and that therefore we have an
impact on the world, making it what it is, really literally making it what it is, the ways in which
we see it, alter what will be there. We know that from quantum mechanics as it's laughably called,
or quantum field theory as I prefer, but it is also part of our experience of the world.
So how we see the world creates is a duty laid on us to pay the right kind of attention,
a kind of nourishing attention that brings things into being, not the kind of attention
that alienates and that cuts us off from that reality and therefore changes it and changes us.
So it has an effect on the world, it has an effect on us, those who are doing the attending,
a moral effect. You can make yourself a very dubious person by always adopting a stance of
extreme remoteness. You can also get things wrong by engulfing yourself in things. So as
always, it is a matter of finessing a harmony of positions that look opposed to one another,
but are equally necessary or at least both necessary. So that's what I mean by it. And I
also mean that if we don't pay the right kind of attention to what we're doing in this world,
and the moment our attention is up for grabs from every kind of electronic device around us,
and I don't think that we are taught any longer how to be quiet and still and concentrate on a
piece of work, on reading or listening to a piece of music for an hour or two at a time,
if we don't reconnect with this kind of attention, we will lose the world. Literally,
you know, I'm not speaking in metaphors, we will lose this world, the world may carry on without
us. But that would be very sad for certainly us and possibly for the world because I, you know,
I don't hate humanity. I think we've got things very, very badly wrong. But what humanity is,
is something very, very special. Well, thank you. And
all of humanity is indeed special. And the work you've done is certainly very special. And
I suppose on behalf of everyone, I'd like to thank you for your decades of, you know,
scholarship and the fire that has propelled that is something that I think we all admire.
And you've done, I feel as though when I asked you earlier, you feel fulfilled about your work,
there's a sense in which you've clearly done with your talents what you alone could do in some
meaningful sense. And that's also why I wanted to share the biography. And I think it's up to us
as a broader population of people interested in your work, concerned about the world in various
ways to consider what it means to us and how we bring it into being. And with that in mind,
we're going to move in that direction now. Beginning with, I'll pass over to my colleague,
Michael Breddy, in a second. And we'll do a very short practice before we move into groups,
and then we'll come back together where we'll have a chance to ask you questions and I'll
help to field them as well. Okay, so this is a pretty fundamental question from Paul. Paul,
do you want to ask it? If you're there, can we see you and, or is that too much, too difficult,
Michael, to do that? I can actually, it might be a bit of a challenge, but I can. All right,
let me just ask it. If you don't mind, Paul, sorry, we better if we ask you. I hope you understand.
I think that's me. Okay, great. Let's hear from you then, Paul.
Thanks very much. So my question relates to how would you say that we could slow down and
nurture the sort of attention that grows out of that slowing down in a world that seems to be
speeding up and with less and less time to sit for three hours with a piece of literature or enjoy
how do we reconcile the speed of the world as we perceive it with the necessity of slowing down
with that? Thank you relatively quickly and just so we can get plenty of questions in.
Yes, I mean, the question is a very good question. And I think it is difficult.
There have never been more pressures on people to do more things in less time.
So the only thing I can suggest is that you stand out against that culture as much as you can.
And it's built into many of the assumptions of the culture that it's better for everyone to be
doing lots and lots of things. It might be better if we did fewer things but did them
with greater thought and depth. So I think one has to make some decisions. I mean, I'm not
holding myself out as any kind of example of what to do. I'm not a good example of doing anything,
but I have no television. I've found myself listening less and less to the radio. I hardly
ever do actually listen to the radio, to be honest. And I have switched off alerts when emails come.
I try to limit the times of day in which I will look at them. And I'm not on any of the social
networks, but I have the luxury of a PA who does and who therefore picks up messages for me.
But if you haven't got such a person, on the other hand, you might not have quite as many
requests or questions. But I think it is difficult. I think it's rather like asking
any kind of spiritual practitioner, how do you do this? And the answer is not some simple thing,
but it's about embracing a certain relation to the world. And that's really what I'm talking
about. So I think it's a start from day one of thinking, you know, what matters is my relationship
to the world, to people and so on, and all the things that interrupt and make more shallow,
my connections with them, my experiences also, are to be resisted. Sorry, it's not a very
satisfactory answer, but that's the best I can say. Thank you, Ian. And I'm looking at these,
sorry, Paul, thank you for your question. And I'm looking at these questions, all of which are
kind of explosive in their own way. One about AI, one about war and peace is one about God.
I want to be honest, I want to ask this because it seems to me something that Perspectiva recently
did an anti-debate about as a whole conversation. But if you're interested, look at the anti-debate.
In what is the question from Christine Miskelly, and it says, in what sense might war be needed
for the development of peace? What sense, if any, perhaps? Well, well, gosh, it's just a very good
question. I don't think it is, it is absolutely necessary, though some degree of difference,
competition, conflict is also part of the process of collaboration. So I mean, one of the things I
say about the history of evolution, which is constantly projected as a simple warfare of all
against all, is that it's not a bit like that. I mean, that it's far more distinguished by
collaboration and cooperation between species. But as a degree of competition is also extremely
helpful. And I suppose bringing it back to human war and peace, I would like to say I hope we can
certainly avoid a war, but that nonetheless some degree of independence of states, but working
together of states is important. That you know, the element of change that comes about when a
country is plunged into a crisis can be extremely helpful. I mean, it's not a bit of a cliche,
really, but it's true that the Second World War produced extraordinary advances in science and
technology, some of which may not be good in themselves, but some of which very clearly were
and have been used to great advantage. So once again, it's not all or nothing. But I hope that in
the case of actual human war, it will be as little as conceivably possible. Okay, thank you, Ian.
Gosh, there's so many. Do keep your questions coming just because we will keep a record of all
of these. So one way or the other, these will be attended to through a moral act, as it were.
And we probably won't manage to answer all of them now. However, there was one question that's
very much of the moment. There is a more challenging real world question from about AI from Pat Kain.
Pat, do you want to frame that in your own vernacular?
Sure. Hi, Ian, I love your work. But this is a pressing question, which is to say,
to what degree is computation a left brain phenomena? And what are the recent achievements
in computation, which are basically sort of modelling and building on the precedent of a
corpus? We all thought that machines, the one thing that machines wouldn't get anywhere near
would be creativity or responsivity. Maybe even that may be a more technical way to put it.
But it seems that's one of the first things that they've come for. We thought they would
be dealing with our routineized behaviours and liberating us from labour. What it seems to be
doing is coming in at the kind of formulaic nature of human creativity and intellect itself.
And that's what advanced AI has come to. Now, within the right brain, left brain, complicated
dynamic, which was Jonathan was at pains to say, is complex rather than manacheme. What's your
perspective on advancing computation and what it does to our sense of appreciation for valuing of
the human? Wow. Well, first of all, to start with the rather limited and more focused
computation is a very left hemisphere element. And it's different from understanding. So it's
clear that the left hemisphere can manipulate words and manipulate figures. But the right
hemisphere is better able to understand the overall import of the words and the overall
nature of what has been computed and what it means. So in other words, it doesn't have the
degree of understanding of the right hemisphere, but it's able to carry out procedures. It's the
difference between procedures and inhabited processes. So what we're seeing is an enormous,
it is striking and troubling, I agree. But if you can compute so that you can get all the possible
permutations and possibilities, this is not the way the human mind works intelligently.
But you can then single out certain elements. But I doubt that I may live to eat these words,
but I doubt very much that a machine can can produce something that is more than mediocre in
terms of creativity. The business of creativity comes out of the business of having a body,
having a mortal life that is limited in extent, and having emotions. And I think and being conscious.
And there's no evidence that, well, clearly they don't have bodies, they don't have
emotions, but they could have consciousness. But I think that's a doubtful but not excludable
possibility. But I don't think this is how great creative works are made. There was already a machine
created by putting all the works of Bach into it, and then asking the machine to sort of
out of this random literature, a new work of Bach. But the trouble is that, although it could pass
as, yeah, in the genre of Bach, it's not created by a genius. And it doesn't move one in the way
that the works of Bach do and speak to one in the way that the works of Bach do. Only a human
being a fellow sufferer can actually do that. Is that something to do in with, thanks, Pat,
for the questions? Is it something to do with reverberation? I mean, you mentioned that this
notion that we have a similar problem in the chess world about whether a computer can play a game.
And there's something about seeing, feeling the other human beings creative acts that is
sort of non negligible, difficult to reproduce. And just you're so fond of the word reverberation
that that came to mind in your response to the question. Well, there's no need whatever for a
computer that's very good at playing chess to have any form of consciousness. I mean,
that's just absolutely not required. All it has to do is do an immense amount of computing very
fast, which would be a very stupid thing to do, which is why I reject the term artificial
intelligence. It's not artificial intelligence. It's artificial information processing that
could be done incredibly fast, much faster than humans can process information. But my God,
knowledge is more than processing information. Understanding is more than knowledge, and
wisdom is more than understanding. Okay, thank you. And you heard it here first,
there's no such thing as AI. I'm just kidding. So, Emma, you had your photo,
you had your hand up quite early, so you can go next, please. Emma Morrissey? Yeah.
Hi, yeah, it's Emer, but don't worry, it happens all the time. First, I just want to say a big
thank you. Your work has had a really profound impact on my life. So, just to get that other
way first. Thank you. Well, thank you very much. I just wanted to ask about the role of creativity,
because obviously, a creative act, for example, writing requires both hemispheres of the brain,
you know, so the right would be kind of free flow of ideas and the left involved in the editing
process, for example. So, I wanted to ask what you think the role of creativity could be as an
antidote to the imbalance that we see in the world? I think it's terribly important. I mean,
I think we are almost definable as creative beings. And as you know, my philosophy is that
we are here to help create reality, that we are, you know, we're not just
passive passers-through of a slideshow, we are actually interacting with something.
So, we are creating all the time. And emphasising that element is important, but it doesn't mean
letting go of what the left hemisphere provides, which are the tools. So, for example, in order
to be a good poet, you have to know your language, you have to understand how it works, and you have
to read a lot. In order to be a good composer, you have to know the rules. Well, I think you do. I
mean, nowadays, all the rules have been thrown out, but it doesn't necessarily produce wonderful
works for art. But I think that a composer is at an advantage. Let me put it that way.
If he or she understands the structures of music, the nature of music, and the history of music.
So, I think, I believe we create out of a living tradition of which we are the new members who
will take it in another way or take it further. That is all brilliant. But what I reject is just
cutting off the ways in which we might learn a skill. Learning a skill, learning an art,
learning a craft, is very important for creativity. It doesn't just happen by sticking people in a
room and going bluer whatever comes out. That is not needless to say how anything beautiful or
gracious created. But I do think it is very important. I absolutely agree with you. And I
think that the way children are educated nowadays is adversarial to that impulse.
But again, I want to caution. I don't mean that they should just be allowed to not learn things and
let it all quote hang out. They really do need to get to grips with things, understand them,
but then allowed to have their own thoughts, their own, you know, that is what my education
was like all those millions of years ago in the dark ages when I was educated by wonderful people
who were excited about what they were talking about, didn't have to follow a procedure that was
sent to them from Whitehall. So, you know, we need to get back to a business of, you know, openness
and that the mind of the young person needs to be trained to think differently, not just to
be indoctrinated. This is what you must say. And if you don't say these things, you won't get full
marks. But no, think for yourself. Turn things on their head. See what happens. It's great.
Okay. Thank you so much. And listen, we're going to have a question from Four Arrows,
which you've raised a few interesting comments throughout the evening and a chance to ask Ian
directly. Ian, I'll let Four Arrows answer the question, but just so you know, what my interest
here is something about the nature of hierarchy that's implicit both in or actually quite explicit
in the master and his emissary, but also to some extent in the myth with which you begin the second
volume of the new book. And I think this is a question that's sort of challenging that to some
extent. Can we hear Four Arrows if he's there? Yeah, I'm just asking. I'm wondering if Four Arrows
could raise their hand, then it's much easier for me to find Four Arrows because we have so many
people here. It's also known as Don Trent Jacobs, PhD. Ah, here I see you now, Four Arrows.
Okay, here we go. Here we go.
There we go. You found me. I'm a big fan of Ian on many levels. As an indigenous scholar, I appreciate
your references to the Uroquois Confederacy as a model also. I have a question that is,
you're in that metaphor that Jonathan just described. I just want to be clear
that you didn't intend for that relationship of hierarchy to the need to be permanent in order
to recognize that each person has limitations. And in the indigenous approach, of course,
hierarchy is contextual. For the buffalo hunt, we'll have a leader, but otherwise it's matriarchal
and non. So can you clarify what you meant by that using that particular analogy? Because it
was a little bothersome. Okay. Well, have you come across the myth that I use? Have you read it?
Yes, I have come across it. Oh, you have? Yes. I disagree with it in a way.
Explicit in it is that there are these two unequal powers, and one is able to be creative
and is able to look after the other one that can do good as long as it's under the supervision
of the greater power. They have two unequal twin brothers.
Just to be clear about the question, as I understand it, that's not in doubt. And I think
that's even accepted. It's just about the permanence of that relationship and whether the
hierarchy is a fluid notion that comes and goes according to context, or whether it's...
Well, in that myth, it isn't. No, in that myth, it is a permanent fact about the relationship.
It's never hinted that the other brother can somehow be the leader because he just doesn't
have what it takes. He on his own would be dangerous and his attempts to create a negative.
And he's jealous of, envious of his brother's position. He's a rival that is an upstart,
basically. This is the same as the story of Lucifer, the brightest of the angels, who became
Satan. And the whole story of Paradise Lost is caused by the resentment of the one that can't
do what the other one can do. Now, it's a very dangerous human reality, and I wouldn't wish to
gloss over it at all. I think the interpretation is incorrect. It's a Western lens through which
that myth is taught. And so Joseph Campbell actually talks about that myth in a different
way. I take it from Joseph Campbell. I take it direct from Joseph Campbell.
Well, then we should have a conversation about that disagree with them, right?
Yeah, because the twin heroes, the twin heroes is the key. And the twin heroes, which can be,
yeah, that mythology is, is that these twins work in complementarity with different strengths
and recognize the different patients in different contexts. And so that's why I like what Jonathan
is trying to clarify in terms of the fluidity. But a brief other one. I use the left and right
brain here also. I use it all the time. That's the problem with our world, exactly what you're
saying. But science really calls our metaphor a myth. And indeed, it is more complex. Can you tell
how you are still using that idea of left brain hemisphere without getting too shot down by
neuroscience? And then I'll close. I think Ian, briefly on that, because we have several questions.
Yeah, okay. Well, gosh, how can I be brief? I think, first of all, that a myth is not
an untrue, but it is a way in which the greatest truths can be expressed. And they can only be
expressed through metaphors, poetry, myth, and ritual. And therefore, these things are very
important elements in language. They're not the stuff of science. That's not a criticism of science.
Science starts out by excluding them. So that's fine. And what I've said is robust in neuroscience
terms. And nobody has really said that it isn't. Nobody with any authority has ever explained to
me that there's anything wrong with it. So thank you, Ian. And we're almost at the end. But there's
one final question. I just want to let people know that your questions have been seen. Some of them
are wonderful that we can't answer. So do know that they're appreciated. We'll keep a record
of them. We may even use them in some other contexts. But there is a very direct question to
end with Ian. And I hope you don't mind. It's from Malband. And it simply says, how do you understand
God? Oh, that's, we have minus 15 seconds for me to answer. And I wrote a whole about the resistance
and all that. So I wrote a 106 page chapter, which is woefully short on it. I can't answer that. In
fact, the only decent thing to say is it can't be put into words, certainly not into the sort of
expression you would like. So sorry to disappoint you. But actually, that is the best expression
of what I can say about it. Okay. And the bell, the bell is the answer also. Wonderful. The bells,
the bells. So listen, there are more questions. I see your hands up. I know there are. But there's
also good to leave. Once again, more and there is more to come. This is the first of several
in this series. I'll be kind of anchoring most of these conversations. But there will be other
people speaking to Ian at more length, from different vantage points, exploring different
aspects of both the books, getting a clearer sense of what we mean by attention being a moral act.
So I do hope many of you will come back. A reminder to will be in touch tomorrow and to
encourage you to sign up to Perspectiva's mailing list so you can hear about this series and the
other work that we do. And also, again, that we are a charity we rely on philanthropic donations.
If any of you feel so inclined, you're very welcome to follow the link that we gave earlier
in the chat or that you can find on our website to make us a donation or sign up for a subscription.
It's much appreciated. And the next event in two weeks' time is with Zach Stein, a sort of
philosopher of education, a really brilliant guy who I've known for several years now. He's the
author of a book called Education in a Time Between Worlds. And he is going to be asking Ian
about many things, but principally this notion of the direct perception of value in the world,
what's sometimes called value-ception. And they'll be going, getting deep into what that means
and why it matters today especially. And there'll be other subsequent talks, but that's the next
one. So I think unless I've forgotten something, we're good to go as it were.
Yeah, if I could just give a reminder, Jonathan, but next week we have a Connection to Priory
session, which Ian won't be present at sadly, but it's more focused on connecting with the
people that have been here tonight and others in kind of structured breakout rooms and different
practices to explore these ideas in greater depth. So to really kind of find the others
and to create a space for that. And it will be directly related to what's been discussed tonight.
So yeah, if you can make that, I put the link in the chat to register for that, but I'll just stick
it in again. And also what I'll do is just put in the link for the main kind of webpage where we're
going to host, make announcements for all of the sessions as they come up. So if you're, you know,
when you want to check back in, you can just go to that link and you'll see what the next
sessions that come up and register for all the upcoming events. Great. Well listen, Ian, as always
a huge thank you. I hope this is the first of many of these, well I know I hope it will be
first of many of these conversations. And thanks for everyone for coming and staying
and your questions and sorry we couldn't get to them all. And I hope now that those who want to
copy the chat have done so. And we'll see you, most of you hopefully in a couple of weeks,
maybe even in one week if you're joining Michael and Lee for the connection and inquiry session,
which I encourage you to do because like it's good to talk, right? I mean, this is heavy, heavy,
heady, heady chat, this stuff. So good to be with others who are wrestling with it too and share
your life experience and how this work comes into your world to be a little bit less alone and maybe
a bit more creative and productive through that. So pleasure to see you all and we'll see you very
soon. Bye for now. Bye. Thank you. Thanks Ian. Be in touch soon. Thank you everyone.
Thank you. Thanks Jonathan. Pleasure.
