Well, welcome everyone. It's lovely to see so many people from all around the world and
it's really an enormous pleasure to introduce tonight's speakers. I'm keen to get out of
the way as quick as I can tonight, not to steal their time. Just briefly to say who
we are and what the context of this event. Perspectiva recently celebrated its seventh
birthday. We're a charity based in London and we play with our elevator pitches and
they change over the years. But the essence of it is that we're interested in the relationship
between three kinds of world. The inner world of the human being, the psyche, the soul,
the spirit is very important to us. We see it as something sort of culturally neglected,
something we need to understand better. But we also want to have that in conversation
with complex systems at scale, the economy, politics, technology and so on. And we're
interested in how all of this plays out in society and contexts like this when we're
trying to navigate together what's going on and make sense of the world. So our tagline
is systems, souls and society as a way of covering the kinds of relationship we're
trying to make sense of. And that's reflected in our public conversations like this one.
But we're also a publisher and although we won't announce all the details now, we do
have some very good news about a significant ramping up of our publishing arm next year
based on a grant that we earned and this year just passed. So watch the space for further
perspective of books to explore these themes in greater detail. And we also can announce
that in June we have the Realization Festival perspective or co-founders of that with St
Giles House. That's right at the end of June. And we have already confirmed to speaker
Ron Williams, the former Archbishop of Canterbury. And there are other things to share. We have
a perspective of a community you can find online. And we do have a sub-stack if you're
interested in our writing and we publish ourselves but also bringing other people to share the
space with us. So do check out perspective of a sub-stack. And if you want to support
us as a charity, not least at Christmas, do consider becoming a paid subscriber. That
really helps a lot. So, well, Ian and Alastair are people I know personally, but let me just
share who they are to the outside world. First of all, Ian is, I think, one of not many people
who can reasonably be called polymath. And he has a background as a literary scholar
and not just, you know, read a few books but actually taught literature for seven odd years
I believe. So a really deep grounding in the humanities subsequently became more interested
in science for a period of time and later became a neuropsychiatrist, to put it technically
correct, I think. And that led to, over the years, to him realizing one big thing, one
really big idea that I've jokingly called the McGillchrist maneuver, but it's based
on the hemispheric hypothesis, an understanding of the different hemispheres of the brain,
not so much what they do but how they are and what follows for how they attend to the
world and the world that's brought into being as a result and everything that follows from
that. And we're very, very proud to publish his book, The Matter With Things. If you don't
have it already, it's a mammoth two-volume book but very highly recommended and I hope
tonight's event at least doesn't discourage you from buying it and hopefully, you know,
send you on your way. Alastair is, well, I know him most recently as someone who took
my son's fishing and I share that with all candor because it gets to the heart of the
man, I think. He wanted them younger generation, he knew they were coming through Scotland,
we were not so far away. He wanted to show them where the food came from, took them out
on his boat. The delight in my son's was off the charts and it's a sort of testament
to Alastair's grounded spirituality that he's very much interested in questions of
meaning and purpose and the sacred but at the same time extremely earthbound, giving a great
deal of his time, energy and attention and brilliant mind to significant issues of land reform
and protecting those who can't always protect themselves, speaking up for those who are in
poverty and fighting on their behalf. So an extraordinary mind and heart and it's really
an enormous pleasure to bring these two wonderful people together. And tonight, we are technically
part of the series, Attention as a Moral Act, which this is now the ninth chapter of that. However,
I've given complete permission, not that they needed it, to speak about whatever they wanted to
and I know that over the last few days, since we decided on this event quite last minute,
only about a week ago, there's been some sending of books across Scotland on both parties
and they're both studying each other's work. So I want to leave it to them to follow the
conversation. The title is First Principles and Second Sight and I'll leave it to them to decide
where to go with that. And whoever feels most moved to speak first, you're welcome to do so.
I will join you again in about an hour. Take care and forward to listening. Over to you, Alastair and Ian.
Will I listen? Here we are. Here we are at last, which is wonderful. And you've got a,
I'm drinking the fine telescope, but I think you're drinking a little known whiskey called the
Hera. I wanted to say we're allowed to do this. But my daughter, who is a clinical new psychologist
you might be interested to know, she sent me a bottle of the Hera, which you'll see,
one that is newly produced in the house. So I will have a small drop of this while we are
talking. Let's not go wild. Very much to you, Alastair, and to our listeners too.
So I wanted to, I mean, I didn't make this title, I think Jonathan did, but it occurred to me as I
was reading your work that it had something quite interesting to say about the Scottish mind, because
in your book, I found that you quoted, I can't remember the name of the man,
Pharah, who said that there was a Caledonian antizygie, which is a lovely word. Sizzigie means
a coincidence of opposites, and he could have got away with that really. But there is something about
the scots that is puzzling. You know, my dad was a scot, and he was a very down-to-earth sort of
scot. And he said the thing about the scots is they're very hardworking, they're very precise,
they're very down-to-earth, they make great engineers and doctors and so on.
And yes, that's true in a way, but there's another completely different side to the scots,
isn't there? And that's the bit that encompasses second sight. So they do nice to do this split,
and it occurred to me, perhaps you'd like to pick me up on this or not, but there's something here
that reminds me of my feeling about the Germans, that they're both, you know, magnificently precise
and make very good engineers, but they were also really the first romantic.
Well, what a way to plunge in. If I might say, first of all, for people who don't know
your book in double volumes, I mean, look at the sickness of that, nearly 1600 pages of that,
with things. You're deeply wrestling with that problem as a philosopher. I'm not coming at it
as a philosopher, I'm coming at it more from a poetic perspective and a culturally rounded
perspective, an experiential perspective. What you were doing in the 1600 pages, which I should say,
I've only skimmed, I've only had it for a couple of days, I've just skimmed it.
You're very badly behaved because there are some chapters to which you gave no conclusions.
I had to presume that they are inconclusive. I only gave conclusions to the first part,
because it's science, and I wanted people who weren't comfortable with the science
just to get the drift. Anyway, yeah. What you're doing is you're putting so many
strands together, you're coming at it from a new psychiatric basis, which is fascinating.
You're also going into the philosophy of time, into wave motion, physics, the whole shebang.
You're doing so in a way that gives a wonderful grounding in these disciplinary areas for people
who haven't got it. The person who came to mind, as I was reading you, was Clarence Glacken,
Tracy's and the Rhodian show. When I was a student at Aberdeen in our first year geography classes,
that was one of the set books. It's often been remarked that Glacken, who said that it was when
the shipwrecked soldiers came ashore on roads, and he saw geometric patterns on the sand, knew
that this must be a sign that there were human beings here, because who else could make geometric
patterns on the sand? And it's often been said that Glacken was one of the last of the scholars
who could really pull together an immense interdisciplinary perspective and bring it
to bear in the matters of the world. And that, it seems to me, he wasn't the last, but you're doing
that here. Now, I hugely congratulate you for what you were doing, but you asked me there about the
Caledonian anti-sissigy, A-S-E-I-S-Y-Z-Y-G-Y anti-sissigy. It's a philosophy's gift to scrabble.
And basically, this was an idea that Professor G. Gregory Smith came up with in his book,
Scottish Literature, published in 1919, in which he said there were two moods in the Scottish psyche.
On the one hand, as your father just said, there is the engineer, the mathematician, the accountant.
On the other hand, there is this crazy world, as he puts it, where you are tossed in the horns
of Earthland, the imaginal world. And I think in many respects, what he is describing there
is what you describe when you speak of the left and right hemisphere, the left hemisphere,
the mechanic, the engineer, the doctor, etc., the right hemisphere, the artist, the musician,
the one who is away with the fairies. You could see it that way, but of course,
as you and I know, the fairies are not to be taken lightly, so that it's not a matter of
being somehow scooped up into some unrealistic fantasy. I believe that there's something
in the Scottish psyche, and you have more than I have because you grew up here, but I know stories
of and have had some experiences of people making unbelievably unlikely prophecies that turned out
to be entirely true. They were able to see things here, and my partner is of Scottish descent,
and she has her head screwed on, don't think otherwise, but she has the most amazing
capacity for a second sight, which she takes very much in her stride, but it is something
that is very real, I think, and we only don't recognise it because if you stop believing in
something and stop attending to it, you don't see it anymore. The faculty for seeing it withers,
you can't do it anymore. We need to ask, why is this important? Because here we are,
we've got 500 odd people on here just now, and we're diving straight into the fairies in the
second sight, which most philosophers would not take incredibly. Most philosophers would think
we are off the wall in this, and why are we taking it so importantly? That we're talking about first
principles and second sight. We're talking here about epistemology. In the warm-up here, I said to
you that right beside me here, I didn't have a plan, this is just on the shelf, I have the Institute
of Metaphysics by the Professor of Moral Philosophy at St Andrews University, he was writing this
in 1875, and Beria invented the word epistemology, which is about the theory of what knowledge is
and how knowledge is structured. How do we know what we think we know? What is the meaning that
gives meaning to meaning? Is there any sense in what we say, these kind of questions? And we're
diving straight into second sight here. You're speaking to me from Taliske House in Sky, I have
here, this was planned, a book recently published in Sky by Steve Taylor, the seer,
Visions, Dreams and Prophecy, I Love Sky and the Heprides. Now I know two of the now deceased seers,
or I knew two of them in here, two of them are good friends of mine, Norman McLeod of Bridgehouse
and Harris, and Taukel McLeod of Grim Shadow, the next village to me in the Isle of Lewis. So I've
sat with these people and had first hand accounts of their seership. Why does this matter? Because
if we are concerned with first principles, what is real? What is reality? Anomalous phenomena,
like these telepathic, clairvoyant type, precognitive phenomena, are of huge importance,
and they may not appear to, to many of the people listening to us just now, because of how they
might be situated culturally. But as you've already indicated Ian, if you are living in an
indigenous culture, such as those of the Heprides, then you cannot not be aware of it. No, you cannot
not be aware. And so you've got to factor this, you can either deny your own culture, and indeed
deny you, as you've just indicated, deny your own reality. Or, well then you're in a state of denial.
We're talking about very, really, when I was 18, I had failed my first year of physics
at Aberdeen University, I had to reset it, and sitting there swatting in my father's,
well, surgery, because the doctor's house and the surgery were united then, so I was sitting in
the, you know, in our surgery house at Glenmore in North Lawson Lewis. And my father was ill,
he was away in Rigmore, he was in hospital there, and my mother had driven off from the car to go
to Stornoway, seven miles away, she went there nearly every day, this was not unusual, and she
was going to go and fly over to Inverness and visit him in Rigmore. And about 10 minutes after
she left, there's me sitting studying my physics texts, and I look up, only to see my father's
beloved whippet dog, Sheba, who he had rescued from abuse, jump up out of the ditch, run it for
several, and smack into a passing fan and killed outright. I ran out, I told the driver, I'd seen
it, there was nothing he could do just to drive on, and I did what any rural child would have done
in that age, I went to the buyer, the cowshed, I got a hessian sack and a spade, placed Sheba's
limp body into it, and walked out to the moor to dig a hole and start burying her.
And I would say, although that I was 18, I psychologically regressed. I needed my mother
to be there, so that she could tell my father, because this was before, this was 1976, summer of
1974, the summer of 1974, I needed my mother to be there, so that she could pass the news,
because she couldn't just pick up a mobile phone and tell my dad in a hospital in those days.
And I'd no sooner got the whole dog. When my mother's car reappeared at high speed
over the brow of the hill, I ran towards it, she screeched to a halt, she got out looking white as
a ghost and shouted at me, what's the matter? I said, the dog's dead. She said, thank goodness,
I thought it might have been a child, she thought it might have been me or my sister.
She doubled back, managed to catch the plane to Inverness, got into Rakemoor, said to my dad in
his hospital bed, Ian, I've got bad news for you. I know he said it's Sheba, isn't it?
How did you know she said it? He said, because all last night, I kept on being awake,
walking up by Sheba, jumping up on my bed and pouring me. Now, Ian, when I tell that story in
Lewis, or if you told that story in Sky, people would tell you another couple of stories just
like it, quite likely some of it experienced themselves. And this is where what you writing
about time, you culminating with that, what is it, 114 pages or something chapter on the sacred
is so important because you're opening the ground for these things.
Well, I see them as separate really, but connected, if you know what I mean.
I have very little experience of paranormal phenomena directly. But I am quite clear that
there is a realm of the sacred and it is that that perhaps this in some ways bridges in many
people's lives. I mean, I sometimes say whenever original people in Australia say that they can hear
the voices of ancestors, that they can see things happening hundreds of miles away, which turn out
to be true, who are we to say that they can't do these things. And again, I think it's atrophy
of a faculty which we have taught ourselves not to use. Richard Dawkins, a man of whom you've no
doubt heard, has a dogma that children wouldn't normally think in terms of anything to do with
the sacred or the religious or particularly the paranormal, except it was drummed into them by
our culture. But the reality, which is, you know, I quote the scientific evidence for this is that
children when they're little automatically do think in these terms, and they only stop doing
when they go to school and find that it's no longer considered smart to talk like that.
So I think that's interesting. And a couple of other things that care to me. One is that you
in sending our initial exchange of emails, you weren't mind my mentioning that you said
that Johnson and Boswell when they were up here sort of mocked this. And I don't
to didn't remember that at all. In fact, I thought it was rather the opposite that they
had exactly the cast of mind that the proper scientific person should have, which is open,
there may be something here, and they would be interested in hearing more, but they weren't sure.
And they certainly weren't dismissive. And they were very impressed by the stories that they heard.
One story that I can tell, but then perhaps we can move on from second sight to more to do with
the more general sense of the sacred is, well, there are some things that are a bit too personal
to mention, but they're absolutely riveting. But one is from my partner, who was at the opera in
London, I think with her husband, and saw a friend that she knew who was in France,
who is there and said, what are you doing here? And I don't remember the rest of the conversation.
But the next day she got news from France that he had died. And I mean, she's not
my partner, given to seeing things as it were, or I mean, she's a very, very rational down to earth
person. And I find that people who have this faculty don't make a big thing out of it. They
take it along with their rationality. And I wish we were able to have this balanced way, this
sissigie of these two things, which complement one another. I remember in also reading something
I just want to mention that you told in part of your book about, I think you had a bus of 18
archaeologists and engineers you brought from Glasgow, Edinburgh, I can forget where,
and you were in the Chossacks, I think, I mean, you've got this wrong. And there was a big question
with a last about going out at a certain time, because this was the fairest time, the twilight,
the gloaming. And you went to a sheen, which is a kind of holy place for where you see fairies.
And you were there in your sleeping bag, and you looked out and you saw, well, you should perhaps
tell it, but you saw this disc of light that was close to the ground, and was coming down the path,
it was moving along the path, as though it were sort of walking almost, and came to you and went
back into the sheen. So I thought that was, let me say, at least very interesting and not to be
just dismissed. Well, I've had your two or three experiences like that, which I've written about
at various points, you're talking about my book, Portia's Pilgrimage, the book where I really go
into the nature of the spiritual and the spiritual embodied in the land. And what interests me about
these experiences is that this opens us up to the nature of imagination. And the question that I
address in Portia's Pilgrimage, do we merely have imaginations? Or are we moving in imagination?
Are we moving in cosmic imagination? And this is where you're writing, where you open a pathway
to profound interconnectedness in your analysis of time, and how it interacts with how you see the
right hemisphere of the brain is very relevant. Why does this matter? It matters because it's
about our relationality together. It raises the question whether we're parts of one another.
Yes, and when you have time to read my book, if you ever have time to read my book at Greater
Lank, you'll see that one of my grounding, in fact, probably the central message, is that everything
exists in relation, that relations are prior to the things that are related, which is why there
was a problem with things, because things are secondary to the relations that they exist in,
the network that they exist in. So I very much agree with that. And I think the important point
about imagination is one that you make using, I think, a now customer distinction between the
imaginary and the imaginal. But I would say that there is nothing fantastic about the imagination.
Words of some courage to very important figures for me intellectually made the big distinction
between fantasy and imagination. And fantasy takes you away from reality, but imagination
takes you into the depth of reality, so that you really see it. And I think what you're seeing and
what you're describing in Lewis is that meaning of the word imagination, not a fantasy world,
but a world more real than the one we imagined is the only real one.
And I'm thinking here, I recently read Henri Corbaill's work alone. So he was a great French
Islamist. And he's writing about the scholar Ibn Arabi. And he has this wonderful line that prayer
is the supreme act of the creative imagination. Yes, I love that. Creative and he capitalizes
creative imagination. That we pray to God or pray for God, God prays for us all in a oneness.
But before we dig into that further, can I ask you the question that fascinates me? Because
I spent a number of hours with your books, giving it, as I say. But I kept on wondering,
what is motivating you here? Because, I mean, you've reached the top of your career
in conventional neuropsychiatric terms and so on. You're clearly well positioned as a philosopher.
And yet the longest chapter in your book, over 100 pages, ends up being on the sacred,
which is the risky ground. What is motivating you? What experiences have you had that opens
you to the importance of this? Well, I don't know. I mean, I can describe experiences,
but really, I think what motivates me is something rather unusual and probably prejudicial to a career,
which is the truth. I mean, it sounds grand to say that. But I think the thing that we have most
importantly lost in our lives is any sense of truth. We now believe and say the most absurd
things that have ever been said by moderately intelligent human beings. We have lost track
of truth. Even in science, we are now being constrained by all kinds of things. You can't
say this, you mustn't do that. We are losing truth. And I wanted to be truthful to the reality. I was
trying to get that. This is my life's work, this book. And I was begged by philosophers who read
my book, not to write a chapter on the sacred, because he said the philosophy in these books is
very interesting. And it can be taken seriously. But if you write about the sacred, nobody will
take it seriously. And yet in many ways, what I'm writing about leads rationally to, I wanted to
take people who couldn't countenance any idea of the sacred or the divine, perfectly reasonable
position for many people nowadays, take them by the hand and show them things that are scientific
and that are reasonable and bring them by stages to a place where they could accept it or see it.
And one of the things I feel very much about this kind of neck of the woods is something
I can't put my finger on to do with the sacred, whether or not one sees it as specifically to do
with a religion or not is another matter. But in the very natural world here, which called to me to
come and live here, is something very, very special. People who come here say there is something,
there is a new man, there is a feeling, there is, I don't know what they call it, but there's a sort
of something that speaks. And I think that, and you can't deny that, I think, unless you willfully
blot it out. And I often ask myself the question, perhaps you can reflect a bit on this. Why did
those Celtic saints have to come so far to find peace and solitude? After all, in those days,
it was before Easy Jet, you didn't have to go too far from Londinium a few miles to find total
peace and seclusion. So what drove them through wildness, through adverse climate, through taking
their precious books on little coracles across the water, pushing on and on towards the outer rim
of the known world? What were they doing? Well, Sinterdammnen in his biography of St.
Colomber, written a century after Colomber's death, around about 697, I think it was, he
testifies to that, he testifies to people coming from far and wide to go out in small books and
find little scaries, little rocks in the sea, where they could sit and be alone with God and nature
and pray for the world. You said about coming to telescope where you are just now, and I would
imagine it's probably a glass of telescope whiskey that you've got with your written also,
certainly have it in your cupboard. What else could it be? I actually did a naughty little bit
of homework here, because I dug out a poem by the Isle of Vassie poet, Sauli McLean, Samuel McLean.
I mean, talk about deep ecology. I dug out one of Sauli's poems called Tyon Beaches.
It's from his poems for Emma, who is the wife of Kuhulun, his mythical muse, his figure of love.
And I just need to explain some place meanings here. Telesca meaning the sloping rock,
the north, coming into the garlic there. Who are the story points? I know the bit you're going to
read. The bit of the reddish rock, the picture being painted here, is of the sloping rock and
then down on the sea, these two rocks and beside them there's the white sea churning in. Now listen
to this, you know what I'm going to read. Wonderful lines, but only read the first
stanza, because we haven't got time for the whole poem.
Don't worry, it's already a short bit. And pre-Charlie, is that how you pronounce it?
Pre-Charlie? Pre-Charlie?
Looks like an animal here. If we were in Telesca on the shore where the great white mouth opens
between two hard jaws, ruin and clash, and the bitter roar, I would stand beside the sea, renewing
love in my spirit while the ocean was filling Telesca Bay forever. I would stand there on the
bareness of the shore until Prishul bowed his stallion head until the rocks are worn away.
That is the place we are living. That is the integration of people, poetry and nature.
It's mind-blowingly beautiful. I mean the poem, we mustn't give the impression the place is,
otherwise the place will be overrun by tourists, which we could never do.
You know, the other thing that I think is very relevant is that haunting line with which
he begins a poem about Halle, the ruined village there, and he begins,
time the deer is in the woods of Halle. And the interesting thing is, I hadn't really picked up
until reading you, actually, that the word deer and wild are one of the same in fear, meaning
the wildness and the deer. And the deer, you know, here I am, I'm sitting underneath the
fairy on the Christmas tree, and I'm sitting at the foot of the sheen, the fairy tale, as I talk
to you, metaphorically speaking, and the deer is a cattle of the fairies. Dr John McKinnis,
there's Michael Newton's book of film. Oh, too high up. You know, in his essay on the Supernatural
in the Gallic World, he says that fairy is a metaphor for the imagination. So in other words,
fairy is an indigenous way of talking about what you call my hemisphere.
Well, it's being open to whatever is listening and being honouring of whatever comes to you,
not constantly saying, but I know better, it's like this, I already know this, I'm going to put it
in my box of knowledge. And it's getting away from that that is in our world so difficult,
it's getting back to all that is meant by Jung's unconscious mind in which the powerful
symbols. And the thing about them is that once they're made explicit, they lose their power.
So they it's a deeply implicit, unexplicit knowledge. And that is why it will always seem
lacking or fantastic to somebody who's determined to dismiss it. And as Johnson himself said,
for those who want to be skeptical, there are many reasons and he lists them, but he also
beautifully says that there are other reasons for standing back from that position as well.
He was so wonderfully unpredictable man, he was in fact, in some ways, the first romantic,
the first appreciator of Shakespeare. And he was also a rational thinker, a very down-to-earth man,
he managed to bridge these worlds we're talking about. And I'm honoured that he came and stayed
in my house. And it's not many people. He came out two nights in your house. He did. And he just
slept in what was then called the Low Bedroom, which is now my library. And as I say, not many
people can say that Dr. Johnson slept in that library. So you put me right on that because I
had picked up that Johnson was a bit incredulous. And what he says basically is that some people
are incredulous about it. But as you rightly corrected me, he himself was very open to what
he was seeing there. And to his reflection on Martin Martin, who wrote about 40 pages on the
second site. Can we take this to a slightly different level? Because one of the feelings
that I had reading or skimming your book Ian, is that it was as if there was a gradually
sloping swimming pool going into unfathomably deep water at the deep end. And you were taking
you a reader in each of your chapters by the hand and leading them round to the deep end
and saying this is actually real. This is where you swim. This is where you swim. This is where you
learn to dive. This is where you even perhaps learn to breathe underwater. Is that... Well, thank you
for saying that. I think that's exactly what I hoped. So I'm delighted, thrilled that you feel that.
But I feel that you're taking people to the same place just by a different means, a more
narrative and more poetic means. I mean, after all, one of the things that is so central to your
work, I mean, the title Soil and Soul itself tells us is this link, two links, really. One is between
the earth and whatever is above and beyond it. And the other is to the sense of the place,
the importance of place. And that's something we've been taught no longer to feel an allegiance
to a place. It's not fashionable. It doesn't fit with the post industrialized society where we were
all uprooted and taken away from our culture and thrown into a hugamugga world in a city
where we had to reinvent meaning because those meanings had been left behind deep in the places
that we came from. And you know, one of the things that staggered me when I was writing The Master
and his emissary was to discover that animals such as rats bond as much with their nest as they do
with their mother. So their nest is like their mother. I mean, that's pretty important. And your
work unveils this what's there in this landscape. I found myself and you mentioned this concept,
which I hadn't heard of. I will get the pronunciation probably wrong. Is it Keanalas?
Keanalas, yes, a deep yearning, a kind of homesickness for place, a yearning, a longing for your
place of belonging. And you know, all the cultures that have not been uprooted and
deracinated and thrown around the world have this feeling. And it's not just a useless yearning.
It's a sense of connection, a longing, which literally means a stretching out of yourself
from someplace that you wish to be close to again. See if Lewis writes very well about this.
Well, you know from soil and soil that my best known work is just land reform.
And my involvement in the 1990s was the organization that brought egg. And I mean,
you will look out your window. Can you see it from where you are?
Not, no, it's from the other end of the island, but I can.
You've probably got rum, but the mountains have rum just blocking.
You can see rum. You can see rum if you're up on the lights.
Just behind, just behind. I know.
So to me, I suppose having drawn up in the Isle of Lewis and having experienced real life
communities of place. And then as a young man, when I was 22, being sent by voluntary service
overseas to Papua New Guinea and finding exactly the same cultural understanding of community
in Papua New Guinea, as we had in Lewis, to the extent it helped me understand my own home
place properly for the first time. You know, you don't see the water till it steps into a different
water. That experience opened me to this work with people in place, which I think
is germane to our modern environmental predicament, that we have become de-racinated,
or as Anthony Gooden's sociologist puts it, disembedded from the place of our embeddedness.
And so one of the practical applications of the kind of work I'm doing and that you're doing
is the ways in which it can help to re-embed us.
We need to be re-embedded. We need seriously to be re-embedded in place and in time. These are
the two things that are most important in where we are in this world. And I don't mean that they
should confine us, but in fact, they liberate us into this other world that we're talking about.
It's through them that we find the greater, the eternal, the whatever. We don't do it by turning
our backs on place and time, but by inhabiting them. And it's the continuity of time, i.e. those
who came before us and those who will come after us, and the continuity of place that have been
disrupted for us and have made us, I don't know what to say, pilgrims wanderers, people who are
fleeing from their own being. The theory on top of my free hands be down just a very book.
And here's what they do as time is. And there is a wonderful line early on in the time is
where Socrates, I think it is, defines time as being a moving image of eternity,
a moving image of eternity. And when I first read that at the age of 20, early 20s, it kind of blew
my mind because it is so much the sense of time that you get in Hebridean religious people. We're
talking here of free church, free church of Scotland, those sort of people that are the
indigenous people of the communities. Earlier, I mentioned the retired policeman now passed away,
Norman the Loud of Bridgehouse of Harris, and he wrote, I forget my single page of notes for
tonight, so I could quote him exactly. But I've got him quoted in Poachers Pilgrimage, where I
discussed my meeting with him, in which he's describing to me the vision, the second site
vision he had of events in the Falkland war several weeks before they happened. And eventually,
he was so afflicted with the second site, that he prayed to God to have it taken away from him.
And as Steve Taylor in this book that I mentioned here, there's got a whole chapter on Norman says,
and indeed, as Norman's own daughter told me, when she came to a talk I gave in Brunbecula
a few years ago, that was successful. He was then relieved of the predicament of seeing what was
going to happen to people before it happened. But Norman said, yeah, isn't it interesting,
isn't it? Because Norman said to me, he was criticizing a book by Ludovic Kennedy in which
Oh, yes, yes, I read that bit, yes, yes, yes. But carry on, yes, yes.
And, you know, Kennedy was poo-hooing the idea of God. And this is what Norman said to me, he said,
my God, Alastair, it's a high and lofty one who inhabits us eternity. His name is holy.
Now, there you have hepody in metaphysical religion who inhabits us eternity.
I mean, it's all there, really, in that. And this sense of, you know, these things that are
double edged slightly, the high and mighty, the awe-inspiring, and the thing that can also inspire
Melancholy, or Kianlas, how have you pronounced it? Kianlas.
That seems absolutely core to the feeling one has here of
contacting something very profound. And without the sort of tinge of the Melancholy or whatever,
there wouldn't be the depths of it. And I'm wondering if you and I both, it turns out,
as I discovered, as far as I can tell, anyway, from my brief reading of you, that we both
embrace Panentheism, not Pantheism. And the important, you pointed out in what you had
to say about that, I have things to say about it in my work, but you pointed out that in some ways
that perhaps explains how so much that seems to our eyes to be painful, destructive, whatever,
is also taken up into the realm that has meaning, that has ultimate meaning. And I think that is
a way I would very much embrace with you. Yeah.
I mean, this is why Hebridean people, for those who don't know, the Hebrides are islands like
Skye, where Ian is speaking from, and the Isle of Lois, where I grew up and had my primary
connections with. The Hebridean people have really experienced hardship in the past.
They've had, you know, in an extreme environment, terrible losses in the first and second World War,
because there were such competent mariners and practical people.
Sorry about that, Ian, it looks like we've just lost Alastair.
He might be trying to come back on in. I might ask Jonathan if he wants to step in.
Well, yes, yes, I was hoping to talk about some other things with the...
Don't worry, he'll be back. He'll be back. Yeah, yeah, I'll play temporary substitute.
I was struck there for a second. I know this is not literally what Alastair said,
but it sounded awfully like for a minute he was saying the right hemisphere is a fairy,
but I want, just for a second there was, you know, were you really saying that?
No. I'm not saying that. I know you're not saying that. I know I think everyone listening
knows you're not saying that. Just I guess we keep an eye out for him entering the room up there.
Yes, yes, of course. What I was curious to understand, Ian, better was what not everyone
watching may know, and even Alastair, because he hasn't had so much time with the books yet,
may not know. In the second volume of the matter with things, although the sacred comes right
at the end, it doesn't come out anymore. There is a sort of cumulative argument that
includes rethinking many metaphysical principles from the nature of time,
the perception of value, sort of cosmological purpose, the nature of the world, and so on.
Can you talk us through just a little bit what that story is, how you end up at the sacred,
and a lot of people want to go straight there, but I feel in some ways even more interesting
is how you bridge the scientific premise to, you know, fill that out towards the sacred.
I suppose it offers two things. One is it shows that it's not disconnected from, but actually
consequent on. Hello, Alastair, and understand, I'll just finish answering Jonathan's question,
but consequence on a reimagining that we which we must make in any case of what we think our
reality to be. And I suppose the other thing is that it offers a way of bringing people who might
not be entirely close to the possibility of the divine, but don't as yet experience it
to coming to a place where they can find something that resonates. So that's really it, yes, yes.
I will take my leave again momentarily, but just to say that part of the book,
the first phase of the second volume for me is my favorite part, just for those who are
watching or interested. I can disappear for a second to let them carry on for another 10 minutes.
Alastair, I wanted to ask you, unless you have something pressing, but I wanted to use the
bit of time we've got left to talk about wildness. I don't know if you like the poem
Gerard Mandy Hopkins, but he wrote wonderfully about wildness and wilderness and how important
it is to us. And I don't think we understand this. We think that as long as there is land,
it's okay. But it being wild, untamed, undominated by the human spirit is very,
very important. And there's almost nowhere left in these islands where this is true. There are
bits of sky and bits of the outer hebrides. And you probably know something that really,
I think it's so awful that everybody watching this should write to their MPs or raise it in public
is that a Danish company who have bought parts of sky are going to erect enormous wind farms on
sky, dethroning the last really great place of wildness in this part of the world, or one of
them anyway. And this is a crime. It's not something that any human being should be contemplating.
If it costs more to put them in the sea, then do so. Or it might even mean that we become less
dependent on electricity altogether. But to destroy the beauty of these wild places
is an unforgivable sin in my view. I feel very strongly about it, I can probably tell.
Well, am I back on? Can I just say that what cut me off there is that although I had my phone
supposedly switched off, so somebody was able to get through, ironically, who is from the Isle of
Harris, one of the men in the Galgale Trust, a local organisation here in Government,
who wrestles profoundly with alcohol, with ill health, a wonderful man, a wonderful man,
who can burst into garlic song at a moment's notice. So that was the Isle of Harris. They must
have known we had to have a whiskey on the second site. Well, I hope it doesn't come on again and
fool me off. Can I engage your considerable prestige, imagination and energy in helping us
fend off this disaster? Or perhaps it's too late. But it is really.
Okay. So basically, my view is that terrestrial wind farms, as distinct from one's far out to see,
should only be where the local community decides that it wants to have them under its control
for its benefit. Like you have the Point and Sandwick Trust in the Isle of Lewis,
putting a million pounds a year into the community, whereas if it were the commercial
one, it would only get 45,000 pounds a year or something like that. So that is my position
on wind farms. The situation we're caught in just now is that the urban world is saying, well,
we need to get carbon free energy. So we'll go to places like the Highlands and Islands. We're not
going to have it from nuclear. So we'll go to places like the Highlands and Islands and we'll
we'll wire it down from there. And the problem I have with that, Ian,
is that if you destroy the beauty of nature, which in my view is this is doing, it is turning
a natural landscape into a mechanical landscape, if you destroy the beauty of nature on that scale,
because some of those sky turbines will be standing two thirds of the height of the Cullen,
the highest mountains and sky from the platform level that they'll be on. If you destroy that,
you start to destroy people's capacity to appreciate beauty and to care about anything
that really matters in this world. And destroy their access to awe and wonder, and thus erode
their imagination and destroy part of their vitality. It is a really, really serious thing.
It's as serious as it gets, in my view. So there we are. I just want to say that because so much
of what you write about and what you alerted me to is this importance in the folklore here
of the wild, how they too, you know, it's often said, oh, only kind of educated, romantic people
like you see this, but actually the ordinary people of sky and of these places also see that
wildness as crucial. But let me put a caveat in here, because a lot of my work this year has
been engaged with Community Land Scotland. You'll find two of my papers if you go into their website.
And the whole rewilding thing, well, again, wealthy people, what we call the green layers,
are buying up vast areas of Scotland to rewild them so that they can sell the carbon and maybe
later on the biodiversity uplift credits on it. And the problem that we have with this,
is that it is taking control of place out of the hands of local communities
by permanently buying it up for a purpose that the layer was parachuted in.
I'm sure you know that I wouldn't be speaking for that. And life is complicated. And one has to,
yeah, well, that's a quite different issue, frankly, from the one I'm talking about,
which is the deliberate destruction and violation of the few places of natural
wildness and beauty that we have left. I think that is appalling. And so I'm not talking here
about the rewilding by green landlords from elsewhere. But there are many sides to most
questions, but some are so clear that we really ought to be doing something to defend our world.
Well, I think you have to have what I would call ecological restoration alongside the people.
Many of these places were cleared of their people historically.
Exactly.
Young people cannot buy places to live in a place like Scotland.
I know, I know.
Because second homers and what have you, price them out of the market.
How do you pull that together? At the deepest level, you pull it together by reactivating
imaginative potential. I've been working this past month on an SE for Dark Mountain Journal,
which I have titled A Sermon to the English on Land Reform. And it's set out in the structure
of a traditional Scottish sermon. It'll be out in Dark Mountain Journal, I think probably around
Easter time. And it's basically suggesting to the English what they need to do to achieve what
we're doing in Scotland was now about 3% of our land and community land trust, so 500 community
land trust. But that comes from the artists and musicians. It comes from the poets. It comes from
the songwriters. It comes from the visual artists who inspire a vision, your right hemisphere.
Inspire a vision of what the future can be so that we remember what has been dismembered.
We revision how the future could be. And then we do the political and practical left hemisphere
work of reclaiming how to bring it into being. And we're in a perilous political time just now
because these massive amounts of money and the desperate imperative of action and climate change
is powering up forces, which in my view are recolonizing our land and should have no place
in modern Scotland. And you're so right that it is also important that this is to do with
a cohesive community and a cohesive society. But I don't think that speculators from other
countries coming in and the Chinese are behind the dispoliation of many Greek islands. They put
money into it and these unutterably beautiful and sacred landscapes are destroyed. Anyway,
there we are. I'm not arguing here that we don't need green energy, we do, but we have to do it
in a different way. Yeah. Thank you both so much. I'm here to usher in the next phase of the evening
to bring in the, you know, feeding the 5,000, but it's going to say feeding the 500, but it's
about that. And I want to ask a couple of things, partly to give people time to write their questions.
Because of the numbers here, choosing people from the audience is far from straightforward.
So we'd much prefer if you could please write your question. The chat is now reopening.
And we have colleagues who will be looking at those questions and choosing among them.
It's not as simple as first come, first serve. We're trying to get a range of viewpoints,
a range of kinds of people. And we're trying to kind of keep in mind what's been asked before.
So if we don't pick your question, please don't take offense. It's not personal.
I'm really glad with where you ended up in a way. I know it was a bit tense,
but it's sort of interesting because I began introducing Perspectiva in terms of systems,
souls, and society. And you kind of got there at the end because, you know, if you begin with
second sight and premonitions and possibly the paranormal and the sacred and you, but you come
around to, you know, a real live political issue in a beautiful place with contested values and
competing economic logics and so on. And for me, this is really in some ways where it's at.
It's the challenge of how do you navigate these different things? So the question is,
first of all, for Alastair, and I have a slightly different one for Ian, although you can both answer
them both. I'll say you invoke imagination. And I know Ian would be a big fan of imagination in
general as well. But I wonder sometimes if people expect too much of imagination. If it
if it's always assumed to be filled with goodness, because there's also dark imagination. There's also
the imagination of those who long for world domination and so on. What is it in the nature
of imagination that gives you hope? Or rather, what what forms of imagination need to be brought
into being such that they're actually beneficent and positive and not destructive?
Tell me more about what it is that gives you faith and imagination.
I think that as Henri Corbass says in his book on Ibn Arabi, it must be grounded in the divine.
Hebridean people take God very seriously. They take God as a matter of fact, a matter of experience.
In Bernard Shaw's play, Joan of Arc, which is somewhere behind me, like, don't turn around
to get it. No, no. We know it. We know it. With my fairy god. You see, what a wonderful fairy I've got.
Her inquisitor says to her, how do you know that the voices of God that you hear
are not just your imagination? And Joan says, but that is how God speaks to us.
That is how God speaks to us. So on your question about dark imagination, I would say
that if imagination, if I work with imagination, if our work of art and of intellect
is not grounded in the God space, if it is not grounded ultimately in prayer,
we must be very careful. Otherwise, as many native peoples will tell you,
the gift or charism can very easily turn toxic and poison both its processor and those around it.
So I would say that if we are working with imagination, Jonathan,
consider starting from a place of prayer, consider starting from a place of offering
yourself and your works to that which will serve what the Russian Orthodox call the fellow Kalia,
the love of beauty, the divine beauty, our relationship with each other.
Thank you, Alastair. Ian, do you want to come in on that? I've got a direct question for you as well.
Yeah, well, I would say, I think Corrid said something like that the imagination is the
repetition in the finite mind of the infinite I am. So he's really saying the same thing that it is
the way in which God speaks, but you're right that it can be perverted as all things in the
human realm can be perverted. And I don't want to go there now because it would take us too long,
but I would stand up for the idea that there is a drive which wishes to thwart and pervert,
and that it's what is traditionally meant by evil. I think it is a real thing that has power
in human doings. And people think I'm mad, but I defend myself on another day. But that's what
I would say about it. So Ian, it's up to the follow up question to that. And this is the last one
I'll ask. My sense is that very few people will think you're mad, but some might find you coy
in the sense that we had a moment there. Well, we had a moment there where we were
alighting between the paranormal and the sacred. And I understand with your scientific background
and due caution about misinformation and being misunderstood and so on, I fully respect and
understand that to keep things grounded and real and yet open as well at the same time. And we've
had this kind of conversation before. But it's intriguing for me that as we're talking about
fairies and you're joking with Alistair about fairies, I think there must be some people in the
audience who are like, what are they? Are they really saying they're fairies? And on second
sight and premonition, are we actually, is it okay now in a public conversation for reputed people
to entertain these possibilities? I'm just saying, is that indeed the case?
Well, fairies and second sight are perhaps not the same thing. And it depends exactly what you
mean by fairies, not as they're commonly imagined, but more messengers perhaps from another realm,
such as angels were thought to be. Although I'm not conflating the two, I have to answer so quickly,
I can't really make the niceties I want. But my view on second sight and the paranormal is exactly
that of my hero, Johnson, which he ended up saying, I came away not entirely convinced,
but willing to believe. He listened to the evidence, he was interested in the evidence,
he asked more questions, he didn't dismiss it, he thought there's probably something here,
I don't know quite what it is. And that's, it's not coinage, it's, I think, a natural
discrimination between types of issues about which one can be relatively certain and those
that one can't. Right. Okay. Thank you very much. So listen, can I just say, Johnson, you know,
there's a huge amount, I mean, that's just three I could reach just now. There's Ted Cowan, the
late professor of Scottish history at Glasgow University with Lizanne Henderson and Scottish
fairy belief. In Scottish scholarship, this has taken very seriously because it is understood
as being about ways of seeing into and talking about the imagination. It's like it's a symbolic
way of speaking about things. Okay. I appreciate that and I appreciate both of you
being both open about it and discerning and discriminating about it. We have some great
questions. If it's better to hear from the person if possible, so we're going to try this initially
and if it doesn't work out, I'll just read them out. But first of all, Catherine Lord, do you
want to try and raise your hand and if we can find you, we'll unmute you. Hello. Okay, that's
have your question. Thank you. Yes, I'm interested in how we educate children and the implications of
the seeing in whole ways and seeing with our imagination and what we do with our children's
schools. And I'm just interested in how you feel maybe our education system might need to change
so that we don't take, stop us being able to see things in with our right hemisphere.
Well, naturally, I feel very strongly about that. And I've talked many times about how I think
education in this country and in the West generally could be reformed. I think the loss of the
humanities, the prevalence of only STEM subjects is disastrous. And I think that education is about
awakening a mind that is seeking, not about sating a mind with information and then checking
whether it can be regurgitated. I think teachers should be freed up to talk about,
I mean, not go wild, but to talk about the things that really interest them. That was how I was
educated. And it worked because the spark came to me, if you like, that was right hemisphere
speaking to right hemisphere. So I think all those things really in brief. Thank you, Ian. Appreciate it.
I would come in at that. Here's what you're kippling puck of pooks. He'll just hand it down to me by
the Christmas tree fairy. You know, it's fascinating because what's going on in the first chapter of
this book and kippling's mother was one of the McDonald's sisters, four sisters who had their
family roots in sky. What's going on there is that puck appears when the when the children say
by oak and thorn and ash or something like that, puck appears, he's the last fairy in English,
England, because he says the English have frightened the rest of us away. And he says,
I too will go when the trees are all gone. What does he do to reconnect the children,
but he reactivates their imagination. Okay, he starts telling them their history. It's a very
robust your history as you'd expect from a writer of the empire, not the kind of thing you'd read
to children today, perhaps. But that is what's so fascinating. He starts telling stories. So in
answer to the question of question, I would say the way you reactivate imagination in children is
story, is beauty, is creativity. Yes, I'd just like to say though that I'm
certainly I don't can't speak for others, but I'm not saying that rigor, clarity, logic, and all these
things are not important. They're under taught actually these days, children are indoctrinated
rather than taught how to think on both sides of a question. So I'm not saying that I'm just
saying that we need to get back into the curriculum, imagination, narrative, myth, poetry, music,
drama, all the rest. Yes, history, our own history above all, but history of other places too.
Thank you, Ian and Alistair. And thanks for the question Catherine. Caroline Thompson,
if you could please raise your hand and let yourself be known. We'll try and unmute you.
And while you're getting ready, if Anne-Louise Wolters can also do the same. But first of all,
Caroline, if we can find you. Hi, hi. Thank you so much for answering my question. I'm a composer
and I write music. And I always feel people appearing in my music who has recently died or
people who I'm very interested in while I'm writing. And since you are both like the
heart and ratio in the philosophy and poetry, I was thinking, maybe you could have a poetic
discourse about how people who died in front of my music and where the music comes from anyhow.
So that's a bit broad. Yeah, I know. It's it's a bit of a complicated profession.
Yeah, I don't want to either of you want to take it on?
Well, I'll kick off if you like. I mean, of course, immediately I thought of
Elgar's Enigma Variations, which were pieces of music inspired by people some of whom had
recently died. But I don't think that's what you're talking about. I mean, I think that
the question where these things come from is very interesting. But the answer seems to be that they
do not certainly originate in our conscious mind. They come through us in some sense. How far away
that that thing originates, I don't know, from my consciousness. But it certainly comes through
my unconscious mind. And I think it comes to all artists in that way. And it's probably something
bigger than ourselves that we don't appreciate that is speaking to us in forms. So I mean,
that's really what I would briefly say. I have a whole chapter on creativity, by the way,
in the matter of things. Yeah. Alastair? Well, just I know that when I'm writing,
and I really start tripping out. It's like, I don't cry easily, but a few tears will come to
my eyes. And it's just like, I'm immersed in something. And I'm telling it as it is, Ian
talked about the importance of truth. Truth with a capital T is so important, because
in the Greek, the word, the Greek New Testament, the word truth, Elysia, also means reality.
In the Sanskrit, the word truth, Satya, your Gandhi Satya Graha, truthfuls. Also, as Gandhi
points out, means realityfuls. So we're talking here about real creativity. We're not talking
about narcissistic art, egotistic art. We're talking about real creativity is about being
receptive to listening to cosmic truth. And allowing that to come through in whatever our art or in
Ian's case with his book is intellectual creativity. It is trying to give expression to
honouring that honouring that. Thank you. Thank you. A little shade of something that Jonathan
and I mentioned, I'll just say this quickly, which was that sometimes there is also a slight
dark side to this. My own experience of the diamond that works in me when it does is that
it's pretty ruthless. I don't really care about my health or happiness. Yeah. Yeah. Ask my wife
the same question. I mean, Ian, I was giving you a talking but becky and an old woman came up
afterwards and said to Viren, my wife, are you his wife? Viren said yes. And the old woman said
he must be very hard to live with. Surely not. Okay. Caroline, I'm just trying to get through
a few more questions just to respect the audience. So Caroline, I think you're unmuted now if you
want to ask a question. Yeah. Your discussion of Sianolas was about the place of longing,
and it kind of made me remember the concept of thin places and that idea that in those sacred
places, spiritual places, you are very close, like a hair breath away from the divine. Do you
have any comments on that? Am I getting close to what you were referring to? Absolutely is what
I thought. So I don't mean to jump in ahead of you again, Aleister, but I mean, that is exactly
what I mean. That's what people say when they come here. This is one of the thin places. It is.
It absolutely is. And the other world is closer here, and no wonder therefore one can hear,
feel, and see things that the noise of the city drowns out. Thank you very much. And then we have
a question from our old friends. No, no, no. George McLeod of the Iowa community.
One of George's things was George's big question, what's the matter? And he said matter is the
matter. It is when we forget that the divine is incarnate in matter. That's when we have to
ask what's the matter, because we've forgotten that incarnation. You may have forgotten that I asked
what's the matter with things. Yeah, just to briefly remind us the meaning of your title,
the matter with things, because that appears to be pertinent. Since you're saying there's
something going wrong that needs sorting out, what's the matter? And there's a lot of the
matter is to do with our privileging of a kind of very debased idea of matter, devoid of any
imminent spirit, simply lumpen matter, and our belief that the world is composed of things.
It isn't. It's relational, and things have secondarily emerged from a web of relations.
Okay, wonderful. Thank you for that quick answer. Rupert Reid, our old friend, Rupert Reid, come
and give us a question. Good evening, both. Yeah, so I wanted to pick up on Ian's remarks about how
we are disconnected, estranged from truth in this civilization. And I wanted to suggest
that while that's completely true, there's also a tendency which is opposite, maybe equal,
that's what I'm kind of asking, which is of an enormous hunger for truth that you can sense here
tonight in the audience, but also in the two of you. For me, one of the ways this has come through
very strongly in recent years is in the absolute determination in the climate movement to break
through in a new way by truth-telling and not staying in the normal confines of a sort of
conservative risk analysis of where we are at. So if there's a question, the question would be,
I'd love to invite you both to comment on, well, firstly, whether you agree. And secondly, if so,
how do we enable this second tendency, the tendency of the love for the truth and the
authentic, to overtake the first tendency which Ian was so powerfully mentioning?
You go ahead, Alistair.
I missed the very last, because we're getting lots of captions coming up over my transcripts,
I'm very deaf, I missed your very last point of your question. Could you just repeat it?
So the very last point was how do we strengthen the tendency to
for the truth, the love of truth, to disconnect from it? Yeah.
You be truthful. You make an ethic of trying to be truthful. It's very difficult. We're in a
culture where we are all expected to tell little white lies because they help to lubricate our
relationships. Well, bugger that. That starts to distort. It's the whiskey speaking.
It's very difficult. It's very difficult. And with, you know, I don't think any of us always
succeed. But you really work being truthful. You work on being honest. I had a dream last night
about this. I had a nightmare last night. I woke up about three in the morning.
I was at the end of our house, the surgery in Louisbus. I was standing by the road. And there
was, it was dark. It was pitch black. And what we would call a poor Trojan, a poor soul, a very
simple man in the village who used to wander from house to house, was standing there. And he
pointed out across the moors. And he said to me, there's a madman raging out in the moor over there.
And I went back into the house. I started locking all the doors to my father's medicine square and
all the rest of it. And there was a sense of discretion, this fear coming in over me and a
sense of that the madman was out to get what my father, the doctor, represented and the national
health service. And then I woke up and for a while I was lying in bed spooked. But when I woke up
this morning, it all fell into place, Ian, in terms of the questions you've been raising about the
dark side of the creatives. Because who was the madman out in the wilds? The madman was your
right hemisphere. The madman was what the doctor's surgery and medicine and the NHS cannot control.
And the dream was saying, don't forget the madman, that is, madman is part of me.
Yes, I well, if you see the truth, the truth is facing that the truth is acknowledging that.
Okay, no, I get what you're saying there, but I don't want anyone who to run away with the idea
that I think that the right hemisphere has anything to do with madness, the left hemisphere is much
closer to that, or with just a fairy not fairy nonsense, it's a it's our truth telling organ,
actually. And I go into that for great length in the first part of the book. What I would say
in our answer to you, Rupert, is that you don't have to teach a hungry person to love food.
And people are starved of truth and they know it. And that's why there's a hunger for people to buy
an incredibly long book which aims to help them on a journey. And from the messages I get from
people all over the world of all ages, they don't feel they've been let down on that. They feel
they have been taken somewhere that has made a difference to how they think. So that's really
what I'd say. I've just finished reading that hideous strength by C.S. Lewis. I don't know if
you've read it, it's quite a good book really. And it really is about how when people see something
desperate happening and destroying everything beautiful and imaginatively rich, they eventually
the falseness crumbles. I hope that we'll live to see that happen. Thank you both.
Thank you both. And thank you, Rupert, for the question. Just in the interest of time, Gary Hoover,
I'm going to slightly paraphrase your question, which is a great question. In effect, Gary is
arguing, and I've noticed the same thing, that many describe the modern world in terms of an
anthropogenic extinction event, that the world as we know it is ending, typically ecologically,
but sometimes technologically. And this may or may not be an accurate scientific prognosis,
but it's limited, sort of reductionistic and technical in its perception. There are other
ways of framing this in terms of, I don't know, apocalypse, Armageddon, or something more imaginal
or this kind of thing. How would you see it both sort of scientifically and more spiritually?
How would you describe the state of the world and the predicament that we're in?
And I'll go with that. Alistair first, please. I don't think we're going to, as human beings,
become extinct. Many other species are already becoming extinct because of their actions.
I don't think we're going to become extinct as some people make out. I think the challenge of
these times is to take in the suffering of the world that we are all participants in creating
and to use this as a wake-up call to building community and creating beauty or being open to
the creation of beauty through us. In my most recent book on climate change, Riders and a
Storm, I've written two books on climate change, but the most recent one, the final two chapters
are about community land trusts in Scotland, because that is where on the ground I see beauty
being recreated, both with nature and in human nature. And that is something we can all do,
you know, whether we're in an urban context, like I am here in governing Glasgow or in the
Hebrides or whatever, we can all work on our relationships with each other and our
relationships with nature, making beauty, making love. It's not rocket science, it's just about
sharing, making a meal, cooking, sharing a book, having a chat like this tonight.
Thank you, Ian. How about our things?
Well, I guess I'm also interested just in your sense of how bad things are,
like, you know, the state of the world.
Well, I would say, first of all, I meant everything that Alistair said there,
those words could have come from my lips. I do think things are very bad. I think it's possible
to use various techniques we have of soothing ourselves and thinking that it's probably not
all that bad. And it may not be that bad because prediction is an imprecise art.
We usually are not entirely accurate in our predictions. And science and imagination
need to be in dialogue. Science alone cannot really tell us what's wrong with the world we're in
or where it's going next. Imagination has possibly more to say about that, but the facts that science
can give us, when it can give us facts that we can rely on, which is not as often as people think,
is very valuable. And you know, my whole epistemology, Alistair, in the second part of my book,
is that we need to bring together science and reason with intuition and imagination,
that none of these is dispensable, and we need to bring them all to bear. I think if we do,
we see both that things are very bad. And in my view, that there is the possibility for something
unforeseen to happen, which is a revolution in the human spirit. And that may sound all
very well when we're facing these practical problems. But actually, the practical problems
won't be solved by simply practical solutions. They also need to be coupled to a renewal of a
spiritual dimension to our lives. And I think the signs that that is very much craved by the young
and the old now, and that this is a sign of hope, and that also just to say, because you said something
like we can all play a part, this is hopeful for everyone, because people say, oh, what can I do?
I'm so small, the world's so big. And by the way, our world is so small. Look at the size of the
cosmos. That's got nothing to do with meaning. That is the left hemisphere's way of thinking,
measuring. But actually, how big is love? How big is the divine? How big is the sacred? And they're
all in here, and they can all begin from here, and you can unleash them, you can grow them.
And that is what we can all begin that work tonight, not even tomorrow morning.
Yeah, I mean, if this was an auditorium, applause with breakout at this point. Listen,
thank you. We've reached our 101 minute mark. And I'm very grateful to you both. I'm grateful
for the audience questions. I would encourage those who've enjoyed the chat during the Q&A
to save it. There is a way of doing that whereby you look for the dot dot dot sign, the ellipsis,
and click on that, and it usually lets you save the chat. That will give you access to any links
that were given there. And I'd also encourage you to search out Alastair's books, particularly the
ones he mentioned, Writers on the Storm and Climate Change, I very much recommend.
Poacherous Pilgrimage and Soil and Soul. For Ian, of course, the matter with things,
particularly highly recommended. And if you want to check out Perspectiva,
we've also given our link to the website. Here we have a sub-stack which you're welcome to join.
And if you become a paid subscriber, there will be perks forthcoming for those who do so.
Thank you very much. The other thing you need is the email for the fairy on the top of Alastair's
Christmas tree. You'll find all the books that you need at the very moment you need them.
Yeah, if you want the books at hand, I'll get that contact information for the Christmas tree
fairy later, Alastair. But for now, I wish you all a thank you. And you can just briefly unmute to
say bye. It's going to be a bit cacophonous, but let's enjoy the merriment for a second.
If we can do that, guys, if not, then we just have to enjoy the silence.
Thank you. Bye.
