Thank you very much.
And I'm conscious that you've all had already a very full day, and I'm also conscious that
many of you came expressly to hear Ian talk and meet him in person.
And Ian has prepared a lecture, you know, something substantive directed at this event,
the theme of difference from his work.
So I'm going to introduce him, introduce the context of his work a little bit for those
who don't know it, then step aside, let Ian take the stage, speak to him for 15 or so
minutes myself, and then pass on to you for Q&A.
And I'm guessing we're going to have more questions and we'll have time to answer.
So do think not only about what you want to ask, but how you want to ask it while Ian's
talking.
It's a real honor to introduce Ian McGilchrist.
I've now known Ian since 2011.
There was a moment when I was working at the Royal Society of Arts in London, when the
chief executive there, Matthew Taylor, who normally chaired events, just couldn't do
the one with Ian.
And two days before, I was given his fairly large, but not quite as large as the current
book, The Master and his Emissary.
And I was very excited.
I thought, well, very interesting bold thesis here.
Started reading it.
The evening of the event, Matthew actually showed up backstage just before we were about
to go on stage.
And I was like, oh, please tell me I can share this event.
Please, like, last minute.
But actually, it worked.
I went on stage, spoke to Ian, and that was the beginning of a very important professional
relationship for me.
And since then, I've done a great deal of work promoting Ian's ideas.
I feature in a documentary about him, visited his house on Sky, and now, by many strange
twists of fate, became the publisher of his most recent book, The Matter with Things.
Now, as some of you may know, and even if you don't know, you can just glance at it
here if you can see the, I might hold it up if I have the strength in my left arm.
But this is two very significant sized tomes, two volumes of The Matter with Things.
And I believe Ian may have the precise details, but the words alone are roughly 600,000.
And then that's just really kind of where it's getting started, because you also have
quite significant appendices, notes, bibliography, references, index.
So by the end of it, it's something approaching a million words, I believe, for both volumes
together.
But they're wonderful, wonderful, wonderful words, and many have read every one of them.
And some have described it as, you know, really the book of our times, the book that everyone
must read, of course, there's many of them, but this is one of them, I think.
And it's very, very deep, and it does deal with very fundamental matters about the nature
of life, the purpose of life, and the meaning of life towards the end of the second book,
especially.
And so I just wanted to share one more thing, which is that when I was describing my experience
of reading this book, I posted a photograph of a large pencil that comes from the United
Nations, so one of these sort of souvenir pencils, and it was put along the spine of
the book diagonally, so it looked, you could sort of see the sort of significance of the
book somehow in the image, you know, it's the social media age, I was doing what I could.
And then somebody said to me, ah, yes, this is actually a three-pencil book, and I said,
three-pencil book?
He goes, yeah, that's the sort of, you know, the might of times if you have to scribble
and take notes and underline and write in the marginalia, all the different things about
the book.
This was Damien Walters, I think his name is, who's a science fiction writer.
I said only three pencils for the book to this size.
He goes, well, the complete works of Shakespeare are only two and a half.
So you can see there, it's really a commitment to read the book, but one that's richly rewarded,
and I believe Ian's going to speak to some major themes from it.
So I think for now that's all I can say, and look forward to talking to Ian later.
Ian McGillchrist, everyone.
Thank you very much, and I hope you will tell me if I'm not audible, and I'm telling the
thing is to have it as close to your beard as possible without touching it.
I'm going to try and do that for however long I speak, and I'm also rather sorry that I
have to do a sort of Tom Jones impersonation.
I'm slightly beyond that, but this is the way the system works.
I'm very pleased to be here.
I'm delighted, and I think that this is the right audience, the ideal audience, to engage
with what I felt I was doing in writing this inexcusably long book.
I myself have told that this book was terribly important, and I really got to read it, but
I had to say how long is it, and when I was told, well, the text goes to 1300 and something
pages, I had to say, well, forget it.
I hope though that you can be encouraged to dip into it.
It covers a lot of ground, and I think it's quite permissible to dip into chapters and
see how that works, and then I'm rather hoping that in the end you'll see that it's a single
story if you like, and it's best if you can read it that way.
Why did I write it?
Like many people here, I feel that we reached a crisis point in which, frankly, we no longer
know who we are.
We haven't the foggiest idea of what we're doing here in this world.
We don't seem to understand any kind of directional meaning in our lives, and if we find anywhere
told that we've just painted them on the walls of our little cell in order to cheer ourselves
up, I can't tell you how profoundly I disagree with that formulation, which seems to be a
pervasive one these days, that of reductive materialism.
And A.N.
Whitehead, who's a philosopher I very greatly admire, said, as we think we live, and I think
there's something wrong with our thinking processes, and that's what I was hoping to
have a little influence over.
You may know that I wrote an earlier book called The Master and His Emissary, and that
concerns the division of the brain into two hemispheres, and this book, the newer book,
also begins from that standpoint.
This is not reductive in any sense, and it has been put to me by one person, only one
person, but he does persistently say it.
He's a philosopher who will remain nameless, I want to spare him his blushes, but he seems
to think that just because I talk about the structure of the brain, I must be reducing
mind to brain.
However, I've now over pretty much 2,000 pages between those two books, made it very
clear that my whole thrust is anti-reductionist.
Why would one be interested in the structure of the brain?
You might well say, I'm really interested in the mind, but I don't really care where
things go on in my brain, it's not relevant.
And I'm sympathetic with that, but I also think there's something very, very important
about the way the brain is structured, and whether the brain gives rise to consciousness
which I can't believe, or it transmits consciousness which it might, or it permits consciousness
which is what I do believe, it will shape the nature of that consciousness.
And it's therefore quite relevant that this organ is divided in two right down the middle.
If you've never seen a brain, it's rather like a walnut, and it has that division down
the middle.
If you have an organ which is said to be a computer, I mean that's an image that I very
much detest, and it's entirely wrong on a whole range of grounds, but if you do think
of it as having computing power, why would you make an enormous division down the middle
of it, since its computing power exists in the number of connections it can make?
Why is the brain asymmetrical?
The world around us isn't asymmetrical exactly, and the skull is pretty much symmetrical.
So what's this about?
Why is the right hemisphere broader at the front and larger altogether, in fact the biggest
asymmetry in the entire brain, is the largeness of the right frontal cortex?
And why something that one did learn about in medical school and never heard about the
right hemisphere?
It's broader towards the back on the left, and this was always said to be because of
the invention of language, which is a very important part of the history of humanity.
But that can't be right, because we know that plenty of the great primates, Bonobos, Gorillas,
chimpanzees have these expansions, but they don't have language.
And I suppose the final thing is these two hemispheres are connected by a band of fibres
at the base of the brain, over which 2% of the neurons in the brain actually cross.
So it's set up for two rather distinct conscious nexuses.
Why is that?
Is it just us?
No, it isn't.
The difference between us, or at least mammals, and other living creatures, is that they don't
even have a corpus callosum.
So the corpus callosum was a mammalian invention, and it's gradually getting smaller in relation
to the size of the brain.
So our brains have expanded, but the corpus callosum remains small, and a lot of its traffic
is saying, I'm dealing with this, you keep out of it.
And that's true as you go down, as we like to think of it, down the evolutionary tree.
So it's true of amphibians, it's true of reptiles, it's true of insects, it's true
of every creature that we know of, including the most ancient creature, still extant.
It's 700 million years old, nematostelovectensis, and it lives off the Isle of Wight, where
it only marginally raises the average age of the inhabitants.
And it already has this asymmetry in its neural network, described by Thomas Holstein, who
discovered it at some Heidelberg, as the origin of the mammalian, and eventually the human
brain.
Well, I think there is an answer to that, and it's quite a simple one, and I've never
heard any explanation that goes near doing as good a job, and nobody's told me I'm wrong.
And it's this, every living creature has to be able to do two incompatible things at once.
They have to enable themselves to survive by eating, and they have to enable themselves
to survive by not being eaten.
And for the first, you need to have highly targeted, precise attention to a detail, for
a bird to pick up that seed accurately and swiftly, for an eagle to be able to catch
that hair.
Whatever it is, you lock onto your target, you know what it is, you go for it.
And that attention is very, very precise, but it's only about three out of the 360 degrees
of the per view that we might have.
Meanwhile, the right hemisphere, sorry, I haven't mentioned yet that the left hemisphere
is the one that does the targeting, the right hemisphere is tasked with doing the whole
of the rest, basically, of seeing the whole picture, looking out for predators, looking
out for corn specifics, looking out for offspring that need feeding and protecting.
And so, this can't be done, actually, it's not just like trying to pat your tummy and
rub your head or whatever it is you're supposed to do, pat your head and rub your tummy as
well.
It's actually impossible unless you have two ways in which you can dispose your consciousness
at once, and that requires two neuronal masses capable of being conscious at all.
So that explains this division, and it's based, as I say, on attention.
And when I realized this, the penny didn't drop immediately, because I had been chained
in a rigorously analytic, cognitive way, and I saw attention as another interesting cognitive
function like memory and language and so on, but no, attention is something very, very special.
It's how we bring the world into being.
Let me just explain a little about that, because it's central to what I'm going to say.
I repudiate either of the two main alternatives that are put up these days in the public arena
as possible ways of understanding the world.
I think most of us detect that it's not quite true that there's just a world out there.
First of all, it might not be out there, and secondly, it's not just out there in that
we are connected to it somehow, and how we experience it changes at least the weak claim
as it changes for us what it is we experience.
That's obvious.
I believe it actually helps to mould what is there in a less personal way, in a more
universal way, eventually, but it also makes us who we are.
If I get in the habit of attending to things that are living as machines, I will see only
their mechanical aspects, and I will see that this works very well, and so it worked last
time, it'll work next time, and soon I can't see any alternative to seeing living things
as mechanism.
I call attention a moral act, by which I mean that we have a responsibility, and that word
responsibility is important because it suggests the coming and the going, the giving of something
and something responding, a reverberative relationship.
I actually also claim in this book, and argue for the position, that relationships are primary,
relationships are prior to the things that are related, the so-called relux.
How can that be, you might say?
How can you have a relation before you've got the things that need to be related?
Well I take the view that actually everything is related, and that it gets its being from
the context of all the other things to which it's primarily very directly related, but
ultimately to the rest, and that therefore you can't tell what that thing is until you've
understood the network of webs of relationships out of which it arises.
In any case, attention is important in this way, and I have this view that it's neither
what I call rot reality out there, and we are just passive receivers of it, nor is it
mumbo made up miraculously by ourselves.
Sorry, those were acronyms in case you're...
It's something very important, an encounter.
So every experience is an encounter, and it's not made up of things, it's made up of encounters
with what are effectively processes, relationships.
For this reason, the way in which we attend to the world matters enormously, and the
title of my latest offering, this enormous book, is the Matter with Things, which is...
We read on several levels, I mean on the first level obviously, I think we probably all agree
there's something that is the matter with things, and I think that what's the matter
is our obsession with matter, partly, and at least if you assume matter is the simple
stuff that has nothing to do with consciousness, if you think it has a bit of consciousness
about it, then you've already smuggled consciousness in, and we don't have to explain how it somehow
mysteriously arises out of matter.
But if you think of matter as simple, well you're on to hiding to nothing, because if
matter has nothing of consciousness about it, and has no direction, and no knowledge of
any of the things that make life worth living for us, how is it that after a few million
years this completely blind collision of senseless particles gives rise to Bach's St.
Matthew Passion?
This is a miracle, if ever there was one, and reductionists always end up having to do
it, and here a miracle happens.
I don't do that, because I believe, and I may come onto that later, I believe that consciousness
is foundational, I think it is what the philosopher's called an ontological primitive, which means
it can't be derived from anything else, it is the primary stuff of the cosmos.
But if attention changes what we experience, how we relate to it, how we act, how we think,
it's pretty important, and if the two halves of the brain have manifested different ways
of attending, and there's not a single neurologist, psychiatrist, physician, neuroscientist anywhere
in the world who will deny that these two hemispheres have this greatly different way
of attending, if that's the case, then it follows that they produce two different kinds
of experiential worlds, they'd have to, and I haven't got time to go through all the things
that differentiate them, but let me just give a sort of lightning sketch of how they differ.
So you can see that if you are paying attention to something that you already know is important
for you, and latching onto it, and then later latching onto something else, and then seeing
one of those two, it produces a picture of isolated fragments that are already known,
familiar, useful, they're decontextualised, they're abstracted because they're an example
of a kind, it's another seed, another rabbit, whatever, the differences between Peter Rabbit
and his brethren are not available to the left hemisphere, and this picture in the left hemisphere
is one which is effectively inanimate, literal, it takes language literally,
because it's not very good at reading subtle signs, so body language, facial expression,
tone of voice, you don't even need to get into the complexities of metaphor,
but already the right hemisphere is much more skilled at this than the left,
but the left hemisphere simply takes poetry, metaphors, literally,
and then pronounces, as some philosophers have, that they're lies.
However the ancient Greeks thought that metaphors were the key to understanding, Aristotle says
that this is the key to every kind of thinker, the strength of that thinker or of that artist,
is to be able to produce new metaphors that illuminate, and indeed I think it's very well
accepted now that all language is metaphorical, in particular scientific language and philosophical
language are metaphorical because they're often dealing with abstractions, and we don't have
the words for those, we have the words for the things we encounter in daily life.
So you've got on the one hand this picture of isolated fragments that have no meaning,
purposeful direction until we put them together, that are inanimate, decontextualised, abstracted,
and they co-together to form a picture of a lifeless diagram, a theory, a map of the world.
Now there's nothing wrong with a map, and there's nothing wrong with the left hemisphere, we need it,
but it won't give us the full story, just as consulting a map of this area before you've
came wouldn't tell you what you see outside the window, what you would experience in this house,
that's all left as it were in the realm of the right hemisphere. So what does the right hemisphere
see? It sees that nothing is ever certain fixed and fully known, that there is always a degree of
possibility that it may be something slightly different, and indeed since it sees unique cases
rather than just general categories, it's aware that actually every blade of grass is different.
So it sees a picture of these undrasped before, but processually knowable, not known already
completely, but something we can come into a knowing of, it sees them as interconnected with
other things, constantly flowing, not fixed down so that we can easily grasp, and as I say
individual, implicit, and embodied. Now all that implicit and embodied stuff is terribly
important, and it's all the kind of things that a computer won't be able to understand until it's
got a body, and until blood is flowing through its cheeks, and it knows that it's going to die,
and it's suffered, and so on. So the left hemisphere is, I hate the idea that the brain is like a
computer as I've already said, but there is something about the left hemisphere that is
rather like one's personal computer, in that its level of understanding is very low, very poor,
but it's very efficient at carrying out procedures. There's a division of labor really. The right
hemisphere is rather like you when you've gathered data, and you want the computer to process it,
to shove it into the computer, the computer wears away cleverly for a short while, and produces an
answer. The computer doesn't know what the answer means, but you take that back into the real-life
world and reinterpret it. So it's this dynamism in which you begin from the right hemisphere,
move to the left, and move to the right, and I'm indebted to Jonathan for having christened this
and McGill christened maneuver. I don't believe it's a maneuver, but anyways, whatever, and it's
best imaged by the idea of learning a piece of music. You're first attracted to it as a whole by
the right hemisphere. The right hemisphere sees the whole picture, the left hemisphere sees parts,
and analyzes. So then you start to play it, and you realise that you've got to take it apart,
you've got to really keep practising that passage of bar 18, and then you sort of understand the
theory of this structure of the piece. So you see how it's here that we return to the tonic,
and that's all very well. It's important, it's good. But when you go out to play the piece,
finally, you must forget all of that. You'll give the most terrible performance. And there's very
much in life that is like this. But at the moment, I believe we live in a world in which we take the
lived experience. We then turn it into a map, a theory, a diagram, take it apart, leave it bits
all over the floor, and then go, well, it doesn't seem to mean anything to me. And this is surely a
very bad way to be understanding the vibrant, living, complex, rich, beautiful world around us.
So that's the sort of neurology part of it, if you'd like. And I begin the book. It has three
parts. In part one, I talk about the neuropsychology. And I begin with looking at the ways in which we
could gather some knowledge about the world to gather it, not to process it, but just to begin
the process of having anything there. And I take these to be attention, but also perception, which
is not the same as attention, judgment, which is formed on the basis of what you've attended to
and what you've perceived, emotional and social intelligence, and cognitive intelligence, IQ,
in other words, and creativity, because nothing ever comes to us just as a blank. It comes to us
as a something. And sometimes we need to be able to revision what that is before it sets. And we
can do this very, very rapidly, so that we don't even know what we're doing. But all those faculties,
all those portals to the world, as I call them, are more reliably exercised by the right hemisphere
than by the left. All of them, including cognitive intelligence, IQ, it's very, very clear. And
that might surprise a lot of people. And you may well say, well, that's ridiculous. That can't be it.
I mean, how on earth would we get by with a brain that only half of which is really reliable? Well,
the answer is that the very important business of getting stuff accumulating power is the job of
the left hemisphere. And that it does exceptionally well. So that when you have a stroke in the left
hemisphere, the right hand with which you manipulate the world and use tools and operate machines is
dysfunctional or nonfunctional, you may lose the power to use language. And one way of looking at
language is we didn't need it when we lived in small communities where we understood one another
directly and lived together. But we needed it as communities became larger and larger. And instead
of having I, thou communication, we had to have I, it communication, and I, they communication.
And that is also damaged. But get this, it's much easier to rehabilitate somebody after a left
hemisphere stroke, despite all that, than it is after a right hemisphere stroke, because somebody
who has a right hemisphere stroke may well not understand the world at all. It's not that they
can't manipulate it. They just can't understand it. And people complain that their partner,
they have a father who suffered such an injury or stroke is no longer empathic in the way that
they used to be, doesn't seem to understand a joke, doesn't seem to understand what's going on around
him, doesn't understand the conversation. So that's kind of important. In the second part of the book,
I deal with epistemology, which is how do we get from our findings, our data, our information,
our percepts, our judgments? How do we get from there to broader conclusions about the world?
And how do we build up a picture of the world? And I suggest that there are four of these,
science, reason, intuition, and imagination. And in the world in which we live, none of these
is quite perceived right. So excessive claims are made for science. And at the same time,
science is not scientific enough. If science were properly scientific, it wouldn't be as
dogmatic as it is. It wouldn't dismiss things that don't fit the current paradigm, because the whole
history of science is of people finding things that don't fit the current paradigm and then revising.
And again, we don't respect science enough. So there are now movements that disrespect science
or disregard science or refuse to publish science if it doesn't happen to fit with your political
view. This sounds remarkably like 1930s Germany. Then there is reason. And reason is very important.
And again, I think the world has lost its reason. It's lost its reason of boldness.
How rarely do we hear that concept, which seems to be central of the reason of bold,
not just the rationalistic. And I'm making a distinction there, which is made in other
languages between different types of reason. In German, there's a difference between
Vernunft and Verstand. And there's a kind of procedure or logic, which is not
unnecessary. It's very important that you ought to be able to synthesize that with the products of
a life well lived for kind of experiential wisdom. And that is reason. And then there's intuition,
which has had a very bad press lately, because there are lots of psychologists who go around
to companies making a lot of money, telling them they must never trust their intuitions,
because they're all wrong. And psychologists rather like the feeling of having power over
other people and seeing things they don't see. And so there's a kind of a chauvinism about
their wish to dispense with intuition. When I say the examples they come up with,
which is quite true, our intuition would probably guide us to the wrong answer. There
are such things that can be set up, and our delivery is set up by psychologists. They draw on
principles that would normally lead us to the right conclusion, but on this occasion just don't
happen to it. And I can show you optical illusions, which are so extraordinary, that you can't believe
it until it's demonstrated. And yet, I don't know many people who say, well, after seeing that,
I'm never going to open my eyes again, because they might mislead me. We need these fantasies.
And imagination, I just want to make an important distinction between imagination and fantasy.
Fantasy is something that takes us away from where we are. And it sometimes
thought that imagination is like this as well. But imagination is not. Imagination
is the only way in which we can truly enter into and understand the life, the existence
of whatever it is we're contemplating. So it's a completely different thing, imagination.
Words from the Coleridge wrote about this very interestingly. I haven't got time to talk about
that now, but they did. And they contrasted the sort of dressing up of something in a fancy way
in order to make it look different and funny or moving or sentimental. They contrasted that with
the sort of deep gaze of attention in which the thing at last is permitted to come to be itself
in your presence. In a word of Heidegger's translation of what Heidegger used in German
unreason, it presences. And that's slightly different from being present. Being present is
very passive. But the idea of presencing is the thing comes into being through the encounter.
Now, in the world we're in at the moment, I just think there's an awful lot already that one could
say that we're missing here. But what I do, and I just finished the counter through the book,
not three years. So we've looked at which hemisphere is more trustworthy. And the answer is
in almost every case, the left hemisphere will mislead us, is literally delusional. I'm not
using that word in a pop sense. I'm using that in a psychiatric sense. It gives rise to Frank
delusions left with self. It's not reliable. So we know that. We know we should be paying
attention to what the right hemisphere tells us, even if it's harder to grasp. And we now know that
we need to bring at least three out of these four science, reason, intuition and imagination,
if not all four to bear on all our problems. But I find that generally we divide into camps
who use either the first two or the last two or nothing at all. That's three camps. And then we
come on to the last part of the book. And in that I sort of say, well, how do we understand the
cosmos and ourselves? How do we understand our position here? What do we think the cosmos is like?
And I begin with a couple of chapters about its structure. The first one is on the coincidence
of opposites, which is a very, very important point, which has gone out of our culture and with
it has gone some massively important insights, wise insights. We think that things are arranged
in linear fashion. So on one end of a line, there's something you like. On the other end,
there's something you hate. And it's just where you graduate yourself on this position. But this
is not true. If you pursue something that you think is good more and more, you will definitely
end up with the thing that you were fleeing from. Thus it's famous that anarchy leads to tyranny.
And we don't understand this. It was obviously as a child that people on the extreme left of
politics were awfully like people on the extreme right of politics. But the answer in calibrating
these things is not just to find a midpoint where things go flabby as it were. The secret of making
a good apple tart is have sour apples and lots of good honey. And this produces a wonderful apple
tart, but just bland apples won't produce any of this. And the image I like to give here is one
that is made by my favorite philosopher of all time, Heraclitus, 6th century BC, far more interesting
than Plato. They're called pre-Socratic philosophers. I think the so-called Plasonic philosophers
should be called post-Heraclitian philosophers, but anyway. In this realm there were a lot of very
interesting voices and then we got thrown off track for about 2,000 years. We began to recover it in
the 19th century. I'm being brief and flippant. I'm a great admirer of Plato. I studied him in
Greek at school. I don't know all of that. But nonetheless, I think that there's a lot about
the way in which Plato has been interpreted, his legacy and Aristotle's legacy, that we have had to
try and finesse and make more complex and pass on from. The image from Heraclitus is that of the
string of a light, the musical instrument, or the string of a bow. And the point he makes is it
must be pulled apart in both directions very hard. And you might say, well, that's a waste of energy.
Why don't we just let it go slack? And then, of course, the string will not let fly the note.
It will not let fly the arrow. So the tension between these opposites held together, but not
collapsed into one or the other. But both genuinely held is very important. And some people get around
this by collapsing the two. It's just saying they're all one. They're not all one. They're
importantly rather different. Or they say they're so different from one another that you can't say
that they coincide. I would suggest that both of these positions is wrong. And then I talk about
the one and the many. I won't go into that, but that's another whole famous philosophical problem
that I think is very interesting about the relation between the general and the unique.
And the particular and the eternal. And the insight I just want to pass on briefly is one that I
think is best expressed in the work of Goethe, which is that you find the particular, sorry,
you find the general and the universal, not by turning your back on the particular, but by
going through the particular more deeply. And you find eternity, not by turning your back on the
temporal, but by going through the temporal and seeing eternity there in the temporal.
That of course is itself a paradox, but I'm no foe of paradox. In part two, I have a whole
chapter on logical paradox, which I think explains, I take about 30, one's known to philosophers,
and suggest that the reason that these paradoxes arise is that there is a conflict here between
the way the left hemisphere sees it and the way the right hemisphere sees it. And guess what?
The way the right hemisphere sees it is more in touch with reality.
Thank you. I'll give you an example of Achilles and the tortoise. Achilles was famously swift
to foot. The tortoise challenged him to a race. Achilles said, no, I don't think so. Come on,
you can never catch me. Achilles thinks, well, okay. And being a generous kind of guy gives the
tortoise a head start. The tortoise, however, is right. Because first of all, Achilles has
got to get where the tortoise now is. But by the time he gets there, the tortoise has moved on to
a new place. Now his job is to get to where the tortoise has gone to. But by the time he gets
there, the tortoise has moved on. And this is an infinite series, so he can never actually
overtake the tortoise. However, we know that he'll overtake the tortoise in two strides.
And the problem there, which I can't unpack now because I've got to get to the end of my talk
quite quickly, is that effectively the mistake is thinking of a continuum
retrospectively as fragmented and analyzed. And then in the rest of the chapters of part three,
I deal with the trivia, time, space, matter, consciousness, value, purpose,
and the sense of the sacred. And most people are with me when we get time yet, very interesting,
yes, space, matter and consciousness are very important. What a hell, why do you put values,
purpose and the sense of the sacred in there? And I believe these are things that are absolutely
essential to our understanding of the universe of the cosmos and of life. And they've been dismissed
from discourse by science not out of malice, but out of a very good principle.
It decided that the way it wanted to investigate things was what it calls objective,
and in that it didn't want to introduce values, it didn't want to introduce any kind of purpose,
it just wanted to see what was there. And then it reports back solemnly after its investigation,
it couldn't find any values, couldn't find any purpose. But to borrow an image from C.S.
Lewis, this is like a policeman who stops all the traffic in the street and then solemnly notes
in his notebook, the silence in this street is very suspicious. Science has not proved that
light is meaningless, that there is no purpose, that there are no values, it's not its job to do
that, and we need to see that and it needs to see that. But I believe that all consciousness,
and let me say it briefly, I think the consciousness matter relate like this. I believe
that consciousness is the primary substance of the universe, if you like. Although substance is
exactly the wrong word because nothing needs to be under it, it is the stuff, if you like,
of the cosmos. But again, it's not stuff, our language, stuff says when we try to talk about
this matter. So consciousness is that elementary stuff, and consciousness is always directed
towards something else. We are seeing something, we are taking it, being aware of something,
we're examining something, we're just contemplating something, but that is directional and it's guided
by value, and it's guided by purpose, and these things are throughout in the living world, and
I would say having read Jude Caravan's latest book, which is very interesting, that in the
cheese, a lot of the book is about the preanimate world, that there is evidence of clear purpose
and value in terms of beauty already present in this cosmos. I think what life does is not just
bring consciousness, because as I say consciousness I think is everywhere, but it brings two things.
It speeds up the process of responsiveness and intensifies it and broadens it. So
unlike the Roth in my garden, I can appreciate more of what there is in the cosmos, that's
life given to me, and what that life means is something that I can come to understand very
much faster than any of the processes that would have existed pre-life. There are animate processes
that can happen a thousandth of a second, that if they were in an inanimate context would take
billions of years. So what is matter? Well I think matter is a phase of consciousness. I think that
consciousness exhibits matter to us, that's indisputable, we wouldn't know matter if we
didn't have consciousness. However it's not true that we wouldn't know consciousness if we weren't
material, we don't know that. A lot of scientists assume the brain somehow nobody has ever got
even with a whisker of explaining how it could possibly happen, but if matter were to give rise
to consciousness it's a matter of dispute, and I for one reject it, but we can't deny that matter
is something that's in our experience, and I say why is matter there? I think it does
one main thing that can be seen in two ways, it allows things to persist for a while,
always only for a while, and it also offers some resistance, and I believe that creation,
creativity depends on resistance, in the face of resistance it can't happen, and resistance is
paradoxical like everything else. What is friction? Friction is what stops motion,
that's what a physicist will tell you, but it's also what starts motion. I'm not able to move
at all without friction, so things have dual roles and this resistance is highly creative,
as has been seen by many of my favorite philosophers including Whitehead and others.
So where am I going with this? I could talk to you about the sense of the sacred, I included a
chapter on that, and many of my philosophical friends who'd read the draft said don't include it,
you've got some really important philosophical things to say here, but nobody will take you
seriously if you talk about the sacred, and they'll go oh he's a faith head, and so I almost,
for a nanosecond, wavered, but I realized that I couldn't not write it, even though it was the most
difficult thing I've ever written in my life. It cost me more blood, sweat, and tears than anything
else I've done, because I wanted to be honorable to what was there, I wanted to be truthful to it,
I wanted to be faithful to it, and neither oversell something or understated, and of course I believe
that all that realm of the sacred and divine is not, is not expressible in ordinary language,
and is not grasped by our common concepts, it is itself beyond such things, but that doesn't mean
it's unreal, I mean it's just an elementary logical mistake to say well we can't talk about it,
we can't conceive it, then it can't exist, but it can, and we can't measure it in the lab,
I know that, but we can't measure love in the lab, I can't demonstrate love to somebody who's never
experienced it, and the sacred is like that, you can't get it from, it's like trying to learn
how to swim by sitting on the bank of the river reading a book, you actually have to get into
the stream, but if you do you will find that something responds to you, I swear that it will,
it may not be what you expect, but there will be this responsive encounter, and it's that that we
are made for, and I believe that it's that, the business of seeing, experiencing, reflecting,
doing our best to magnify in the world what is beautiful, good, and true, that is the reason
we're here at all, so we have an important, if you like, role, and we started rather late, so I'm
just gonna, I'll wind up in five minutes, and you've probably heard of Pascal's wager, yeah,
and Pascal's wager for those of you who don't know it was, the maybe a god or the may not,
if there is a god and you decide to deny him, you made a big mistake, but if there isn't a god
and you think there is, well no harm will come of it, it's always seemed to me not really to cover
the basis and to be a little bit venal in its, in its motivation, but there's something called
the Galperist wager which goes like this, either there is a god, in which case, yep, we'd better
get to know that god, or there isn't a god, in which case no harm is done, ala Pascal, but
there is this possibility that whatever the divine and the sacred is, it is exploring itself,
it is coming to know itself in its creation, one might ask why did this logos, this
ble, this ultra, this ala, this god, why did it bother with the creation, and the answer in most
religions is that god is love, and love is relational, coming back to my idea that everything,
everything is actually relational, and relations are two way relations, so you have to have a
cosmos in which something can come that can appreciate that divine ground, and it's exploring
that, unfolding the beauty of it, that is the purpose of the creation, and here at the very last
minute I come to the question of division and union, which I would love to give a whole hour's
tour of them, because it's very, very important, but let me be very brief. Goethe, again another
person I very greatly admire, said, dividing the united, uniting the divided, this is the business
of nature, and it is like he says, the sisterly and diastole, which are the two beats of the heart,
it is like the inhalation and the exhalation, and he also suggests, or hints that it's like the
warp and weft of a fabric, into which our being is woven, he said. Now I think that is extraordinarily
important, and perhaps I'd just leave it there and we can explore it a bit, but in my view,
everything depends on seeing this importance of having division and union, but of having them
unified, not divided. This is an example of the meta position that I held on many things,
for example, I think it's great that we have both and, but we also sometimes need either all,
but we don't need either both and, or either or, we need both, both and, and, and I, of course my
whole works about symmetry and asymmetry, which I think goes much further than the brain, goes into
the substance of life, and I believe there that we need not just symmetry or asymmetry,
but we need the asymmetry of symmetry and asymmetry. That really is a lot of work,
and it's all there in the postage of one of fire.
I'll give you a chance to take a rest in for a second or two. Yep. Quite a tour de force,
and I'm keen because of time to really involve the audience quite quickly, so I'm going to just
have one question on the sacred, and it relates to an experience I had with you
on the out of sky. A little minor tragedy is that before the book came out, I traveled up to
the sky to film a day, a day long interview with Ian about every aspect of the book,
which was recorded, of course, but for a range of reasons that won't go into,
we could never retrieve the recording, but there was a moment towards the end of that,
that time that I particularly wished we'd, we'd got on camera, and it was a moment where Ian
started welling up with, with tears, and it was speaking about Christian mythology
and how beautiful you found it, and one question I have for you here is, it's,
to speak of the sacred, might be threatening to scientific peers in a scientific context,
and it might be risky, risky because you're invoking quality of life that's, well, you can
tell me in a minute whether you think it's supernatural or not, or whether that's the
right expression, but it's invoking something entirely natural, but outside of our normal
sort of capacity to empirically perceive things that would be a more sort of orthodox
way of looking at things, but in that moment, you know, I felt you emotionally were,
you know, very deeply invested in this, and I've also noticed in some of the reviews,
perhaps by Rowan Williams, perhaps by a few others, they wonder if you're sort of pulling
your punches a bit, that actually, far from not including this in the book, you culminate in the
sacred, and yet, even in the sacred chapter, it's quite cautious and quite tempered, and we just,
I just wonder what stops you from saying what you just said towards the end there,
something in, of the order that like, God exists, it's very important we come to know
God, and our life should be directed in that, in that sense. What's, what's pulling you back from
that? Yeah, I, I, I consistently, as you say, pull my punches for a good reason, and actually,
at the end, I don't say, and I say that although I'm very suspicious of a lot of God talk, and
although the very word God produces all kinds of complications that need to be dispensed with,
but I think we're too quick to say we can bypass this or dismiss it, and that I think it's our job
to try harder to understand what this ancient truth that people have always believed is about.
Why do we think we're wiser than they were? And I do actually say that nothing I have experienced
is in a sense more certain to me that there is some meaning to this idea. And that's expressed in
that way carefully, because as Jesus said, we should be as wise as serpents, but as gentle as
dubs. And part of my job was not to draw people to Christianity, I think I'm a rather bad Christian,
and I'm not a committed Christian, and I don't go to church. On the other hand, I cannot think of a
more wonderful mythos, and I use that word without any implication that is false. The mythoi by which
we live are the most important kinds of truth, and if you think you don't have one, you've probably
bought into the one of our age, which is that everything is a machine. That's a myth as well.
And I think it's such a powerful myth about a God who is involved in the creation in such a way
that he actually also experiences suffering, although there's a complex concept in theology,
by the way, because he may be so-called impassable, but I don't want to go into all the details.
But the beauty of this idea, and the extraordinaryness of the art, and the music, and the poetry,
the architecture, the words of the liturgy, the words of the King James Byron, I think these are,
they speak to me directly, and I came from a family that were neither very well educated nor at all
religious, and I sort of first encountered all this in my early teens, and I just thought whatever
it is that I've been taught to believe about the world is not right. I need to commit myself
to understanding this, and I thought that I would probably actually become a monk after I'd
gone to Oxford and graduated, but by then I saw sense and realized I'd be a very bad monk,
and would also make a very bad monastery. So there we are.
Just a little follow-up. We heard from Linda this morning about fortune telling,
and in my group afterwards we spoke about astrology, and there's a sort of
book you may know by Jeffrey Kreipo called The Flip, which is premised partly on seeing
consciousness as primary, but not just that. There's also a lot of parapsychological data in it,
and he's arguing that really there's a moment at which suddenly the world looks very, very different.
Now my impression, knowing you for many years, you care very deeply about your scientific
authority and respectability, and for good reason, but I also wonder if, you know,
to what extent can we go there as it were? To what extent is it legitimate to wonder if the
eaching might actually speak to you, or the tarot cards might actually have something to say about
your psyche that's meaningful? Is this beyond the pale, or is this...? Well, not to me.
I'm far from being able to say that I know or experience or have in my world picture the whole
story. I haven't, none of us has, and it's the hubris of modern humanity that seems to me it's
worst trait, and what we need is a massive dose of humility which may come, alas, with societal
collapse, but we certainly need to re-embrace modesty, war, and compassion rather than anger,
division, power struggles, and all of that. There are a couple of things really, and
one of the things I forgot to say, and I just want to say this about why I didn't bang on about
Christianity is that as I say I'm not necessarily sure I'm a Christian, but I also didn't want to
be exclusive. I didn't want people to get there and go, oh God, he's a Christian, so now we've got
one of all that, but I wanted to draw on religions worldwide, and I found that they had enormous
wisdom and that these wisdoms cohered, and what's more they cohered? With the position I'd been
arguing for through neuro psychology, philosophy, and, um, slightly physics. I have a band of what
I call tamed physicists, and when I want to say something in physics I, there are people who
approached me and said, far more than biologists, this book is terribly interesting to us as physicists,
I know that's good, so then I tend to, is this okay to say, and they go very up, probably.
So why am I saying that? I just don't want people to think that anybody should be excluded from this,
even though to a very, very tentative, and I often think that the honest agnostic is the closest
to somebody who's really honestly searching for God.
Sorry, where were we before that?
Well, just that, um, I think,
yes, um, well it depends what you define as natural and supernatural, and I think that
lots of the stuff that we've now sequestered in the cupboard mark supernatural is not at all unnatural,
it depends how you look at things, if you happen to notice certain things and things,
events in life or reading something can make you open your eyes to it, you start to see it,
and that doesn't necessarily mean that it's real, I think we should be skeptical,
I think that scientists are not skeptical enough about their own findings,
and I think we should be skeptical as thinkers, as philosophers, as scientists,
but I also think we need in the end to be skeptical about skepticism,
in the sense that you can take it too far so that you're paralyzed and don't really know
that you can believe anything, that would be a mistake, but you see, it's not,
what one believes is not something one worked out in a seminar room, it's not just the
culmination of a series of propositions, the root of the word belief is from love,
it's liven, you know, and the old English word leaf, dear, and um, what we believe
is very importantly what we are attracted to is right, what we have faith, faith is uncertain,
faith is incompatible with certainty, and faith is more valuable than certainty, certainty means
you're certainly wrong, it's one of the only certainties we can have, and so it's very important
to maintain this idea, I mean I want to say this whatever, because I think it's so important,
a reconceptualization of truth, truth is not something out there, a distant goal that we
can work our way towards, truth is something we can encounter in this world, and it's not a thing,
it's a process, it's a journey, and it's about not something being definite, but of a continual
unconcealing, so we are unconcealing the truth, we are sweeping away misconceptions as we find
our way to it, as we find our way to God, whatever you mean by that word, and this idea of truth
is very important, because truth is at the basis of fidelity, when we talk about truth,
and Calvin just talked about two surfaces that are true, indeed they say they marry, and truth
is what happens when warring factions stop fighting with one another, and come to what
we call a truce, a truce is derived from the word true, and truth is something that we uncover
in the business of living, so it's a very different thing from what goes on in the seminar room
usually, but if the seminar room takes into account pre-socratic philosophers,
modern phenomenological philosophers, it may get close.
Okay, thank you, so questions now from the audience, if you can put your hands up, I think
I'm going to have to do this roving for the recording sake, so the mic is there to be recorded,
I think if you want to ask a question, but you don't want to be recorded, let me know,
but I'll assume you do, so I'm going to bring the mic to you, and I'll begin,
yes, does anyone else want to play the roving role? Nick are you sure? Okay, so then we'll take
these two at the front, if we can take a few together, it helps, not too many because it can
become overwhelming, but maybe two at a time, and we'll see how it goes.
Thank you Ian, I think we all want to thank you for persevering with the million words.
You live on sky, I live in a tiny house on wheels in the Derbyshire Dales,
and I'm very careful what goes in, and your book is in, so thank you.
Thank you. You say consciousness is primary, for you is consciousness mental or material,
or neither of the above? Okay, is that one? Thank you Ian, I'm looking at the two lights behind
you which are on all the time, and it made me think about the right hemisphere and the left
hemisphere, do they flicker one on then the other, one on the other, or are they both
on at the same time, or do they fade in and out, do you have a sense of that? We take those two
together. I'll deal with that question first, and based on our hemispheres are operating all the
time. Which one is guiding our attention is more a matter of a divided role, and so effectively we
don't need to be thinking and shouldn't be thinking that we are just using our left hemisphere or right.
What I'm talking about there is a short hand, I believe that in this world when we enter into
discourse we don't like contradictions, if you contradict yourself that's almost worse than
talking nonsense, anyone will listen to nonsense as long as it's coherent with itself, but actually
truths are often very very complicated and require different things that we go, well that
doesn't add up, I mean the left hemisphere is very quick to dismiss anything that seems
contradictory or paradoxical. The second question, or the first question actually,
and is very good, but I think that what you've done there is reinforce a division that I don't
think is correct between the mental and the physical. So consciousness is the ground of
both mental and physical life, and the physical life is the material expression of consciousness
which we also have in an immaterial way. So consciousness, let me give you this image,
and what is water? Well you think you know what water is, it's that translucent stuff that flows,
but it's also that very hard opaque white stuff that's extremely cold and can crack your head open,
and it's also in this room, I mean this upper part of this room is filled with water,
but we're alive and we don't see it. So there are different ways in which consciousness can be
manifest, and if you like a congealed form of consciousness is more of a matter. I want to
get to the position where I don't collapse the division between my mind and the consciousness of
the rest of the universal garden law with you, but we don't collapse the two, but we don't entirely
divide the mind. We live in a country in which we think division means separation, but it doesn't,
it doesn't mean actually having to separate. It's being able to see the difference, and the best
example of this is in a bar magnet, where there's another north pole and the south pole, they're
completely connected to one another, but they never separate. In fact night and night can possibly
exist without the other, it isn't a hard division where they cease. Okay, thank you. Wow, more
hands. Okay, Isabella and Milky, just opposite. Yeah, thank you again for this great talk. I moved
again to hear your story, and I'm most interested right now to hear whether you had an experience
that brought you to the place you are right now in terms of your feeling of the sacred,
or was it purely through studying? So from my experience, reading you and poetry has brought
me as close to a religious experience as I've ever had, and that sounds too much, but it is true,
and I'm wondering whether it's for you becoming a scientist and doing the work and thinking
concessually and feeling something that you didn't get from that that brought you to digging
deeper and then having an experience or the other way around. Okay, thank you, and take Milky's
question as well, please, just there, Nick. I believe you kind of touched on it with your
conversation with Jonathan, but you mentioned four elements, science, rationality, imagination,
science reason, reason, reason, yeah, and I forgot the other one. Imagination, intuition,
but there is, I think there is a missing, at least it appeals to me, memory, memory,
remembrance, footprints of people who have been, you touched on it at the end, I think, in your
conversation, and another thing I wanted to add was if you give an advice to a technologist,
someone working in the tech sector, what would that be? Okay, I'll just speak that one in the end.
How do you save the world from AI quickly? So Isabella's question, where did the sense come
from, from ratiosination and study, or from some kind of revelation or experience?
It's never come from revelation, and oddly, I didn't think I've had any revelations in
I mean, other than suddenly, wow, when I experience a work of art and something like that, I don't
know whether that counts, or just a very beautiful scene. I've been saying, oh wow, all my life,
are these really revelations? Not in the kind of way that I think you're suggesting. So it's
been an equation of experience that has been cohesive since I was a teenager. I mean, I
remember as a teenager having a very strong view that the whole was not the same as the
sum of the parts, and I couldn't explain it, and people would say, so what's this mysterious
something else that gets put in when you put the parts together? And of course, I didn't know how
to answer that, I wouldn't know now, but so he was continuous as a piece of life.
The question that you asked, Milti, yes, memory. You see, the way I think of that is that he's
a sort of subset of all the things I've mentioned. So science needs to remember to amass, and to
bear in mind past experience. Reason is based, in my view, not just on logical working of things
out, but being able to make the right analogies to see the correct context, all of which comes from
experience, and one way of talking about experience is memory. And I would say the same thing about
intuition and imagination that they're fed into by memory. But thank you for drawing my attention
to it, because I think memory is a very interesting topic. And I'm thinking hard about
actually what I think about memory now, because we're beginning to think that living organisms
must respond to imprints that we can't find in DNA, and they may be in fields that bear such
memories. This has been considered rather wacky in the past. I hope Rupert Sheldrake will live
long enough, dear man, to see himself indicated, as I'm sure he will be.
Thank you. And just a follow up on Isabella's question, because it was such a profound one.
You did say that you're not enduring the talk. I thought I heard you say words to the effect
that if you there was something along the lines of if you listen, if you attend,
you will feel a response. It wasn't it wasn't quite if you listen for God, you'll hear,
but it was a little bit like that. And so I just wondered to push back slightly on what you said
about the accretion, because that makes it sound still quite safe. There is a sense in which you're
experiencing a relationship in your life, is there not? Many relationships with the divine,
if one can say that, I believe, with nature, with people. And I sometimes think, you know,
you mentioned, if you listen, you'll hear God speak. I do listen, and God doesn't speak. And
I sometimes said, look, it wouldn't hurt you just once. They something. Does human family
you are there in communication with me? And then I made it, I think, and maybe that is God speaking
but I spoke to you this morning when you looked out of the landscape. I spoke to you this morning
when you got a phone call from your door. I speak to you all the time. What's the problem? Okay,
wonderful. Thank you. More questions. Darius and Zordek, just one over this corner here,
because then we'll get the cluster. You can see a cluster emerging. We're coming to you.
We'll take Darius and then we'll move to the cluster. Thank you. So you've been using two
sets of terms. One is ground of being, and then you've also talked about God. So
is that a distinction that is clear to you? I mean, God is generally like a personification,
some entity with a personality, while ground of being connects to other traditions like Taoism,
which do not personify the ground of being. It's a profound mystery. And once we personify it,
we're actually over defining it and making too many assumptions about it.
I think we'll take this. No, you're not such a big one, I think. Basically, we just asked,
is God a person if I understood it correctly? I think so, because it's too big to get with
another question. A very good one. Of course, what I mean by the ground of being is that which,
in a way, doesn't kickstart being in a temporal sense. It's not the cause in the sequence,
but that underwrites all being. So it is there as the ground of being. And
this is where I want to mention the Trinity, a Christian concept, although I discovered that
it's actually a very ancient concept that was in many pre-Christian belief systems.
But at school, this always seemed to be manifest absurd, and I always felt
a squirm factor when the Trinity was mentioned. I mean, what is this about the man, the boy,
and the bird? It doesn't make any sense to me. As I matured in my thinking, I realized it's
extremely important as an expression of what I was much more able to accept, which is Panentism.
Just to gloss out for people who are not familiar with the term,
Panentism is the belief that God is just the sum of everything. I don't believe that.
But Panentism is the belief that God is in everything, and that everything is in God,
has its being in God. So that God is never separate from anything in the cosmos. And
the way in which that manages to work for me is that it manages to bridge
the debate about whether God is... What's the word? I certainly lost the word.
Female? Female? I'm just kidding. That wasn't the word.
No, whether God is... I hate this.
With transcendent, whether God is transcendental or imminent.
And I believe that it's important to be able to hold both of these things without
collapsing into one or the other. And in that sense, God is both the sort of ground of being
and the process of this cosmos. I said that it was in, or he, or however you like to put it.
I mean, it's unsatisfactory. She is also unsatisfactory. I just stick with he because it's
conventional. And he or whatever is that other is also in the process of creation
and is present in within us right now. And it was made clear to me by a simple Franciscan monk
in my teens who said, well, think of it like a book. Where is the book? Is it in the mind of the
writer? Or is it in this book on the table here? Or is it what happens when you read the book?
And those are the three things. And it's also in Rumi. I like to be able to bridge these things.
Rumi says it is the water source. It is the water that flows to the cup. And it is the water that
is drunk. Thank you. I can just check with the audience. I'm conscious of time and energy.
And so at the beginning of the end, there's a cluster of questions here that we will take.
But I'm just conscious that we're talking about God. And there was a time when I first met Ian,
maybe a decade or so ago, where that would have created quite a strong degree of discomfort.
And I'm just wondering if anyone cares to put their hand up. If you feel that talking about God
is somehow discomforting, uncomfortable. Okay, thank you. Anyone else? Yep. Any more? Don't be
shy. I'm sure you have lots of allies. Right. Because some people might, yeah, this is sort of
tacit coercion, sometimes baked into the conversation. Just good to know you're, you know,
that's not surprising. And many would feel it. Other questions now, the cluster.
Can I just comment on that? It's exactly avoidance of coercion that led me into the position you
put me with first, because you don't seem to come out.
I don't want any, I didn't want any of my readers to feel he's got design.
But I don't, and I'm constantly, you know, going, it doesn't have to, nobody has that view.
I do appreciate that's the intent. I'm also wondering, though, whether it's felt so palpably
that the intent is somehow less important than the experience that this is in the room, as it were.
And so, okay, we have a cluster here. Let's take it. Yes, the hands have been up for a long time.
Thank you, Ian. I wanted to follow up and dive a bit deeper into what you mentioned about friction,
as not only that, which creates resistance and conflict, but that which propels it sort of
the heart, at the heart of the fabric of drama and expression in the cosmos. And particularly in
within your work, how you see deception as an essential part of this friction.
I want to differentiate it in two ways, perhaps the left brain side of deception being that which
is asserting a particular story to enable a certain way of being to sort of self-justify itself,
and the perhaps more right side, right side of deception, which would be
that which you find in the greatest forms of art, whether it's poetry or comedy or even science,
where it's a form of deception that unearths its own limitation, speaking to its own limits of
language, or it's something that unravels into further creativity. And I'll be curious how deception
ties into your work. Okay, Ian, thank you. We'll take a few more questions if you don't mind
hold the question about deception. One bridge was just in front of there, Nick, and thank you.
Thank you, Ian, for your very important ideas. My thoughts are in Alice in Wonderland and Moby
Ticks, some very important ideas were hidden and passed on to a public that might not go very deep
initially. In the age of shortened attention span, which we have now, how would you feel and have
you thought about if your ideas were packaged in, say, a Netflix show or something that would
make it more accessible? And for what age group would you feel it would be most appropriate and
effective? Okay, thank you. So let's take those two then deception and then genres.
The first thing I'd have to say about perception is to go back to the neuroscience.
It was deception, right? If I heard correctly, not perception, but yeah, no deception.
And the different kinds of deception that there was might be a kind of creative deception in the
right hemisphere, as I understood it, whereas the left hemisphere's deception is invariably
maladaptive in some way. If I've done justice to the question. To understand if I can relate to
right hemisphere deception. Well, yeah. The trouble is that I think that, as even Mike
Gazzaliga, who's the biggest mechanist in the world, believes the left hemisphere is not really
interested in truth. And so it does project the most massive lies. And it's also vastly
overconfident that it's right. So it is the home of mistakes and deception. I'm trying to think
how the right hemisphere would deceive us, except in as much as it would not contain what it is the
left hemisphere can say or would say. So the left hemisphere is different from the right hemisphere
in its relation with the other hemisphere. So the left hemisphere is exclusive of the right
hemisphere, but the right hemisphere is inclusive of what the left hemisphere knows. And actually,
in the image of the master and his emissary, the title of my earlier book, it's the master that
actually instructs the emissary to go and do this work, expects the emissary to report back,
but the emissary goes off on a thing that it's the master. Okay. Yeah, I would just feel that
there's so much more to come. I don't know how to present. Yeah, it's it's it will hold the question
in the air. And but the subsequent question about genre, I mean, you have had almost like I see a
sort of, you know, many different kinds of, I was about to say Russian doll, if I'm honest,
then I suddenly felt that sort of political weight of that. But I was thinking that the
number of different kinds you've had, you know, RSE animate that there weren't seeming any millions,
there's been a kind of documentary, there's been yeah, all that. And I have Jonathan very
much to thank for this, because he said after I'd given this talk, we have somebody who will turn
it into a cartoon. And I said, Oh, God, no, that's the absolute worst thing they can have, because
this stuff is already, you know, in most people's mind, the pop idea of the two hemispheres is
ridiculously caricature. I don't want that. And then after a while, he said, No, I've talked to
the guy and he's read your book, and he really understands it. Okay. And then on the day the
thing came out, the actual talk, it's about 11 months after the talk had gone up, my talk had
12,000 views. That afternoon, the animate had 46,000 views. And so I'm completely converted to this.
And I'm delighted to report, I don't know if you've known this, actually. You do, yes. The guy who
did it contacted me and said that he wanted to come and interview me for the purposes of making
some more. And he came and interviewed me for three or four hours. And he's going to make, he says,
five or six very short animus. And that will, that will be a very helpful move, I think. I don't
think it's that people have become incapable of this kind of attention, but they, you're quite
right that they need some kind of weigh in. They need a lure. Yes, exactly. Okay, thank you. We
have a few more questions. So Nick, yeah, a lot. Yeah, thank you at the back. We've noticed you
at the site. I've noticed the two wings here. We have Dominic. I know Dominic, you've been trying
for a while, I get it. And we have, take one at the back first. Quick question. You, you're a very
observation. You're a very convinced monotheist. Whereas very convinced monotheist.
No, isn't it? Monotheist. Whereas most religious people entertain the existence of many spirits
and beings and gods and goddesses and demons and so on. So that's an observation. The question is,
different traditions and communities use the word spirit or energy. And you use consciousness.
Are they talking about the same thing? Or is there a reason? Is consciousness somehow
different? Talking about something different? Yeah. I think that's a big one, Nick. We'll take
that one first. I mean, ultimately, I say that these things can't be neatly carved out from one
another. But I still think it's very useful to use different terms. It's very important to use the
terms North Pole or South Pole correctly of a magnet. But, you know, effectively, they exist
together. They co-create one another and so on. I mean, polytheism is interesting. But I think
that it's a step behind what I'm trying to say, which is that is the union of division and union.
So it's not unreasonable for this God that is, if you like, ever present in the world to take
different manifestations at different times. And maybe when I have an experience that I think
is of the sacred, then that is a very particular thing. And in the past, if it had taken place in
a wood or a mountain, it would have been a different God. I don't think that's really necessary.
And I think that there are differences between spirit and consciousness and God. I mean,
consciousness is part of the cosmos that God is the ground of. What I mean by spirit is not just
my consciousness. My consciousness could be engaged in something absolutely nefarious or horrible or
trivial. But that is not spirit. What you mean by spirit, I believe, or what I mean by spirit is
something rather special, not just any other consciousness. And so we have a word for it.
That seems to me okay. Okay. Thank you. There's so many other questions, Nick.
And also, you've described yourself as a Taoist, but we'll come back to that maybe in
subsequent question. Yes, thank you. Yeah, I know. I know Dominic. Don't worry, saving the best for
last. I just want to thank you for the ways that you articulate and bring to language and things
around. Maybe I'll have a quiet voice. Just extending gratitude for the ways that you're
bringing to language. Matters of the sacred. Okay, try again, Zoya. Sorry.
Okay. Just expressing deep gratitude for the ways that you're bringing to lexicon
ideation of the sacred and innate ways of knowing. I feel like the colonization of God
is like one of the greatest unravelings that many of us experience in this age.
And I found the metaphor of the violin and that duality being important and of the
poles being really important, really poignant in this time of what we witness all around or what's
bombarded all around us around division. And I wanted to ask this, I wanted to like
zoom in on this duality of division and unifying or how you might bring that to words.
What does that mean for each of us acting in this age in response to the extent of the divisive
epistemologies of material reductionism? What kind of rigor does that require of each of us
acting as agents? Okay, thank you, Zoya. Before you answer, we need to take the last
round of questions, okay, because I think just because of time. So I've got this question
in mind and hopefully you have too. Okay, quickly, please. Yeah. What's driving you? What's your
life's mission? Okay, good one. Good one. We'll hold that thought. And a few more, please. Yes,
Dominic, okay. Well, Dominic's going last because I've already promised that.
Yeah, this is sort of related to what Linda was saying about. I was very struck by her talking
about this morning about things like fortune telling and which is a long way from the sense
of the sacred that I was getting from your book. But it's a lot more closer to what every day
understanding of the spiritual is. And there's one part in your book where you touch on near
death experiences, but say you're not going to go into that. And I suspect for the reasons you've
already explained around other stuff with the spiritual. What I'm fascinated by is that near
death experiences are actually very, very well documented now. And in a way, if that were better
known, that might be a way of pushing us past this sense that the place we're in at the moment,
where basically humanism rules and says, when you're dead, you're dead. We've got the question
near death experiences question mark. And okay, Steve, and then Oh, we got one, two, three,
and then we're done. Okay, yes, please won't be able to answer all of them. But Ian's such a
brilliant synthesizer, he'll get to the gist. Okay, so question.
I'm interested in how you feel this work is landing in society. So how have you been most
touched by the receipt of this work and most disappointed? Okay, great. And then Steve.
Yeah, we'll go. Yeah, we'll take two more of them or them or really. Okay, okay, okay, okay,
let's let's answer that. So yeah. Okay, we can do two sets then if people can. Yeah, fine, go ahead.
So kind of what I'm here for, but that's okay, go ahead.
So Zoya has a question about the violin metaphor, the tension. What does it mean in real life?
How do you put it into action?
It's the technique, I suspect, not the microphone. Why is this? This always happens to me that the
person who's interviewing has a good microphone. This has repeatedly happened. There is a God,
after all. And also, I was amused when I was at the Chalk Valley Festival. I was being interviewed
by Jonathan Gaysman and he had 25 questions and we had about 30 minutes. And he said,
I'm going to try and be concise. And he said, well, I've never seen that before.
But the trouble is that I'm trying to compress a lot. And that's my excuse anyway. I think that
the idea of the division and union is very important in resolving tensions because we're not,
but almost more important because I'm short of time, I'm going to say this. I think that the
elements that are required are humility, charity, or compassion, and a degree of awe before the
extent of the things we can't know, don't know. So people certainty that they're right, that the
other person must be wrong, that they must be terrible because they held an opinion that they
don't hold. This is all utterly horrible. And nobody should be forbidden to say what they
honestly and truly believe as long as they don't say it in a very inflammatory and horrible way.
So I'm really worried about that in society. And I think the answer is not to ban people all the
time, but actually to do the precise opposite, but to sit people down and listen. And look,
it's not very complex. You can have marital therapy between a couple that are at one another's
roads. And you get the person to speak and then you say, no, your turn's coming. Now,
what did your partner just say? No, that wasn't what I said at all. Now, that actually would be a
very, very useful exercise. I'm going to be really annoying to you because I wonder why I'll say
something else while I'm on this topic because I didn't have a chance to talk about, which is
values. Effectively, there is only one value for the left hemisphere and its power. And the entire
debate about everything since about the middle of the 19th century from Marx onwards has been
about power. Every way we look at things is about power. It's the only value that counts.
If you're an artist, it's no longer good enough to be beautiful. To have beautiful work is almost
a put down. It's powerful. And that's the only thing we respect nowadays is power. And you may say,
well, that's the way men have left it. But don't let's embrace that. Let's try to get away from it.
Let's not just drill further into power. Let's talk about beauty, goodness, and truth. Until
we talk about beauty, goodness, and truth as our guide, we are stuffed. Now, there was another
question on another one and another. Yeah. Well, the big question was the purpose of your life.
There was a big question about what's driving you and what's... Oh, yeah.
Yeah. Yeah. Well, it's quite easy to answer. I don't know. But in retrospect, my life has
made sense at the time it never did. Yeah. I mean, why did I... I wanted to do philosophy
at university, but for various reasons I didn't. It wasn't an honest degree, the one I wanted to do
philosophy and theology. So instead, I read literature. Why did I do that? I know. Why did I
switch to science in medicine? Why... In retrospect, it all makes sense. But what drives me is,
if you like... And it is a driver. It's a demon. I mean, I have a diamond in Plato's sense. It is
very cruel and won't give me time off and says, no, you might want to do that, but no,
you're sitting down at this desk and you're going to write. But the reason I want to do that is
because I believe that I have a vision that is coherent and I believe that it changes the way
people look at life. I know this. I absolutely know it from all the feedback I get. And so,
as long as I've got breath in my body, I'm willing to go around trying to promulgate it.
My impression is that it's landing very well across the educated, intelligent reading public.
There's a deafening silence from neurology and... No, not from neurology and psychiatry,
but from neuroscience. So I've had tons of wonderful messages from neurologists and
psychiatrists all around the world, but not from neuroscientists, except for Roman Chandran,
but he's a clinician as well. And so some very big names in the field have responded,
but what hasn't happened is I've been able to move on neuroscience. And neuroscientists are
people who let spend their life in the lab, but neurologists and psychiatrists actually encounter
people. And the brain has got nothing to do with people, but it has. And I've got
Mike Gazaniga on the film, The Storm, The Divided Brain, and he actually says, you know, he takes
these findings of neuroscience and so on, and then he applies them to the lives of real people.
I'm not comfortable with that. Well, I'm not comfortable with you, Mike, because you're not
doing the job you should be doing there. Anyway. Well, is there really another one there? Are you
sure? Or do we just not get to it? No, there is. There's a man who asked me over here.
There's one more question over here, which was, what has pleased me or displeased me? Yeah.
Well, it's not the same. I want to respond to it. I was just asking about that thing about
near-death experiences. I'm not against them. I wouldn't mind having one. None of these things
ever seems to come my way, but maybe one day it will. But no, I'm appropriately detached from it.
I'm prepared to believe the evidence. I know there are very good scientists involved in the area,
but I have enough battles to fight without people going, oh, I see. So he's one of those people
who believes in seances and things. I don't know what I think about seances. But I really have to
fight my battles a bit, and it's about restricting. I've got enough to cover without having to cover
things that will only land me in the soup. Okay. Okay. Stephen and Dominic. But I want, yeah,
who was the man who asked me what pleased me? Stephen and Dominic. All right. I want to say
what pleased me and what didn't. You can answer that at the end. I can say, all right.
Hey, and my question is, it might be a little late for this question now, but I'm curious,
why do you think we went in the direction in the Western world after the pre-Socratics in the
direction that we went and didn't follow what, you know, some of the profound, because I'm with you,
I think the pre-Socratics are extraordinary. So why did we take that direction?
Dominic. So actually, my question is quite quick, I think. Do my tongue. Perhaps it's quick,
but I wanted to go back to the brain. And you said something, you were talking about Jude
Coravan, and you said that animate life enables the speed of consciousness. And I wondered why
that's important. And then it was kind of a follow up on that question, which was related to what
Linda said, which was, could we, you know, you're talking about consciousness and matter,
and could consciousness be another way to think of time and that matter enables the flow of time?
Okay. If I could remember all of that when we get there. So history of ideas, yes.
I mean, really, so is not to waste time. I don't really know. I think what happened was there was
a great deal of commerce with the East, with India, with Persia, and so forth, and that many of the
ideas one finds in those cultures and in Greece at the time of the Pre-Socratics are very consonant
with one another. And then something happened in which we took a step back and started to inspect
ourselves more self-consciously. And that's what gave rise to this process. And I found something
very interesting in Whitehead the other day, which is a society thrives until it starts to
overanalyze itself. I believe that's where we're at now. Yes. Well, rather as I said before,
there's a reason why we have these different words because
yes. Yes.
Yes. All right. I think probably the way I put it was suboptimal. Thank you.
What I would have been better to say was that responsiveness is what life magnifies. So
there is a way in which inanimate matter is responsive if water comes, eventually it moves,
and so on. So there's a kind of very slow process, but it's not going to give rise to a satisfying
sense of the divine. So you need to create, as it were, creatures that are much,
much more responsive. And they respond faster, they respond more deeply, and they respond more
broadly. So that's what I meant to say. And I think that's what life brings to the party.
Finally, I think we have a chat. No, no, no, there's a time thing. Yeah. I mean,
in the chapter on time, I think we miss, I suggest that we misconceive time because we don't
understand the nature of flow. And consciousness may be a kind of flow. But first of all, I'd
have to talk about how flow is different when you're inspecting it from the outside,
and when you're actually in it. And so when you're standing on the edge of a river with
stopports and a clipboard, time and the river seem to be passing. If you get into that river and
move in the exact flow of the river, time will appear no longer to be an issue, because you're
moving with it. And so time is in itself absolutely fascinating. But I wouldn't want to say collapse
it into consciousness. I think time can exist without our self-consciousness. If you say that
it's part of the structure of the universe, which I believe it is, and consciousness is the origin
of everything there, then I see what you're getting at. But I'm just nervous of conflating
things that ought to be kept separate. No, I just wanted to say, I mean, I really,
my first book I wrote in my twenties was called Against Criticism, and it sold about 400 copies,
and it then got unceremoniously remained it. It's slightly satisfying to me that if you now
try to buy a copy, it will cost you 2,000. But I didn't believe that the master and his
emissary would take off. I genuinely didn't, and it caused a change in my life, because I actually
gave up the day job in order to lecture and write further. And the good side of that was I could live
on sky, and the bad side of that was that I took a 90% cut in income. But what has really
staggeringly moved me, and it really does move me every day, is people who write to me saying,
this book changed my life. I mean, if an author gets that once in a lifetime, they should be
overjoyed. But I do hear it time and again. And people also say, which makes me feel I must be on
to something, somehow I knew all this, but I had no way of articulating it, defending it,
but you have given me confidence. This is so moving. I mean, after all, one of the reasons
I went to the psychiatry, I can say is because I wanted to investigate the mind-body problem.
That's true. That's very sort of top level. But another level, I had wanted to be a monk. I
decided I didn't really want to be a priest, but I felt very happy being a doctor. And I had a very
warm relationship with my patients. And one of the things that crossed my mind is if I'm going to
retire from that, that's going to give a huge hole in your life. Actually, it didn't, because I've
met so many people through this work, and I was freed to do other things. But anyway, I just wanted
to say that I'm enormously grateful to them for that. And I hope that people will continue to write,
because everybody's contribution is somehow different and increases the feeling that it was
okay to go through all the loneliness of the long-distance runner, because it really has been
a very, very, very long and hard grind at many times. And I don't really, although I may appear
to be confident, I don't really have that kind of imposter syndrome. And when people say, no,
this thing really means something to me, that means something very great to me. So I just
want to thank you all very much.
you
