Okay, welcome everybody to this evening's anti-debate.
As you know, I'm Jonathan Rouson, I'm Director of Prospectiva and the anti-debate process
has been funded by the John Templeton Foundation to give us two years to create this thing.
And we're currently a few months into that, so what you're about to observe is a kind
of toddler rather than a fully fledged adolescent or adult.
It's something in the process of creation, but let me say a little bit at the beginning
before we start about why we're doing it and what it's about.
It has its place.
The debate can be beautiful, edifying, it's often a spectacle, a clash, entertaining,
it's often very enlivening, it's done well, it can even be informative.
But sadly, the way the world is today, there's many structural incentives towards polarization
built into the way we get our information, not just our papers, but the channels we watch,
the social media feeds that we have algorithmically being done to us, means that on any given
issue we're less likely to see it in the round and more likely to see it in a way that reinforces
our biases.
So we're in a phase of history where divergence and bifurcation and disagreement is actually
being compounded and exacerbated by the systems and structures that prevail.
And this is a big deal because democracies or even any functioning form of government
that includes people relies on a capacity to discuss adequately what's going on.
It relies on a sense-making process, if you like, a meaning-making process.
And debate was the sort of high end of what it was like to observe a culture talking to
itself.
So there will be a future for debate.
It's not that we're against all forms of it, but we do think there's a case for trying
to develop something radically new.
I would say that the key idea to grasp here is that whereas debate is primarily about opposing
views in which the center of inquiry is somehow in the middle of the room and people are trying
to figure out who's winning, which side am I on?
That's sort of debate classically conceived.
But we live in a time where we're all exposed to things that we struggle to make sense of,
moments where we can't quite agree with ourselves.
Our values don't always align with our actions.
Our ideas don't always chime with our values.
And a lot of what the anti-debates are getting at is that internal struggle.
And it's a struggle you'll see between us on stage, probably, but it's also one we want
you to experience, too.
It's about finding your own inner center in a relationship.
So what are we trying to achieve at the end of it?
It's not some beautiful middle position in which everyone can agree on.
It's not some consensus verdict.
It's a deeper felt sense of your relationship to the issue of hand.
And another beauty is that we don't know what the issue is yet.
We're about to find out.
Thank you.
I'm going to ask my colleagues here to spend a moment now just going into themselves and
asking for a provisional question that feels it matters right now, that feels maybe a little
bit uncomfortable, maybe a little bit pregnant with possibility.
Would you like to get us going with a provisional question?
Is this a moment in history?
Maybe we shouldn't be striving so much.
If I could put it more bluntly, it's like, should we feel guilty about not being able
or what is this consternation?
Elizabeth, how are you feeling about what you're hearing in relation to your question about
is fear ever useful?
It feels related, but it does feel quite separate.
Or rather, it feels like there's a hearing or a polarity here.
And they're related because they're about, oh, who do we be?
What is the state of being we should be seeking?
What's come to meaner now?
Is masculinity the problem?
I just worry that a lot of the conversations we've been having feel quite abstract, maybe.
And I think I don't mean to pose this question so that we can find the bogeyman and blame
something, but I feel like we need something tangible to unpack and to look at.
How are you guys doing with this now as well, in particular?
There's something about my question, which would definitely include this question.
There's no question of that.
So I'm certainly not attached to my way into the problem.
I think that's another way into the same problem.
And I'm going to ask, first of all, for a show, a question for Indra's question,
is this a moment in history asking us to step up?
And then let's, oh, we've got a couple here as well.
OK, thank you.
So let's now get a show of hands.
Is masculinity the problem?
Show of hands.
OK.
So is masculinity the problem we will go with?
Would anyone in the room just like any kind of clarifications about the question?
I mean, I guess people have at least a start of 10 on what masculinity is.
Mina, are you happy with the way that the question is framed, as you originally framed it?
Yeah.
The question stems from the many discussions that we've been having.
So is it the problem for many of the big challenges of the 21st century?
My sense is that there's sort of two things that are really causing a lot of the problems,
whether it's the climate emergency or polarization, poverty and inequality, those kinds of things.
But one is the kind of the economic model that we have.
It's completely unsustainable.
We are exploiting our planet.
We're exploiting ourselves in order to sustain the economic model that reigns.
And then there's the kind of the model of social, of relationship,
not just social relations between humans, but relationship with ourselves individually,
with each other, and then with the more than human natural world.
And in both of these, like both relationship and the economic model,
I feel as though without reimagining masculinity, which has shaped our largest economies
and family structures that feed into economies and so on.
And also, I guess, a kind of quest to explore other parts of the world,
which has resulted in colonialism and neocolonialism.
It's men who have done these things and continue to largely lead the world.
And also, in so far as our relationships and how we may not be able to express emotions with each other,
how we denounce interiority and always stay on this kind of abstract space.
And that feels to me like it's actually very connected to how we perceive masculinity.
We have a question now. You have completed the first stage of the anti-debate.
We didn't know what we were going to talk about 15 minutes ago. Now we do, my goodness.
We're going to invite you to come outside and we're going to create a line where we ask you to
place yourself on this line between yes and no and all that lies between.
So is masculinity the problem now? Yes, we'll be right here on the left
and then you can place yourself anywhere on that line. That's how you feel.
We're going to add one extra dimension to this. We're going to turn this into an axis.
We still have yes and no, but then we're going to add,
do we believe we can make progress on this together this evening?
And really take a personal note of your own position so that you,
because later we'll come back to at the end of the process
and just to see if we have felt a shift in ourselves.
We want to just get everything in the room that is relevant on the table.
So if you have a metaphor or a short story that relates to this bigger social issue,
if you have a strong emotional reaction to it, please say it.
If this is okay with you guys, I don't think we're going to get into the biology of sex and gender.
Let's keep that down off my board.
We're talking about masculinity in its kind of broadest cultural sense.
And I will guide a little bit, but I want to hear from everyone.
So please do not hold back. You don't need to try and be clever.
That's not what this is about. It's something else.
The first thing to say is that the question may be sad,
even though it's about masculinity and not maleness or being a man.
Nonetheless, the first reaction was one of really, can this be true?
There's such great men out there. Can it really be inherently about masculinity?
For me, it's more to do with design.
It's how we've designed a public space and that men have designed a public space in a certain way.
And it's not holistic. It doesn't really draw on the more complex resources that we have.
If there's a problem, it's the lack of culturally appropriate, sacred initiation into the masculine.
And that's what we lost. And ever since we lost it, patriarchy developed.
And men aren't doing very well. Some of them are killing themselves.
They're trying to live up to this. Men are depressed.
Men have sacrificed themselves for centuries in wars, running into machine guns and bayonets.
I don't want to because you're opening, so I just want to say that completely.
Patriarchy doesn't do men any favour.
So a better question might be, what does it even mean to be human?
That goes up there.
The problem is the question.
The question itself is very masculine.
A binary.
I had a very strong visceral and personal response to looking at that quality.
And it sort of hues around two significant losses in my life.
The first was my father, who died in a reckless accident, a careless violent accident.
And then 40 years later, my husband hung himself.
And so there's something around that like sort of heedless physicality or bravado.
These are, particularly my husband, was a lovely sensitive man.
And whatever made him turn to that kind of violent response.
I mean, I think it works with Michael's sense of the lack of initiation into a whole being.
So I wanted to add violence over here, Marley Charmin and Nina.
And other things that there is just...
This is a big thing in the world.
And it's mainly men who perpetuate it.
But then over here, I want to put education, because I think what I see as the mother of a son.
And I actually don't think it's shameful to say, as a father of daughters, I get feminism.
Because I think when we encounter people in human relationships, that's how our empathy deepens.
But as a mother of a son, I see the way the education system actually problematises young male
who develop more slowly, generally, and can't sit still and need to run around in general.
And actually the discipline system in schools is problematising masculinity at that age.
The first thing that sprung to my mind was the image of Yin Yang and the movement of one into the other.
And the fact that one contains the other as well.
And it kind of frapped all the way.
And that describes Sun and Moon or North slope or South slope of the same mountain.
And that, I suppose, to one extent, if you kind of get it back here into balance
and remove the extreme masculinity, the thing that you used to call feminine has its kind of masculine side.
Just with that, I want men to be men and I know that my power is as a female in the feminine.
Perhaps the majority of the things that were coming up and are going on that board
are still being viewed through a structure of masculinity that is unsaid and largely invisible to us.
And that there's this profound absence in our thinking overall about a sort of missing femininity.
And I mean the feminine principle here, I don't mean women.
Just as there's this extraordinary accumulation of historical absence in the institutions that we're dealing with.
It's even in our framing of how we speak about this.
Now, I can't take everyone who's got their hands up, so just take a second and think, is this missing on the board?
I think there's quite a lot missing on the board, so I'll try to just say it as briefly as possible.
But yeah, starting with the question being the problem, I don't think that it is.
But one of the clarifications to make again is that, of course, to Dominique's point, masculinity is intersectional, you could say.
So it's layered with race and ethnicity and culture and class and all of those kinds of things.
The reason that the question I think is far more important than the question of just human interactions
is because we are talking about things like toxic masculinity and crisis and masculinity.
And even the conversation here in this room has kind of been talking a lot about kind of striving for balance
and we brought up male pain, if you like.
And I do want to acknowledge that that exists and it's important to talk about.
But actually, if you really think about it, masculinity and men are thriving.
Men are leading countries. Men are doing less domestic work.
Men are wealthier than women. Men are just incredibly privileged in comparison to women.
So if any group is in or any construct is in crisis or it would be femininity.
I'm tired of women not having power, not being able to shape our societies, not being able to shape conversations that impact our lives.
I'm tired of women being raped and abused and killed and beaten up in their homes.
I'm tired of not seeing women in all of the powerful institutions.
I'm tired of women not being acknowledged as voices.
I'm tired of old women being made invisible.
I'm tired of girls being conditioned to become passive with toys.
I'm just tired of so many things.
And what I'm tired of of all perhaps is that men are not talking really about how masculinity is the problem.
And so women once again have to do even that.
I'm just tired of those conversations not happening and yet there is so much pain and so much suffering for women
because masculinity and not humanity is the problem.
Thank you so much. Thank you for being honest and bringing your feelings.
Sorry, Michael. I'm going to just call a halt.
If there's anything I could say to help at the end or if the question.
I just, I think it's been really useful somehow.
I hope everybody else felt that way but I just think that we should not leave this space and leave the question behind.
Okay, so this is after the entry debate.
We're now sort of reconfiguring our positions on this question and we have two axes basically.
We have an axis on the existing question, is masculinity the problem?
And if it's a yes, it's over here and if it's a no, it's over here.
And now we have another dimension which is about our chance of making progress on this question in the wider world.
And if it's a yes, it's in that direction and if it's a no, it's in that direction.
In other words, you have to find yourself across two axes,
both where you are on the issue and how constant you are that we can make progress on it.
So for me, I'm somewhat towards the yes but quite close to the middle.
And after that debate, after the entry debate, which went, I feel quite well,
I'm inclined to move backwards towards the yes.
And I feel like I'm about happy here.
Thank you for being part of the first public anti-debate.
I can add a couple of things. One is that, as you know, it's still in its early stages,
but it has very different principles.
It's involving the audience in a certain way.
It's bringing in emotions in a certain way.
It's taking quite a lot of time to get the question right so that we feel a shared investment in the inquiry.
It's stopping to check with the question holder about whether they sent the energy that they brought into the room
as being honoured in the right way.
And it's also about finding the disagreement within ourselves, not just between each other,
but also our own grappling, our own dissonance, our own sense of struggle.
Because if the question is a good question, we're likely to feel somewhat conflicted about it.
And the anti-debate is about giving each of us a chance to feel that we can make some kind of progress
within ourselves as well as in the shared context, what we might call collective individuation,
something that we get closer to our own sense of who we are because of the question asked
and because we're sharing it together.
And that's the beginning of the anti-debate.
Future trinkets and alterations might include bringing in a longer spell.
As we felt there, there was more to be said.
It could last a whole day even, potentially.
Some feel not, but we're discussing that.
Someone to bring in metaphor to have a phase where we talk only about metaphor.
Someone to improvise a little bit more.
Someone a bit more ding-dong and a bit more clash.
But for now, we're pretty happy that we have a template to work with,
and I thank you all very much for joining us.
Thank you.
