Welcome, everyone, to this second event. It's good to see you all. I'm Jonathan Ryerson.
I'm chief executive and co-founder of Perspectiva. Perspectiva is a publisher, and we're very
proud to publish Ian's book. This is the second volume of the Matter of Things, Matter
with Things here. Perspectiva has other things, too, though. We're a charity based in London,
and our general emphasis is on trying to reimagine the world from first principles, giving people
permission to do that, social and intellectual permission, and encouragement to rethink the
world. We see this as a necessary kind of work that we have to do today. That brings
with it certain events, and we have an annual festival. We have a European network called
Emerge. We have a methodology we call the anti-debate, and we're in the business of creating
some course material that we hope to start sharing with you all soon. So watch this space
for further developments on Perspectiva, and in the chat, maybe Michael can just share
our website if anyone's interested to know a little bit more about us. I wanted to say
a few things before Zach and Ian speak, and then I'm going to disappear in the digital
sense of no longer being on your screen. The first is to thank, the tonight's event is
free, and that's partly because we were given a grant to help bring Ian's work to more public
attention and to inquire more deeply into the material in the matter with things. So
I'm very grateful to the inspiration incubator, particularly Nikki and Max, which has made
it possible for these events to be free. And there are going to be, there's already been
one, this is the second, there's going to be double figures events. We don't yet know
if it's 10 or 12 or 15, but we're going to be in that sort of magnitude of events, because
there's a lot to discuss in Ian's book, and because we want to do something a little bit
different. In essence, Ian's work sort of came to public attention around 2011, some
13 or 12 or so years ago. And since then, as Ian, as someone who's followed his work
closely, the wonderful thing is that it's coming to public attention, the big idea, the main idea,
the hemispheric hypothesis. But that's been a good decade now, a good decade of questions
clarifying what exactly Ian means, what's the difference in the right and left hemisphere,
how does it play out in the world? And there's still a place for that. There's a lot of people
catching up with the significance of that and why it's a world changing insight when you
understand properly what Ian's saying. But it's also true that Ian has moved along and deepened
the inquiry and in a more specific way, applied his understanding to particular areas. And they
need greater attention on their own terms. So in this seminar series, there's a kind of presumption,
although we will reiterate and restate the argument as we go, we're trying to move beyond, let's
say McGilchrist 101. We're trying not to be simply, this is the main thesis. Can I ask you again
about that, please? We're trying to assume a level of understanding and engagement with the work
that allows us to move it on. And when I say move it on, I mean move it on philosophically,
to really understand more deeply what's being said. But I also mean move it on kind of
in a more quasi-applied or proto-applied sense, because there's a lot of risk in rushing too
quickly to understand what might follow for Ian's work. But there's also a need to
begin to figure out what it means for each of us in our personal and professional and even political
lives. And with that in mind, the first event was trying to frame the purpose of the series as a
whole. And that was called Attention as a Moral Act. And I also introduced what I called the
McGilchrist Maneuver. And there's a little blog post about what the McGilchrist Maneuver is,
I think, and that can be shared in the chat too. And that's a way of trying to get people to
orient towards how we begin to think about the places where Ian's work makes sense in the public
realm. What value it might have for civil society rethinking things. And we're continuing that
tonight. And just so you know, as a little bit of a preamble, we have future events relating to
sanity and imagination. So we're trying to zoom in on particular issues that are dealt with in
great depth in Ian's books. But which are also of a sort of have a degree of salience and relevance
and tangibility in the real world. We don't want to be in the simple business of because Ian says
X, we should do Y, because Ian would be the first to say that's not how it is. But we are interested
in the shift of perception that arises from Ian's work, and how that begins to look in different
contexts and in different thematic areas. And tonight, we're on a really big one. Values.
Value. And this is one of the things I want Ian and Zach to help clarify for us. Because
when I was reread, by the way, if any of you are wondering about the reading material for tonight,
or what's to read after tonight to sort of cover the ground again, chapter 26 in the second volume
of the matter with things is particularly relevant to what you're about to hear. And it's Ian will
go into it in more depth, but it's a philosophical take on where what value is, where it comes from,
why it matters, and the extent to which it can be perceived directly. And the reason I think I
wanted to inquire into this question is because values are mentioned everywhere. If you're working
in a sort of civil society space as I am, everyone's speaking about trying to work on values for
campaigning. There's a values and frames company that think about messaging to try and get particular
values encoded in the language you use. Political strategy is full of tapping into implicit values.
In the commercial world, the world of commercial ethics, if you order food from, for example,
waitrose in the UK, you hear that they have their chicken, eggs, and milk come from farmers who
share our values. And then of course, if you're working in the business world or the finance world,
you hear a lot about the value proposition of something and the bottom line being about
shareholder value. So this word value kind of permeates society in lots of different ways.
But it's used maybe without adequate reflection to really understand what's going on.
I'd like one of the things for Ian and Zach to clarify is this sort of distinction between
value singular and values plural. I hope that will come up at some point in the discussion.
And also kind of what I sense is a kind of big transcendent sense of value, almost value as
equivalent with Dower or God or something like that. And then a kind of value that's something
to do with truth, beauty, and goodness, and maybe love and maybe meaning and purpose,
the kind of fundamental values. And then there's sort of derivative values like pleasure and maybe
integrity and things like that. I'm curious to understand the kind of reverberations of those
things and the connections between them. With that said, it's a great pleasure to introduce
both of our speakers. Now, Ian, I think, goes pretty much without saying for the audience here.
He is Inter Alia, the author of The Master and His Emissary and The Matter with Things. He's a
well-known polymathic scholar and public speaker. Zach Stein may be a little less known,
but for those who do know him, it's hugely exciting to give him a chance to speak with Ian.
I have known Zach now for about four to five years, and we went to the same graduate school,
although my sense of talking with Zach is always that I've heard of the books that he's actually
read. That's usually my feeling of encountering Zach. He's a very studious, very early diet fellow,
really engages very deeply with all the material that he touches. So when he speaks,
he speaks with a great deal of authority because it comes from a lot of study and consideration.
He is, among many, many other things, one of the co-founders of the Civilization Research Institute.
He is working on a lot of different books, but I happen to know as publisher that he has a manuscript
in preparation that relates to metaphysics, which is one of the reasons I thought he was
particularly well placed to talk with Ian tonight. He's also a philosopher of education,
and he's written several essays for Perspectiva, which you can again,
we'll share with you in the chat in due course. So I think that's all for me,
if I haven't forgotten anything. I hope I've made sense of a thank you to our main sponsors,
why we're having this series at all, why tonight's event matters most, and why our
speakers are great. And with that, I can disappear for 45 to 50 minutes and let you enjoy Ian and
Zach's company. I'll see you later on. Bye-bye. Thank you, Jonathan.
Thank you, Jonathan. It's a pleasure to talk, never spoken before, so it's kind of
interesting to have a first conversation, so publicly. Jonathan mentioned that I'm working
on a book on metaphysics. I have a training in cognitive developmental psychology as a
neo-Pijadian, and so when I encountered work, it was actually like
that experience of someone saying something that I almost completely agreed with,
where there was just this complete absorption of the book and both volumes and the prior work.
And what was interesting to me was that in my own experience and in the branches of psychology
that I explored and philosophy that I explored, value was a given. And so the skepticism and
cynicism about value that I encountered in postmodernism and even some forms of modernism
was actually kind of like I didn't understand it. But I also encountered people who didn't
understand value as a given. So when I got to the places in your work where it was clear that
there were hemispheric dominance patterns that were expressing themselves across these different
philosophical positions and even in the personalities of the people who are holding them,
lights went off. And so I'm just kind of thanking you for your work before I get into it.
No, thank you very, very much. I hope the lights went on as well.
Yes, anyway. No, thank you very much. And yes, I look forward to talking about these things.
Perhaps I should just begin, unless you've got a question lined up. Have you got a question
lined up? I had a prompt, which was page 1122. And so this is the second volume. This is the
chapter on value. You say something and it's just a simple sentence, but it's very, very profound,
which is that you're placing value as equally primordial with time, space, matter, and motion,
and consciousness. And so this is when you think about what is the universe? What is reality?
Time, space, matter, motion, sure, everyone kind of buys that consciousness. You can get people to
do that. Placing value as equally primordial to those elements of cosmos is part of the work
that I'm doing in metaphysics at the Center for Enduroism with Gaffney and Wilbur. And it's
core to the work that I was doing as a psychologist, as a Piagetian, where he was in part with
moral judgment and Kohlberg. What they were looking at was value-ception, was the ability of the
organism itself to perceive the field of value. Kohlberg was a moral realist. He believed that
you equilibrated your moral judgment to a moral reality the way you equilibrate your
socio, excuse me, your sensory motor intelligence to gravity. Gravity exists. So you operate on
gravity as a kid, and you learn to work and navigate space and time with your body.
Kohlberg's basically saying, and you do a similar thing with moral reality, with the field of value.
You learn from it. It's not a simple instruction. And so I'm wondering if you could speak to the
philosophical lineage that has always held that as true. Because my sense is that most humans in
most cultures, with most philosophies and worldviews and religions, held this as true. It's only mostly
recently in modernity. That default position has been a value cynicism or value skepticism.
And so I wonder if you could kind of underline that point that, yes, value is life, time, matter,
motion, really primordial, constitutive of universe.
Yes. Well, I believe it to be so. I felt that people would, and I'm glad you have that reaction,
think, goodness, you've talked about all these things that everyone agrees are constitutive of
the cosmos. But now you're talking about things like value, purpose, and the sense of the sacred,
which are my last three chapters. And I left them to that point, because I thought that if
people understood enough about what I said earlier about the more commonly accepted foundations of
reality, they would probably see why I would consider these things also as foundational.
The chapter is called value, not values, as Jonathan pointed out, because
I'm not really talking in this chapter about which particular every day values we might consider to
be the more important ones. I think there is a discussion to be had about values, but often
values boils down to objectives. And that objective is often economic, as Jonathan pointed out.
And I don't think values are objectives exactly. An objective is something that in the
left hand is where you target, you find a line to go to it and achieve it. Whereas what I'm talking
about is something that is, I believe, impossible to do without. I mean, it's not an invention,
it is something that is there in the ground of our being. We don't, I think, a very important
starting point is I don't believe that we invent values and paint them onto reality in order to
cheer ourselves up, but that we actually discover values. They are there for the discovery. We either
respond to them or we don't. And perhaps that would take us too far from this discussion,
which hasn't even got going on value yet. But I do argue that the purpose of life,
the reason the cosmos brings into being something quite so counterintuitive as life
with all its problems is that it is the ability to bring forth in that cosmos something that can
respond to these primordial values. So I think I start by saying something like,
so consciousness is not what life brings, because I've suggested in a previous chapter that
consciousness is everywhere in the universe, and that's becoming not an unusual point of
view. It's, of course, very widely been accepted for thousands of years, particularly in the east,
but it's now being accepted much more in the mainstream of analytic Anglo-American philosophy.
But the idea of value is, I think there are a number of aspects to it, really. And perhaps
if I just say something about what I take it that we generally believe in, something about
what I am going to argue or what I do argue there, that would help. There are about half
a dozen of them, and one I've mentioned, which is this idea that we don't invent but discover it.
And related to that is that it is not a cognitive derivation. It is not something that we look at
life and then we attach certain sort of things and we call those values. But we have this ability
to be in touch with something which is an ontological primitive. And we do it through what
you've already mentioned, this concept of value-ception, which I believe is a translation
from the German of Max Schäler, who invented a word in German, which didn't until he made it up
exist, which is Warnähmung, no, sorry, Warnähmung is perception, but Wertähmung, which is valuing.
And so Wertähmung is really a version of Warnähmung, which is a perfectly straightforward
German word for perception. But the link with perception is interesting, because when we perceive
things, we don't take in a piece of data passively. We're not like receptive plates that absorb
data and then do a calculation on it and have a response. We immediately, as it were, get an idea
of what it is that we're dealing with here. And in fact, we go to meet it, which is another
interesting idea. So it's disclosed in a precognitive take on the Gestalt of what we're seeing. It's
not calculated. And this is particularly important when it comes to my understanding of morality
itself, of goodness. It's now been for a long time normal within the mainstream of Western
academia to consider that anyone who espouses another view of morality than utilitarianism
must be making a fundamental mistake. But utilitarianism is exactly the kind of morality
that is made simply out of making a calculation of what results from it. And that perhaps brings
sharply into focus what I'm talking about. It's not about a result. It's not about
a calculation towards a known goal. It is something that evokes in us a reverberative
relationship. So it calls to us and it calls to us from in front. So it is in that sense rather like
a final cause rather than efficient cause. Most of our thinking is to do with an efficient cause,
which is what pushes us from behind. The thing that makes us do something in the way that one
would make a machine do something. I know you know all this, but I'm just saying it for everyone's
benefit. Whereas a final cause is a cause that brings you to do something because you have a
relationship with it. It's not a self-generated concept, but it is another. And that's a very
important part of what I'm saying. And there are just a couple of things more to say and then I'll
hand back to you. One is that this makes it something that is not determined, but is free.
We can choose to respond or not. And we can choose what we believe actually fulfills each
of these values. So I mentioned that there are goals or objectives or targets or things we like
to do. And which ones we decide are beautiful, good or true is another conversation, an important
one. But I'm talking here about the very fact of the being, beauty, goodness and truth at all.
And the last point I'd like to make is that utilitarian thinking, which is in fact the value
of the left hemisphere, that of utility, means that values are designed to make us do something
that is evolutionarily beneficial. So beauty is just a way of making us choose the right mate
or whatever. The idea of truth is just something that's made up by a powerful hierarchy to
dragoon people into following it. And perhaps goodness is in the same league. Now what I'm
saying is that truly understood, properly understood, these values are fulfilled in
being responded to in themselves, not for any further purpose beyond that. So if I leave it at
that as a sort of laying out my stall, you can now pick it apart. No, I think it's like I said,
I agree with so much of what you're saying. And it's one of the things that I think clarifies the
nature of value as you're trying to express it as a basic property of the cosmos. Something I write
about in this work that Jonathan was speaking to, it is that it pre-exists the human, right?
Because if you're a postmodernist, you take value as a social construction, then there's basically
nothing until the human emerges and then we create value systems and we use them to oppress
people or whatever you do with that. But the take here is that actually no, life emerged to respond
to value which pre-existent. So I think Whitehead spoke of the appetite of the cosmos,
that the cosmos had an appetite that it wanted something, that it moved towards something.
And so that the evolutionary process responds to value makes it teleological.
It also means that there's a dimension in biological evolution
that is responding to the same field of real value that we are responding to. And that's, I think,
again, a position that humans have believed before, like I think of natural law theory. It's not a
great instance of it, but natural law is a case of that. And I think of religious systems where
the ordering of the cosmos, you participated in it as a microcosm, so that there was this
continuity of value across life and human and divine. So it's interesting that the power of
the left hemisphere to reify a worldview that is so much a minority position respective to
most of human thought is one of the things that strikes me. Because again, there's something
about socialization or early childhood education or the nature of the things that get the left
hemispheric dominance put in place. There's a type of person that hasn't been domesticated
to that by the educational system. It's not clear why that occurs. And for them, arguments about value
as I'm making here seem, actually, they like them. Makes you feel good. You feel like you're at home
in the universe. Like the things you care about actually matter to the universe. And then there's
another personality type, let me say, which is deeply skeptical, cynical of that view. In fact,
anything that would make you feel at home in the universe is probably proof that it's not science.
Right. And you think that would make you feel comfortable thinking about
the emergence of human value from biological evolution would be odd. So I guess I'm
Yeah, please. No, I'm just kind of that's, that's, of course,
a case of Petiti Open Kipi, isn't it? I mean, it seems like it must be wrong because
science starts from the standpoint that of course, all this has to be viewed as objectively alien to
us. And so it discovers that it is curious enough alien, you know, after after much looking for things
that it has ruled out from the start, like purpose and real values, it finds that these things can't
exist. Or if you hold that they do exist, you can't be being scientific. Well, I mean, I've tried to
argue from science and philosophy for these very concepts themselves.
Yeah. And it's there, you can see it in the science if you read it from a different angle.
Can I mention Darwin, because people will, you know, we're talking about evolution, you
raised biology. And one of the things that I love about Darwin, apart from anything else,
is that he was motivated in his study by beauty. And that in his earlier writings, beauty is already
beauty or beautiful occurs on one in six of his pages. But in his final writings, it occurs in
on average, every other page he uses the term beauty or beautiful, he's constantly referring to it.
And twice he puzzles over it. Because he says, it's all very well to say that birds choose a mate
because they find them beautiful. And that of course, in itself suggests that it doesn't just
arise with us, with us humans. But the existence of beauty itself remains a mystery. I mean,
what that that observation addresses is given the existence of beauty, how can it be made useful to
evolution? But it doesn't answer the question, how does beauty come about? And what does it lie in?
Yeah, it's interesting. Darwin also writes a lot about love. And I bet they co-occur with beauty.
It's dynamic of allurement and attraction in the animal kingdom.
Not as much. But yes, yes.
Yeah. And the the plentitude of nature in the creation of beautiful things, because it's not
just that the bird is beautiful to the other bird, it also appears beautiful to us, which
seems it seems extravagant. Like, why would it be that the human nervous system responds so
immediately to completely these things? This is a point I make. I mean, why is it that the
things that birds and animals find beautiful? We also find beautiful, even though they have no
relevant. I mean, the fact that a bird has certain colors doesn't or a plant. In fact,
a plant that is poisonous may be very beautiful. So it's not a matter of, you know, being evolution
really beneficial. It just is beautiful. And another thing is trees, the shape of trees,
the shapes of trees are intrinsically beautiful to humans that have been commented on since
time immemorial. But there's nothing about the shape of a tree that can in any sense be attractive
from a propagation of the species point of view. Of course, they need insects. But don't tell me
insects are going around going, that Elm is just exquisite. And why would my nervous system evolve
to be appreciative of the beauty of the tree and indeed, indeed, and it certainly is. And so that
notion of kind of like moving the utilitarian calculus down into evolutionary explanation,
and therefore believing that something that's here, like my whole body and mind involved for
this very narrow function is in fact incorrect. That if value exists and life responds to value,
then it's reasonable that we optimized actually biologically, neurologically for love, beauty,
or a whole host of values that we actually have the ability to respond to. And so value
perception, this gets to a question. Value is like a skill. Like value can be trained. And when
you think of the aesthetic perception, I had training as exactly, it was a music, it was a
music actually where I, I so desperately wanted to have certain albums in my possession, and to
like expose myself to such a beautiful thing specifically jazz and Indian classical music.
Whereas why? When I take a working job at a coffee shop specifically to get money just to buy these
things. So the intrinsic value and the impression. So this question, oh yeah,
how do you build value perception? Why is it that our schools, for example, seem to inhibit it,
that the culture seems to actually create the opposite, where things that happen,
where things that happen are perceived as having value is one way of even describing the commodity
form itself, that you perform a trick. Yes, yes, yes. The exchange value overriding the actual
use value as it were. So yeah, how do we get better value perception? How do we get confused?
Yeah. Yes, it's a very interesting question because like so many things, it's not black
and white in that value section can only exist once it's been trained. But it's also true that
it can be trained, but it is intrinsic. So I think children without any instruction find certain
things beautiful and certain animals, for example, beautiful. And they also find some ugly. And this
is an important point to make because something that might be said is, well, you know, you find all
these beautiful things in nature just because we're trained that whatever is natural is beautiful.
Absolutely not. Although most of nature manages to remain extremely beautiful, there are certainly
lots of things in nature that are just plain ugly. And in the book, I'm afraid I draw attention to the
rather unattractive features of the shoe build stalk, I seem to remember. There it is, it's an
entirely natural bird creation, but it's not a very attractive one, I think to most people.
So I think they're intrinsic and also goodness. I mean, goodness is obviously culturally determined
to a point. But this can be exaggerated. I mean, there are very few cultures in the world
where it's considered good to murder and rape. In fact, beauty too is far more culturally universal
than is made out by people who want to impress on us that it's simply made up. Most Eastern
peoples, Chinese and Japanese, for example, find no problem whatever in enjoying the works of art in
Western works of art in our museums, coming to the plays of Shakespeare, we find no problem at all
in going to in the beauty of their art and their culture. So and interestingly, it's also true that
things can be found that quite specifically mean things that are intrinsic. So for example,
certain intervals and shapes and melodies in an Indian raga can be understood by Norwegians who
know nothing about Indian music. If they're asked to say, what is it that this is expressing,
they are remarkably similar to what an Indian listener trained would say that was being expressed.
So I mean, that's a scientifically verified result. So I think it's like so many things
that you can have a basic understanding of something. But what we can do is help it to
flourish and grow in beneficial directions. And this is a little bit like anything that grows,
a plant. A plant can grow and will grow anyway. But a gardener can actually make plants thrive more
and can make them grow to another shape or to another size or to another color. So there is a
way in which whatever is there can be trained by us. But that doesn't mean that it's made up by us.
I believe that Goethe is right when he says that everything properly considered and appreciated
by us calls out in us the faculty with which we can appreciate it. And so for example,
you talked about music, and I imagine your experience is the same as mine, that when one
starts learning to love music, one loves certain things that one perhaps still loves, but one
can't necessarily immediately respond to other things that as one learns more and more, the faculty
in us to appreciate them grows. And the deepening of value, one way to think about human development,
the human development is just that maturation, if you will, is this deepening of creation of
more and more value. And it's not, it's not the making up more things to care about. It's the
getting deeper in touch with reality. It's actually deepening to this field of value.
And again, from a human development perspective, it does seem that it's a disposition that is deeply
rooted values. And that a lot of what occurs is just the absence of support for that skill and
things that counteract it, which is to say anti-value. So preference, like preference
falsification is the root of advertising. And advertising suffuses our environment. So there's
a intentional thing in our culture to actually disrupt the ability to truly perceive value.
So it's a thing that we need to think about, like how do we protect ourselves from being confused
and then sit and appreciate how does that actually work? Even just the ability to hold
attention for a long period of time is necessary for certain levels of appreciation of value and
beauty. Which is another reason why attention is a moral act, as we have called this series,
which is a phrase that I think I use in both the master and his emissary and the master of things.
Yeah. Yeah. So I'm right there. But the implication also, another implication,
kind of a question is, so therefore, if we really downgrade value exception,
like let's say value collapses at the center of culture, which is what you could say is occurring,
that we've kind of burnt off the fumes of pre-modernity and we're running out of
center of value and even the ability to then perceive value. That's very dangerous. Like if
part of what evolution has been is adapting us to perceive and relate to value. If we cut off
that ability, then we become evolutionarily non adaptive, which means we go extinct. So another
place that this work that I'm doing is the relationship between value and existential
risk and civilization on the rise, which is that the patterns you're pointing to
are actually deep generator functions of existential risk. If you will, let me drop
into that. Okay. I'm saying like the inability to see the simplification of problem to narrow
metric. This characterization of a complex thing as a complicated thing that could be fixed,
but actually you can't. All those characteristics are things that are
leading us to a point in civilization that is treacherous. There's an urgency,
I see it as an educational urgency, to figure out how to rebalance the hemisphere. And that's
why I'm focusing on value exception. What can we actually do to allow ourselves to perceive
what's actually valuable again? Because we're clearly very confused about what value is.
If we've been brought to a place where our civilization is about to self-destruct,
and AI is a great example. The core of the AI risk is the alignment problem, which is a value
alignment problem. So that's me kind of saying help us save civilization, Ian.
How do we learn to perceive value again so that we know?
Thanks. Yes, I can't remember who it is, but you can probably tell me in Silicon Valley who said
that, yes, the way AI is going will probably render us extinct, but it'll be very good for
the economy in the meantime. And that perhaps sums up the left hemisphere's approach to these
things. It only understands power, control, utility, and as a sort of subset of that pleasure,
which is assumed to be what these things give. Although, by the way, they don't.
People who have as much power as you can conceivably imagine lead unhappy, anxious lives.
But there we are. I can tell you for free as a psychiatrist. But yes, how do we get back on
course? Well, partly, of course, you won't be surprised to hear me say that
even below the fixing of values is this business of the hemisphere balance, because you mentioned
there the idea of a complicated machine that can be fixed versus a complex system, which is
the difference being that a complex system is intrinsically indeterminate. It is intrinsically
free. It is intrinsically not controllable. It is intrinsically able to move in a way that we
can't actually program. So that is, that is a kind of slap in the face to the those who hold
this left hemisphere view that we can make ourselves all powerful. And to me, the most
heinous thing that has happened in the last 200 years, or perhaps even since the enlightenment,
is this belief that we can control everything, that we have power. And if only we could have
humility enough to understand how little we know, how little we really understand what we're dealing
with, and how helpless we will be in the face of things that we are now setting loose, and then
if it might not be too late to do something about it. So regaining some sense of humility and
awe before what it is we're seeing, respect for these things, not the whole idea that we
make them all up, of course, is a version of this idea that we are the creators of everything we
see. We are the creators of all that we experience. Excuse me, we are not. We are the receivers,
we are the grateful or should be grateful recipients of some enormous gift that we only
partly understand. And we have a responsibility to respond to that. That's the root of
responsibility is this idea you have to respond to something. And that that something is calling
to us to behave in a different way. So obviously, one of the things I would say is that we need to
open up the minds of those who are both now in control and will control our futures
to the idea of we don't understand this, we don't know what it is, but let us find the good in it,
the beautiful in it, and what is true about it. Because at the moment, I don't think there's ever
been a period since recorded time that I know of when truth has been so profoundly
travested. And with the development of AI, it's going to be almost impossible for education,
for the law, for politics to function if we don't know whether something is a video clip that is
made up by a computer showing a politician saying things he never said. When we get to that, and how
do we know that the children or the young people we're teaching have really understood anything
if they can generate an essay that will satisfy an examiner. And it's going to negate all the
things on which a civilization is built. And what a civilization is for is to guarantee that we are
better at seeing the beautiful, the good, and the true, which to me are with the sacred, which
goes above it, is the most important value of all. Yeah, and this is one of the central risks that
people don't see in terms of catastrophic risk, is the true collapse of culture and truth at this
in value. Because what occurs there is basically, I'm not going to steal Benito Roy's thunder,
but basically it's a schizophrenic break at the level of culture where the entire culture gets
out of touch with the ability to perceive value. And AI is the thing that could perpetrate that
break. I wonder too, though, about the relationship between depression and the hemispheres and
traumatic experience in the hemispheres. So part of me is like, okay, you think you can control the
world, and you kind of pretend you can for a while until it slaps you in the face and something
occurs that forces your identity to reorient. Because I'm thinking like, what is the actual human
development process when someone actually reorients their basic hemispheric dominance pattern?
Maybe that's too simple a way to think. But I wonder if, you know, at various points in history
where we seem to step in and speak from, you know, the master, more times, sometimes after
very hard lessons were learned. And so I'm wondering if one of the things that will reawaken the
perception of value is actually the occurrence of catastrophe and tragedy?
Yes, I think that's right. And I wouldn't cast it myself in terms of depression, trauma and the
hemispheres. Because that's just too complicated. I mean, I think there's something in it. And you
know that I devote a whole chapter in the matter of things to showing what the correspondences are
between a left hemisphere dominated picture of the world and a right hemisphere deficient
picture of the world. And that of the subject of schizophrenia. So that is very much like
left hemisphere overdrive. And it's been commented before I drew these parallels by people like
Louis Sass, that something seems to be happening to our culture, which is rather like what happens
in schizophrenia. And of course, schizophrenia is a very distressing condition, which often
does lead individually to suicide. I believe that we are actually pursuing our own suicide
very rapidly at the moment, we're disemboweling our culture and destroying all the good in it.
We are disemboweling and destroying the beauty and the the vibrance of nature. And we've turned
our backs on the sacred and the divine and said that these are just childish fantasies,
whereas they're probably the most important realities that they're not easy to find for us
now. So I don't disrespect somebody who can't find them and can't see what is meant by them.
And indeed, I think that the talk about them is quite problematic. And no doubt,
I'll talk to someone else in another session about that. But nevertheless, I think these values are
hugely important to me are losing them. It might be worth just mentioning, because I think it's
something helpful to me, I found, which is Schäler's pyramid of values. I'm talking here,
not about Schiller, but Schäler, Max Schäler, S-C-H-E-L-E-R, who was an early 20th century
German phenomenological philosopher, said by Heidegger to be the brightest philosopher in Europe
of his generation. And he wrote about values in a way that Heidegger himself didn't,
nor actually did, Victor Constantine to the same extent. Although in culture and value,
I find he writes beautifully about these things. But in any case, Max Schäler had a pyramid of
values, a hierarchy, and at the bottom were those of use, i.e. utility and pleasure,
and then somewhat above that were what he called the labents, that are the values of life. And he
meant by these things like generosity and courage and magnanimity and loyalty. And then above that
came effectively what he called the geistige, that are meaning either the intellectual, the spiritual
values, which are, I believe, beauty, goodness, and truth, principally. And other values that you
might mention are effectively derivative from either beauty, goodness, or truth, that we value
them because we think they are either good, or we think they're beautiful, or we think they're true.
And then on the top of this pyramid was the sacred. And what I suggest is that in our own time,
we have inverted this pyramid so that the left hemisphere's value is at the top,
that of utility, and the other ones are said to be simply in service utility. That is the vision
of the materialist reductionists who until recently have held the floor in the universities.
That, thank goodness, is changing. There is a wonderful move of foot I see in philosophy,
I see in biology, that people see that this very simplistic, mechanistic vision is gone.
It's over. It just doesn't work. Yeah, thank you for all that. That was intriguing. I'd been saying
for some time that we were dealing with basically a suicidal culture that was running and overdrive
down into those patterns. So it's like this from getting too much into that. But your enumeration
there of the hierarchy of values gets into Jonathan's point about values versus value,
and is there some structure to the organization of first principles and first values? Like the
core of the work that I'm doing at the differential wisdom is that enumerating first
principles and first values from a perspective of continuity with evolution itself, so that
there are some values which are periphery, which occur locally, and then there are other values
which are so core that we can actually say that we share them with like animals, and that we share
them perhaps with cells. That value pre-exists us, then there's a continuity of value that we
participate in. And so things like harmony. Like harmony is expressed very early in physics,
where you either get to land or you do not work. And if you think of multicellular organisms
or complex organisms, a lot of what's occurring there is complex systems of
interest, harmonious things. Humans start to use speech, they start to try to name values,
and you get something like justice or fairness as a continuation of this dimension of. So that's
some of the thing we're doing there. What emerges is that there's a paucity of language of evaluation
in our culture. So this is Charles Taylor makes, he talks about languages of strong
evaluation, being the core of the culture together. And that means a language of shared value. We
talk about a universal grammar of value is absent. We kind of have a grammar to talk about
mathematics and science and all of these other things, but when we get together and we try to
have a conversation about value, our tongues are tied. And especially when we've got our culture.
So there's this need to create some new languages of value, I think.
How much do you think that depends on the level at which one is talking about value?
And I've sort of set up a kind of an idea of certain values such as beauty, goodness and truth.
And it would almost make no sense to say up to a point about these things. We just do think beauty
is good. We do think goodness is good. We do think the truth is good. It's almost a tautology.
But if you start talking about the values that we hold as a society and one may go back to
the call of the French Revolution. And these sound like a very good start.
But immediately one finds oneself and this is where one might get tongue tied and there might be
conflicts is but what exactly do we mean by these things and in what context and how much and for whom.
So liberty is on the face of it highly desirable and I certainly wouldn't admire a culture in
which there was no liberty. But obviously utterly untrammeled liberty is anarchy and restraints and
constraints within reason are very important and we have mature societies able to balance
those things. And you know it's true of egality and fraternity. You know what exactly does one
mean by them? Are they always necessarily good in all contexts or do we have to finesse them?
And I think that's what I would think is the difficulty about values themselves.
Perhaps the only way in which one can
resurrect the good sense of values is in fact by looking at societies that have been stable
for a long time and produced that harmony that you thank you for mentioning that because I think
it's terribly important and it's not only a very important idea in physics but also as you point
out in biology and also of course it was foundational in Greek thinking you know from Pythagoras onwards.
And some of those things you can see like it's a yes and you can hear it.
Yeah so it's just it's a remarkable and suffuses I remember this quote by
Whitehead again where he says you know the circle haunts the universe like a ghost and what he was
talking about was just the presence of universals amongst the flux. And so harmony is harmony kind
of haunts evolution at all stages and we yearn for it like in our in our societies we want
harmony and it's interesting that. And what Harmony points out is it's all in relations.
It's not unison it's relations between things but beautiful and generous relations that work
together to produce only good and beautiful sound. So you know we talk about other species
and humans and one and you talked about how harmony seems to be very much a kind of human
conception I think you hinted that at any rate I hope I'm not misquoting you. But it is also true
that you know birds sing but in essence they sing competitively but only humans can sing
in harmony and attune their voices to one another. So this is I mean there's so much
that one can regret about humanity but the trouble with this is that it leads to a kind of
disparagement of everything that humanity can be and we need to preserve the ideal of what a human
being and a human life and a human society can be what its meaning is at the same time as being
highly critical of many of the things that it's now interpreted as involving and this comes down
to my basic point and the reason I wrote the matter of things is that we no longer understand
what a human being is what the world is and what we're hearing it for.
And that's very unfortunate. That's very unfortunate. I believe in the in the Master's
Emissary you cited that research that the vocal cords were more developed before the
language centers so the very first humans communicated mostly through song basically
that there was this kind of even state where there was this harmonic vocalization of somewhat
sapient you know bipedal creatures who were basically singing together before they were speaking
and that the function of language the function of language to be denotative and descriptive
piggybacked on the use of the vocal cords for basically harmony.
Well you know I mean this is I have to rely here quite a lot on anthropologists
but there is a prominent school of anthropologists who certainly believe this even my than being one
of the most best known exponents of it but what I think is nice is that there is very good
if you like paleo anatomical reasons for believing that this is the case and from the examination
of animals that their ability to vocalize and so on the nature of their skulls and their ribcages
too much to explain now but it's in the Master and his Emissary but what I love about it is that
it inverts this assumption that of course all the business is done with language and music is just
some frivolous exaptation of language but actually it turns out that the science is on the side that
music comes first and that language is a useful exaptation of music.
Exactly that's the idea and were we being stopped was that a bell to intervene Jonathan?
No no it's just that I'm part of my um hopelessly a tech world there's a grandfather clock sitting
just in the next house so it was just yeah. I am ready to I am ready to come in like but carry on for
now. Yeah I mean it's just a very it's a very deep point about what society ought to be like
in things that in fact we listen. It's a knell that summons us to heaven or to hell sorry no
sorry it's like carry on. It's a very pivotal moment in the conversation now.
So the point is both that we misunderstand theoretically the function of language thinking
that its primary function is denotative and descriptive when in fact there's a deeper
function which is the resonance that allows for between us. As someone who's done some clinical
work when you listen to someone speak you're often not listening to what they say you're
listening to the tone and tenor and anxiety or absence of anxiety and the prosody and the
pace of their speech and all the musical tones basically not the content and in fact the mismatch
between content and that underlying musicality is a sign to pay attention to so it's just
interesting to think that in fact we something as basic as language we're not we're missing the
hemispheres are allowing us to misunderstand suddenly and that you know harmony suffuses
this organism and it is resonates with it and yeah the chanting and the music
and then the notion that in the human the value of harmony becomes aware of itself
and so we actually arrange and this is the kind of an interesting note that runs through a couple
of places in the matter of things that there's a something that occurs with the human as an
evolutionary emergent where value and consciousness become aware of themselves in ways that they were
not previously and this is a big I think that's a really important point and it goes back to my
idea which I think is absolutely constant with my understanding of whitehead which is that whatever
we mean by god the creative force logos li burta whatever it may be and that is bringing the cosmos
into being and the cosmos is bringing it further into being so that each is unfolding and discovering
more of its potential in this dynamic relationship it's not a story of a static something that just
is or of two static some things but of a twofold relationship in which something is ever more
coming into being that seems to be at the center of creation and if there's one thing one can say
about the cosmos it is that it is creative in this way that is one of the primary values if
like of the cosmos is simply to make things happen to differentiate out of an enormously
potential unity all that that potential means when it's unfolded and then to refold it again into a
now enriched unity which then carries on this process it's an alternation and of course this
is very much in keeping with david bone's idea of the implicit order the explicit order and then
being re unfolded into the implicit yeah we speak of evolving evolving value or evolving eternal
value yes yes that yes to think about it and in the cabalester tradition there's a saying that
there's more god to come which is basically i i didn't know that if you if you can give me the
reference to that because i'm very keen on the cabala and i've never heard that but i argue of
course that the cabala actually sees that um you know that whatever is the ground of being ends off
is actually coming into being yeah now that's the root of this work because it's the collaboration
with rabbi gaffney and ken wilber both esotericists and gaffney's gaffney's command of the cabalistic
literature you know and and it's part of the through line of the matter with things is the
line back through shelling uh you know through bohem to the renaissance basically christian
and metaphysics has to be implicit there which is of this is the where god invests in the
cosmos the ability to basically further the divine to create new god and so as something
like harmony falls or beauty evolves um the intensification of the value evolves forever
and we participate in that self-aware you're creating a value so it's a it's a kind of we
either participate in it or fail to do so and that is the tragedy that at the moment we're
failing to do you say right thank you second ian if you i mean i i'm aware that you guys can talk
for hours further and uh i hope you will at some point and i'm very glad you've met and i i feel
very validated by the decision to bring you together and i hope it's the first of many
conversations because i'm aware that you're um you share depths um and common interests that are uh
uh are are sometimes esoteric and are sometimes extremely difficult but of fundamental importance
and um you know you're both first principles thinkers in a way that the world currently needs
so i'm very grateful to to have you here and bring you together but i'm also conscious we have 330
odd people um some of whom are keen to ask you things um i will before i'll ask you something
myself first but just to allow the audience to sort of warm up i am keen as a point of
principle in these sessions that we try and ask a question about what's just being spoken of
um not to revert back to the gochus 101 as i say um of course uh you may have you may have more
fundamental queries but it would be good because you've just shared something together that we
that we focus on what we've heard um with that in mind i am feeling significantly clearer about
my sort of quam inquiry earlier vis a vis the mapping of the relationship between
value values and and so on um but i'm also curious about something that is sort of
point related to that and it came up last in the last session too for all the bashing of the
left hemisphere and and i know you you you're quite famous for saying that the left hemisphere is your
second favorite hemisphere um and that it's you know it's one to be loved and cherished and it
shouldn't be you know knocked down i i i feel this work that i feel responsible for and the
perspective is engaged in of working with first principles thinkers like yourselves
trying to make sense of what they're really saying philosophically about the nature of
reality and our capacity to know it maybe love it um relate to it there is a certain um dignified
beautiful role for the left hemisphere in taking a few moments as emissary just to get clear about
what exactly the master's saying right absolutely and that's why when i occasionally feel almost
guilty like when i part of me has a kind of weird socio epistemic guilt about trying to map these
things mentally in a kind of cartography because i feel shouldn't i just be presencing
shouldn't i just be with this shouldn't i be playing some music or doing some art here
instead i'm trying to sort of craft out with these words in a bubble chart how they link
together and i think no surely it's not that nonetheless what i was trying to get at is that
you you mentioned shellers hierarchy or or rather structure thereof of the sacred giving rise to
sort of fundamental truth beauty and goodness and then you make mention of this more derivative
values um and that's useful but what i what i was left wondering is if value is primordial
and pre-human and in some sense something that life is for for us to be in relationship with
as you argue in the book you go on to have a chapter on the sacred but help me out here with
the distinction not between values plural and the sacred but values singular and the sacred
how can we make a distinction between them that's useful to make sense of what's being said here
first of all i should just comment that shaler doesn't imply that um the sacred gives rise to
the next lower line of the pyramid and so on down to utility and he simply says that there is a
hierarchy of values and that um some are simply more important than others they are more central
if you like to the business of leading a fulfilled human life and what i would say my answer to it
also touches on what you've just said about the importance of the left hemisphere that it's good
that it should um as it were question and and try and make clearer to itself what it is that the
master is talking about but it has to do so knowing that at the end of the day whatever it
can come up with for short of whatever it is the master is saying so the process is useful in that
things come out of it but at the end of the day it's not going to have an equivalent map and say
ah i've got the master's message now and it's all this because that would automatically be wrong
so having said that and what i think we can see is that the sacred is something that is dark
um it's the mystics talk about it as a kind of visible darkness a light that's so bright that in
fact for us it is invisible and penetrable or unknowable now if that is the case what happens
is that when it passes through a prison we can then perhaps begin to see it it it the light is
somehow um softened felted and the prison through which that light of the sacred comes is the one
that generates in my view beauty goodness and truth that these are manifestations of it that
the creation can respond to and that are its principal lures that are calling to us to to to
go to it does that help i mean it's beautiful before i can decide whether it has utility in the
sense of helping um so already i'm feeling the feeling the right sort of relative importance
of things um it does help and i don't it doesn't need to be pristine there was a moment i i shared
this with zack prior to the call um many of you will know uh george lackoff and his work on sort of
the representation of um concepts predict being embodied and sort of often often grounded
in metaphors of the body so you know an idea is big for an idea is big for example or um
you can um you know you can play with notions of of something being a long shot you know and
there's these sort of expressions which get at the idea that the way the mind organizes itself
conceptually is through these spatial metaphors and i found myself having a moment reading your
chapter 26 where i was going okay so you've got this value that's sort of primordial and
pre-human and fundamental and then you have love which comes up and you speak about the
relationship between love and then you have meaning and you have purpose and not just
any old purpose but cosmological teleological purpose and and i'm trying my mind to actually
see this in space so i had this moment of sort of you know um whatever that's called
edictic imagery or whatever that word is for this sort of thing in your mind and i was trying to
sort of right trying to picture that in my mind and i suddenly realized how absurd the whole thing
was in the sense that i couldn't possibly capture it because it somehow was as you say
always going to be an inadequate representation of what was actually being described and it was
very useful it was almost it was a it was a sort of micro spiritual experience of sorts because
there was a definitely a sense of these fundamental features of the universe love truth beauty goodness
value the sacred meaning purpose there's a lot of them right it's a family and and and you've said
before the vis-a-vis the mogulcus maneuver just as the one as many the many as one so it's not true
that they're all the same there and there's one sense the same and another sense they're not
and when you try and hold that in your mind and actually see how they map together is if it was
some kind of flowchart the only answer is a kind of laughter because it doesn't really work and it's
a liberation in some ways that it doesn't work and yet there's still a part of me that's a little
bit uneasy and i'm curious if anyone else feels that way well and if Zach or Zach or Ian has anything
to comment before other people come in i'll start looking at people's questions now while you're
answering that okay well i i'd just like to respond since well it's your point is it is
aimed at what i've been saying i suppose and i i i agree with that that idea that there seem to be
a family of these things but another way of looking at it is that i didn't put love in as a value
because i think love is the grounding the nature of being whatever and the sacred is our sense of
that ground of being and you could say that that ground of being and call it god whatever
one wants to call it but the ultimate essence of of the creation of of the cosmos is itself
purposeful that it in general it generates automatically not as an extra thing not as a
sort of subsequently now i'm going to have a purpose but it is purposive love is purposive
it is ultimately aimed towards something that it's it's directed it is relational automatically
but i wouldn't again make relation another separate thing the trouble is that we're so
in hoc to things and i almost called this book there are no things because it isn't a thing
truth and beauty and goodness but what we're really trying to adumbrate is the nature of this
loving core that is in itself true that is in itself beautiful what it does is automatically
good although that is something that theologians could dispute for is it good because god automatically
goes there or does god go there because it's good you know and so forth but what i'm really
saying in brief is that these are different unfoldings of a single element the multiplicity is
the many strands that do nothing to um in any way imperil the integrity of the whole but in fact
enhance it okay the closest the closest thing would be like a field right so we speak of a field
there's a unified field of value but it's not featureless yes basic property by field would be
eros we talk about eros so we talk about cosmorodic humanism in which eros is the foundational
field root of value but then all of these values differentiate out but some have existed
since the big bang and others are more or more recent but yeah they're not things and therefore
when you flow chart them and even when you try to sequence them in a strict way you can't
um the left hemisphere will do that at lower moral stages of development but maturity as
deepening into value perceptions sees inevitable value conflict and again it's not a harmonious
picture in its totality whitehead speaks about the the intensification of polarities not about
everything getting better but about the intensification of the polarities and dynamics of
values all co-evolving in tension right erotic kind of like basically self-disclosure
so erotic self-disclosure okay um i i i'm very good in a flash yeah yeah the questions the questions
are very good um and we'll come to them very quickly moving swiftly along so um i'm conscious that
we may not get through all of them but we're going to try and get to the best ones at least
i'm also conscious that for many who are of a philosophical mindset um some of this discussion
will have been delicious and um exactly the kind of their staple diet if you like but for others
we're more practical mindset perhaps less philosophically um you know adept it can seem
a little abstract so i have a really good question here which is principally for zack actually although
i'm sure you will have thoughts on it and because i happen to know that zack has written a great
deal about propaganda and thought about it at length and written about it on the conciliants
project website and we're in a time of intense propaganda zack the question here is from kevin
cotwas if i've said that correctly and he just says can you talk about the weaponization of value
in propaganda and uh i'm sure he has thoughts too but if you could begin yeah i mean a few things
to say there one and i mentioned already that preference falsification being the foundation
of advertising just clarify what you mean by that because i didn't quite get at the first
falsification when you think you value something but you actually don't truly value it you've kind
of been tricked into valuing it sometimes through coercion sometimes through uh tricks of psychology
so so it's like preference falsification is the goal of psychology excuse me of advertising
advertising was one of the main places where psychology was operationalized after world war
two coming out of large-scale propaganda programs that were built during the cold war and so you're
looking at a science of persuasive communication and if everything we're saying is true about the
intrinsic nature of value and the way the human nervous system responds to value then if i'm trying
to get you to do something and i'm a psychologist and i know that then the first thing i do is
manipulate your value systems and your value preferences so without even speaking about
propaganda just staying on advertising we can see that the saturation of that kind of persuasive
to the point of being coercive style of communication uh is one of the things that
has undermined our ability to perceive actual value right so that's the idea that if you're
if you're succeeding as an advertiser you're not just getting them to value what
you want them to value like coca-cola right like why did we drink coca-cola right it's actually bad
for you but people really want to drink coca-cola the main reason you want to drink coca-cola is
because of advertising and they're incredibly they've been doing it for decades and they're very
good at it it's very subtle so the making you want something making you perceive value but it's not
actually value just to play devil's advocate for coca-cola here i feel like i'm on the bbc or
something trying to be impartial i mean all all know how that goes but i was going to say it's
not just caffeine and sugar don't i just want the caffeine and sugar and some some some sweeteners
yes but that's again part of the falsification of value what you want is to feel good
what you actually want is to feel good and the falsification of value goes right down into
your actual body and limbic system and so like when so when we sent our boys over there with
world war two they were not in a position to position to really know geopolitically what was
going on they were in a position to have been told what was going on right and they fought for
their country with love with full flux of value as a result of propaganda and again propaganda
is very complex to discuss because there's a thin line between propaganda and education
and it becomes the evil twin of education is propaganda both of them piggyback on value
section both of them deploy strategies of getting you to value something right that's what i was
going to ask you zach that's why your question to ian earlier about how one begins to cultivate,
refine, develop the capacity for value section is culturally critical almost a matter of
civilizational survival and it doesn't just apply sort of in the classroom but you it also applies
more in the front line of culture influencing our everyday activity and then because values
are values they are also explicitly thematized reflectively by propagandists so like the culture
wars are a result of both sides trying to create conflict around value and values so to get that
one of the things that makes it hard to talk about values is that they've been subject to
in the united states to a kind of internal informational civil war where just like in the
30 years war the different visions of heaven and hell and other things were used by propagandists
to get the Protestants and the Catholics to really fear and hate one another similarly
digital propaganda is working us into a frenzy mostly along these value fall lines which are
identified and then cleaved and like salt is thrown on the wound and they're they're trying
to make value conflict as polarized and difficult as possible so there's tons to say but because
I know you have yeah you have no lack of things to say on propaganda and for those who are interested
if you go to the conciliants project there is I believe three very considered early day essays
on propaganda that Zach's written there maybe Michael if you can put that in the chat if you
can find it but it is there um Ian any thoughts on propaganda before we come on to other things
I think I think Zach covered it perfectly and I agree with him over and I thought the point about
education and propaganda being evil twins and sometimes being confused with one another
particularly important at the moment right I agree um this is quite a more refined sort of
philosophical question but a pretty important one because I've fallen into this trap myself
it's by Andrew M Davies or Davis sorry much of this conversation has bounced between aesthetic
and moral value a lot of bouncing whitehead makes the claim that moral order is merely
certain aspects of aesthetic order here aesthetic order is wider and deeper than moral value
how do you understand the here's the question how do you understand the relationship between
aesthetic and moral order is one more ontologically primitive than the other so it's an eight
and a plus for the question there Andrew what's the answer is that can Ian do you want to go first
yes okay um it's a good question and it's one that I do um tackle a bit in in the in the uh
at least in in this chapter I think um beauty is a difficult one because you know I'm I'm a great
admirer of Keats but he did die when he was 26 and he was a poet um he wasn't on oath as a
philosopher as it were when he said that beauty is truth truth beauty this is all you know and
all you need to know um if it were as simple as that we wouldn't have two quite distinct terms
and the questioner wouldn't have used them um nor would whitehead have thought that these words
were worth preserving because I can think of things that are beautiful and definitely not good and I
can think of things that are good that are definitely not beautiful unless you I mean it's
always open to somebody to so twist the meaning of a word that it will now encompass but in the way
we normally use them they're different um so it causes caused me more trouble than anything to be able
to um deal with these and it's interesting that whereas moral values seem much more distinctly
carved up between the right and left hemispheres as David Hecht at UCL says um the um the right
hemisphere basically deals in in good and and the left in in what is morally bad I mean that that
that's that's his words um or a paraphrase of them and and um so it's much easier whereas with the
with the matter of beauty both hemispheres do get involved with it and do contribute to it
although to go into the niceties of it I would take us too too long and too far I don't agree
in short um with whitehead on this particular point um uh Andrew uh knows that I'm a great white
hedion um but on this one I just can't really agree with it because it seems to me that in a way
we value beauty because ultimately it is good but we don't value good ultimately because it's
beautiful I that's the way I see it maybe that's a product of my um modern western european education
and a degree of Protestantism in the background that I've overlaid heavily with other strands
but I don't know that's my take on it what do you say is that I mean I'm not sure either but I think
about just the big three the good the true and the beautiful having been differentiated for quite a
long time uh so there's something to the value of that differentiation that in modernity they became
disassociated and you know you had science running running hegemonic over the over the good and the
true um but I also think of Kant and the structure of the three critiques right and then at the end
Kant basically is saying that you know it reduces down to this very complex form of aesthetic judgment
which is which is more than just the judgment of beauty it's also the ability to perceive the
teleological to basically to perceive value per se would be my reading of the third critique
in which case there is something that is neither of those three that's more deep so if I think
about the sacred I think sometimes that's just an intensification of all three at once and that
there's something like a deeper field of allurement or arrows that is primary to the emergence of
even the differentiation of those three and there's a story that um Weber tells and Habermas
tells about the differentiation of those value spheres after their pre-modern synthesis that
there was a time when they were merged in the idea of the sacred uh that slowly they were differentiated
out uh Habermas talks about the linguistification of the sacred and the differentiation out of those
three and then eventually the asymmetry that emerged with uh the unbounded rationality of
modernity so that's me not really answering the question but talking about what I know about the
person um like what if I could just quickly um come back for a couple of things um the first
is that your um invocation of Kant shows perfectly what I mean by what one can achieve by redefining
what one means by beauty and because if you call this aesthetic then you are enlarging the meaning
beyond what most people normally use it to mean in order you know like Humpty Dumpty you're allowed
to do that but then have you really achieved anything by applying this particular term to it
and and the other is just to say that I think your illumination that the sacred is all the
three of these combined it's just perfect because this is what I was saying about the light being
differentiated through colored glass um but when the the colors are separated one doesn't call red
blue you know but nonetheless in the light they are together right and it occurs to me Zach um
and I know Ian you know Daniel Schmackenberger as well a little bit but Daniel has said in
a couple of his talks I've heard him say I don't know whether he still holds to this philosophically
but it's a very elegant line he says I wouldn't really care about goodness and truth if it wasn't
for beauty that was his way of putting it it was something about the charm and sort of um
intuitive elegance and attraction of beauty was sort of primary that it sort of drew you and you
know this is how I understand his claim and there was something about beauty that that was the prior
motivation to to look at goodness and truth I'm not saying it's right I'm not saying it's exactly
of how he means it but for what it's worth he said it and I find it quite quite an elegant
a proposition or provocation to to think about but Ian you've already answered adequately why
that might not be the whole story and likewise that yes and I want to get to some other questions
and I can see we still have let's see quite a few more Michael do you want to take a shot um and ask
it yourself yep yep I'm happy to Jonathan thanks for that um yeah so I guess my question stands
from the fact that I feel this view that is being put forth here that value is ontologically
fundamental if that was to take hold more broadly in society and culture I feel it could be very very
powerful like a very very powerful view to transform our way of relating to life um and I guess and
you know before I ask this question I'm aware that it might be my left hemisphere grasping
after certainty but I'm wondering and this is really for both of you Zach and Ian
how likely is it do you think that in time the the evidence for this will become more and more
compelling like do you see that the new scientific findings um will start to make a compelling case
for the fact that that we can actually quite convincingly say no value is ontologically
fundamental um Zach you mentioned about how we see maybe um in biology values that seem to be
existence existent out with any need for human beings to exist um so I'm kind of thinking in
those terms um yeah I'll leave out that and I have something to say first and then then use that
yeah sure go ahead um well as I always say prediction is is a fool's game but I don't
think that science will ever answer this question or shed a great deal of light on it it's a
philosophical question of a kind that science is not really equipped to answer I would say
and you know that's no disrespect to science but there are certain places
science won't take us profitably I think though that it may become more vivid to us when the
over sophisticated over technical over scientific way of conceiving ourselves has been blown away
by a collapse um some kind of cataclysm that will lead to suffering and here I
go back to something that I think uh Zach um was I think getting at when he talked about
or hinted at the idea that suffering might actually enable us to see certain things
that otherwise we wouldn't and I do think that in a paradoxical way but then you know that I
profoundly believe in the coincidence of opposites that the um the way in which things will get better
is actually by getting worse that in doing that our our vision will become clearer our responses
will become more natural and we will see what matters and that that which matters to us and
which will enable us to survive will to be to be able to trust people and to achieve something
which really exemplifies goodness truth and beauty and I you might say but in circumstances of
dereliction would beauty matter and in the book I emphasize that the earliest human artifacts that
we know about are are beautiful and seem as um what was he called the chap who did 100 the
history of the world in 100 objects suddenly forgotten his name Neil um the the director
of the British Museum for heaven's sake what was he called I don't know anyway well anyway
you surely know about the history of the world in 100 objects anyway no yeah yeah yeah but not the
author no no okay I mean he's very well known but his name suddenly gone but anyway he he said
one of the things that he noticed was that when we first started making things the simplest you
know hand actors we required them to be beautiful as much as we required them to be of utility
right and I quote a a consultation on a school in Mexico where the parents in a very poor area
were going to be gifted with a school and they were asked what above all they would value in
that school and the first thing they said was that they wanted it to be beautiful
yeah I mean the return the return to value at the core of culture is inevitable if cultures
to survive that's one almost uh like a a symptom of the state of our civilization is the degree to
which we are removing value from the center of culture and what's interesting is that uh the
native disposition of the human is to respond to value still so we haven't been completely dehumanized
yet and there's evidence to show that like during natural disasters and when other things occur people
spontaneous spontaneously do heroic things they spontaneously collaborate that the number of
people who go completely sociopathic and actually much smaller than you'd think that our spontaneous
action under complete adrenal overload is basically to respond to immediate value and save that baby
and get this person water and just do what needs to be done so there's a fallback position of the
human nervous system that's involved to respond to basic value so I'm isn't green and paxton have
also demonstrated much to their surprise that the default position for us is to be honest
and that lying is actually stressful and difficult not that we are naturally deceitful
so I think these things are really important that you you've just said sorry and just just that we
have a few minutes left and I I've been brought to task and quite rightly for the genuine balance
in the questions and it was entirely because I hadn't seen askable questions um but I believe
there's one from clear I can't see you clear very easily on the screen but if you're there please
let it be known to us with a hand up and that will make it easier to find us
have find you I know what your question was roughly but it would be better if you can ask it in your
own voice it's early morning here and it's in Wellington New Zealand um and welcome
me thank you no it just sparked my attention was that um when you were saying I'm a PhD student
and I'm I'm I'm dealing um with these topics and um I've very much focused on the idea that you
know of the paradigm shift to make consciousness fundamental to matter um and you know um matter
as secondary and consciousness as primary I'm looking at that issue um and then you said that
value is fundamental and I thought well how many things can be fundamental and if value and consciousness
are both fundamental um what's the relationship between the two of them and are the other um
qualities that are can be defined as fundamental good question and perhaps I could just have a
quick stab at that um uh I myself hold that consciousness is an ontological primitive and
that matter is an aspect of consciousness um but it seems to me that consciousness is intrinsically
relational that um consciousness is always consciousness towards or consciousness of
something else and therefore immediately comes into the question the nature of this
relationship and if it if there is a relationship um and maybe if one would say that it is intrinsic
and here I'm not multiplying entities but just saying these are other facets that one can talk
about about love love is intrinsically relational it is intrinsically beautiful it is intrinsically
good it's intrinsically true when it is a true love so that these things are I mean we get tied up
in in linguistic knots but it's not that there are a whole cupboard full of entities and we come back
to my point that there's a problem when we verify things whereas all we're really alluding to is
different qualities of this primal whatever it is that's would be my answer
Zach thank you Zach it's a very deep question um and as I alluded to before you know I would take
consciousness matter time space motion value as differentiations from an underlying field
which I would characterize probably as being a field of value if I had to pick one of them
which is interesting that again the basic root of the cosmos is like a desire like an
appetite like a wanting to be and so and then once you get after those the question is there's
some more fundamental set is one of the things that we're working on a limited set of first
principles and first values that would characterize cosmic evolution basically from the beginning
which we can either choose to self-consciously align with these first principles and values
of the cosmos or not and this is the view of cosmorodic humanism as we're articulating it recently
so I'm not clear how to I don't it's kind of above my philosophical pay grade to make the final
decision about about those fundamental categories but I but I do think like if I
that the list that Ian gave where you add consciousness and value to matter time space
and motion that's a very important basic list and the addition of value is just
one of the most important philosophical moves that that can be made in our culture today because
people kind of buy consciousness they're kind of even physicists are willing to buy consciousness
but the idea that the universe matters and has a purpose and that the universe responds to value
is intrinsically valuable is a little bit like that so the addition is just so critical I believe
and puts the press on puts the press on the the hardcore left view reductionist view it puts them
into a corner okay thank thank you Zach is that a good enough response to the question yes I will
ponder that but the the only thing is I was thinking is that matter time space of all three
dimensional activities or qualities and I'm just you know I always thought things like
consciousness value beyond maybe three dimensions so that's again a deep question Ian I have the
same similar experience while shifting between these things in the second volume yes that there's
there are different kinds of things going on that are all fundamental yes you're asking
a very deep question and my attempt to answer it very briefly will not be satisfactory but
what I would what I would say at the moment is this that
I believe that matter is a phase of consciousness that could be considered secondary to consciousness
or could just be a way in which consciousness can manifest under certain circumstances
its reason for doing so is to provide two things that consciousness can't which is
a degree of permanence and a degree of resistance and the degree of resistance and permanence up
related to one another and why resistance is important to creation would take me a long time
but it's a thing I deal with in the book and once you've got matter and it cannot
we cannot talk about anything material at all or imagine it without the need for time and space
so when people tell me that by some mathematical jiggery-poetry they find equations in which time
disappears I would say well you've just cut the rug from under science and indeed philosophical
discourse because without the existence of time we can't say anything know anything and we can't
rely on anything that we empirically experiment with and so we get into knots because of the
limitations of our language but also of our consciousness we're limited beings let's enjoy it
and let's celebrate it and but what we have is glorious and it's up to us to you know respond
well to what we've been given thank you Ian it's a great thought to end on being limited beings
time is one of our limitations and we were trying perspective or trying to be disciplined
about our 100 minute events 100 minute 100 minute moments we're thinking of calling them we're
still working on it internally but really glad that you've all shared this one with us and
there will be further events coming up we will have one in two weeks like I say we're not
quite certain who the mystery guest is but it's one of two people we're currently clarifying
that in the next couple of days that will become clear and and this will carry on for several
weeks and we the event is free and Perspectiva is a charity but if you've enjoyed this event and you
want to support our work please go to our website and there is a donate button there if you feel
like giving it additionally to allow us to carry on doing this kind of event carry on publishing
this kind of work and all that remains for me to say really is a very deep heartfelt thank you
to Ian McGillchrist and Zachary Stein thank you very much both of you thank you to David
and thank you for those who put questions in the chat if it could be saved and sent to me later
I'd like to see them because I'm very interested in new light on what I'm trying to illuminate myself
yes and yes thanks a lot for the questions and we'll hopefully see most of you again soon and
I think over and out thanks a lot take care and see you again soon
