So music metacrisis and metanoia. So what I want to talk about today, it really kind
of comes down to these two ideas. Acrasia and metanoia, two ancient Greek words. And
you see the statue that's related to Acrasia is someone kind of bound in chains and unable
to break free. And then this sculpture, which I discovered online when I was looking for
a counterpart to the sculpture of the man bound in chains, has this kind of quality
of an inner light bursting forth, which I think speaks to metanoia. So I want to look
a little bit more deeply at these terms. So Acrasia is from the Greek meaning without
and kratos meaning power or strength. So it's a lack of power, it's a lack of strength.
And the term Acrasia really means a kind of lack of command of oneself. So this, we see
this when individually when we know what is the right thing to do. Intellectually, we
might think, okay, you know, what's a really important value to me is to be healthy. And
so I don't want to eat too much chocolate. But then we have a weakness of will. And we
go for the cookie or we eat the chocolate anyway, you know, so that's a kind of banal
form of Acrasia, maybe a more painful form of Acrasia might be when we know that we don't
want to lose a temper with people that we love. But in the midst of strong emotions,
we say things that hurt people, you know. And so it's having some understanding, some
intellectual knowledge of what is the right way, what is the wise way, what is the good
way to go. But then for whatever reason, we're not able to adhere to that, we're not able
to be in alignment with that. And so I mean, my sense is that this is a very, when you
understand, you hear this term, there's a kind of familiarity, we think, oh, yeah, I
can see that in my own life, I can see that myself. I feel, I believe at the moment, we're
experiencing a kind of civilization on Acrasia, where our kind of young, nascent global
civilization is collectively going in a direction, acting in ways that I think many of
us sense is not wise. Many of us sense is taking us in an unwise, a wrong direction. And yet we
seem unable to change that, to change course, to do something different. And there's almost
a kind of an inevitability of this unfolding of the Metacrisis. So this is our kind of
predicament that we're in. And the counterpart to that are the journey that we could maybe
make to something different, I think is encapsulated in the term Metanoia. And so Metanoia
comes from the Greek meaning Meta, the Greek term Meta, which means change after or beyond. And the
word new, which means meaning, which means mind or consciousness. So it refers to a kind of
profound change of heart. But it's not just a change of mind, like a kind of shallow kind of
change in the way of thinking or change of opinion. In fact, in the synoptic Gospels, it's the
first word that Jesus says. So the term Metanoia has a really deep history that speaks to a
profound inner revolution and inner transformation. And it relates to one seeing the error of our
ways, but also this kind of profound commitment to go in a completely different direction. And so
if we are stuck in a kind of civilisation like crazy, then one possible solution, if I can use
that word, although it's not the most appropriate word, the response needs to be some kind of
collective Metanoia, some kind of profound transformation. And I want to share with you a
depiction of Metanoia before I say a little bit more about Metanoia. And it actually comes, it's a
somewhat humorous depiction, but it comes from the film Blues Brothers. If you haven't seen the
film, Jake and Elwood Blues, I think Jake just gets out of prison, and then they go back to their
orphanage and the orphanage is about to close and they're running out of money. So they need to kind
of find, find them, they're given this task, you know, like the hero's journey, they have this task
to complete. And they're told to go to church. And Jake's not happy, but he doesn't want to go to
church. I think Jake is John Baluchian, Elwood is Dan Lackroyd. And then you see this kind of
Metanoia transformation that happens as they're in the church listening to music. So I want to play
this for you just now. One, because the music is so wonderful, but it also, it only came to me
after I wrote the essay that we published in Substack, that this is an example of Metanoia
through music. So I'm going to play this for you just now.
We all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all
We all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all
We all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, we all, are like
Jake a, are you all right
ست Abb')
All hail!
All hail!
All hail!
All hail!
Hail!
Hail!
Bear!
The bear!
Do you see the bear?
The bear!
Do you see the bear?
What light?
Have you seen the light?
Yes! Yes!
Jesus hates God-dancing Christ!
I have seen the light!
The band! I want the band!
The band?
The band?
The band?
The band?
The band?
The band!
And God bless the United States of America!
The band!
When I hear the term metanoia, it sounds like, oh, wouldn't that be lovely?
Wouldn't a metanoia be a wonderful thing to have, you know?
Some kind of spiritual awakening.
And it seems to my mind, within kind of spiritual circles,
if you like, a metanoia could be treated a little bit like
how falling in love is treated in rom-coms.
Bear with me here.
What do you mean by this?
And I think there is actually a deep connection between metanoia and falling in love.
But in a romantic comedy, a couple fall in love,
and then that's the end of the movie, when they get together.
And it's like, happily ever after.
But of course, you know, if you've been in a relationship that's lasted any amount of time,
you know, the falling in love is not the end of the story, it's the beginning.
And then there's the relationship, and maybe the many decades,
and the work, and all that happens with that, you know?
And so you could look at a metanoia, or if we talk about what the world needs,
and we talk about it like it's a shift of consciousness,
like if we had that, then everything would just be solved, everything would be fine.
But I actually think a metanoia is simply the beginning,
and then the painstaking work begins of actually bringing oneself
and one's life into alignment with that revelation, with that understanding.
And of course, in the Blues Brothers, I never thought I would turn to the Blues Brothers as a source of wisdom,
but there you go, in the Blues Brothers, the metanoia experience happens at the beginning of the movie.
It's the start, it's not the end, it's the start, it's then they go on their kind of journey.
So, I just want to situate that in that way,
that metanoia is not the kind of, once we achieve that, that's the work's done, that's just the first step.
And so, to my mind, metanoia, and this is just the way that I understand it,
as I say, it's a very deep term, and there could be many different ways of understanding and moving into this,
but what occurred to me was that metanoia is a three-part transformation,
and it's a transformation in loving, it's a transformation in knowing, and it's a transformation in action.
And so, I'll start maybe by talking about loving, by saying metanoia is a transformation in what we love,
and what I want to point to is it's a transformation in their structure of value, a hierarchy of value.
This is something, there was a wonderful conversation between the philosopher and educator Zach Stein and Ian McGillchrist,
that took place, you can find it on our YouTube channel, Tifa's YouTube channel, maybe eight or nine months ago,
and they talked about the importance of value-ception, and with value-ception, what they're talking about is this,
this capacity that we have as human beings to perceive value directly,
and that value is not something that we just kind of, our consciousness paints on to the cosmos,
but it's something inherent in the cosmos, and that we actually perceive it, we can come into a relationship with it.
And one of the points, and I can't remember whether it was Zach or Ian, but I think there was very much an agreement with this,
was that there is a problem with our society's collective capacity for value-ception.
Like as a society, we, our value-ception is not working very well.
We are valuing the wrong things and not valuing the higher goods that we should be valuing.
And so, in an individual metanoic transformation, what happens is, before the metanoia,
the individual might be concerned with narrow egoic concerns, status, reputation, comfort, pleasure.
And then, with the metanoia, their concerns, what they value, what they deeply care about, starts to transcend beyond themselves.
An example of this, of course, is a Christmas carol, Charles Dickens' Christmas carol,
where Scrooge, all he cares about is money, but through those kind of, the dreams and the encounters with the ghost of Christmas past, present and future,
he becomes transformed and he cares about things beyond himself.
So there's this transformation, and this is why I call it transformation and loving,
because it's about what we deeply value, what we deeply care for, and about what we love.
And therefore, what we want to serve.
And then also, I see it as a transformation in knowing, because along with this comes a kind of reordering of our understanding of reality and our place within it.
So, for a Buddhist, it might be an awakening into the profound interconnectedness of all of life.
And then the kind of myopic, narrow concerns of the self might seem silly, you know, and there's kind of an overflowing of compassion and love outwards.
And in the Christian tradition, it might be seeing oneself as a kind of a child of God or Christ.
And then, once placed within the cosmos, it's shifted somehow.
So there's a kind of transformation or understanding of reality and what matters in reality and our place within it.
And again, I think this is, this connection to falling in love, I think is quite deep.
Because if you think about when you fall in love with someone, the loving them, the coming to value them, comes along with the learning more about them, the insight into them.
So the learning about them, the discovery of the person and the loving them are kind of like one in the same thing, they kind of happen together.
And so, I think there's this profound transformation in loving, there's this profound transformation in understanding, knowing insight.
And then these two things bring a kind of call to a new kind of action.
And I think this transformed action has, we can think of as having an interior aspect and an exterior aspect.
And the interior aspect, I believe, is the kind of orientation to the spiritual practice, to transform oneself.
As I say, you have a kind of metanoia experience.
And then, I'll give you an example, you go on a retreat.
You have this wonderful experience, you feel maybe deep sense of peace, you feel you're in touch with the wondrous life, the miraculousness of life.
And there's this sense, now everything is going to be different.
Now I'm going to be a completely different person, I'm going to change how I live all the rest of it.
And then three weeks later, you're back at home in the same job with the same partner.
And you find yourself being the same old grumpy son, so you've always been, you know, this miraculous experience.
And then back to the way you were.
And, you know, the first time you're going to retreat and then come off it, that can be a bit disillusioning.
It can be a bit disappointing, you know, it can be kind of crushing actually.
But after you go on more retreats, you see, oh, this is what happens.
And so then the practice becomes nurturing that nurturing the soul really nurturing one's spiritual transformation so that oneself can go in the direction of what the metanoia is calling.
And then also in the external world, living that.
So this is the, and while I'm talking principally about the individual, I think this can apply to us collectively.
And a kind of collective metanoia would be a kind of profound transformation in what society what we collectively value profound transformation or understanding of reality, which I think is taking place in many, many respects.
And I think this field is really important to that.
And then, and then a profound transformation in actually what we do how we live that is informed by that deep care and that deep understanding of reality.
Okay, and the contention I want to make in this kind of workshop is that music has a particular power to enable a collective metanoia.
And I just want to just refer back to the term a crazier from earlier.
If you remember that term, it means a lacking command over oneself.
It means an absence without power, particularly I think the absence of the kind of spiritual power to the existential power to do what one feels is right to do what one feels called to do.
And I think music actually has within it a spiritual power to enable a collective metanoia.
And I think this is just a very brief aside one thing that as many of you will know Ian McGill's Chris work and the difference between the left and right hemispheres.
And he talks about how the left hemispheres principle concern is power and acquiring power.
But I would, I would argue that the right hemisphere has a power as well, but it's a different kind of power.
It's not a power to control a power over another.
It's more a power to enchant more a power to in soul and more a power to move the heart if you like.
And this is what music can tap into.
Okay, so we better have some evidence for this.
And music has this power.
So I want to explore this now.
And just before I get into this, I should say, I'm not saying that music by itself can address or resolve the metacrisis or solve all the world's problems.
That would be completely idiotic, you know, totally foolish.
And because the metacrisis is so multi multidimensional, our response will need to be multimodal will need lots of different and a variety of responses, maybe countless responses in many, many different ways.
But I do believe music in the arts more generally will be necessary because the kind of they can speak at the level of consciousness in a profound way.
And I want to talk a little bit about that just now.
So music has deep roots in our nature, both ontogenetically and phylogenetically.
So let me explain what those words mean.
So phylogenetics is the study of evolutionary history and relations among or within groups of organisms.
So when I say music has deep is deep in our nature phylogenetically, I mean, it's deep in our evolutionary history.
For many researchers, they believe it predates the emergence of language.
And in a moment, I'm going to show you a clip of a dog actually dancing to music.
And you can see that the dog really is grooving to music, which suggests this deep common ancestry that goes way back predating ourselves as humans.
And then also what's interesting is ontogenesis is the development of an individual organism or anatomical or behavioral feature from the early stage to maturity.
So this talks about the kind of development of like the human being from the embryo and all the way up to, you know, the baby to the infant and so on and so on and so forth.
And what's interesting is that there is a appears to be a parallel between ontogenesis and phylogenesis.
So what is ancient in our evolutionary history, you can often find it in the early stages of the organisms development.
And so this is an example, this is really, I'm just going to move this little zoom box here.
So you can see this is a fish, salamander, tortoise, chicken, pig, cow, rabbit, human.
And you can see the embryos of all of these creatures are very, very similar.
And of course, interestingly, the human embryo, when it's really, really young has a tail, because that's part of our evolutionary history.
We evolved from mammals that had tails, even even prior to mammals, fish, reptiles.
And then you can see as the embryo develops, it starts to take its own path and goes its own trajectory.
Okay, so music, I want to argue is is deep, deep ancient part of ourselves.
And I want to share with you some videos that reveal this now.
Now I'm going to play this clip and you'll watch.
You'll actually see if you watch closely, you'll see the dog moves actually in time to the music.
And then of course, you can also see the expression of the dog, which shows his or her pleasure as well.
Okay, pretty clear that dog likes his kind of funky blues.
Okay, next video, I want to show you of a mother with her baby.
I can find the video.
And what's interesting here, you'll see the mother sing a few songs, the baby and the baby's quite happy and then she'll she'll sing opera.
And I just want you to notice the strength of the baby's emotional response.
Like the baby responds to this music more strongly than many adults would.
Okay, so my son who is super happy all the time and loves when I sing every song like everybody clap, clap, clap, clap.
Everybody sing la la la la la.
Okay, so he loves that song.
He loves heavy metal.
Okay, that should like terrify a baby, but not George.
But when it comes to opera, he gets super emotional and upset.
George?
Okay, so I think it's very interesting just how profound the baby's response is.
Like the pathos in that opera music, the baby picks it up and his response, I think is just revealing how quick we are to kind of resonate with music.
And what's interesting is this, the deep kind of, the fact that music is deep, deep in our nature means that it's really cross cultural.
And so I want to show you another couple of clips.
One is of Bobby McFerrin.
And I'll just let this clip kind of speak for itself if I can find it.
Give me one second. Okay, here it is.
Expectations? Expectations.
Much.
Ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba.
Ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba.
Ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba
ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba balua ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba ba annaa aaw.
Now, what's interesting to me about that is, regardless of where I am, anywhere, every
audience gets that, but it doesn't matter, you know, it's just, you know, the pentatonic
scale for some reason.
Okay, now, in that little video clip, Bobby McFerrin used the audience for singing what's
called the pentatonic scale in music, and I might be able to play this. Let me see, can
you guys hear this if I play this? Can you hear that note there? Yeah? So the pentatonic
is just, that's it, those five notes. And that's the scale that he was using. And I
want to show you one more video now. And I might flick through this video a little bit
because I don't want to spend too long on it, but it just shows you the various, from various
cultures all over the world, using the pentatonic scale. And in the Western musical scale, there
are 12 different notes that, of course, can be arranged in all kinds of different forms
and there's all types of different scales. But the pentatonic, for some reason, these
five notes are used by cultures all over the world, much more than any other scale. So
let me just find this and bring this up. Okay, I've got it now.
Okay, and it goes on. You get the idea.
For some reason, these five notes touch the human being, activate our emotions, speak to
love, speak to pain, speak to all of these different aspects of what it means to be human.
And all different cultures all over the world create music around these five notes. Now, of
course, there's a lot of music that's created out with these five notes, but there's something
quite universal about this. And so what I wanted to kind of point to is the fact that music has an
impact to touches in a kind of deep way and move consciousness away. And so to return now to
the little slideshow, I want to, I want to now explore the three pathways that I think music
can offer to, to enabling this collective metanoia. So one, and this relates to, of course,
the knowing is music as a metaphor, as offering insight into the nature of reality and ourselves.
And so the first thing I want to touch on is I want to share with you three different
metaphors that music can offer. The first one is a little bit playful, but it just, I just want to
show you how music reveals truths about who we are as human beings, mirrors our nature,
and then mirrors also the deep nature of reality. So the first has to do with something called the
12 bar blues. And the 12 bar blues is this structure that you see here. And if I can,
I can maybe play it for you. Can you hear that? Yeah. Okay. Yeah. Okay. Cool. So the 12 bar blues
is one of the most widely used famous song forms in Western music, Western music. And it was the,
the absolute foundation of rock and roll. Okay. And the devil's music. And that's important
because we're going to come back to that in a minute. So I'm going to play. So if I was to play
the 12 bar blues, it would be a bit like this. Okay. So it'd be like, um,
so I'll play in a kind of rock and roll kind of rhythm. So like,
so this would be the one chord. That's the third bar, fourth bar. And then I move to the fourth
chord. And then back to the one. And what's interesting about this, and I don't know,
I'm sure other people have said this. I think I stumbled across this revelation myself. I don't
know what it says about me. But if you look at the structure of the 12 bar blues, it's actually
pretty similar to the classical pattern of an orgasm. Now, why would it be the case that the
music of rock and roll, which is kind of the music of sex, you know, that's what rock and roll was
all about. Um, and which people, you know, derided as the devil's music, if you look at the structures
of them, it stays on the one for a while. And then it gets to this, the four chord, which is that
middle part where it kind of gets to the plateau, right? And then the excitement's building. And then
you get to the climax. And then the resolution. And then back to the one. So this is just a
slightly humorous example, but it just, it just shows you how music has this capacity to speak
to deep aspects of who we are, ourselves as embodied beings. Now, another aspect of another
kind of music, a kind of metaphor that, that can be the music can offer, I think, and maybe
teach us something a little bit more profound. So this is something that we use actually at the
beginning now of the anti debate that perspectiva has developed. And the anti debate is seeks to
be an antidote to debate, a way of having public conversations, a kind of democratic discourse
that is that moves beyond polarization and moves into a deeper appreciation of diversity of you.
Um, and there's, there's, there's many aspects to it. And I, I, I, I, um, there's a lot to the
anti debate. Um, and watch this space because we have a video on it coming out soon. But I just
want to share with you one metaphor that we use that draws on music that, that's helpful to, to
understanding what we're trying to do with it. And I think it's helpful to understanding the
nature of truth actually. So when we think of consonants in music, we usually think of
intervals that fit well together. So you can see there, if the, if I was to play the note middle C,
okay, or I play, if I play this note here actually, so this is C. And then if I play the note above,
that's an octave above. And you can see in those first two waveforms, the second waveform,
this one here is double the length. Um, or, or it's, um, the ratio of the two wave waveforms is
two to one. So the second there's, there's for, for the same length of time, there's two waveforms
for the length of time it takes for one in the first. And this is why these two notes fit together
because the wavelength of one is double the length of the other. And so they sync up very
frequently. Now, if I go to the next note, G, which is the fifth, that has a ratio with the note C
of three to two, two, three to two. So they're very, um, they're very consonant intervals.
These intervals fit well because the wavelengths fit together. So when we think of
consonants or harmony, we usually think that harmony is about consonants. It's about notes
that fit well together. And in some sense, this is true. But if you only play notes that fit well
together, then what you'll actually get is quite boring music. You don't get anything interesting.
Okay, it sounds a little bit deranged. There's too much order, you know, actually, when you
play music like that, it's almost, you know, it has kind of the kind of quality of a totalitarian
state comes to mind. Now, if you take an interval that has a lot of dissonance, so rather than
these two notes together, an octave, rather than playing C and C, I play C and B, the ratio of
those two notes is something like, I can't remember exactly, something like eight to 19 or
something. It's very dissonant. And you can hear to the ear those two notes clash. Okay.
But if I play two other notes along with them, so these two notes clash, but when I add in E and
G, so I play C, E, G, and B, then they form a chord called the major seventh.
And actually, that dissonance is unfolded within our larger relationships that actually
produces a more beautiful harmony. And all of music
is all about the interplay of dissonance. It's actually the interplay of dissonance
that creates beauty that creates richness that creates soulfulness in music.
It's not consonance. Consonance by itself, constant intervals don't do much at all.
It's actually the interplay of dissonance. And to my mind, this is also true of the nature of
ecosystems. If you think about the relationship between a lion and a gazelle, it doesn't look
very consonant, certainly not from the gazelle's point of view. Okay. There's a lot of tension,
a lot of antipathy, animosity, but when you take the step back to the ecosystem as a whole,
that is unfolded within a larger harmony. And so what can this teach us? Well, what happens if
we apply this to the notion of truth rather than the being one truth? What if we understand the
ontology of truth to be like an ecosystem? And actually, there are a diversity of truths that
come in together that kind of form a larger whole. So this is, to my mind about the direction we
need to go in, these kinds of metaphors might offer us insight about the nature of reality.
Okay, I want to go to one more now. So I'm just going to grab a guitar.
Okay. So unfortunately, I probably need a very, very close microphone for you guys to see this,
and you won't be able to hear it either, but you'll just have to take my word for it.
If I play this string here, it resonates and vibrates. Okay. Now the other five strings in
the guitar don't do anything. They don't move. But if I play this note here, if I put my finger in
this fret, that's the same tone, same pitch as this note. And what's interesting is when two strings
are at the same pitch and you play one of them, the other starts to resonate as well.
They start to sync up, and the other one actually starts to resonate and vibrate.
If it's not the same pitch, it'll just be completely static.
So how does this offer us an insight? What is the metaphor that we can draw here?
Well, I want to argue that this is actually a metaphor for music itself, because I believe that
music has the capacity to allow different consciousnesses. So the consciousness, for
instance, my consciousness, the consciousness of Anna, the consciousness of Haley, of Kylan, Rob,
we can actually come into a resonance together through music. And this is what music does.
And I want to share with you an example of this. A quite powerful recent example of this,
which is from the singer Oliver Antony. And he has a song, I'll see if I can bring this up now.
You might have heard this, you might recognize this. I think this video now has over 110 million
views online. And there's something about the pain of his song, about the authenticity of his
singing, the melody and the words that resonated with people all over the world.
So I'd like to play just a little bit for you.
It's a damn shame what the world's gotten to for people like me, people like you wish I could
just wake up and not be true, but it is. Oh, it is living in the new world with an old soul.
These rich men, old for rich men, Lord knows it all, just want to have total control.
Want to know what you think, want to know what you do, and they don't think you know.
But I know that you do, because your daughter hates shit, and it's tax to no hand.
Tax to no hand, old for rich men, old for rich men.
Okay, I feel really bad for having to cut these songs off.
So I hope you can be with me in that.
What was interesting about this was if you look at the comments on YouTube,
you see people from all over the world saying how they resonate with this.
People living in Iran, South Africa, Finland, Zimbabwe, the UK, Turkish, Netherlands,
Germany, Australia, it goes on and on. And there's one comment that I wanted to just highlight
that somebody said, I'm from the UK, and this song isn't just an American anthem,
it's a world anthem. And so there's something about music, and I think it's because it goes
into the depth of who we are as human beings, that it can kind of, to use a kind of musical
cliche, strike a chord. It can somehow, consciousness is all over the world, and
different people can resonate in the same understanding. It's much more profound,
I think, and much more powerful than just words, just saying, yeah, to just say,
working people, working class people are having a hard time at the moment. Doesn't do it like his
song does it, no? And so one of the ways that music can enlighten, can reveal
deep aspects of the nature of reality, aspects of nature ourselves, is through metaphor,
and I've talked a lot about metaphor, but the other way is actually through direct experience.
And I want to share with you a couple more songs.
One is from a band called the Swan Silver Tones, a group of singers, a group of gospel singers.
I was fortunate enough to stumble across this group of singers when I was about 15,
and I just happened into a CD store and bought some kind of compilation of great gospel singers
for about, I think it was probably about £1.50 at the time. And these are some of,
to my mind, some of the best singers I've ever heard. And you might notice that I have a particular
affection for the African American musical heritage. So I'm going to play with you for
you a song called Mary Don't You Weep. And for me, there's something amazing about this music
that comes from a time and from a people who suffered extremely, like suffered terribly.
And the music has within it that suffering, has within it the pathos, the struggle of life,
and yet it has joy, and yet it has ecstasy, and yet it actually tilts into moments of transcendence
and hopefulness. And to me, that says something profound about the word it means to be human
and what's possible for human beings. I'll play this just now, and it's just about just short
of three minutes, I think this song. We're hopefully not being too indulgent, but I think it's just
so good it's worth listening to the whole thing. And just to notice, just noticing the warmth,
the softness in it, but then the kind of movement to the climax of ecstasy and joy at the end.
And Mary, Martha don't have tomorrow. Listen to me, Mary, Martha don't have tomorrow.
Pharaoh's army, they got drowned in the sea one day, but Jesus said Mary,
your little sister don't have tomorrow. Now can I get a witness, he said Mary,
Martha don't have tomorrow. It may be somebody sick today,
if somebody here ain't got no home. But listen, Pharaoh's army,
they got drowned in the sea one day, but I believe in man said Mary,
your little sister don't have tomorrow. Now listen, if I could write your name,
I won't tell you that I surely would not. Put your foot on the rock,
put your hand on the rock, stand on the rock where Moses stood one day,
because of the Pharaoh's army. That's what the Bible said, you got drowned in the sea one day,
but I believe in man said Mary, your little sister don't have tomorrow.
He said Mary, your little sister don't have tomorrow.
He said Mary, your little sister don't have tomorrow.
Trouble in the land will be all over after war. You won't have to give up night for long for
more, and maybe it could have been a little hard to hear. And I believe Jesus said I better call a
little bit louder. I wish I had somebody to help me call Mary.
Over deep water I've been trusting my name.
I don't believe she heard you, you better call her again.
Okay, this one's Silver Tones. So,
this is the annoying aspect of metanoia, but there's another aspect which is the
music of spiritual practice, and this is the kind of the action part of inner transformation.
And there are many ways in which music as is either enhances spiritual practice or is a direct
directly implicated or the direct path of spiritual practice.
I'll come back to the writer and the elephant. We see this in the indigenous traditions,
in plant ceremonies, in Christian choral, even song, and Buddhist chanting,
and the Sufi mystics, the whirling dervishes, and breath work. And then, of course, more recently
is an existential and spiritual practice psychedelics. Music is often really, really central to that.
And one of the reasons I think music is particularly powerful, and it relates to
this notion that Jonathan High developed this metaphor of the writer and the elephant,
which is a description, a way to describe the human psyche. And so, he sees the human psyche
as being composed of these two parts. The writer represents the rational mind, the intellect,
their capacity for planning, their capacity to plan, make decisions, see into the future,
and the elephant is our kind of deeper, more evolutionary, ancient, instinctual, emotional,
impulsive self. And what's key is the way these two aspects of ourselves relate to each other.
So, on the surface, it might look like the writer is in control. The writer's deciding,
right, go this way, go that way. But really, if the elephant wants to go in a different direction,
what hope has the writer got? And so, this speaks to the problem of acracia,
that we might see what the right thing to do is we might desire to go in a certain direction,
but due to our emotional selves, our instinctual selves, our impulsive selves, our desire for
pleasure, or the force of fear of whatever it might be, the elephant goes its own direction.
And the reason spiritual practice is so powerful is because we can then, it's a way for us to train
the elephant. It's a way for the writers to say to the elephant, okay, we're going to learn how to
go in the right direction. And I think music is a particularly powerful aspect, particularly
powerful method in spiritual practice, because music actually speaks to the deeper aspects of us.
It doesn't just operate at the kind of upper intellectual level, the more recently evolved
aspects of human cognition, but it speaks to the depth of our being. And which is why it's used
in all of these different traditions. It can be used devotionally, so then it can kind of draw
us towards the good draws towards the beautiful draws towards the transcendent. It can also be
used as a kind of an alchemical process, like in breathwork practices or psychedelics, where the
music itself seems to be a kind of a catalytic agent that can actually bring about kind of
inner transformation. So I thought it would be nice actually for us to engage in just a little bit
of practice right now together and use music as part of that. So what I want to do is just do a
very short meditation. I'd like to guide us for a few minutes, and then I'd like to play
a very well-known song, you've probably heard it many times, Debussy's Clair de Lune, which is a
beautiful, evocative, very deep song, piece of piano music. But what I'd like to do is guide us
into contemplation on the interconnectedness of the cosmos. And then as we listen to the music,
just rest in the kind of remembering. In Buddhism, the word for mindfulness is sati,
which means remembering. And another way of saying remembering, which I really like,
I learned from the trauma specialist, Peter Levine, is remembering being the opposite of
dismembering. So when something is dismembered, it's pulled apart, but remembering is to sew
back together. So the invitation is to kind of rest on the remembering of our interconnectedness
with everything, or coming back together with the whole. And I think this short quote from
Einstein, which is also well known, is appropriate for this. And this is something Einstein, I think
he wrote this to a friend when they recently experienced the bereavement, and he wrote this
to them to console them. This was in a letter he sent to them. A human being is a part of the whole
called by us universe, a part limited in time and space. He experiences himself, his thoughts and
feelings as something separated from the rest, a kind of optical delusion of his consciousness.
The delusion is a kind of prison for us, restricting us to our personal desires,
and to affection for a few persons nearest to us. Our task must be to free ourselves from this
prison by widening our circle of compassion to embrace all living creatures and the whole of
nature and its beauty. Okay, so if you want to find a way of sitting that feels comfortable
and stable, and I'll guide us in a short meditation just for a few minutes, and then I'll play the
piece of music and my invitation is just to listen to the music and let yourself rest into it and
just let your attention really be fully with the music and where it wants to go. Okay, so
get me nice too. Let me close the eyes that feels comfortable for you.
It can also be good to take a few slightly deeper breaths.
And with each in breath and out breath,
allowing the mind, allowing the mind to kind of rest down into the body,
and feeling also the body supported
by the chair whenever you're sitting on,
feeling the gentle force of gravity operating on the body.
And then allowing the breath to find its own rhythm, allowing the body to just breathe naturally.
Almost everything that is alive breathes in some way.
So sometimes it can be a sense that life is breathing us.
The breath, it's a rhythm in nature like so many rhythms, the rhythm of day and night,
the rhythm of the seasons,
the rhythms of the tides,
the heartbeats of countless creatures,
and of course the body is warmed by the sun in this moment.
Without the sun there would be no heat.
And also the body is full of water,
because dependent on the rivers, the oceans, the clouds,
so simply resting here in a kind of remembrance, the interconnectedness with everything else.
Hey, we need some time to come back,
back to the screen.
Back from the cosmos, back to the screen.
So I'd like to just finish by speaking briefly about music as realisation.
And so if the music's capacity to enlighten is about bringing us into deeper understanding
of reality and offering insights to reality, and in souling is about practice,
then if we come back to that kind of those original three aspects of metanoia,
to my mind music as realisation is maybe the most important and most profound,
which is transforming what we love, transformation of loving,
very much in that respect value section.
And so to this end, I want to draw in the words of Thich Nhat Hanh.
And yeah, I'll read, I'll just read this out, this is from I think the fifth of 10
love letters to Mother Earth. Thich Nhat Hanh writes, Dear Mother Earth,
There are those of us who walk the earth searching for a promised land,
not realising that you are the wondrous place who've been looking for our whole life.
You already are a wonderful and beautiful kingdom of heaven, the most beautiful planet in the solar
system, the most beautiful place in the heavens. You are the pure land where countless buddhas and
bodhisattvas of the past manifested, realised enlightenment and taught the Dharma. I do not
need to imagine a pure land of the Buddha to the west or a kingdom of God above where I will go
when I die. Heaven is here on earth, the kingdom of God is here and now. I don't need to die to be
in the kingdom of God. In fact, I need to be very much alive. I can touch the kingdom of God with
every step. So for me, this is quite a profound view on the nature of life and the nature of
the nature of our relationship to what could be called divine or sacred.
One way that this is spoken on, the pithiest way this is spoken of, this is it, which is to say that
music doesn't just point towards the true, the good and the beautiful, it doesn't just point
towards the possibility of a sacred relationship with reality or the realisation of sacredness.
Music is itself a beautiful manifestation of truth, goodness and beauty. It is reality manifesting
as joy, as beauty, as sacredness and we can participate in that directly through music.
In this Zen tradition, they teach that this is available to us all the time and a similar
sentiment is depicted in this painting by Michelangelo on the ceiling of the Sistine Chapel,
where you have Adam and God reaching to each other and if you look closely, you'll see that
Adam's finger, where God's finger and arm is fully outstretched, Adam's finger is,
for them to make contact, is up to Adam to just extend his finger that little bit further.
And the meaning of this is that what we can infer is that God is all of what's available to us,
the ultimate, the divine, the sacred nature of reality, beauty, truth, goodness, the wondrousness
that is reality is available to us, but it's just up to us to kind of wake up to it, to realise that,
to make that movement towards it. And I like to think that music is, to add one more dimension
to this picture, music is kind of God calling to us, singing to us, urging us to come into
contact with this sacred nature of reality. And there was a conversation recently between
Ima Gilchrist, Daniel Schmutterberger and John Verveke, and they talked about the need for really,
for a transformation or value-ception, for collectively, as to come, to reorientate towards
deeper, true or higher values. And the term the sacred actually came up 52 times in the space of
the conversation. And it wasn't just in one part, it came up throughout the entire conversation.
And this is three very accomplished thinkers putting their minds to the question of how do
we address the metacrisis and how do we chart a new path. And there was this constant coming back
to this need to orient towards the sacred. And my sense is that music offers us a way to,
not just to point towards it, but actually to participate in it, to realise it, to experience
it in the here and now. And this is, I think, what music offers us is realisation.
And it can help us fall in love with reality. If somebody can have an appreciation of the
sacredness of the beauty of reality through music, then my sense is that that can open up
into an appreciation and the sacredness of reality as a whole beyond music as well.
I'd like to share for you one final, final clip. Okay, just before I get to that clip,
I just want to share this briefly. This notion that the fruit contains the seed.
So far, I've been talking about music as metaphor as a way to understand reality, music as spiritual
practice. And all of these things would point to the notion that music is a way to get to some
better goal. And you could think of all of our attempts to address the various crises we're in,
the predicament we're in, as means to some kind of end, maybe in the future, maybe 700, 150 years,
where human beings finally learn how to live in harmony with each other on the planet.
But I think we also need to understand what we can learn from this notion that the fruit and the
seed can be the same thing. And what I mean by that is, if we are seeking a more beautiful world,
if we are seeking a more beautiful world, one way to explain the way to that is that there is no
way to a more beautiful world. The more beautiful world is the way. So if we seek to bring into
being a more beautiful world, we have to realize it in the here and now. We have to make it come
alive in the here and now. And when I think about what a beautiful, more beautiful world might entail
it definitely has people singing and dancing in it. It's people somehow coming together in community,
maybe sharing food, and maybe they're celebrating the joy and the miracle of life,
maybe they're having a live experience of the beauty and the wondrousness of existence.
There's something of that there. And if we can do that in the here and now and move into that more
and more, I think it sows the seed for more in that it sows the seed for a more beautiful world.
Whereas if we think, well, that's kind of a luxury. We need to just figure out how we're going to
transition off of fossil fuels, or we just need to figure out how we're going to deal with our
the kind of scourge of misinformation, or we need to just focus on the problems.
My concern is that we'll actually forget to be in love with the world. We'll get to be in love
with reality. And that is really surely going to bring our demise. So there's a need to bring to life
the more beautiful world in the here and now. And if we do that, that has its own causal power,
that has its own causal agency. And the final thing I want to point towards is that we need to find
new ways. We need to give birth to new forms of communitas that generate the right set and
setting to fully harness the spiritual power of music. And so what I mean by this is in psychedelic
therapy and psychedelic practice, they talk about the importance of the set and setting.
If you're the set is the kind of mindset you bring to it, the intention you bring to it.
And the setting is the environment, the people you're around. And if these things are
not right, the likelihood of a good trip or a valuable trip is goes down. And the likelihood
of a bad or very traumatic trip goes can go up quite a lot. But if you get the set and setting
right, you can have a much more helpful experience. And I think just now what happens with music,
sadly in our kind of spiritually hollowed out culture, and are the way kind of capitalism
has infiltrated every aspect of life, music is reduced to mere entertainment,
something we merely consume. And we don't really engage with it in profound spiritual
context or with a profound spiritual intention, kind of related to the this historical moment,
to the challenges of our times. And if I feel like it's something we need to experiment,
we need to explore how we can do that. And I don't know how to do that. Quite honestly,
I'm not sure. I also think there's a necessity to do this in ways that are not bound within the
old religious traditions, which to many people, the kind of dogmatic metaphysical and cosmological
claims turn them off. And we need to do this in a way that can be more pluralistic, more open,
but none the less, affirms the deep maturing of life. And so I want to just share one final video
now, which is of, which I had the chance to record when I was in Argentina last year. And
in Argentina, Buenos Aires, my wife, Kylan, who's on this call, we were there for, I think,
just over two months. And one of the things that we saw a lot, which was quite, in some sense,
kind of amusing, but also wondrous, is that the Argentinians, they protest a lot. They seem
to be always on the streets protesting, right? But whenever they protest, they're out playing
drums and they're dancing. Okay, so I want to show you just a quick video that I took of just this
video. Okay, so there you go. So this is just an example that was, that doesn't happen, at least
in my country in Scotland, we don't see this, you know, very much at all. But it's kind of woven
into communal cultural practice that has a kind of socio-political end to it goal in mind. And
it becomes a form of communitas, but also is devoted to some wider aim. And I'm really curious
about how could we form, how can we kind of give rise, give birth to new forms of communal activity,
new cultural practices that really harness music, and the address that speak to the challenges of
our time. And so that's the one of the things that, in this project that we're, we're kind of in the,
in the very early stages of a perspectiva, I'm giving my mind to, to think about how that might happen.
So that's me. I'm finished with that workshop. I hope you guys are not totally exhausted by that.
And I very, very much appreciate your presence and attention. What I'd like to do now
