So, for the next seven years, he'll live with the Randolphs, each in a different wing of
the Tuckahoe plantation, to return to Shadwell at nine.
This is significant because this experience of living with extended relatives is one of
the things that induces what many historians, particularly Jan Lewis, has noted, a southern
code of stoical manners and politeness.
It's a way of keeping peace within large extended families.
What did Jefferson think of his father?
Again, this is very speculative, but Jefferson seems to have loved and idolized his father.
He seems to have seen him as the symbol of the hearty westerner, the frontiersman.
And certainly Peter Jefferson was that.
But Jefferson's recollections, at least to his grandchildren, inflate that image.
He tells stories of his father often surveying expeditions, killing an entire den of bears
by himself.
He was a big figure, strong, and over six feet.
But Jefferson's recollection of his feats of strength are almost legendary.
He tells a story of how, at one point, Peter Jefferson is trying to pull down a barn.
So he has a big chain wrapped around it, and he has three slaves pulling on it, and they
can't budge it.
So Peter Jefferson tells them to get out of the way, grabs the barn, the chain, and with
one huge thrust pulls the entire edifice down.
There's another great story of him lifting two full hog sheds of tobacco and putting
them upright.
Well, these are the recollections of a child.
They may be apocryphal.
In fact, they probably are.
Two hog sheds of tobacco would weigh somewhere between 1,000 and 2,000 pounds.
It's quite doubtful that anyone's able to lift that.
But it does tell us something about Jefferson's imagination.
He idealizes his father as the strong, powerful figure.
And that's significant, because while Jefferson is tall like his father, he's not particularly
strong.
He's got the body of a Randolph.
He's graceful.
He's thin.
He's lanky.
He's a fine horseman, but not a particularly good outdoorsman or athlete.
In fact, this is exemplified in another famous story.
At one point, Peter decides to toughen up his son and sends him out in the woods with
a gun and says, come back with your dinner, and you're not eating unless you capture
some game.
Well, if you'd ask him to conjugate a verb, Thomas Jefferson's the man.
If you ask him to parse a sentence, to interpret a document, or if you ask him to go hunting,
it's not his forte.
Jefferson hunts around for a while.
He can't find anything, and uses his intellect.
He finds a turkey in someone's pen, ties it to a tree, and shoots it.
He has to tie it to a tree because he's not a particularly good shot.
Then brings it home to his father, look what I have.
His father quickly figures out what's going on.
I mean, there's blood on the garter.
He used to tie the turkey, but it evidences the difference between son and father and
the ways in which Jefferson idealized some of the things that he frankly wasn't.
My sense is that it's this idealization of his father that enters in his conception of
the importance of his own education.
One of the few things he does tell us about his father is that he was uneducated.
And I quote, being of a strong mind, sound judgment, and eager information, he read much
and improved himself in so much that he was chosen with Joshua Fry, Professor of Mathematics
in William & Mary College, to continue the boundary line between Virginia and North Carolina.
There's a particular pride Jefferson has in his father's autodacticism, in his father's
ability to educate himself to be refined gentlemen.
And Jefferson sees his own education as fulfilling this promise and dream of his father, one
of the few things he does tell us in his autobiography is that his father had placed
me at the English school at five years of age, and at the Latin at nine, where I continued
into his death.
So we'll see in Jefferson's education, in his own mind, a fulfillment of his father's
dream of uplift and mobility.
Well, I want to turn to Jefferson's mother, Jane Randolph, the daughter of Isham Randolph,
one of the very first families in Virginia.
Isham was a great planter, a merchant, a graduate of William & Mary.
He spent some time in London with William Byrd, meeting with amateur scientists.
He was a particularly refined and educated gentleman, and in fact, the Randolphs have
a fairly distinguished lineage.
If you trace the family tree far back enough, you'll find a Lord Chief Justice of England,
a King of Scotland, I believe David I, one of the baronial signers of the Magna Carta,
and even farther beyond that, they're descended from Alfred the Great and even Charlemagne.
But after the death of his father, Jefferson will be under his mother's supervision until
the age of 21, and curiously will actually live with her until her death when he's 27.
There's more than a little evidence to suggest that Jefferson resented his mother, and particularly
the authority she had over him.
She's never mentioned in any of his correspondence or in his autobiography.
The only thing he does say is that she married Jefferson, and that her family traces their
lineage far back in England and Scotland, to which let everyone ascribe the faith and
merit he chooses.
There's a bit of sarcasm in the way he treats his mother.
His commonplace book, a commonplace book, by the way, is a book where a student would
have written down important quotations that he'd have read.
His commonplace book at the time is full with misogynistic quotes about, well, how one should
never get married, how women can't be trusted.
Perhaps most revealingly, there's large excerpts from the Odyssey by Homer, particularly the
chapters where Telemachus pines as his mother's suitors destroy his inheritance.
And Jefferson's clearly identifying with Telemachus in that situation.
He'll later tell John Adams when asked if he would live his life again.
He says, sure, as long as I don't have to live the first 25 years again.
