Well, that obviously squelches Jefferson's plan, and he scotches it after that.
But Jefferson learns an important lesson here.
And the lesson is that even the law is subject to the control of the elites.
And this will subsequently inform his endeavors for not only legal reform, but land reform.
He realizes that if he's going to create the leveling and social democracy that he so powerfully
desires, he's going to have to do it not just through the courts, but through the medium
of politics.
Jefferson also had a variety of other cases.
I really want to just look at one because it's extremely principled, and it suggests
an issue that is emerging in Jefferson's thought, one that will dog him for the rest
of his life.
And the case is known as Howell vs. Netherland, it's brought up in April of 1770, and Jefferson
performs it pro bono, he doesn't ask for any compensation.
In cases as following, Samuel Howell's great grandmother was white, but she had a child
with a black man.
By law, that child, who turned out to be a daughter, was bound to servitude till the
age of 31.
Before she finishes that servitude, she gives birth to a son, and that's Samuel Howell,
the plaintiff in the case.
And he must serve till he's 31 years of age, at least according to law, at this point he's
about 27 or 28.
And Jefferson knows that the code of Virginia statutes will not allow Howell out of these
three or four years of servitude.
So when he argues in front of the general court, it makes a very stirring appeal, not
to provincial law, but to a higher law, to the law of nature.
Under the law of nature, all men are born free.
Everyone comes into the world with a right to his own person.
This is what is called personal liberty, and is given him by the author of nature because
it is necessary for his own sustenance.
The reducing of the mother to servitude was a violation of the law of nature.
Surely then, the same law cannot prescribe a continuance of the violation of her issue,
and that too without end, for if it extends to any, it must be to every degree of descendants.
Well, obviously Jefferson loses the case.
It's a violation of the actual laws of Virginia to emancipate Samuel Howell before the age
of 31, but it is revealing that Jefferson is grappling at this early stage with the
problem of slavery, and slavery will be a critical issue for Jefferson throughout his
career.
He'll struggle with it both as a revolutionary American, as president, and then as a retired
statesman.
Well, Jefferson's legal career ends in 1774.
He quits the law.
It had really only been a modest success financially.
On paper, he did quite well.
He was owed fees of up to about $50,000 a year in contemporary terms, which is not insignificant,
but he never collects more than about $20,000 a year.
Given his training and expertise, this is clearly not sufficiently rewarding.
Jefferson's real legacy begins when he turns to politics, and that career begins in 1767
when he moves up to the seat that his father had held in the Albemarle County Court.
The following year, in December of 1768, he is elected to the House of Burgesses at the
ripe young age of 25, and it is a traditional Virginia election.
Jefferson is responsible for what is known as swilling the planters with bumpo, which
is to say on election day he would put out a huge cask of rum and punch, ales and cakes
and treat the voters, and Virginia elections were, in fact, these sort of ritual public
barbecues.
There was no secret ballot.
The voting was viva voce, which is to say, if when you went up to vote, you would walk
up to the table where the votes were registered and publicly state who you would vote for,
and then that person would shake your hand.
There's a lot to do with deference.
It's part of a traditional order.
On May 8, 1769, he takes his oath as a Burgess, as a member of the House of Burgesses.
One week later, on May 16, the House of Burgesses unanimously passed the Virginia Resolves,
a set of resolutions which denounced the imperial policies of Great Britain, the Townshend
Acts, which were leading America on the road to independence.
As a result of these acts, the governor dissolves the government or the House of Burgesses.
But the Burgesses don't retire to their country estates.
Rather, that day they meet in the Apollo Room of the Raleigh Tavern, and following George
Washington's lead form what's known as the Association, a non-importation organization
that's trying to use economic coercion to force the repeal of the Dreaded Townshend
Acts.
That's also significant, because Jefferson, for much of the rest of his career, will look
to that as an agency of foreign policy.
That being the notion of economic coercion, of peaceable coercions.
