He can claim that the Constitution enables the federal government to do almost any action
which serves the general welfare of the United States.
And I want to read his opinion on the constitutionality of an act to establish a bank.
It is not denied that there are implied as well as expressed powers and that the former
are as effectually delegated as the latter.
Then it follows that as a power of erecting a corporation, in this case a bank, may as
well be employed as any other thing, it may as well be employed as an instrument or means
of carrying into execution any of the specified powers or any other instrument or mean whatever.
The only question must be, and this as in every other case, whether the mean to be employed
or in this instance the corporation to be erected, has a natural relation to any of the
acknowledged objects or lawful ends of the government, and in fact it clearly did, which
is why Washington endorsed it.
Well Jefferson and Hamilton, as I've mentioned, also disagree fundamentally over foreign policy.
We have to remember the 1790s is a period of global ideological war between on the one
hand revolutionary France with its radical politics and its attempt to export revolution
and Great Britain, which stands for conservatism and order.
And each of the two parties identifies with one of those two causes, Jefferson and his
Republican Party champion the French revolutionary cause, while Hamilton's high federalists
support Britain.
And the issue comes to a head over the disposition of the military alliance that the United States
had entered into with France after the execution of the king.
Hamilton believes that once the king is dead, the treatise are no longer in operation, and
that the United States should declare neutrality in the ongoing struggle between Britain and
France.
He does this in part because he needs British trade to keep the American economy afloat
and to continue to bring in revenues to pay off the debts of the United States, and he
distrusts revolutionary France.
Jefferson by contrast wants to honor the treatise, not because, or rather, because he
doesn't see them as treatise between the king and the Articles of Confederation government,
but rather between two nations or peoples.
As he writes in his famous opinion on the French treatise, I consider the people who
constitute a society or nation as the source of all authority in that nation, as free
to transact their commerce or their common concerns by any agents they think proper.
That all the acts done by those agents under the authority of the nation are the acts of
the nation, and the nations remaining in existence, though both of them have since changed their
forms of government, the treatise are not annulled by these changes.
And Jefferson will remain loyal to France, even at the height of the infamous Genet Affair.
Edmund Genet, or citizen Genet, is a French diplomat dispatched by the Jean d'Anne government
to treat with the United States, and also to rig out privateers to attack British shipping,
which is a violation of neutrality between the United States and Britain.
And he does this despite the fact that Washington has instructed Jefferson to inform him that
that is not to be tolerated.
Well, this eventually comes to a head because the Jeffersonians embrace Genet wherever he
goes, he's fed it, and he begins to think that in fact the Jeffersonians are just what
Jeffersonists, excuse me, the Republicans, are just what Jeffersonists claimed, the vast
bulk of the population.
When Washington tells him he has to cease arming privateers in American waters, attacking
British shipping in American waters, Genet threatens Washington that if he doesn't back
down, he will appeal to the American people and depose the trees in his presence.
It's at this point that finally Jefferson realizes that Genet is out of control, but
shortly before that he writes to Madison, while everyone else in the administration
is shocked by Genet's activity, in short he, Genet, offers everything and asks nothing.
Yet I know the offers will be opposed and suspect they will not be accepted.
In short, my dear sir, it is impossible for you to conceive what is passing in our conclave.
It is evident that one or two, at least under pretense of avoiding war with the one side
written, have no great antipathy to run foul of it on the other and to make a pot in the
Confederacy of Princes against Human Liberty.
While this clash of foreign policy is also personal, involving charges of official misconduct
or failure to perform duties, Hamilton intrudes himself into foreign affairs, which is the
realm of the State Department which Jefferson heads.
And Jefferson deeply resents this, not least because Hamilton almost always wins in any
appeal with Washington.
Indeed, the historian Julian Boydus claimed that Hamilton was in fact guilty of treason
in a book called Number 7.
