In 1801, he had written to the U.S. minister in France,
we believe the practice of seizing what is called
contraband of war is an abuse of practice,
not founded in natural right.
War between two nations cannot diminish the rights
of the rest of the world remaining at peace.
And this is a central issue,
the right of America as a neutral to ship to both sides.
And Jefferson believes that given this choice,
the world can't hesitate that the American route
is the right.
However, he considers the observance of these principles
as of great importance to the interests of peaceable nations,
yet in the present state of things,
they are not worth the war,
nor do I believe war the most certain means
of enforcing them, those peaceable coercions,
which are in the power of every nation,
if undertaken in concert and in time of peace,
or more likely to produce the desired effect.
Well, Jefferson had a chance to finally apply these issues
as a result of the expiration of the J Treaty in 1805,
with war breaking out on the continent.
The British decide to outlaw American re-exportation,
which is to say, Americans would,
American ships would take goods from enemy colonies,
those of Spain and France,
and re-export them or export them to Europe,
and Britain decided it would no longer allow that.
In fact, his diplomats, Monroe and Picney,
get this right to re-export in a treaty from Britain,
but Jefferson refuses to submit it to the Congress,
ostensibly because it doesn't deal with the issue
of impressment, but in part because Jefferson
is still hostile to the British.
Finally, on June 22nd, 1807,
the USS Chesapeake is fired on by the HMS Leopard,
which is looking for deserters to impress.
On November 11th, the British orders in council,
like Napoleon's Berlin Decrees,
now ban all neutral shipping.
Jefferson retaliates with the embargo.
Now, I want briefly to lay out some of the consequences
of the embargo because just like his wartime governorship,
it will result in Jefferson's leaving office
in less than desirable circumstances.
It causes a financial and commercial depression
throughout the North.
Hard-hit urban areas have record high unemployment.
There are over 30,000 mariners alone unemployed.
A British observer in New York notes,
in the month of May 1808 alone, over 80 bankruptcies,
hundreds of debtors in prison, and thousands unemployed.
Farm prices drop, cash disappears,
and farmers can't pay their mortgages.
And as a result, Jefferson begins to get a reputation
as not only repressive, but a little bit loony.
And it ends as presidency on a down note.
However, there are a series of very important issues
in civil liberties raised by these embargo acts.
The first act simply states that the United States vessels
can't go to foreign ports.
Foreign vessels can't take cargo from the United States.
Very quickly, Jefferson discovers that there's resistance
to this, and responds by redoubling his efforts
against smuggling.
On January 8, 1808, he makes coastal shippers post-bond,
which is to say people shipping from one city to another.
This bond is double the value of both cargo and craft.
It is an incredibly expensive proposition,
and it increases the penalties for smuggling.
On March 12, the penalties are increased further,
and the embargo now covers all exportations by land,
because people in upstate New York are shipping goods
right across the border into Canada.
On April 25, 1808, another act is passed,
the Fourth Embargo Act, which allows collectors
to search and seize on suspicion all coastal shippers.
They don't require warrants, and they
don't require any due process.
On April 19, Jefferson declares an insurrection
in upstate New York.
His attorney general, Albert Gallatin,
sends in the army.
The town's denounced it as a military despotism.
That army will remain in control of the region
throughout the rest of Jefferson's tenure.
The Fifth Act, which is passed in 1808,
raises the bonds on coastal shipping.
Collectors can seize suspicious property,
not just on the water, but anywhere,
without due process and without warrant,
and the president can use any branch of the military
to enforce the acts he wants.
Finally, after Madison is elected in December 7, 1808,
Thomas Jefferson washes his hands of the affair.
He feels that, although his term does not
expire for a few weeks or a few months,
I should say, the people have spoken,
it's no longer his problem.
I think when we look at this, we see Jefferson grappling
throughout his presidency.
Between the realities he faces and the principles
he believes in, and negotiating that difficult conflict
is neither easy nor simple.
