I am going to argue that Jefferson's greatest literary legacy is actually his resumption
of and contribution to a remarkable correspondence with John Adams.
Considered by many to be the greatest work of early American letters, the correspondence
was self-consciously written for posterity, and it represents one of the noblest achievements
of the founding generation as two partisan foes reached across the chasm, the divide
of political disagreement, to re-establish their affection and state their creeds.
And Jefferson and Adams had in fact been extremely close friends since the first great
collaboration at the Continental Congress. In fact, in some ways, Jefferson was the
junior partner to Adams. Both were the champions of independence, both were the champions of
reconstructing state government, and they clearly collaborated quite closely, and there was
a lot of affection between them. He writes to James Madison in 1787, the following critique
of Adams. You know the opinion I formerly entertained of my friend, Mr. Adams. Yourself
and the governor were the first to shook that opinion. I afterwards saw proofs which
convicted him of a degree of vanity, and of a blindness to it, of which no germ had appeared
in Congress. Now, in fact, he's quite right. Adams' vanity is legendary. He's referred
to it in the time as his pomposity. But he's wrong to think that Adams is blind to it.
Adams himself is actually tortured by it. One of the first entries in his diary is vanity.
That is my great sin. I want to continue the letter. A seven months intimacy with him here
and as many weeks in London have given me opportunities of studying him closely. He
is vain, irritable, and a bad calculator of the forces and probable effect of the motives
which govern men. This is pretty damn stuff. But what follows is pure Jefferson, and it
shows the affection he feels. This is all the ill which possibly can be said of him.
He is as disinterested as the being which made him. He is profound in his views and
accurate in his judgment. He is so amiable that I pronounce you will love him if ever
you become acquainted with him. Well, what soured that relationship was their political
disagreements in the Federalist period. Jefferson's partisan allies castigate Adams, which neither
he nor his wife can forgive. For his own part, Jefferson feels deeply hurt over Adams'
appointment of the infamous Midnight Judges, the judicial appointments he makes in the
month after the election of 1800 is over. Jefferson denies to Adams that heresies he
had mentioned in a prefectory note to Payne's rights of man were directed at Adams, who
had written the discourses in the villa. And Adams doesn't believe him, and in fact he
turns out that Adams is right, that he was referring to his old friend. So what emerges
is a long silence between them, which is only broken in 1812 by the constant cajoling of
Benjamin Rush. And what Benjamin Rush does, and he's one of the few people who's close
friends with both Adams and Jefferson, is he claims to Adams that he's had a dream,
a vision, a dream in which his son is reading a book. And he asks, what book is that in
your hand, said I to my son Richard, a few nights ago in a dream? It is the history of
the United States, said he. So he opens it and he looks at the year 1809, which is the
year he writes the letter. In the month of November 1809, Mr. Adams, who has been in
mind, addressed a short letter to his friend, Mr. Jefferson. This letter did great honor
to Mr. Adams. It discovered a magnanimity known only to great minds, and Rush knows exactly
how to play to Adams. Feed his vanity, feed his pomposity, play to his ego. These letters
were followed by a correspondence of several years, in which they mutually reviewed the
scenes of business in which they had been engaged, and candidly acknowledged to each
other all the errors of opinion and conduct, into which they had fallen during the time
they filled the same station in the service of their country. Many precious aphorisms,
the result of observation, experience, and profound reflection, it is said, are contained
in these letters. And Rush proves prophetic, because that is in fact what we'll find in
the letters. To Jefferson, he writes two years later, when I consider your early attachments
to Mr. Adams, and his to you, when I consider how much the liberties and independence of
the United States owe to the concert of your principles and labors, and when I reflect upon
the sameness of your opinions at present upon most of the subjects of government and all
of the subjects of legislation, I have ardently wished a friendly and epistolary intercourse
might be revived between you before you take a final leave of the common object of your
affections. Posterity will revere the friendship of two ex-presidents that were once opposed
to each other. I am sure an advance on your side will be a cordial to the heart of Mr.
Adams.
