And what we see here, and we'll see in the rest of this dialogue on the problem of aristocracy,
is Jefferson's optimism in the ability to create a natural aristocracy of virtue against
Adam's prudence and caution, his skepticism whether such a thing can ever exist.
As he writes to Jefferson in June 25th of 1813,
"'Ticks and balances, Jefferson, however you and your party may have ridiculed them,
for our only security, for the progress of mind as well as the security of body.
Know thyself, human nature.'"
Well let's turn to Jefferson's response.
Jefferson said,
"'I agree with you that there is a natural aristocracy among men.
The grounds of this are virtue and talents.
There is also an artificial aristocracy founded on wealth and birth, without either virtue
or talents.
The natural aristocracy I consider as the most precious gift of nature for the instruction,
the trusts, and government of society.
We may not even say that the form of government is the best, which provides the most effectually,
for a pure selection of these natural aristoy into the offices of government.
You think it best to put the pseudo-aristoy into a separate chamber of legislation, the
Senate, where they may be hindered from doing mischief by their coordinate branches.
In contrast, Jefferson is full of optimism.
I think that to give them the power in order to prevent them from doing mischief is arming
them for it and increasing instead of remedying the evil.
Nor do I believe them necessary to protect the wealthy, because enough of these will
find their way into every branch of the legislation to protect themselves.'"
And Jefferson is claiming that, in fact, this is not just a difference in optimism,
but a difference in temperament, but a difference in sectional experience.
He says,
"...but our difference of opinion may in some measure be produced by a difference of character
in those among whom we live.
For what I have seen of Massachusetts and Connecticut myself, and still more from what
I have heard, and the character given of the former by yourself, who know them so much
better, there seems to be in those two states a traditional reverence for certain families,
which has rendered the offices of the government nearly hereditary in those families."
He writes in January 24th of 1814, to Adams,
"...you surprise me with the account you give of the strength of family distinctions still
existing in your state.
With us it is so totally extinguished that not a spark of it is to be found, but looking
in the hearts of some of our old Tories, that all bigotries hang to one another.
And this in the eastern states hangs, as I suspect, to that of the priesthood.
Other youth, beauty, mind and manners are more valued than pedigree."
Now in reality, as both Jefferson and Adams know, it's not quite that simple.
Indeed, Adams as well as Jefferson knows that Virginia is still dominated by a gentry elite.
Jefferson knows this too, at about the same time he writes to John Taylor about the state
of Virginia, that the judiciary is seriously anti-Republican because for life, the National
Army wielded, as you observe by military leaders, irresponsible but to themselves, add to this
the vicious constitution of our county courts, to whom the justice, executive administration,
taxation, police, military, etc.
Nearly all our daily concerns are confided, and self-appointed, self-continued, holding
their authorities for life, and with an impossibility of breaking in on the perpetual succession
of any faction once possessed of the bench.
And that also, that one half of our brethren who fight and pay taxes are excluded like
hellots, the slaves of Sparta, from the rights of representation, as if society were instituted
for the soil and not for the men inhabiting it.
But Adams understands his friend and sees the pain he's in on this issue, and so he
lets it drop, and they turn to a discussion of philosophy.
And I think this is a wonderful and unique event in American political letters, two great
statesmen discussing metaphysics, political economy and religion, and we're going to
look specifically at metaphysics.
We've seen before that Jefferson was, in fact, a materialist, and we'll look at some
of the letters he wrote, letters decrying Plato and platonic dualisms.
Adams, by contrast, was a bit of agnostic on the questions of metaphysics.
He writes in 1814, I am very glad you have seriously read Plato, and still more rejoiced
to find that your reflections upon him so perfectly harmonized with mine.
From thirty years ago, I took upon me the severe task of going through all his works.
And here's where Jefferson learns, Adams is a voracious reader, he reads an incredible
amount of material.
But unlike Jefferson, he's not always serious, he's playful.
My disappointment was very great, my astonishment was greater, and my disgust was shocking.
Two things only did I learn from him, one, that Franklin's idea of exempting husband
and mariners, et cetera, from the depredation of war were borrowed from him, because Plato
in fact had a separate warrior cast, and two, that sneezing is a cure for the hiccups.
That's Adams' traditional goofy humor.
