In our previous lectures, we've chronicled Jefferson's remarkable career, a career full
of rich accomplishments and important contradictions. And it's not easy to make sense out of that
career and that legacy, but even harder is understanding Jefferson the man. Peering into
Jefferson's soul is a peculiarly dangerous undertaking. We know that Jefferson hid behind
a southern mask of polite sociability, and he projected a public facade of almost disembodied
rationality. But we also know that there is more to Jefferson than the mask, as witnessed
by his affairs with Maria Cosway, Sally Hemings, and a rather infamous pass he made at Elizabeth
Walker. I haven't mentioned this one previously, I saved it for this lecture. In fact, it was
first exposed after Jefferson was in office by a press agent he'd hired to attack the
Federalist opposition, who tried to blackmail him once he achieved office to get himself
appointed as postmaster of Richmond. His name was James Callender. And James Callender
threatened that he would expose to the world both the Hemings affair and this pass at Walker.
And Jefferson, much to his credit, publicly acknowledged the pass he'd made at Mrs. Walker
and stated that she had acted in completely honorable fashion. I want to look a little
bit about this dalliance, because Elizabeth Walker was in fact the wife of one of his closest
friends, John Walker. And in 1768, while John Walker was away on provincial business, he
asked Jefferson to look after his bride and young infant, and in fact planned to make
Jefferson the executor of his state. Now we actually have an interesting document from
Jack Walker himself, which he wrote some years later explaining what he understood to be
the basis of the relationship. During my absence, Mr. Jefferson's conduct
to Mrs. Walker was improper so much as to have laid the foundation of her constant objection
to my leaving, Mr. Jefferson, my executor, telling me that she wondered why I could play
such confidence in him. At Shadwell, his own house in 1769 or 1770, on a visit common to
us, being neighbors, and as I felt true friends, he renewed his caresses, placed in Mrs. Walker's
gown sleeve cuff, a paper tending to convince her of the innocence of promiscuous love.
After this, we went on a visit to Colonel Cole's mutual acquaintance and distant neighbor.
Mr. Jefferson was there. On the ladies retiring to bed, he pretended to be sick, complained
of a headache, and left the gentleman among whom I was. Instead of going to his bed as
the sickness authorized a belief in, he stole into my room where my wife was in dressing
or in bed. He was repulsed with indignation and menaces of alarm and ran off.
Walker claims that, in fact, Jefferson continued to pursue Elizabeth Walker even after he
was married, ending the pursuit only in 1779. But this is interesting because at the one
hand we can look at Jefferson here as a cad. At the other hand, we have to remember something
even after this became public and even after Walker published this letter. He wanted nothing
so much as a rapprochement with Jefferson. He wanted nothing so much as to resume their
friendship. And I think that's an interesting statement about Jefferson's character. There's
an element of duplicity, but there's also a sincere graciousness. Even those whom he
has in some cases hurt, still love him and care for him. And that raises our fundamental
problem. What we see in Jefferson's character is always speculative, and it often reflects
our own predilections and our own assumptions. And I want to give you a sort of exemplary
case of this, something that many people don't know about Jefferson. Apparently, Jefferson
always sang. When he wasn't speaking or doing something public, he would sing to himself
or hum a tune. As his manservant Isaac recalled, hardly saw him anywhere, but he was a singer.
One of his overseers recalled, when he was not talking, he was nearly always humming
some tune or singing in a low tone to himself. And this raises an interesting question. What
kind of a singing was it? Was he singing heroic tunes? Was he humming to himself, odes of
joy and victory? Or was it a nervous whistle? Was he, as it were, whistling past the graveyard?
Well, we see the same duality of vision when we look at Jefferson as a family man. On the
one hand, he was a loving father in patriarch. He collected his children and grandchildren
from around him in his retirement and always saw their neighborhood of a few close friends.
