These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university-level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in just weeks.
Browse our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just 30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors, carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
The lectures on these tapes are titled Natural Law and Human Nature, Part 1.
The lecturer is Fr. Joseph Katersky.
Fr. Katersky is a member of the Society of Jesus and is an associate professor of philosophy at Fordham University, where he specializes in the history of medieval philosophy and natural law ethics.
Fr. Katersky received an HAB in classics from Xavier University and earned his doctorate in philosophy from St. Louis University.
Ordained as a priest in 1992, he earned his Masters of Divinity and License of Sacred Theology from the Western School of Theology in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Prior to taking his position at Fordham University, Fr. Katersky taught at the Center for Thomistic Studies at the University of St. Thomas in Houston.
While at Fordham, he has been recognized for his teaching skills. In 1998, he received the Dean's Award for Upstanding Undergraduate Teaching and the Graduate Teacher of the Year Award in 2000.
In addition to his teaching, Fr. Katersky is a prolific writer and currently serves as editor-in-chief of the International Philosophical Quarterly.
Fr. Katersky prepared the course guide that comes with these tapes. The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical notes, and bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines or review them before or after each lecture.
Lecture 1 The Philosophical Approach
Our study of natural law ethics in this course intends to reflect upon a very ancient and venerable tradition in the consideration of morality.
It is a study that involves the consideration of ethics as it's been known since the time of the Greeks through the Middle Ages and into the modern period and to our own day.
It's a study of one important strand of ethics that goes by various names. I'll be entitling it to natural law, but you also see it under such terms as the higher law,
an unwritten but nonetheless superior law which stands over any piece of jurisprudence that any particular community, any kind of custom that any human culture has ever devised,
and asks about the justice of those customs and the justice of those laws. It's called a higher law. Sometimes it's referred to under the tradition of natural rights.
Sometimes one finds it being talked about in terms of human dignity, and these are just a few of its names.
In order to try to make clear what this tradition is right here at the start, what I'd like to do is to begin with three important cases that bring out this notion of a higher law or a natural law,
and then reflect for just a little bit on the importance of considering our topic philosophically.
And then finally I'll say a few words about the general nature of this whole course and the parts that the course will take.
But let me begin with calling upon an ancient story from Greece in the classical period.
The wonderful play by Sophocles called The Antigone. You may well know that story.
It's the story of the town of Thebes, which has been rent by a civil war on which, opposite sides, two brothers have fought, Paul and Isis and Atiocles.
Both have been killed in the course of the war. They are brothers to the heroine of the play.
Their sister's name is Antigone and she gives the play its name.
And she finds herself in that predicament of having family loyalties to both brothers.
But the king has decided that only the brother who supported the side that won, that supported the administration of the city, should be buried and buried with honor.
Whereas Antigone's other brother will be left to rot in the fields as a kind of dishonor.
Precisely in order to discourage rebels from raising arms against their city.
It's an understandable position that Creon would have to maintain order and will stand for the maintenance of that system of justice which he is charged with considering and charged with maintaining in the course of his administration.
But Antigone feels a very strong loyalty to her brothers and she cannot imagine leaving her brother to rot.
She finds that her obligation is an obligation that takes her counter to the civil law, to the law that Creon has enacted which forbade her brother to be buried.
But which calls upon a higher law, calls upon a law which is invoked by Zeus.
Let me read a short portion of the relevant text.
Creon is speaking.
You tell me not at length.
But in a word.
You knew the order not to do this thing?
And Antigone says.
I knew.
Of course I knew.
The word was plain.
Creon then says.
And still you dared to overstep these laws?
Antigone.
For me it was not Zeus who made that order, nor did that justice who lives with the gods below mark out such laws to hold among mankind.
Nor did I think your orders were so strong that you, a mortal man, could overrun the gods' unwritten and unfailing laws.
Not now, nor yesterday.
They always live and no one knows their origin in time.
Now one finds in that short passage of a very interesting play all the important themes of natural law which will eventually be articulated by philosophers in the course of history.
We start in the first thing that she says with an admission that this has been a voluntary action on her part.
She has gone and buried her brother thrown dust upon the corpse so that the soul will now rest in peace.
And she has done so knowing that this transgressed the law which the king had made.
Hence we find that scenario which is so common in the history of natural law that a law that is higher and unwritten is being invoked against the law that was laid down by the authority in the community.
Creon is the authority in the community.
And there's every sense that he has a legitimate authority, that he bears his power correctly, and in fact that he has given a command here, namely that the corpse of a traitor should not be buried,
given a command which is quite reasonable, a command which is clear, a directive which requires that its citizens do something which makes good sense for the common good of the community.
Her appeal is to a higher source. It's interesting how she does it, again to read just the relevant line.
For me it was not Zeus who made that order, nor did that justice who lives with the gods below mark out such laws to hold among mankind.
She is invoking a higher source. She calls this higher source Zeus, but she also calls it justice.
And one has a sense that this is not just an appeal to some specific command that the Greek gods Zeus ever gave.
We could look in the various stories of the mythology, and we will not find a particular command to that effect.
But rather this is a very philosophical kind of Zeus.
This is a sense of using the word, the name Zeus, and linking it with the very notion of justice as justice personified.
That this is what justice requires that I do for my brother.
In fact, later in the play, in a passage that is somewhat complicated, the scholars debate over whether or not it is the original rendering or a later change that was made in the manuscript.
She even makes the case that it is not simply because it is her brother lying there, but that anyone who died should be given proper rights of burial.
And if that second reading of the text is accurate, this would invoke that very strong natural law theme of the universality of natural law.
That it is something that applies to every human being, regardless of our particular kinship relations with them.
It's also a sense in antiquity's speech that this is a higher law, because she contrasts it very strongly and immediately with the law that Creon has laid down.
She does not dispute his authority in general.
He is, as the leader of the city, perfectly justified in making laws that give directives that we sometimes dislike.
But rather what she finds is that the particular directive he is given violates justice, that it transgresses this higher law.
And hence she invokes a higher law against a law laid down by a human ruler and urges that morality requires her to do what she did, even if it will cost her.
And indeed it does cost her her life.
As the play goes on, she is shot up in a cave and Creon leaves her to starve to death.
There's an interesting romantic element because she has been a fiance of Creon's own son.
He rushes to try to find her, but too late.
It is one of the great tragedies of the period.
And it begins some of that reflection upon natural law that the Greek period knew.
Let me turn to a second great story, because it also gives an important sense of the way in which natural law has been present, not just in the period of antiquity, but is present in our own modern jurisprudence.
One of the interesting factors, I think, of this whole course will be the tremendous recurrence of the natural law that it comes again and again in every age.
The incident I mean to mention for the second story are the Nuremberg trials, that in the history of our own century just past, one found a scenario where natural law, not under that name, but under one of its synonyms,
had to be invoked in order to solve a problem in modern jurisprudence, namely the fact of a government, the Nazi government, which did actions and laid down its policies, which in fact enacted legislation, which after the war was prosecuted in the city of Nuremberg.
The judges at the trials of Nuremberg found themselves at the very start of the proceedings with a very difficult legal problem, namely that even though they were British or American or French or Russian jurists, that they could not try German officers or members of the German government under British, American, French or Russian laws,
because what had been done had been done not in any of their jurisdictions, and yet here they were set up as the trial court to examine certain of the deeds of Nazi Germany.
They found that they could not use German law because although the people who were now being accused of these crimes were indeed German citizens and had done their deeds on German soil,
they had done them in perfect legality according to German law, for part of the story of the Nazi period is to care with which the Nazi movement made sure to bring the deeds that it intended to do under legal jurisdiction by enacting appropriate legislation.
So you couldn't use the law of the victors and you couldn't use the law of the vanquished. What could you use?
What the members of that court decided to do was to prosecute the people who were brought before its tribunal under the term crimes against humanity.
And there we see another one of those synonyms for natural law. I suspect they did not use the term natural law because natural law has a checkered history.
We will in fact see in the course of these lectures when we turn to some of the historical instances of natural law that natural law theory has sometimes been used and I dare say abused for ideological purposes.
In fact, a part of the Nazi period was an attempt to justify the repudiation of tribes of races other than the Aryan race under natural grounds suggesting that there was a superiority to the Aryan race by nature.
And hence you did not want to now try them under natural law or at least to be using that term if it in any way suggested an acceptance of what the Nazis had done.
Natural law idea is never confined to that particular terminology. Sometimes it will be human dignity, sometimes it will be natural rights, sometimes it will be human rights, although for most of its history it's been called natural law.
Here these justices required a term that would speak to the consciences of the world about what it is they were doing and they settled upon crimes against humanity for the sake of the trials that they needed to conduct.
Post-war Germany also felt the importance of what the Würmberg trials had done and in the effort to re-establish a system of justice and good jurisprudence in Germany after the war one finds German basic law and the jurisprudential tradition within Germany making use of this natural law idea.
Let me again read a short portion that comes from some of the jurisprudence that was elicited after the war.
These laws of confiscation, this is a passage that deals with the return of property that had been taken unfairly during the war, these laws of confiscation though clothed in the formal rules of law are an extremely grave violation of the super positive principle of equality before the law as well as of the super positive guarantee of any legal order which must remain inviolable.
These provisions were and are by reason of their unjust content and their violation of the basic demands of any legal order, null and void, this law could not even at and during the time of the Nazi regime produce any legitimate legal effect.
That passage from 1955 is a very interesting instance of natural law reasoning. It suggests the importance of a law that is somehow higher than the laws which were used during the Nazi period and whose validity and legality were now being commented upon.
This reference to a just, a justice that stands higher than the laws that were actually enforced makes that same contrast between what the formal rules of law were and what the justice that any code of law must embody always has to insist upon.
Here the insistence upon a just order and a just content manifests that same sense of a moral tradition and it brings up this need for judicial review.
Judicial review is one of the terms that we will be invoking again and again in the course of our lecture and it refers to the employment by the court of a standard by which to judge the legality and the justice of legislation.
Our own American Supreme Court has a doctrine of judicial review which operates in a somewhat similar manner. We'll have a chance to examine later in one of the lectures about the extent to which it uses a natural law standard.
Here there's a very interesting bit of terminology that I want to call your attention to. It talks about super positive principle of equality and a super positive guarantee of any legal order and that is terminology with which we must be familiar right from the beginning of this course.
Positive here is not being used in the sense of the contrast between positive and negative. Rather positive is being used in the technical legal sense of a law which has been positive or a law which has been laid down by human authority.
In this sense, a constitution as well as administrative laws as well as the legislation that is passed by a particular Congress or a particular legislature, all of these are positive law because they've been laid down by a human authority.
And what the German court is referring to in this 1955 opinion is the notion of a super positive standard that is some principle which stands above anything that has been laid down by human authority.
A suggestion that whatever the human authority lays down or posits for the sake of procedure or for the sake of some substantive principle of law, there are higher principles yet, principles which are above anything that has ever been positive, principles that are eternally true.
True because of what we are, our human nature, true perhaps because God laid them down, but for whatever source they come, they are true and they are super positive or they stand above the legislation that comes from human authority.
In this sense, the German court is invoking the natural law tradition without having to call the thing by that particular name.
Let me now turn to a third example that comes from our own American history and that cuts very deep to our hearts, I think. It is the case of civil rights and the enormous progress that has been made in the civil rights movement, especially in the course of the 20th century.
I'd like to refer to the case of Martin Luther King in particular. In his letter from the Birmingham Jail, a very famous document, he also makes use of this natural law tradition in order to protest against racial prejudice.
And here we see a third important scenario because we have not just the actual state of existing laws against which he was protesting, but he's also protesting against a custom which was a very long standing here on these shores.
And so in the course of making his analysis, he is invoking the natural law not just against a particular decree, as in the case of Creon, or a system of law, as in the case of the Nazis, but managing to use natural law to examine human custom as well.
And hence I think this is a very important third representative case. Let me quote from Martin Luther King.
He says, a just law is a man made code that squares with the moral law or the law of God. An unjust law is a code that is out of harmony with the moral law.
To put it in the terms of St. Thomas Aquinas, an unjust law is a human law that is not rooted in eternal law and natural law.
Now in that passage, we find Martin Luther King invoking Thomas Aquinas. And Thomas Aquinas is a figure whom we will see again and again in the course of these lectures.
In the whole history of philosophy, he is probably the most famous proponent of natural law. He does it in a rather brief compass within a treatise on theology that he wrote.
But in the course of doing so, he manages to state with great precision what these principles are and to put the thing in a systematic compass.
Martin Luther King, knowing of this tradition, invokes him as an authority, but does so largely to emphasize to us that one can do this from the point of view of morality considered in secular society,
the kind of instance that Martin Luther King must consider because of the jurisprudence in this country.
Or it may be done in a religious tradition, not just the traditions of ancient Greece where we had that reference to Zeus in the first passage that I read,
but now reference to the God that Christianity accepts, the God of Jesus Christ, which Thomas Aquinas had reflected upon in such great detail and which Martin Luther King believes in.
And Martin Luther King, invoking the tradition in this way, urges us to say one can do this philosophically as well as can do it theologically.
I'll be trying to make use of those themes in the course of our lectures, this particular course, trying to talk about its theological roots as well as its strictly philosophical roots.
Now, mindful of this recent history of ours, Martin Luther King, it's good to reflect that Martin Luther King didn't invent the idea.
Martin Luther King wasn't the first to apply natural law to the questions of civil rights, but rather is that wonderfully heroic prophet of natural rights and of civil rights in our own day.
But he relies upon a tradition that was much older.
A century before Martin Luther King, Charles H. Langston was convicted by an Ohio court.
The year is 1859 and so we are before the Civil War.
He was convicted for violating the federal laws at that point that required the return of fugitive slaves.
This is one of those incidents that led to our Civil War.
In the course of his defense speech, he too invoked a higher law.
He did not succeed in his plea before the court.
Civil rights at that stage in our history required a very bloody war, and then after the war required amendments.
We'll have a chance to look at them later on in the course of our lectures.
But listen to his words and hear that doctrine of natural law ring out in the course of what he considered to be the civil rights of individuals where those civil rights were not being respected.
He said,
I will do all I can for any man thus seized and held, though the inevitable penalty hang over me.
He says, we all have a common humanity, and you all would do that.
Your manhood would require it, and no matter what the laws might be, you would honor yourself for doing it.
While your friends and your children, to all generations, would honor you for doing it, and every good and honest man would say you have done right.
Notice his reference to a common humanity, his sense that no matter what the law may say, calling the black people of that day who were slaves and therefore property or chattel,
nonetheless he recognizes in them a common humanity, and he thinks that this requires that he act, failing to return fugitive slaves even if it is against the federal law of that day,
precisely because there are duties that flow from our common humanity, and he's willing to accept the penalty.
This too will be an important part of the natural law tradition, the willingness to accept the penalties that civil disobedience incurs because there is a higher law that must be respected as higher,
not because we prefer it, but rather out of a sense that it is superior and supreme.
Now in these examples what I hope to have shown is that people of very widely different periods of time, in extremely varied circumstances, and even of different background and religious belief,
have nonetheless called upon this tradition of a higher law or a natural law.
In this course what I'd like to do is to give philosophical consideration to that idea.
Philosophy is a wonderful approach to these questions that we sometimes have an intuitive sense of.
We heard in all three of those, especially in Antigone's speech, her intuition that she had to do something for her brother.
We heard in Martin Luther King a sense that we have a fundamental humanity which must be respected.
But when we find that others disagree with us, we need to make arguments, and so the burden of this course of lectures will be to try to make a philosophical argument.
It will be an effort to make those intuitions that we have more rigorous, give them very precise statement, for that is what a large part of what philosophy does.
We need to consider ideas that are other than our own, ideas with which we might disagree or agree spontaneously, and we must submit them to rigorous scrutiny,
because sometimes the things that we find so evident and so compelling are merely prejudices.
And the things that we find a little disagreeable with, perhaps because we sense something uncomfortable about their implications,
might actually bear tremendous importance and have effect upon things that we have taken for granted, that there can be tremendous moral progress,
even in the course of examining the ideas that we have a spontaneous reaction to, favorable or unfavorable.
A second reason for submitting this to philosophical scrutiny beyond merely the desire to be fair and honest about somebody's idea,
a second reason has to do with the institutionalization of these ideas.
Namely, we can have ideas, Antigone had them, Martin Luther King had them, the justices at Nuremberg were very deeply having them,
but there is a need for the institutionalization of ideas if we want everyone to receive fair treatment by law courts, by administrative officials,
by those authorities who were charged with care of the common good.
Philosophy, especially the philosophy of natural law, is aimed with considering how to institutionalize those ideas.
Some of the obligations of morality will be relatively easy to institutionalize, laws, for instance, against murder or against theft,
laws which defend our property and our liberty, but other ideas of morality will be extremely difficult to institutionalize.
Have you ever thought, for instance, about whether there could be a law that required gratitude?
We tell our children from the time when they're knee-high to a grasshopper that they need to say thank you,
and that they're not doing right if they fail to be grateful for, and yet we wouldn't think of locking somebody up for not being grateful.
Some parts of morality can be institutionalized in ways that require sanction, penal sanction if they are violated.
Others are things which moral suasion does better at, and hence a philosophical review is intended to consider these questions.
A third reason for turning to a philosophical consideration of natural law is precisely because of the status of natural law ideas in our own legal theory today.
Legal theory that is present in most law schools and practiced in most courts goes under the name of positivism.
Just a few minutes ago we talked about those super positive ideas that were referred to in the German 1955 decision.
Positivism is a broad legal theory which suggests that law and morality have to be kept entirely separate.
Perhaps morality can have a role in legislatures so that if you have moral ideas, whether from a philosophical source or from a religious source,
you ought to work with legislatures to try to enact those, if you think it appropriate, and for the common good.
But that courts should say strictly away from any such reference to morality, and that courts should insist only upon formality
on asking about whether a particular deed does or does not follow under a particular law, and secondly, to ask whether a particular law does or does not fall under the purview of the Constitution.
As such, the consideration is purely formal, and in a pluralist society that may be the best we can do, confining questions of morality to the legislature,
and then asking our justices to make a strictly formal consideration of it.
On the other hand, something doesn't sit right within us when we have laws that seem to violate our moral convictions.
One found that, for instance, in the civil rights cases of last century, when the case of slaves was brought to the court and decided against the slave in the case of Dred Scott.
Somehow we found, most of us feel, that there's something dreadfully wrong about that.
But it's a question whether or not there should be a moral angle to the judicial review that is practiced by the courts charged with considerations of deeds and of laws.
What we will be undertaking then with a philosophical consideration of the matter is aiming to bring philosophical scrutiny to these fundamental ideas of justice and a theory of justice.
I'll be referring again and again to the following traits, objectivity, universality, and intelligibility.
Because I think these are philosophical ideals for anything that we try to turn our philosophical of human to.
And when it's a matter of questions of ethics, these will be extremely important.
In considerations, for instance, of universality, what we'll be aiming at is some kinds of notion, some kind of theory, some kind of justification that applies to every human being.
Not just to people of a certain race, not just to people of a certain religion, not just to people of a certain kinship relationship to us, but rather something that is truly universal.
Secondly, there will be a concern with objectivity.
That is, a desire to have any person who is attempting to make these claims provide the kind of evidence, provide the kind of argument, provide the kind of understanding of the material that will compel,
that will seem to be truly coercive, that will seem to be truly strong to another person considering the matter.
It won't be just subjective opinion, but rather we'll have an element of objectivity to it, something that I do not create or control or alter that is the basis of my truth claim.
Third, we'll be considering intelligibility, that is, whether or not the notion that I propose or that anyone in the natural law tradition proposes is something that is readily understandable.
Some of these things will, I think, strike us as very simple and common, and ethics is generally on sound footing when it starts with cases that are intuitively clear.
Murder, for instance, is wrong because it's a matter of taking an innocent life and doing so deliberately.
That's an intelligible notion, and we find it readily intelligible that there should be no arbitrary license to kill.
But when we turn to things that are much more complicated, things much further in detail, the intelligibility will come only when there is sufficient training.
What we'll be attempting to do then in this course is to submit the notion of law, the notion of nature, the notion of human nature,
and finally the notion of natural law to philosophical scrutiny in order to try to provide a morality, a theory of ethics that has those characteristics, objectivity, universality, and intelligibility.
Lecture 2, The General Nature of Ethics
The study of ethics in any tradition is a study of what is good and what is bad, what is obligatory and what is forbidden and what is permitted.
Within the tradition of natural law, which is our subject for this course, it is likewise a matter of considering that moral evaluation in a very complicated area.
In order to try to appreciate the complexity here, I would like to organize this course on natural law ethics by considering the matter both philosophically and historically.
Philosophically to consider the nature of human beings and the nature of our obligation, historically in order to appreciate the various ways in which these insights have occurred.
The history of the record of these insights is itself intrinsically fascinating, but it also will allow us to appreciate how difficult and how hard one some of these insights were.
For the purposes of organization, I will devote this lecture and the next two to giving an overview of natural law theory, in particular to try to define some of the key terms and to show their relationship to one another systematically.
Then, in Lectures 5 through 16, we'll consider the historical evolution of the idea of natural law, in order not just to appreciate the sequence in which these insights emerged, but to try to ask ourselves some philosophical questions.
For instance, are the insights of natural law culturally bound? Certainly they emerged within a culture, but I don't think that that's in any way something that detracts from their philosophical validity, because we know even eternal truths only within time.
Hence, by studying the historical emergence of natural law, we will see precisely why some of its claims are so important, why they are so recurrent.
Finally, in Lectures 17 to 24, we'll attempt to consider some of the contemporary questions of morality, which natural law can provide an insight on.
We will be admittedly dealing with things that are somewhat controversial.
What I promise you is that I'll do my best job to present a reasonable position, but I'm quite aware that there is dispute within the natural law camp about how to handle these things, and I invite you to a real natural law project of making for yourself an investigation of what reasons are cogent and what evidence needs to be ascertained.
Today, I'd like to study ethics in general and to place natural law within the larger schema of the history of ethics. Hence, we'll consider first some of the other ideas that have been used as the basis for ethics, and take note of what's so specific and distinctive of natural law.
Secondly, I'd like to consider some of the main objections that have been raised to natural law. It's one of the important parts about philosophical fairness that one consider not only one prefers ideas, but one consider the ideas that one disagrees with.
One can learn so very much from them, and hence I'd like to review some of the main objections that have been brought to the very idea of natural law, let alone objections to specific tenants that it might hold.
Finally, in the bulk of this lecture, we'll be given over to studying some of the central assumptions about human nature and about knowledge which are made in realist philosophy and which are crucial to the project of natural law.
First, then, the general subject of ethics. Ethics is an attempt to systematize and to reflect theoretically about questions of morality. We all ask questions of morality, and I think human beings have always done so, long before there was any technical philosophy.
But there's an effort to make this systematic and to make it reflective, to make it rigorous, and this generally goes under the name of ethics. It is a matter of considering how you tell right from wrong, and then how you tell good and bad.
There are questions about what is obligatory, what is forbidden, what is permitted, what is exemplary, noble, excellent conduct. All of these are questions about human conduct, about human feelings, about human practices and human institutions.
Among the standard approaches that have been made to the subject of ethics, natural law has a very distinctive standpoint. Let me first propose four of its alternatives, various other philosophical approaches to questions of morality, some of which coalesce nicely with natural law, others which are deeply opposed to it, but these are some of the main candidates that have emerged in the course of the history of western thought.
Probably the first systematic theory of ethics is the theory of ethics of Aristotle. This is largely a virtue theory. It's a theory of morality which asks about what real nobility is, what real excellence is, and it uses the category of virtue to describe that excellence.
Aristotle's great schema is to think about excellence or virtue as being what is really right in a given situation, what is neither excessive nor deficient. So, for example, in matters of courage, he thinks that there is a real peak of excellence in the courageous response to a fearful situation.
Too much bravado would be a bad thing, as well as too little if you're paralyzed by fear, but rather there's a peak of excellence or virtue which is called courage, so too with respect to temperance, so too with respect to prudence, and above all, the central virtue for Aristotle is the virtue of justice, getting it exactly right with regard to the giving and taking that we do in the course of various transactions.
Aristotle's theory does have a place for law, but it's a relatively small place within the notion of justice. He's not generally regarded as a natural law thinker, but he is perhaps the source of some natural law thinking precisely because of the strong sense of natural justice, a sense that there's something right that is prior to human codification.
A very different type of ethics is called the ethics of duty, and this is associated with the great thinker of the German Enlightenment, Immanuel Kant.
Kant wrote various works on the subject, it's rather like an accordion, there's some of his works on ethics, boil it down into just a few ideas, and some expand it, and some give the great theoretical background that Immanuel Kant is known for.
But if I were pressed to put it into short compass, Immanuel Kant's theory is the theory of the golden rule, made philosophically more precise. Do unto others, as should have them do unto you.
It's a relatively formal system, a system that focuses on asking whether what we intend to do, or what we intend to avoid, can be stated in a general way.
It doesn't presuppose that there is something already intrinsically right or wrong in view of human nature, in fact Kant has us stand away from those kind of considerations,
lest we in any way diminish or curtail the tremendous cultivation and quest of human freedom, for the Enlightenment stood as a period above all others in trying to accentuate human freedom and human reasonableness.
Where Aristotle had looked to human nature to found his virtues, Kant looks to reason and to reasons own demands.
A third theory of ethics with which we might contrast natural law is utilitarianism.
This is the view of ethics that is especially associated with figures like Bentham and Mill, and it takes one particular aspect of human experience, the aspect of pleasure,
and tries to determine how we can maximize pleasure.
It's a matter of getting it for the greatest number of people and getting the greatest amount of it, and it's a sophisticated sort of theory.
This is not raw hedonism in the sense of crass pleasures, but rather an effort to rank and differentiate among the various kinds of pleasures that human experience can bring,
and to ask how we can treat everything else as a function of utility, hence the name utilitarianism.
How useful is this or how useless is that with respect to maximizing our pleasures and minimizing our pains?
As such, it has a certain rootedness in nature because we human beings do like our pleasures and we do dislike pains,
and yet it tends to privilege just one aspect of our nature and not to consider nature in its completeness in a way that I think natural law tends to do.
There is a very different form of ethics and yet one that is in some ways compatible with natural law theory, and it is generally called divine command theory.
The notion that the human reason can't necessarily figure out what is right and what is wrong, what is good and what is bad,
but that God may have told us so. This is, in a way, in a very superb form in, say, the Decalogue that occurs within the Torah,
within the books of Exodus and Deuteronomy in the Old Testament.
When God lays down his commands, gives them to Moses in so many words, things are now right and wrong because God said so.
One finds something similar when Jesus, in the two commandments of the new law, says that we should love God with all our heart and mind and soul and strength,
and then secondly, that we should love our neighbor as ourself.
One sees this in the Quran that is so central to the Islamic faith.
What is right and what is wrong is now a measure of what God has commanded.
One of the questions that natural law theory will have to ask about this theory, divine command theory, is to what extent these things are truly able to be compared.
Some things that God commands may also be things that we can discover by our own reason, and so these are theories which are compatible,
but they aren't theories which completely overlap.
There may be things about which God has never made a command.
Should we, for instance, practice cloning or forbid it?
And it's your hard-pressed to find a place, say, within the Christian scriptures or the Jewish scriptures, that makes it clear what the answer to that question is.
One has to figure it out, if one can figure it out, by one's own reasoning.
Likewise, there may be things that God has commanded, and we only know that they are right or they are wrong because God has commanded them.
In that second commandment of Jesus, for instance, to love our neighbors as ourself, that has frequently been understood as a command to be charitable in ways that exceed being just.
It is a command which in, for instance, the parable of the Good Samaritan requires us to go out of our way to help someone who is not related to us, who we did not injure,
but simply is in grave need, and that commandment of charity does seem to exceed the demands of justice strictly speaking.
How would we know that there was a command and not just an ideal there?
Perhaps we would know it only because it was revealed.
Those sort of questions allow us to see the stance that natural law occupies within the general framework of the history of ethics.
Now, in mentioning these different theories of ethics, I don't mean to be giving the impression that this is an academic supermarket,
that one can pick and choose one's version of ethics depending on what one wants to do,
and sometimes even mentioning that there are diverse theories of ethics can make it sound like this is a moral supermarket.
Rather, my point is to say that it is crucial for us as philosophers, for us as trying to make a philosophical approach to the matter,
it really is crucial to understand the different positions on a question, on a theory about human conduct, the different positions that have been taken,
and to understand them sympathetically.
I would highly recommend the study of all four of those theories, as well as of other ethical theories that have been proposed in the course of history on their own terms,
because each of them has tremendous insights about the human spirit.
Each of them has real factors of genuine genius with respect to what it is that we should do if we want human culture to flourish.
So, I don't think that we should fear relativism merely by mentioning plural theories,
but on the other hand, I will be attempting not to give a detailed explanation of each of those four other theories,
but rather using them as points of contrast for pointing out what it is that natural law theorists have tended to argue,
and why they do so, finding a lies where they can with these other theories,
but sometimes spotting something that is just irreconcilable, a point of difference on which one has to simply agree to differ,
and in doing so, natural law will try to make a good case for its own position.
As I mentioned in the last lecture, what we'll be aiming for is a theory of ethics that has some claim to universality, transcending cultures where possible,
some claim to objectivity, a concern with getting beyond merely subjective opinion to what is really compelling for any reasonable person,
and thirdly, to intelligibility, a way that anybody can understand it, that one doesn't need a doctoral degree
to try to understand what it is that morality requires, although the morality that is required by one's nature may be able to be formulated
in technically precise ways, theoretically and systematically, in ways that philosophers of a professional standing can appreciate.
Natural law theory then, how is it organized? Natural law theory tries to get to that objectivity, universality, and intelligibility by rooting morality in nature.
Considering nature here, it's important to define the term. I don't mean by nature, the woods or the field or the birds or the trees.
Those are good legitimate senses of nature, but that's not primarily what one means in natural law theory by talking about nature.
Rather, one means here, our nature in the sense of the internal principles by which human beings are structured in the way they're structured.
The nature that is the source of the activities that are typical of us.
Granting to a certain degree, our nature is an animal nature, and we share certain bodily structures, and we share certain activities with other animals.
As merely living beings, we share certain structures with plants, and we share certain activities with plants. That too is a part of our nature.
But the thing that will be so crucial, the thing that needs emphasis again and again, will be our specifically human nature, our rationality.
And by our rationality, I refer to our powers of intellect and our powers of will.
That is, our powers to understand something, and our powers to express it in ways that we can communicate what we mean to someone else.
Some of these aspects of rationality don't even get verbally expressed when one is playing the piano, or when one is knowing how to play baseball,
or when one is simply knowing how to walk and to talk.
One is using our nature and our specifically human nature, the specific powers that are typical of this species.
It's all of those things on which natural lawyers like to reflect.
Because the question we're trying to answer when we're asking about the nature of a human being, or the nature of a cat, or the nature of a plant, is what sort of thing is it?
What are its typical structures and its typical abilities?
The things that are present in mature instances of this species, but instances and activities and structures which may take a while to develop, things which have to mature gradually over the course of time.
In this sense, we ask questions about nature when we know anything, when we're asking what sort of a vacation someone had, and we start talking about mountains and rivers and sea.
We're asking about the nature of the things that we saw, if we're engaged in activities of chemistry.
What we're looking at are the types of activities and the types of structures of various chemical elements.
We're asking what is it by looking at the types of appearance that it has, looking at the structures that make it up, looking at the activities and the operations that it normally performs.
The things that belong to items of this class and not to any other.
To that degree and in that pursuit, we hopefully can gain some objectivity.
When we were discussing last time Martin Luther King and his concern with common humanity, his aim there was to get a notion of real objectivity by looking at human nature.
He wanted everyone to understand that everyone, every human being needs to be treated fairly and that this is an object of consideration, not a matter of prejudice, not a matter of subjectivity.
Our second goal, as we said, was to get to universality.
And in philosophical terms, our quest for universality is to try to find something that is truly comprehensive, something that applies across the board.
We saw that in our example about Nuremberg, that even though French and British, American and Russian jurists were seated there, trying German nationals for actions which had been performed under German law,
they thought that they could try them and bring them to justice precisely because there were crimes against humanity, something that was truly universal in nature,
something that every law code ought to respect and that if it failed to respect, there would be some problem with that law code and a reason for going to war and a reason for bringing such people to trial.
Hence, natural law is forever concerned with finding a basis in our human nature that will allow those universal assertions.
Third, there is the question of intelligibility.
Now, this is something that is extremely difficult to assess.
How can we tell whether someone should have known something?
It's that sort of question that we're asking and in natural law explanations what we're looking for in the nature that we're going to be calling attention to, human nature, the nature of human institutions like the family and the state.
In any consideration about nature, whether it be a biological nature, something of a spiritual nature, something of a social nature, what we're looking for is something that will be truly reasonable,
something that any person with an open mind and a good will will be able to see and to understand and after reflection, even if they didn't spontaneously see it,
can come to see that there really is a structure there that the person making the rights claim, the person who's insisting that justice is on their side, isn't making up, isn't just pretending to have or isn't asserting that they have on the basis of power,
but rather that there's something reasonable and that any person of good will can grasp this.
When we're concerned about this in ethics, as a general rule, what we're concerned about is noticing how human actions can be tested for their reasonability.
To say that an action is something for which we bear responsibility, it will be a matter of asking, did the person know and in the course of knowing, did they really choose it?
If those two conditions have been fulfilled, we say it's only reasonable to say that the person was responsible for what they did.
If they somehow didn't know or if somehow they were forced, then we say it's only reasonable that they be excused altogether or at least to a certain degree.
Natural law claims will be forever looking to reasonability and intelligibility.
Now, in the course of making these various claims, we also have to look back to the source of these moral claims.
Some natural law theorists will be content to look at human nature as we find it now.
But other natural law theorists will want to look at the origins of these nature claims in our creation by God.
And natural law theory can very easily be reconciled with divine command theories of morality and with religious positions on morality.
Even though natural law theory uses nature as its centerpiece term, looking at human nature, looking at the nature of human institutions,
a religious perspective which believes that these natures were created can suggest that natural law theory can handle this because there was in the mind of the creator a legislative will.
And it's precisely for that notion that God created these natures with certain structures, with certain inclinations, with certain typical activities,
and especially with certain ends and goals and objects to be attained that a religious-minded natural law theory can say the reason why these things are so binding, ultimately,
it is precisely because God made our natures that way.
These will be some of the important factors to consider in any natural law theory.
But to make a parallel with the positive approach to natural law theory, we also need to consider those who would object to natural law theory.
I classify them under three headings, relativism, subjectivism, and skepticism.
Relativism is that position which is very, very skeptical about the claim that we could ever find a universal ethical norm,
and rather would insist that all morality is ultimately tribal, my tribe against your tribe, that all morality is something that's customary,
that it grows up out of the way humans like to do things.
In fact, the very term morality comes from a Latin word, most mores, which means customs.
Precisely because so much of ethics and so much of aesthetics comes out of one's culture, comes out of one's own society,
some people will be inclined to say that this viciates the very prospect of a universal theory.
This will be an important objection to consider.
I won't try to answer it all now, but simply to note that we have to be constantly alert to the fact that there is an objection from this quarter
if we're going to try to make a good case on our own.
Subjectivism, here the idea is largely that we can't get to objectivity.
We can't get to a claim that is really compelling and intellectually cogent,
but rather these things emerge, these moral claims, assertions of right, emerge always from the subject.
It's my will, my opinion, my preference, perhaps the preference of my family or my small group or even of my tribe or my nation.
And yet ultimately, subjectivism would hold whoever it is that's making the assertion, the only reason why it is in any way compelling,
the only way it is in any way obliging is because there's enough power behind the assertion.
One will find this in the modern period with Nietzsche, one will find it in the ancient period when we turn to Plato and start considering Thrasymachus and Calakles.
A third important objection that we'll need to meet is the objection of skepticism.
Skepticism in general is a philosophical position that questions whether we can know what we claim to know.
One could be a general skeptic, a skeptic about everything, a pure skeptic.
As such, one wouldn't be able to know anything, even that one can't know anything, and the position is very quickly self-refuting.
The skeptic claims to know at least that.
But generally, we're not dealing with pure skeptics, we're dealing with moral skeptics, people who deny that we can know what we claim to be knowing in regard to morality.
And the issue that we'll be facing repeatedly in the course of our considerations during this course on natural law is whether there are such things as moral truths.
Part of the position I'll be trying to defend as we go on is that how much we know is a factor of our culture, is a factor of our education, is a factor of our families.
Some people start with an enormous advantage in knowing things about morality.
Some start with an enormous disadvantage, even their culture might lead them into some moral backwaters.
And yet, what natural law theory wants to claim, and what I'll be trying to defend, is the notion that there are some things that we cannot not know.
To take us just a brief example of that, the injunction that forbids murder.
I think that it is impossible not to know that it is wrong ever deliberately to take an innocent life.
We can fight in many respects, morally speaking, about whether or not these people deserve to have their life respected, whether they're innocent, or whether they're in some way aggressors.
One can find, certainly in the course of the history of natural law thinking, groups who only saw their own group as human, and saw every other group as somehow subhuman or alien, and hence did not yet extend to them the protection that they extended to their own.
So granted that the application, the fullness of the moral law injunction, may take real theoretical reflection, may take years and centuries of experience sometimes to see.
Nonetheless, I think that there are such things as moral truths that we cannot fail to know, and we'll be attempting to look at some of them as we go on.
Given these various objections, what we need to do philosophically in order to approach the topic of natural law is to consider some of the claims that are being discussed and debated here between natural law theory and those who object to it.
In particular, we'll be having to consider problems about moral knowledge and considering problems about natural kinds.
Let me try for the balance of this lecture simply to reflect for a moment on the notion of a natural kind, and I think it will give us the basis for what we need to do in subsequent lectures about the claims of human nature as distinctively human.
A natural kind, as philosophers understand the matter, is a group that can be objectively distinguished from another group, objectively distinguished on the basis of some properties.
What you do in order to try to determine in chemistry or in biology or in questions about human natural law theory, what you do in order to try to determine whether there's a natural kind difference is to make a distinction between differences of kind and differences of degree.
And what you look for is some property, some particular trait, some particular structure.
There is a difference in kind if every member of a certain group possesses that trait, however much or however little they possess the trait.
On the other hand, the trait, in question, whatever it is, is present at least to some degree in every member of the kind and is totally lacking in other instances.
To take a simple example from chemistry, H2O, water, that set of properties that are associated with H2O will be present whether it's in the form of ice or whether it's in the form of liquid or whether it's in the form of steam.
And there will be all sorts of other differences that will emerge in the case of water depending upon its state and the kind of energy there.
Those are differences of degree, and that's why we can have degrees of temperature.
But water is different in kind than something like sodium chloride, and the properties that are present in sodium chloride are altogether lacking in water and vice versa.
Now those are relatively easy and non-controversial instances.
The much more controversial instance that we'll be considering from the point of view of natural law theory is the question about human beings and human natures as different in kind.
One of the questions that we'll be considering is how human beings stand vis-a-vis our close relatives in the animal kingdom, not just animals in general, but mammals, primates, and so on.
Similarly, we have various similarities with all animals, we have many more similarities with all mammals, and we have a tremendous number of similarities with all primates.
And yet, are there not some particular characteristics, some particular traits, which differentiate us from all the primates?
The answer that I'll be maintaining in subsequent lectures is the answer of rationality, the powers of intellect and the powers of will.
And yet, for a natural law theory, there's nothing particularly threatening about research along the dolphins or on the chimpanzees to see whether these creatures are capable of being taught language,
or if we should ever meet creatures from Alps and Tarai who manage to show a certain kind of rationality.
Whether we find them in the animal kingdom, or whether we find them from other planetary systems, all that does is to expand the group of rational animals that expands our kiss and cousins.
It does not alter whether or not we've got natural kinds, those deserving of moral respect. To that question, I will turn in subsequent lectures.
Lecture 3
Law, Nature, Natural Law
Over the centuries, philosophers have found that real honest disagreement in matters of morality or in any matters of philosophy requires that one have honesty of understanding what the other was saying.
One can disagree about something by showing that you disliked the argument, found it somehow invalid, or you can challenge the truth of a particular premise that an argument has used.
To establish the truth of those premises requires, at the very start, that there be clear definitions.
So I'd like to attempt here, in this particular part of our course, a little bit of background and philosophy about definitions in general, and then I'd like to reflect on the efforts to define law and to define nature, in particular human nature, in ways that will be acceptable.
To do this, I'll be making use throughout, especially of the ideas of Thomas Aquinas, for his particular clarity at coming up with some of these definitions has been crucial to the project since that time.
First, however, a matter of defining definition itself. Aristotle, in some of his logical works, took it upon himself to try to offer us a definition of definition, and he does so in terms of genus and specific difference.
And this has proven a strategy, beneficial time and again. That is, to define something, what you do is you look for the larger group, the genus to which it belongs, and then you try to figure out which slice of the pie it is.
You try to figure out the specific difference that makes everything within that subgroup, united as a group, as a natural kind.
Because every member of that kind possesses the property, however much or however little, every member has that property which the rest of the larger group lacks.
As such, it's an effort to get to objectivity in our definitions, and it follows the lead of the patron saint of philosophy, Socrates, who spent his time wandering around Athens, trying to define things like virtue and justice.
Never quite willing to give a definition, but trying to elicit it from those with whom he was discussing, in order to determine and have everyone assent to this particular approach, the larger group, when he, for instance, was trying to define virtue.
He asked whether virtue is knowledge. And then, in the course of his conversation, he would bring the listeners to see that virtue isn't quite identical with knowledge, but that virtue always requires that we have a certain knowledge and knowledge of a certain kind.
And he gained the assent of those with whom he'd discussed by using this particular method.
There are other strategies for definition. Let me consider two of them with you. One can define something in terms of its structure, or one can define it in terms of its function, its use.
If one is focusing in on structure, then what one will be doing is looking at the parts and looking at the whole, trying to see that if we're defining a human being, for instance, we've got a whole and organic unity, and we could define a human being structurally by noticing how the parts of that whole fit together.
Equally, we can talk about definition in terms of function that is looking for what something can do. If I were to take, for instance, a piece of modern technology, something like a microphone, I could analyze it in terms of its structure by dealing with the separate parts that are involved and are put together in a certain way.
But equally, I can define a microphone in terms of the function that it has and realize that something that can look considerably different, where the parts are arranged in a different way, could still function in the same way and therefore still be a microphone.
Our considerations then are to try to get objectivity, to try to see the larger group and the specific difference, sometimes focusing in on the parts in relation to the whole, sometimes considering not that, but considering the use that a thing has, the function that it has.
In either procedure, whether using function or whether using structure, there is the possibility of using it well or the possibility of using it poorly. I could, for instance, use a microphone to try to hammer in a nail, but it wouldn't do a very good job at it.
It would be very poor at that function. I can, on the other hand, use something that is a hammer to pound in those nails and the structure of the pieces serve the function very well.
Let me turn to the ethical application of these things. When we're trying to define human being, we face the efforts of looking for the larger group to which all human beings belong and looking for that specific difference, which is true of each one of us, and one can emphasize structural features or one can emphasize functions.
In the effort to make some of those definitions, some of the definitions that will turn up turn out to be very, very useful. Aristotle, for instance, proposes defining the human person as a rational animal, and one can see that he's got the larger group, the animals to which we all belong.
He could have, I think, chosen mammals, or he could have chosen primates, but for reasons of his own, he wants to stress our animal character, the fact that we have a body, and that the body is alive for a certain number of years, and that we need to do various things in order to keep that body alive.
But he also focuses on the specific difference, our rationality, taking that term rationality in a very inclusive sense to talk about practical rationality, knowing how to do things, as well as more theoretical rationality, knowing how and being able to explain in so many words.
But the efforts to define human being have not always used Aristotle's rational animal. Frequently enough, a group has wanted to define a certain other group out of consideration and out of the protections that normally going along with being a human person.
One can think, for instance, about those Nuremberg trials that we gave as an example earlier on in the course, and in the Nazi system, Jews and Gypsies and other groups, which the Nazis did not like, were arbitrarily defined out of the race of human persons.
They were defined out of the human race.
You can usually spot those things because of the semantic gymnastics that are involved, and so that when the Nazis were trying to do this in the course of their own philosophizing and in the course of their own legislation, they frequently used terms that were things like parasite, parasite upon the body of Europe, or disease,
in order to try to give the impression that this was something that belonged in a different genus. It belonged in the realm of medicine and of illness, and hence, if it's something of a different type, a parasite or an illness, it is most appropriate to remove, to kill, to exterminate that thing.
We find that, I think, morally repugnant, and yet, when we're honest, we realize that people do this, and sometimes there can be a cultural blindness in the use of definitions.
One finds, for instance, in the slave holding that was at issue in the civil rights movement that we were discussing when we brought up Martin Luther King, that slave owners tended to regard those whom they held in bondage as pieces of property or chattel,
and even our constitution reflects this in the way that slaves were counted for the purpose of representation, but not counted when it came to matters of human rights.
One sees this in the present day, for instance, there have been questions that I've noticed very recently in the paper about certain practices of the Chinese government in which they are willing to sell the organs of criminals who are executed,
thereby treating those individuals as disposable property, rather than as having certain intrinsic rights.
I mentioned these examples not to try to cast blame on anyone too quickly, but simply to suggest a lot depends on our definitions, and the definitions have to be objective.
They have to be done in the calm of our living rooms or our cars when we have time to listen to tapes by the teaching company before we need to act, because if we try to generate definitions at the time when we're under enormous pressure to act,
the temptation will be to generate a definition that serves our purpose, rather than a definition that offers truth because grounded upon the nature of the being.
Let's turn now to the two items that are so crucial to our consideration here, namely the topics of law and of nature, specifically human nature, and to think about the efforts to define those terms.
In the effort to define law, I'd like to refer us again to the works of Thomas Aquinas, whom I've indicated will be the centerpiece for my thinking in this course.
Though we'll be studying him in greater detail in Lecture 12 when he comes up in the historical period, I'd like to borrow just one aspect of his theory today because of the clarity he reaches on the topic of the definition of law.
First let me read to you his definition. It occurs in the treatise on law within the summa of theology. He says, law, any kind of law, is an ordering of reason promulgated by the person in charge of the community for the common good.
Now in that definition we are to hear four important components. First, that law is an ordering of reason. The alternative would say that law is an ordering of will, that law is an ordering of power, that law is only law because there's somebody with sufficient strength or someone with sufficient desire or someone with sufficient will who has said so.
Granting, some things are law only because there is power. Granted, some things are law only because the will of the ruler has said so. For Aquinas and I think for any reasonable person, we would say that must be questioned.
Law can't be its own source of justification in terms of power, rather law needs somehow to reflect reason and hence Aquinas would insist that all law, that any law that we might want to put to the test, has to meet the standard of being reasonable or else it's bad law and it might be sufficiently bad as to be something which ought to be ignored.
Second part of the definition is has to be promulgated. By that he means it has to be publicly disclosed. One can't be expected to abide by a law that one didn't know was the law. Granting when one's driving through a small town, one might not notice the speed limits that have been posted but they had better be posted and if they haven't been posted one can't be held accountable for having gone too fast.
If one didn't notice them, then it's the driver's problem. The law must somehow be promulgated. Third, it has to be promulgated by the person in charge of the community. That is, there's a recognition here that there are authorities and that authority at least in principle is legitimate and that authority in principle is different than power.
Now this is worth reflecting on for just a minute. Namely, some people I think are inclined to coalesce authority and power and to insist that authority is nothing other than its power. But I don't think honestly that any of us could live with that and I think we need to make a distinction between authority and power.
I'd like to define authority in this way. That authority is that person or that office who is witnessing to some truth that is earlier or prior or higher than the authority himself and then using power to do that witness.
Some examples. I think that a policeman is an authority but that a policeman is an authority not because of the power that he packs in his pistol. Rather, the pistol or any kind of power that the policeman has will be a kind of power that will maybe be used to quell those who are resistant.
And yet any police officer knows that that's the last resort, that there's a moral suasion, that there's a way in which that policeman is witnessing to the truths of the community about the order of that community, asking people to be peaceable, asking people not to rob one another or to beat one another, but rather to settle their differences amicably.
And that he will follow the perspective of the city council or the authority higher than himself which has decided upon the policies the policeman uses.
Take a different instance. How about a third grade teacher teaching fractions? Admittedly we've got a lot of power here and the teacher is going to put the class through some exercises with respect to we're going to practice fractions now and now we're going to practice spelling.
But the teacher isn't the source of the truths to which the teacher is witnessing. One third plus one half does not equal one fifth, even though three plus two is five. The teacher is not making up the truth as she goes, but rather there's a strong sense that there are truths to which the teacher is witnessing as an authority.
If any of you have ever been parents, you realize that you are a moral authority there too, and you hope to be a reasonable authority, and yet you may not in every single instance be able to explain all of the reasons that you have for making the decisions that you do.
What time a child should come in when that child is now a teenager and wants to stay out late at night will be decisions that an authority needs to make. Progressively they have to respect the freedom of the teenager, and yet there is an authority that needs to be asserted here.
Someone who is not making the authority felt well enough will leave the child feeling that someone doesn't care. On the other hand, someone who's too stringent will be instead almost oppressive in the way in which the authority is making its will known.
In general then, an authority refers to the person or the office which is charged with maintaining this witness and making various decisions, using that power, and this will be crucial to the notion of a law.
The fourth part of the definition is for the common good, namely that if a law is designed simply to favor the self-interest of the ruler or the self-interest of those whom the ruler likes, the law quickly comes into contempt.
Somehow the law has to look out for the common good, difficult as that will be sometimes to establish.
Now for Thomas Aquinas and for the natural law tradition, this definition of law will hold for all the instances of law that we find, including natural law.
Granted, this is controversial, granted some people will object to it. There will be people who hold a voluntary notion of law, who insists that law is what it is simply because of the will of the ruler,
because of the power of those who put the law down on paper or make it prominent in a given community.
And there will be some who will insist we have to do it because it is impossible for us ever to know the natures of things in matters of morality.
This is a topic we'll have to consider. So I'm noting that there are objections and yet what I'd like to emphasize today is that we have at least a reasonable view of the definition of law when we emphasize its intellectual or reasonable component.
Let's use that definition and divide. Let's make a certain typology of the kind of laws.
Thomas Aquinas urges that there are four such kinds of law. The highest kind of law that he envisions is what he calls eternal law.
This is the law that God in his own providential care of the universe has made when God devised and created the natures of each of the particular objects that are in the world.
He's devised by his intelligence, a nature for them by which most of them operate all the time.
This would be to say that there is a natural law for horses by which horses do horsey things and a natural law for cats by which they do the things for which felines are known.
There's a natural law for electrons in that they very steadily refute the attraction of other electrons and instead find themselves attracted to protons.
There's a sense of natural law in which all of nature is covered by the way in which things have their very being.
For human beings, however, it will be more complicated precisely because our human nature is a personal nature.
Nonetheless, this first type of law according to Aquinas is the law that God has designed by his providence by which each nature very regularly acts toward the end for which is natural to it.
A second type of law is called divine law. We saw this a couple of lectures ago when we were talking about divine command theory.
For Aquinas, divine law refers to those commands, those directives, those laws which God has explicitly and in so many words declared, things like the Decalogue that occurs in Exodus and in Deuteronomy,
things like the two commandments that Jesus enunciates, things like the Quran, which is an effort to say here is a divine revelation about how we must act.
Aquinas reflects on why God would make both an eternal law and a divine law and he takes note of the fact that it was so wise of God to explicitly state what the laws are with respect to humankind
because not everybody will have time to reflect upon what God's plan is, nor will everybody have the same intelligence by which to figure it out.
And sometimes even when we can intuit what that law is, even when we feel a spontaneous inclination toward the end for which our nature has been created,
nonetheless we can be uncertain and we will be aided by the added certainty of God having said so in so many words.
A third kind of law that Aquinas enunciates and one that is so prominent in what we are talking about in this course is natural law.
Aquinas envisions natural law as our human participation in God's providential ordering of the universe.
Namely, we are more like God than any other creature precisely by having an intellect and by having a will.
Our rationality, as is manifested in our power to know things and in our power to choose things, is much more similar to God than any of the other creatures that God has ever created.
We're able to look ahead, we're able to understand both what our nature, what our families, what our communities need and we're able to see what sort of things would frustrate those natural ends,
what sort of things would destroy or make it very hard for us to enjoy the happiness for which we seem to be designed.
Hence, natural law, for Thomas, refers to the power of our reason to reflect upon our nature so as to determine what it is that is morally required.
It's not that natural law is written anywhere in a book that we can look it up.
It is rather something that is written upon our very being, written in the heart, and if we look conscientiously enough at what is written on our heart,
if we look at that to which all human beings are inclined and if we start sorting out those things which are just self-interested,
from that which is needed by everybody in order to be a human being, full and mature and flourishing,
he thinks we'll be able to see what some of these natural law obligations and natural rights are.
Finally, the fourth category is human law or positive law.
I mean not positive in the sense of positive versus negative, but positive in the sense of laid down or posited by a human authority.
Human law also must meet this standard of being an ordinance of reason promulgated by the person in charge of the community for the common good.
There will be lots of things which the natural law doesn't determine.
Should we drive, for instance, on the right side of the road or on the left?
Natural law doesn't require that it be one rather than the other.
Natural law simply requires that the person in charge of the community decide because high-speed automobile traffic is not going to work well if we each choose.
Rather, there's a natural law obligation that someone decide the question, which is entirely neutral in terms of its determination,
and then that the rest of us respect it, like it or not, in order for the common good of human safety as well as efficiency and travel and transportation be affected.
The only important obligation that natural law holds out for positive law or human law is that human law should never violate that natural law.
And we saw that, for instance, in the case of Antigone or in the case of Martin Luther King or in the case of those Nuremberg trials.
We found some egregious instances when positive law seemed to violate natural law obligations.
Question then comes, should we try to work with the legislature to overturn the bad legislation?
Should we simply disobey and in civil disobedience accept the consequences?
Should a court take it in hand and try to overturn this by judicial review?
These are great questions.
For the remainder of this lecture, I'd like to turn our attention to the questions about the definition of nature,
just as we have now wrestled with questions about the definition of law.
We've been so far practicing a kind of top-down philosophy by looking at the criteria that any ethics will have to meet
if it's going to be reasonable, namely to be objective and to be universal and to be intelligible.
But in the effort to define human nature, frankly, we can't start at the top.
We have to start at the bottom and work our way up.
This is the procedure that Aquinas recommends following the philosopher to whom he is most indebted, namely Aristotle.
What Aristotle recommended with respect to the definition of the nature of anything is that we undertake two processes,
observation and reflection.
In short, defining the nature of anything will require that we get lots and lots and lots of examples
and that we compare the things that we have observed to try to see what it is that is really common.
And on the other hand, what is merely idiosyncratic or typical of just this subgroup or that subgroup.
Hence, we're working from the bottom, very inductively, by trying to do lots of observation and then lots of reflection upon which we make our abstractions.
It will be a matter of coming to know the types of things on the basis of their structures and on the basis of their activities
and very important for living things on the basis of their development.
Again, let's take a case other than the human case for just a minute to see the importance of this.
If, for instance, you see a caterpillar and then you see a cocoon and then you see a butterfly,
to see them independently would lead one to think that we had three very different kinds of things.
And yet we know that when we've observed long enough that we've actually got one and the same nature.
We can now examine its DNA structure at the molecular level, but we can also see simply by observing it over the course of time
that we have a common nature there which is developing and maturing and promoting the good of the whole species
by its own individual participation in the maturation activities of that particular species.
So too with respect to humankind. Our observation of it will show us both the mature instances as well as the stages of gestation.
And on this point, it is so important to reflect for just a few minutes about how we take this term natural.
Namely, the term natural when we're using it in ethics and defining human nature so carefully
and so as to make statements about what is natural in the moral sense and what is in some way or other unnatural
always has reference to the normal case as its starting point.
We call it in philosophy the privilege of the normal case that when we're trying to look at what is typical of a human being
vis-a-vis other species, we look at the normal mature healthy adult and we look at the skills and the abilities.
Even after looking at the things with the operations we see a person do, we look at the bodily structure
which makes those activities and those operations possible and then we look to the powers that are present that make those activities possible
and finally we articulate a definition of the things nature having worked inductively from activities to structures to powers
back to that collection of traits and powers that are typical of the human being.
But we admit we are using the normal healthy privileged adult as our privileged case.
My brother is a pathologist, a veterinary pathologist and he loves telling the story about how veterinary pathologists learn their art.
What they often do is take a nice healthy instance of the animal in question and then you trace disease on the basis of health.
You never trace health on the basis of disease.
You start with the healthy individual and then you see what the various kinds of sickness are.
Now this said, we need to make another important point about not using those healthy normal mature adult functions,
not using them as demarcation principles for excluding instances of the species from the species.
If for instance one is dealing with the unborn or dealing with very young children or dealing with teenagers
or dealing with the very old who have lost the use of some of their functions.
If one were taking the healthy normal adult case one would say that the unborn or that the very, very young
or the senile and the decrepit, the person with Alzheimer's or the person who's laying in a persistent vegetative state.
If one were trying to use a definition that were done strictly in terms of function these people would be cut off from our consideration.
They would either have ceased to have the structures or the functions that we're so interested in
or they would have not yet seen these structures and functions develop into the maturity that we find in the privileged case.
Very important therefore to be clear on how we define in terms of structure or how we define in terms of function.
Because many a person in the modern philosophical community has attempted to give a definition of the human person
strictly in terms of the functioning of rationality and have been quick to be willing to have physician assisted suicide,
various forms of euthanasia, cutting off those who were at the end of life
or various forms of abortion or infanticide near the beginning, I think because their definitions have been too narrow.
Part of what we need to understand is that the species is not defined in terms of the function,
rather species is compared with other species in terms of function,
whereas membership in the species is determined largely on the basis of the origins of the individual
produced by other members of the human species, whether in the biological ways that are typical of sexual reproduction
or perhaps even done in technological manner such as is now possible in vitro fertilization
when the gametes are made to arrange themselves and to unite in a petri dish.
Our consideration here for moral purposes needs then to take careful consideration about how our definition was reached
and what is contained in it.
Aristotle's definition, which Aquinas supports and which I would like to discuss with you in the remaining time on this lecture
and especially in the fourth lecture that we will do in this introductory set,
concerns the human being as rational animal.
To take this definition is to focus on the genus, what we share with a larger group.
We could have taken all beings or all living beings,
but it's useful to take all animate beings precisely because our animal selves,
the various things that we need for reproduction, the things that we need for nutrition,
the things that we need for our animal life are so frequently considerations in matters of ethics.
But then also questions of being mammals, questions of being primates,
all of these are the groups to which we belong and ultimately the specific difference,
the thing that sets us apart is our rationality.
Now Aristotle only got as far as calling us rational animals.
One of the distinctions that has been made since then that has been utterly crucial has been that we are also persons.
And in the next lecture we'll consider this question of personality and how that adds to the question of rationality.
Here in this lecture we do well simply to take note of the rationality in all of its many forms,
the practical rationality of knowing how to do and how to make,
the theoretical rationality in terms of how to understand,
and to take note that this will be an important, a crucial aspect of our personal nature,
that is beings with a responsibility that comes from having known and having chosen,
having been irreplaceable, the unique individuals,
and therefore as having a special dignity among all creatures such that there are moral rights and moral duties.
Thank you very much.
Let's begin to consider the long history of natural law and to see how this tremendously interesting but complicated theory came to develop.
But I'd like to devote one more preliminary lecture here to an extremely important concept which in a way makes all the rest as significant as they are,
namely that notion of the human person.
Because natural law, if it's grounded upon anything, is grounded upon an understanding of the human person.
In technical philosophy we call this philosophical anthropology, that is the effort to deal with the humankind and to deal with it precisely as person.
What we'd established, I think, through the end of the last lecture was a strong sense of human nature.
And so today what I'd like to do after briefly reviewing that point about human nature,
is to go on to ask the question about human person, and then after we've talked about human person,
I'd like to make a few last preliminary notes about moral knowledge and about the form that natural law theory will take as the result of all of this.
First, however, the questions of philosophical anthropology.
What we were saying was that natural law depends upon their being such a thing as a natural kind, namely the humankind, distinguishable from other sorts of animals.
As such, the natural kind, that is human nature, is defined as rational animal.
A kind of animal, and therefore having all sorts of things appropriate to animals, a material body, life, the capacity for nutrition,
an ability to grow, to reproduce, locomotion, being able to walk around, sensory activity, and so on.
All the things that we associate with biological life.
In all of these respects, natural kind, that is human nature, shows not just a static completeness to these things,
but shows a pattern of development.
And one of the things that is so crucial to our understanding of human nature, for the purposes of natural law theory,
is an appreciation not only of the normal case when we have an adult that's healthy and mature, we call that the privilege of the normal case,
but also a strong sense of the development by which that particular mature, healthy adult case comes about.
And that this pattern of development is as important to natural law theory and to human nature as the finished product.
Strong sense that development is crucial, and that the pattern of development that flows out of the nature is deeply and intrinsically objective,
is something that an open-minded person can be brought to see upon sufficient observation and sufficient reflection.
I think that this will begin to answer the kind of questions that are raised when immediately objections come to our mind.
How about those individual human beings like autistic children, or like the senile, the aged,
if they are unable to manifest all of the activities and the typical operations of the healthy, normal, privileged, mature case,
do they still count? Are they still a member of this protected species?
And this is why we need to consider not only the question of human nature in its animality and in its rationality,
but why we also need to consider the question of person, because person is a moral category.
Person refers to what deserves certain kind of protection by virtue of having an intrinsic dignity, and therefore certain kinds of human rights.
And likewise, person is what is able to be held accountable by virtue of any actions, by virtue of choices made.
There's a moral responsibility that comes by our exercise of the powers of rationality, by the kind of things that we knowingly choose to do.
So the question comes, are all persons human, and are all humans persons?
I ask both those questions, because the category, as we use it in ordinary speech, seems to be that all humans are persons, and all persons are human.
But if we reflect a little bit more, we see that there is a very strong and interesting and somewhat controversial claim being made here.
First, are all persons human?
Well, as a matter of fact, those who are religious believers think of God as personal, and yet God is certainly not human.
And likewise, if your own particular religious stance includes a belief in angels, we have other personal beings who are no way human.
So I would want to say for my own purposes here that the category person is actually larger than the category of human.
There are persons who are not human persons, but divine or angelic ones.
On the other hand, those who do not believe in God or do not believe in angels will find that the question still pertains, presumably, all human beings then are persons.
But that too is a controversial question.
Namely, if we define human being in a structural way, I think we will say that all human beings are persons.
But those who would prefer to exclude certain categories of those who are human biologically, sometimes people want to exclude the unborn,
or exclude the deformed children, or exclude the deficient, aged, or to exclude the senile, they will be trying to say that not all human beings are persons,
but that personhood is restricted to function, the capacity to exhibit this rationality.
I think that that is a fundamental moral mistake that cannot carry the day because it is subjective rather than objective.
That is, it is based on an arbitrary distinction rather than based on an objective distinction, but I regard that as the burden of proof.
This is what has to be established in order to make the claims I'm going to make.
Now in order to consider the question, I'd like to suggest that we make a bit of an historical detour.
The very origins of the notion of person have an interesting history.
The classic definition of a person is provided by a sixth century Roman jurist by the name of Boethius, and his definition for person goes like this.
A person is an individual substance of irrational nature.
He articulated that definition not because so much of human moral questions, but he articulated it for theological reasons.
That is, he was concerned with some of the theological questions that had originated about Christian religious claims.
We have, for instance, the claim in Christianity that there are three something or others in one God.
And likewise, in the being that is Jesus Christ, the Christian church makes the claim that there are human and divine aspects of this one single individual.
But in Boethius' time, there was no reliable term available for talking about the three who's in one what, or talking about the two what's in one who.
Rather, there was a need for the development of terminology.
In Greek and Roman philosophy, up until that point, the philosophy of Aristotle and Plato, the philosophy of Socrates and the Stoics,
there was a tremendous development of terminology.
Being, for instance, refers to everything which exists.
Individual refers to unique entities that is unified entities.
Nature refers to the kind of thing that a thing is.
But there was no such term as person.
In Greek, for instance, there are plenty of terms for God and the various gods.
There are plenty of terms for angelic intelligences.
There are terms that take in all human beings.
Our word anthropology comes from a word anthropos, which means human being.
There are terms for male and female human beings.
But there's no word that gets gods, angels, and all human beings as rational beings under one collective term.
Even though we say the Greeks had a word for it, turns out they didn't have a word for this one.
But there were terms available which thinkers like Boethius and others of his own time found and provided a little philosophical development for
so that they could capture this notion of rationality in a unified substance.
The term that we use, persona, is a Latin origin of the word person.
The Greek word is prosopon.
Let's stick with the word in Latin, but it means the same thing as the word in Greek, persona.
It's a word that has theatrical origins.
You remember, of course, in ancient theater that they were tremendously dependent upon masks.
And the masks serve both to indicate who the character was, as well as to serve as a kind of a microphone, a certain loudspeaker for the theatrical community.
The word person comes from persona, which means to sound through.
And it initially refers to just the mask that the actor is wearing.
But then, in addition to referring to the mask, it can refer to the role that the actor is playing.
In, for instance, classical Greek theater of Escalus or of Sophocles, there are just two actors, plus a chorus.
If there are more characters in the play, it's done by using different masks.
Eventually, Sophocles introduces a third actor, Euripides and Erosophanes follow suit, and their plays get much more complicated,
and the plots get much more delightful precisely because they've got more actors available to play more parts simultaneously.
But the term person at the time prior to Boethius simply refers to the mask or the role that is being played,
and only comes by virtue of work of people like Boethius to refer to the human individual who is playing the role and serving as a character.
That is, there's gradually a giving of philosophical weight to a term that is primarily theatrical.
The term persona in Latin also refers to grammar.
When we talk about I as first person, you as second person, he, she, or it as third person, it has a grammatical sense.
Likewise, it has a legal sense.
The third thing we've seen in this country when sometimes the court had to consider whether railroads were corporate personalities.
So too in Gromen law, persona can refer to a corporate personality.
But to get the notion to refer not to a railroad or a forest as a person,
but to find a term that could include intelligence and rationality and will like God or angels or human beings,
but not animals, however sophisticated, there was need for this philosophical progress and the term person was made to bear that load.
Let's consider some of the parts of Boethius' definition and we'll see so much of what's important in the subsequent history of the term person
so that it eventually comes to have the things that you and I associate with personality, personal consciousness, center of personal identity,
and especially for moral purposes, the bearer of moral rights and responsibilities.
Boethius says that person is an individual substance of a rational nature.
Individual is a relatively clear term.
We mean it not in some radically atomistic sense of being absolutely isolated from others,
but rather some recognizable unity, that an individual and we can have individual trees in a forest,
we can have individual cats in a group of cats we're trying to herd,
we can have individual atoms and we can have individual protons and individual electrons.
But for some things in this world, individuals are harder to come by.
We don't think of water, for instance, as an individual or we can get it down to an individual atom of H2O
and yet the individual atom, if we could have just that separated by itself,
that molecule would not have many of the properties of water.
You need lots of them around in order for water to be acting and having the properties of water.
We can have individual pales of water or individual gallons of water,
but as such, we have artificially introduced the distinction, putting all the water here or putting all the water there.
Whereas with an individual cat or an individual tree or an individual human being,
the individual is clearly what it is precisely by being an internally unified being,
which can move around separately from some other.
The term that Boethius adds to the definition to try to bring this out is the term substance.
And substance is a word which to us, I think, suggests different chemicals.
We say, what kind of substance is that? And we think it's gold or we think it's silver.
But substance names the being of a thing according to a certain kind.
And so when we're referring to an individual, we say that individual always has some particular kind of nature.
You can see how his definition is unfolding. An individual substance of a rational nature.
So the key element here will be to identify the properties and the traits and the powers
which make possible the identification of this individual substance according to a specific nature, namely rationality.
We have here taken the privileged case, whether it be a god operating as a god should,
an angelic intelligence operating the way angels do,
or human being in the full, mature, healthy, normal sense showing and exhibiting that rationality.
But where god is god eternally, and where angels seem to be always angelic and never have a process of development,
they don't grow up from being little angels to being big angels, humans have a process of development.
And hence the term person is designed to identify that type of being which we are,
which is so different from all the rest of the animal creation, and is capable of making us similar to gods and angels,
namely having rationality and having a kind of uniqueness by virtue of that rationality.
Now even the uniqueness has to be understood carefully.
Maybe you have your pet rock, or maybe you have your favorite tree,
and they are certainly unique trees which have grown just that way,
or rocks which have been formed in just the way that they have been formed.
And yet their uniqueness is of a relatively static kind.
It's this rock rather than that, it's this tree rather than that, it belongs to you or belongs to me.
But their uniqueness is largely in terms of something else, my ownership, or their position in space.
Their uniqueness isn't particularly anything special, it isn't anything of a moral dimension.
Whereas what we mean by the human person is a uniqueness that comes not just from being an individual of the human nature,
but as a uniqueness that comes by virtue of the personal histories that we ourselves bear responsibility for working out.
That over the course of the time that we live and that we develop, we start to have such unique personalities.
I love chatting with my friends who have young children and asking them, you probably ask the same sort of question,
do your children have their own personality?
And my friends, my young friends insist that even from the time of them being slight and small babies,
you can start to see their very individuating characteristics which makes them quite irreplacably unique.
Characteristics which were already starting to develop in the womb,
and scientists have done amazing studies with respect to how even the unborn are able to hear
some of the strains say of classical music or the strains of rock music,
and that their moods are also altered by what they're hearing, even though it isn't yet at the point of understanding,
it's more at the level of some emotional impact.
They've done long-term studies with respect to how emotions develop in the course of those sort of long-term perspectives
and the experience that children have over the course of their lives.
Their uniqueness comes partly as a result of nature, what their genetic structures are,
partly as a result of nurture, how they are treated,
but also, and equally important, our uniqueness is a function of our rational choices,
of starting to know at the very early levels what the options are and starting to choose.
One sees in the smallest children signs of willfulness,
and I can't help but think of that wonderful story of Augustine when he's thinking about his own infancy,
reflecting upon some of the traits he sees in other instances,
and he tells the charming story at one point of two children, one at his mother's breast, the other at his mother's knee,
and he notes how utterly jealous the one at the knee is.
Even though he's well-fed, quite full, he's jealous and would murder the other little kid simply because the other is getting attention.
There's that willfulness and he's starting to show a sign of what sort of a child he will be,
and needs to be carefully dealt with so that there is real love and attention that is given,
even though he has to learn that he's not the center of the world and that he can't always have all the attention.
Our unique personalities began at a stage before we're in total rational control,
but emerge more and more as the powers of our rationality come into place.
One sees then, if I may summarize, the importance of Boethius' definition for all human persons.
One also sees, if one does studies in neonatology and in embryology,
that the efforts to try to define some human beings as non-persons invariably fail.
They try to articulate demarcation points, after which some particular function is now available.
And yet, there has been no radical change.
There is still the same DNA structure.
There is still the same genetic composition.
There is still the same continuity of biological existence.
The creature has not changed its nature.
Rather, we have fundamentally and entirely the same type of being, the same nature,
even though the personal characteristics only start showing up later in the course of the development.
In addition to considerations of individual personality,
it's also important for natural law to realize the social dimension of our personality,
namely that we're not atomistic units, not when we're full-blown, not when we're tiny.
We are always relational beings. We're beings which are social.
In fact, Aristotle's other preferred definition for humankind is not just rational animal,
but social animal, or sometimes he says political animal.
And by that, I think he means to suggest we are by our very natures,
whether you're a Greek like Aristotle who thinks that human nature is an eternal thing,
or whether you're a religious person who thinks of us as truly created by God.
We are either by our natures eternally, or created to have these natures by our creator,
with natures that are social.
And the sociality goes in various levels.
It starts at the most immediate level of the family and extends outward to various forms of association,
some of them merely geographic, tribal, others of them of a voluntary nature, the groups that we join,
and extending eventually as far as states or even international organizations.
If one is extremely cosmopolitan, one may think of oneself as a citizen of the world or a citizen of the universe.
But all of these levels of sociality are things that we need.
Granted, highly granted, the forms that sociality take can vary enormously.
And yet, there is a human need for social organization.
Think of the various kinds of families that you know.
There are very tiny families in which there are only spouses, perhaps one child or two.
There are families which are much, much larger, and then there are those families
when they have family reunions that have hundreds coming.
You need a map in order to understand the whole thing.
But the ways in which families may exist, living just in very tight nuclear families,
whether existing in much larger groups, nonetheless share certain bonds.
They make certain things possible, and there are patterns of dependence that are observable by sociologists.
Likewise, the forms of social organization for which we voluntarily exceed are enormously varied.
There will be some societies that will be organized according to work groups.
There will be some societies that allow for political organization.
There will be some societies that really do foster the notions of teams and sports,
or groups in which we have our fund.
There will be some political organizations that are focused largely on the territory you can unite within one city.
And there will be forms of social organization that transcend vast distances,
such as our own country does, where we have virtually annihilated distance precisely by the forms of our communication.
But whatever these forms take, there is still a natural need for it.
And what natural law is emphasizing in reflecting upon persons is our tremendous need for this socialization,
our utter inability to do without it, even though there is a tremendous flexibility with the precise form this social organization takes.
A natural lawyer, worth assault, always has to remember that there are certain things that natural law can figure out,
and certain things that a natural law analysis loan cannot determine.
Part of what natural law requires is a patience for looking at the history of a culture,
and looking at the history of a society, and looking at the history of a family,
and even looking at the history of an individual.
You can't determine everything in advance, but often you have to use the reflection upon the history.
What really did work in order to foster human development?
And what really frustrated human development?
It may have seemed good at the time. It might have seemed enormously pleasant.
There might have been a tremendous instinctual attraction to it,
but somehow it undermined the kind of development that was necessary for real maturity.
And there are other things which don't seem promising,
in a way that discipline always seems hard and forbidding,
and yet those social disciplines or those family disciplines may be just what we need for our full development as persons.
One can see this not only in the Thomism that I've been trying to present to you so far,
but one can see this in very different theories,
just for the sake of an example and to show that this is not simply a position held only by one point of view,
but by a position that very much differs with it on many other important moral points.
Let me switch over for a moment to Freudian theory.
One of the Freudian psychologists that I have found most helpful in the course of my own readings in that subject
is a British Freudian psychologist by the name of Elizabeth Moeberle.
And in her books she is very much interested in talking about
the ways in which human beings depend upon one another for learning how to love and to be loved.
And she stresses the necessity of social organization and family structure
for the sake of true human personal development,
and she shows the tremendous traumas and difficulties that come when something is injured,
early on in the periods when a child is under tremendous influence of those who are around it.
In the book Psychogenesis, Elizabeth Moeberle discusses the traumas that can afflict a person
when either one's mother or one's father is not acting in ways that are helpful to human development.
She stresses that every little boy needs to learn how to relate to his father and to his mother
for everything that that child will subsequently do with respect to dealing with men and dealing with women.
That there's something about the way in which one gives love to one's father and receives love from one's father
that will be very helpful.
It won't absolutely determine, but will be an enormous influence with respect to how that boy deals with men subsequently in his life.
Likewise, there will be something about how a boy deals with his mother,
gives love to her, and receives love from her that will be of enormous influence with respect to how he deals with women in all the rest of his life.
Perhaps you've noticed that sometimes a man will tend to marry somebody who's very much like his mother.
Sometimes it's because of the over-emphasis upon one aspect of this,
or sometimes because of the under-emphasis that all one's life one feels the need to try to repair some damage that was done early on.
Similarly, a little girl has the same sorts of relationships, but differently from her point of view.
She learns to give and receive love to other women on the basis of the way in which she has related to her mother,
and she learns how to deal with the men who will subsequently be in her life,
with very much influence based on how she has given and received love from her father.
Again, I repeat, I'm not a card-carrying Freudian, nor do I mean to suggest that this explains everything about psychopathology that takes place later in life.
I don't think that, I don't think that the Freudians think that.
The claim, rather, is that our family structures are of enormous natural significance in providing us some of the stability,
in providing us some of the stimulation, in providing some of the challenge,
in eliciting from us and drawing out from us some of those things that can't ever be learned in so many words,
or at least not learned except without a tremendous amount of trouble,
but rather are learned by us, even in our smallest period, by the ways in which our family society has been organized.
I think one could do the same kind of reflection upon the ways in which different political organizations manage to bring out different virtues.
A democratic culture, for instance, insists that its people learn various things and learn to discuss and to debate things without ranker,
that one has to learn how to act in the public forum and state a position clearly,
and then stand up by what one does for the position that one has taken,
that one will be called to account both for one's reasoning and one will be account for one's life,
and one will be expected to show that life by one's example.
This would be true of a democratic culture, such as our own, in ways that would not be true of a, for instance, certain types of aristocratic culture.
In certain types of aristocratic culture, where, for instance, there is an aristocracy and a nobility or a king,
the nobles are expected to act nobly, but one has the sense that the vast majority of the population may not be capable of such noble activity,
will never have an explicit participation in politics, and the social culture is enormously affected by the type of regime.
My sense, then, is that natural law theory is enormously alert to the fact that we need various kinds of help from one another
by the forms of social organization that we have, and that differences in this may be quite tolerable.
That is not just one type of political association or just one type of family, but there is a range of permissible options.
Permissible, largely in terms of the subsequent history, the form of family, or the form of voluntary association,
or the form of governmental culture, will allow persons to develop relatively well.
There will be some cultures which inculcate habits or blindnesses, which will be in fact destructive.
I think, for example, of cultures which practice human sacrifice, and what they are saying about the worth of an individual
speaks volumes, precisely by that form of culture.
Slaveholding cultures now may seem extremely alien to us, and yet it is not that far back in our American history
when somehow there was a cultural blindness in this respect.
Moral knowledge, in this matter, is something that comes about first by way of inclination.
We look at how human beings are inclined to act.
And yet our inclinations themselves do not give us perfect knowledge of any of these things.
The inclinations that we feel, toward a good or revulsed from some evil, from some pain, always need to be submitted to rational reflection,
the individual reflecting on his or her own experience, the community reflecting on the experience,
and letting those who are wise, letting those who have more experience, greater powers of articulation, greater powers of comparison,
begin to philosophize about this so as to recommend patterns of association, patterns of dependence,
patterns of development and maturation that lead to real human fulfillment, and that avoid the patterns of disintegration.
In the next hour, we'll be turning to questions of history and learning how some of these ideas came to be discovered in the course of philosophical history.
Applause
Music
Lecture 5 Greek Ideas of Nature and Justice
Applause
If natural law is an unwritten, but universal standard of morality, how did it ever come to be known? Where could it be read?
Our effort in the next lectures, from this lecture through lecture 16, will be the effort to retell important parts of that history of thinking about the natural law,
both to appreciate the genius that was involved in articulating it, but also to deepen our understanding.
Have you ever had that experience of trying to say something and you knew what you wanted to say, but you didn't quite have the words for it?
It's easier after the fact to be a Monday morning quarterback and to say what you should have said,
but at the time, the problem you faced, you couldn't quite find the solution dearly as you tried.
I think much of the history of philosophy is that and the history of natural law in particular, and it's a history very much worth exploring.
At the same time, I'd like to mention as a pre-note that there's a constant need for watchfulness when doing the history of natural law
to determine genuine instances of the subject from false trails as well as from counterfeits that are really ideological.
The danger is that as soon as we start thinking about morality in ways that are going to be lawful and in ways that will have political and social impact,
there's a tremendous temptation to use some of these theories and to use some of these ideas for ideological purposes,
for trying to achieve some very specific social objective.
And natural law has not been exempt from this, whether it was a question of trying to justify the worldwide imperial rule of the Roman Empire,
of the Roman emperors, or an effort to try to dispossess feudal barons of some of their lands,
or whether it be the quest for participation in political power as the modern period began,
or even the revolutions that were taking place in France and in America in virtually the same part of the 18th century.
There were uses of natural law for ideological purposes, some of them quite good, as I think our own experience,
other than them for purposes which were somewhat less than honorable.
And so it will be necessary as we study the history of natural law thinking to be constantly on the alert for what is a genuine case of good natural law thinking,
what's a false trail, and what is simply a counterfeit and a surrogate for ideological purposes.
We begin philosophy of natural law as we begin all philosophy, however, with the Greeks.
Those thinkers who began the tradition of Western philosophizing in their effort for a better understanding of the entire cosmos as well as the world of human life.
Although the thinkers that I will mention in today's lecture have importance in many other areas besides,
I'd like to concentrate on just a few points.
Namely, the pre-socratic philosophers who initiate the discipline, and then the figure of Socrates and of his writer Plato,
and then in the next two lectures I'll move on to Aristotle.
And I'll be considering the two poles of our own subject natural law, namely nature and ethics,
because the history of their thought about nature and their history of their thought about morality is so deeply intertwined.
We begin then with the pre-socratic philosophers and the rise of both natural philosophy and ethics.
Teriously, they're called pre-socratics because they all came prior to Socrates.
Socrates is that world standard figure who has such enormous importance that we lump together a great number of figures
who did not live in exactly the same part of the Greek world and who had theories very different from one another.
Nonetheless, we call them pre-socratics because they all are prior to Socrates.
The main project of the pre-socratic philosophers was the quest for a first principle.
In Greek the word is archae, which is rather like the word archaeology, a search for origins, or the word archaic, old things.
There was a search for an archae, for a first principle that would let them explain the universe.
Now, as I understand the context in which they were working, it was a very mythological culture.
There was an entire realm of charming gods and goddesses, some of whom were doing some awfully naughty things,
why it made them look like sort of mischievous human beings.
But this realm of mythological deities, the Zeus's and the Hera's and the Poseidons,
all of this group of wonderful gods and goddesses was the source of explanation for many things that happened in their world,
from the crops to the weather, to incidents of good fortune or bad fortune which individuals experienced.
Our group of pre-socratic philosophers had it in mind that this couldn't possibly be the explanation for many of the things in this world.
It is not that they were opposed to God, in fact some of them have some very noble visions of God,
and yet if there is a common link to these pre-socratic, it's the development of ideas about the first principles of the universe
that are increasingly given to a very impersonal understanding of God.
To us it may seem a contradiction to think of God as an impersonal deity,
and yet this is the answer to which they progressively came, a respect for God, but an impersonal form of God.
I'll review some of the particular figures here who stand of some importance,
but I think that the real significance lies not in the details of all these unpronounceable Greek names,
rather the great significance resides in their project, their search for a first principle of explanation for things that occur in the natural world.
The first one is a group of Milesian physicists.
Milesia refers to a part of Greece, a part of the Ionian coast,
and they were concerned with trying to find some one material principle which could explain all of nature as they understood it.
A man named Thales posited water as the first and most important principle,
and Ximines thought it was air, and Ximander thought it was the indefinite.
Now, their explanations strike us as somewhat naive, part of the problem may be that we have only really small snatches of text from any of them.
But what they were involved in was asking not so much that everything was water or how everything could be air,
but rather that they were concerned with what was the element that made all the rest work.
And when one thinks about Thales' answer that water is this first element,
one is very mindful that in the non-living world, water is still a tremendously active force,
whether the power of erosion on a piece of land, whether it be the force of the waves beating up against a cliff,
or within the organic realm, how all plants and how all animals so desperately need water, need liquid, need moisture.
There's a strong sense of how reproduction involves moisture and liquid,
and Thales' answer of water, I think, is intended to suggest that water is the element that makes everything else work.
As they proceed through their various answer, other presocratics devise other solutions to this, naming various material elements.
Some come up with the notion that there are four main material elements, earth, air, fire, and water.
What they are seeking is an answer in terms of nature, rather than in terms of God and goddess.
And what their importance resides in is their quest for a physical explanation.
In fact, the Greek word fousis, from which our word physics or physical comes, is the word that means nature.
It means something that's alive and growing according to a pattern.
And what their primary significance consists in is their progressive attempt to give a scientific, or perhaps in a word closer to their own project,
a natural, rather than a personal explanation for the various events in the universe.
Some of them preferred to work mathematically.
We have the wonderful figure of Pythagoras, after whom the Pythagorean theorem is named.
Pythagoras wanted to propose that it wasn't so much one of these material elements that was the decisive point of nature,
but rather that mathematics, numbers, ratios were the crucial figure.
And so he proposes that what one needs to do is to understand the material elements in terms of their mathematical structure
in a way that modern physics has often followed his example.
When it comes to matters of ethics, what Pythagoras proposes is that we need to seek a harmony with these various ratios and harmonies in the body
and with the ratios and harmonies of things in the external world.
That if we follow out these basic harmonic ratios, our own life will be peaceful and fulfilled.
Later figures yet, like Heraclitus, used one of the elements, fire, to designate something.
And with Heraclitus, we really have a revolution in how to think about this.
It's not that he proposed that everything was fire any more than that Heraclitus really meant that everything was water.
Rather, he takes fire as the principle that makes the world go around.
Just think of fire for a moment.
It's fascinating and entrancing when we're watching the fire in a fireplace or a campfire by night or a candle flicker.
And yet it can be terrifying if it's in gulfs or house, if it takes over the neighborhood or the woods.
There's something very dangerous, very transformative about it, and yet there's something about fire which suggests that it's the agent of change
and at the same time it's a very constant factor in the process of change, in the process of any combustion,
in the warmth by which humans or other animals digest their food,
in the force of the sun by which so much of the wind and the water and the waves have the actions and the motions they do.
With Heraclitus, there's not only an effort at a physical explanation in terms of one of the elements,
but a sense that everything is constantly changing.
And the one thing that's constant is that there is constantly change.
He proposes various conundrums and paradoxes for followers in the history of philosophy to solve.
How can there be any identity? How can there be any stability if things are constantly changing?
Sometimes he puts it in the form of riddles.
It is impossible for a man to step in the same river twice, by which he wants to suggest this constant change.
And yet he did not think of change as merely anarchic change, changes without rhyme or reason.
Rather, his effort is to suggest that there's a pattern to change.
We saw in the preceding lectures on natural law how important this is, namely,
that we concern ourselves not just with the perfect form, the mature, healthy adult instance of human nature or of any nature,
but rather that we are alert to the process of change, the process of becoming, the process of development,
by which even those incipient forms of life already have human nature, are already of a personal kind,
even as they grow within the womb and then grow as children and then grow as adolescents,
and grow finally to the maturity that we expect and associate with adulthood.
That there is a pattern to this development, it's a pattern that allows for certain flexibility in a certain range,
and yet there are patterns of development.
I think Heraclitus would have absolutely loved television.
Television gives you a strong sense of how you can have flow and change that's very dynamic and very interesting,
and yet have an exact repetition of the flow.
I know college students who can repeat word for word and gesture for gesture,
everything that happened on segments of Gilligan's Island.
They can do it because they're so fascinated by the flow, and yet it's an exact repetition of the flow,
and I think Heraclitus would have appreciated Gilligan's Island, instant replay and football,
and all of the other things and patterns and discovery that are possible by virtue of our modern technology showing the patterns to a flow.
His nemesis in ancient philosophy, however, is a man named Parmenides.
Parmenides who stood for being, that which is simple and eternal and unchanging.
Parmenides, in opposition to Heraclitus, was one who had a strong sense of these eternal essences of things.
Well, in our study of natural law so far, we've already come to appreciate the notion of human nature,
the notion of some of the values that are crucial to human nature, things like justice,
or other virtues like courage and temperance and prudence, are eternal essences.
They are unchanging even if the forms in which individuals participate in them are extremely varied and extremely changing.
Nonetheless, there's a true justice that is always the case, whether it be ancient times or modern,
whether it be instances of paying our bills or punishing our criminals.
Parmenides is the spokesman for the unchanging nature of value and the unchanging nature of human ideals.
There are other figures yet, the various pluralists, people like Empedocles and Annex Agarus,
people like the atomists, Democritus and Eucipus, all of whom propose other physical explanations.
Their significance for natural law is the better and better articulation of permanence within the flow,
plurality of natural kinds, and a sense of eternal essences,
that even if they cannot put the whole world together in the ways that they hoped,
and there was something very frustrating about these pre-socratics,
nonetheless they articulated the standards by which subsequent explanation by other figures would have to be judged.
In summary, the history of Greek philosophy and the history of Greek science,
prior to the development of Socrates and Plato and of Aristotle,
should I think be understood as a progress of seeking out a first principle,
which makes ethics and harmony, as well as makes the plurality of natural kinds that we find in the universe.
And it's not so much an atheistic or secular spirit,
so much as an effort at science that will counter anthropomorphic explanations in terms of gods and goddesses,
with an explanation of what is natural, natural to the physical substances of our world,
natural to the patterns of growth and development that humans experience in the process of their maturation.
Their concern was to search for regularities in the physical world,
as well as to search for moral values that are true and unchanging in the human world.
Now, at this time, a sense of the insufficiency of their explanation begins to develop.
One of the groups that is very highly charged and antagonistic toward the notions that the pre-socratics have been articulating,
is the group called the Sophists.
The Sophists are the teachers of rhetoric and persuasion,
and they tend to be very, very critical of established customs,
even critical of the notion that morality could ever possibly be objective,
and they want to insist instead that many of the standards of morality,
many of the principles of human organization and sociability are purely humanly devised,
that they have nothing natural about them.
Let me discuss the Sophists all too briefly by mentioning three of their really fascinating figures,
because they too have a contribution to make to natural law theory.
Protagoras is an early Sophist who is famous especially for having articulated the notion
that man is the measure of all things.
This is a thesis which is true in some ways.
We are the ones capable of speech.
We are the ones capable of measuring whether a particular practice or a particular custom
really does let human life thrive or whether it in some way frustrates it.
But there's a way in which Protagoras' view is false, because it's very relativizing.
The notion that man is the measure of all things could and was taken to mean in antiquity,
reality is what we decided to be.
Reality is simply how we choose to measure it out.
What Protagoras insists on is that most human cultures,
most social arrangements, most governments, most systems of morality
are merely matters of human invention, and that that isn't what is really truly natural.
But he has a strong sense and appreciation for what we must do about it,
namely come to his fellow Sophists to learn how to get along,
to learn the techniques of rhetoric.
Given this tremendous war of all against all that anticipates Hobbes,
humans must need to learn how to deal with this enormous set of problems that they have
and must learn techniques that will be actually efficient, like the rhetoric that he could teach.
A second Sophist is Hippias.
Hippias took the view that the natural likeness of all human beings
really does imply their equality and their universal fraternity.
He has equal skepticism about social arrangements,
because he thought that aristocratic arrangements that were so prominent in the ancient world
offended against this natural equality by making some groups of people called nobles and aristocrats
to him that was an extreme offense against the natural inequality and the universal fraternity of all men.
Hippias therefore is extremely critical of most social institutions,
but in a way he articulates part of the insight that is crucial to natural law theory,
namely a fundamental equality among all human beings simply by virtue of their natural status.
A third and a really destructive fellow is Calichlis.
Calichlis is a figure about whom we know mostly from Plato's dialogue, the Gorgias.
His spiritual brother is a man named Thrasymachus who appears in Plato's Republic.
The position they hold is a position that does rest an awful lot on nature
and yet is antithetical to natural law theory as we will later see it develop.
What Calichlis and Thrasymachus hold is that might makes right,
that the individual who is naturally stronger, naturally brighter, naturally more persuasive,
naturally more powerful in terms of physique, this is the person who ought to rule.
This is the person who ought to exhibit that power, that power if anything is natural
and if anything laws and institutions let alone morality
are merely the sniveling impositions of order by the weak upon the strong.
Calichlis and Thrasymachus take a position much like the position Nietzsche will take much later in the history of philosophy
that the strong really ought to rule over the weak and the weak really ought to be the slaves of the strong.
It is precisely against figures like Calichlis and Thrasymachus that Socrates, the historical Socrates,
as well as the Socrates of Plato's dialogues emerges.
Socrates stands for a quest for truth and for justice, a quest for real knowledge and a quest for ethics.
I will not here try to make any distinction between the historical Socrates,
who for 70 years wandered around Athens asking people questions,
and the figure who appears as a character, a literary character in the dialogues of Plato.
Those two are impossible to sort out to my way of thinking and so I put them together
because they both stand for a figure who really quested for moral excellence.
In the dialogues that were probably written first, the dialogues like the Apology, the Crito and the Phyto,
these are dialogues which concern Socrates near the point of his death
and we have a strong sense of the force of moral obligation that he felt,
that one must pursue justice at all cost, that one must be willing to suffer wrong rather than to do wrong
because one is by one's nature responsible for everything that one does,
but one is not responsible for what is done to you.
Hence he would rather suffer injustice, suffer evil, suffer pain, even suffer death,
rather than do an action which he knew to be immoral.
Even if he does not use the language of natural law, the language, the terminology will come only later,
Socrates is clearly standing for a natural obligation in opposition to the Sophists.
What Socrates and Plato and Aristotle all hold in common is a tremendous appreciation
for the laws of Athens and the laws of many ancient communities as attempting to codify,
as attempting to embody these moral and ethical standards which they knew by their reasoning.
We currently, in his questioning in daily life in Athens,
we currently in the dialogues that Plato writes with Socrates as the main character,
we see Socrates practicing natural law reasoning, namely, let's investigate the opinions people hold,
let's investigate the activities and the structures that make those activities possible,
and let's try to see ultimately what those structures are rooted in in terms of the powers of human nature
so that we'll see what makes human nature really foster and be fulfilled
and what on the other hand really frustrates or disorganizes human nature.
Perhaps the best dialogue for showing this is the Republic,
and so let me spend the balance of the time that remains for this lecture
and the Republic as an early effort at natural law thinking.
The Republic begins with a book that is dedicated to the discussion of what justice is,
and one finds the character Socrates having a discussion with an older man named Cephalus,
and Socrates asks Cephalus what justice is,
and what Cephalus insists on is that it's a matter of paying your debts.
Cephalus is an older man and one gets the impression he hadn't always paid his debts in the course of his life,
and so very quickly he wants to get away from old Socrates and go off and pay his debts,
and so he hands on the discussion to his son, Polymarcus.
Polymarcus, when asked by Socrates what justice consists in,
Polymarcus says, well, it's a matter of giving to another person what is owed,
giving to another person what is fair.
Now, that ultimately is the definition of justice,
but Polymarcus gets a little confused, as many people did, under the persistence of Socratic questioning,
and when Socrates asks him, well, what do you mean? What is fair? What is owed?
He bumbles into a mistake, and the mistake is helping your friends and hurting your enemies,
and Socrates has no trouble dispatching that as not measuring up to the standards of justice.
What if your friend is actually doing wicked things, and what if your enemy for a change is being just?
Well, then helping your friends and hurting your enemies will offend against natural justice.
Here one sees the character Socrates devoted and committed to the standard of ideal justice
that natural law tradition will always embody and will always praise.
Even if he isn't using the language, he's doing the kind of thinking and reasoning about a standard of ideal and complete natural justice.
At that point in the conversation, Thrasymachus breaks in,
and Thrasymachus, taking a position much like Calakles, insists, this is all sniveling drivel.
What we need is a position that honors real power that might make right,
and Socrates spends the rest of the first book of the Republic trying to refute Thrasymachus.
Now, remember, Thrasymachus is a very boisterous character.
Socrates even has a hard time getting a word in edgewise,
because Thrasymachus will not really discuss, and this is the crucial thing for natural law ethics.
It's reason reflecting on nature, and it's going to be a matter constantly of involving the community of reasonable people
to reflect on what the real natural justice standards are.
Socrates has to silence Thrasymachus by embarrassing him by a very clever ploy.
When he does finally get him quiet, Thrasymachus will then stay around and listen to the discussion,
but he's so embarrassed that he doesn't take an active part, and that Socrates has to carry much of the burden.
Books two through ten of the Republic are an effort to carry that burden,
and to try to show what about human nature requires certain conduct, what it is requires certain practices.
It's a relatively complicated story, but I'd like to emphasize just one aspect of it
to try to make my point about Socrates and Plato as early natural law thinkers.
What the character Socrates proposes early in book two is this,
that the state, Athens of their day, for instance, but any state,
the state is really the man writ large, and that the parts of a state correspond to the parts of a person.
They decided that they will consider the parts of a person first,
and they think about the reasoning element we associate with our minds,
they think about the spirited, the source of feeling and affection and strong feeling that's sort of associated with our chest,
and they think about our desires that are associated with our stomach and that are associated with the lower parts of our body,
suggesting that the desires that reign supreme there need to be ruled by the force of courage and the force of feeling
and the force of well-trained emotion, and that that in turn needs to be ruled by the reason,
that that needs to be ruled by that part of us which can look out not just for immediate gratification,
but can look for long term health and harmony.
After the articulating this for the sake of one person, they go on to suggest the state is like that too.
There must be guardians in a state who can look out over the whole course of the state
and can consider what is for the common good and not just for the good of one of the parts,
and there need to be soldiers who will have that same unflinching readiness to use their strength
to summon their desires and all the feelings that martial music suggests
in service of whatever it is that reason urges them to do.
And finally, that there are desires and that desires are good because desires are aimed at something which will be pleasant
and often which will be useful, but frequently the pleasures outweigh what is useful.
There's something natural about our desires, but these desires need to be reined in
and they need to be disciplined so that they can be called upon to provide interest and enthusiasm,
but that they don't overwhelm us and make us a slave to our pleasures.
Now, whatever one makes of this tripartite division of the human soul, the human body,
or a tripartite division of the state, it's an effort at natural law thinking
because it's a suggestion that we as human beings have souls and have bodies which already have these structures.
We have thinking part, feeling parts, desiring parts.
Each one has a job to do and if each one is doing its job well, there will be virtuous activity
which will come together into a harmony of justice in the whole person just as there are three parts of the state
and the state here is being envisioned very much upon the model of a human body.
The state is thought of as having a nature, things that already exist as structural features of it
regardless of what the particulars of the way in which a particular state might happen to exist in history.
It's an effort at natural law thinking because it's suggesting that in order to determine what will really fulfill us
as opposed to what will frustrate us, that what we have to consider are things that we didn't create, control or alter,
but rather aspects of our nature and that untutored these aspects of our nature will go to seed
and will become slaves of our pleasure or will become so cultivated, so convicted of honor
that we'll do everything, even things that are unreasonable.
But that if we get a good education, if we find ourselves in a moral formation that disciplines the passions,
that reigns in the feelings and that looks out for the common good, there will be a natural development of virtue
that will lead to genuine happiness, genuine good feeling and genuine community.
In this sense, Plato in his Republic is a natural law thinker.
He envisions these human natures as existing from all eternity.
In one of his later dialogues, the timeus, he even envisions a kind of God called the Demiurge, the craftsman,
but this Demiurge or minor God always is looking up to these perfect forms.
The God that he envisions is a very impersonal kind of God,
and the really controlling element are these perfect ideas, perfect forms, perfect virtues for which Plato is known.
In our next hour, we'll turn to another natural law thinker in the history of Greek thought,
namely Aristotle, who gives us the categories of nature and makes tremendous advances in the science of ethics.
Lecture 6
Aristotle's Clarification of Nature
In the last lecture, we had the opportunity to consider the Presocratics and Sophists,
Socrates and Plato for some of their contributions to natural law theory.
In Lecture 6 and in Lecture 7, I'd like to give a little time to consider Aristotle for the wonderful contributions that he has made.
By taking two lectures for this, we'll have a wonderful opportunity to illustrate at some depth.
One of the themes that I think is so important for the understanding of our entire course,
namely that one's view of ethics, whatever picture of morality one has,
depends a tremendous amount on one's view of human nature and not just on one's view of what a person is,
but also depends upon one's view of reality. It's in philosophy called the subject of metaphysics or philosophy of being.
One can see that the way in which one conceives the human person has a lot to say about how one pictures ethics
and in turn the way in which one views the whole cosmos determines a lot about how you understand human nature.
That will be very true of Aristotle.
In this lecture 6, what I'd like to consider is first one of Aristotle's great contributions to this subject,
namely the notion of final causality, the sense that there's an end or a purpose that is already within human nature
and that ethics is the project of trying to understand what we need to do to foster that end and let it come to its fruition.
And on the other hand, what the dangers are, the things that could incapacitate the development of this natural end that we have.
So first we'll consider his notion of final causality within his scheme of causes.
Secondly, we'll consider his own answer to the problem of change that we had begun to consider two lectures ago
when we were talking about the Presocratics, and then we'll have a chance to consider that picture of the final end,
the goal of human life as happiness, and in lecture 7 we'll show how this has direct ethical and political implications.
So first of all, his notion of final causality within his schema of four causes.
Aristotle develops his theory of the four causes, the material cause, formal cause, efficient cause, and final cause
as a way to handle that very perplexing problem of change that the Presocratics had dealt with.
When we were considering the likes of Heraclitus and Parmenides, Empedocles and Annexagoras,
those various Presocratic philosophers had each named one particular element,
perhaps earth, air, fire, and water, which was the set of elements that the ancient Greeks knew.
They had named one of those elements as the primary element, the thing that was so responsible for the order and change in the universe.
And yet their explanations were somewhat incomplete because they seemed to be operating at only a single level of causality,
only a single level of explanation for how things change and become what they are.
Aristotle insists, and he takes up those Presocratics and weaves them into his system,
he insists that there are four such causes, material, formal, efficient, and final.
One can think about the distinction between these four causes by using an example that Aristotle himself recommends,
the example of a bronze sculpture.
Now imagine that you have a sculptor and he's working with various materials, let's say bronze in this case.
The material cause is the stuff that goes into making the sculpture.
The formal cause will be the arrangement, the shape.
It's something that might be communicated precisely by a mold into which he pours it,
or if he were making it out of a different substance, if he were for instance chiseling and carving a rock,
the form is now going to be the structure of the sculpture as it takes shape.
The efficient cause is the sculptor himself, the one who's making the mold, pouring things in, chiseling out the stone.
The final cause refers to the goal or purpose that he has, so it might be to make a statue of a human being or a statue of a horse.
But the goal is something that is in the sculptor's mind, that is it's in the agent's mind,
and he's arranging the matter to have some form or shape so that his goal will be accomplished.
Now in that particular example, we have something where the efficient cause, the sculptor,
and the final cause, the purpose he has in mind, have to be imposed on the statue, have to be imposed on the matter.
One can however equally apply this explanation to something in the natural world,
and this is part of Aristotle's genius to take that system of four distinct causes
and to let it be a principle for explaining how organic things work,
let it be a principle for understanding the natures of things that are entirely within them.
Again, let's take an example that's very dear to Aristotle, the way in which a plant grows.
The development of an oak tree illustrates this procedure very nicely.
One finds in for instance an acorn, already the matter and the form that are unified together in a new substance.
That matter and the form are intrinsic to the new substance, the acorn.
It's a certain kind of matter made up of a certain kind of cell, certain kinds of molecules,
and they're organized according to a certain form.
The material and the form, that is the stuff and the structure, are already intrinsic to a being.
Now in this example, as in the example of the bronze statue, the agent cause has to come from outside.
In the case for instance of an acorn beginning to germinate, it's water or moisture that makes the acorn start to grow.
But here we find a difference between the growth of an acorn into a full blown oak tree and that bronze statue.
Because in the case of the bronze statue, the goal or the purpose was something that was in the mind of the agent,
unless there had been a sculptor who envisioned making a statue of Napoleon or a statue of a horse.
One would not have had any particular goal for the procedure.
The goal was entirely extrinsic to the new substance in the case of an artificial object.
But in the case of a natural object, the thing that we're going to be so concerned about in natural law ethics,
when we're concerned with how it is that a human being grows and develops to become full and complete as an adult human being,
the goal and the purpose is rooted within the being rather than in something extrinsic.
And one sees already in this acorn that already the goal is present in germ in the acorn,
that an acorn will never grow up into a dandelion, it will never grow up into a cherry tree,
but rather the full blown oak tree is already in germ, we would I think talk about the DNA structure and the genetic composition,
which already determines to an almost complete amount what that full blown oak tree will look like.
The final cause, the tea loss, is already contained at the level of the seed.
A third example comes of course from biological generation of animals.
Any sort of animal that is produced by sexual reproduction, we could take for instance the case of a new human being,
is much more like the acorn than like the sculpture, in that one has matter and form when the gametes,
the sexual cells of egg and sperm have come together to form the new human being.
One has matter there of a certain type arranged according to a certain definite pattern.
This new unified substance does require that there have been an agent cause,
in this particular case of sexual reproduction, two agent causes which came together and produced this new unified human being.
But already in the very, very small tiny child, all of the goal, all of the directedness, all of the final cause,
is already present in the new organism and as the new organism comes to grow within the womb
and then outside the womb as a young infant, as a child, as a teenager and into full adolescence.
We grow toward that maturity that we experience as adult human beings from a principle that is within us.
That is what Aristotle means by the nature of a thing and it is so crucial to his explanation
that in the whole order of natural objects, in the order of plants, in the order of animals including the order of human beings,
these four causes are at work and that the final cause in a way is directing the whole operation from within.
The difference, of course, as we'll see for ethics, is that as human beings we are also able to have conscious purposes and conscious choices
so that by our rationality we're able to make all sorts of interesting decisions about how to carry out this plan for our direction and growth.
But there are things that are within us that we do not choose, that we cannot control, that are simply part of us by virtue of this end that is within us
directing our growth and our development. Aristotle's procedure here is to reflect on the nature that we share with all other plants and animals
and to take note of how these four causes are operating.
Theoretically now, before we turn to its application in ethics, he also has a theory of change in which he manages to solve some of the problems that those pre-secratic philosophers had raised.
You will remember from our last lecture that Heraclitus had been urging that everything in the whole universe is in constant change and flow,
that there is no possibility even of stepping into the same river twice because things are constantly changing.
Heraclitus' insight there, that there is such constant change, is I think largely by way of a challenge and an incentive to subsequent philosophers.
How then do you explain the apparent continuity? How do you explain stability? How do you explain identity over time if there's all this change?
Permanenties, on the other hand, had issued just the opposite kind of challenge. Namely, for Permanenties, the concentration is on being.
Being is that which is, and he poses a logical problem for his successors. If being is that which is, then how could there possibly be any change?
Because change would seem to be going from that which is to that which is not, in which case there would be nothing.
Or it would be going from that which is not to that which is, something coming from nothing. But as Permanenties constantly repeated, from nothing, nothing comes.
Aristotle, in a way, is the person who solves this problem. And he does so by invoking those four causes that I mentioned a moment ago.
Matter, form, efficient cause, and final cause. He invokes that theory of the four causes in line with his own explanation of the principles of change.
His understanding of the principles of change require three concepts. The notion of a substrate, something which underlies the change and stays the same in the course of whatever change happens.
The notion of a form or structure. And finally the notion of privation, the lack of a form. His basic idea is that in the course of a change, at the beginning of the change, we find something that has a certain form,
but lacks other forms. In the course of the change, in the course of the process, the form that it had, it now comes to lack, but one of the forms that it lacked, it now comes to have.
His idea then is to honor Heraclitus, the fact that things are altering, and yet at the same time to appreciate Permanenties' position that something has to remain the same, something has to remain immutable.
In making such an account of change in terms of privation, form, and this underlying substrate, he is trying to preserve identity at the same time to explain difference.
Now if we yoke together these three principles of change with the four causes, we find Aristotle able to understand and to explain the kind of natural developments that we see so constantly in the world.
Namely, beings have a certain underlying matter. If they are simply developing, as acorns do into oak trees, or as plants, as some kind of animal does in the course of starting as a one-celled creature and developing into a many-celled creature,
his idea is that the substrate that endures, the thing that remains the same throughout the change, is this combination of matter and its basic form, its substantial form.
That the form of an acorn is already an oak form, but only in germ. That the form of human being is already present to us at the very, very beginning of our development from the union of those gametes or sex cells within our mother's womb.
And that all the rest of the changes that we experience are the unfolding of the native potencies, the development or the actuation of the full flowering of the form that was already present in this very, very primitive sort at the time when the organism began.
By understanding the matter in this way, he can think of the end, or the final cause, as directing all the changes.
Now, when we speak about an end, or a final cause, directing all the changes that a substance undergoes, we are using as our model human artistry, human creativity.
And we're suggesting we can understand how an agent from the outside directs the changes. In that example of the sculpture that I was mentioning a few minutes before, we can understand how the end, or the goal that's in the sculptor's mind, can be placed into the bronze that is being used for the statue,
or be chiseled out of the stone that is being used in a rock sculpture.
What Aristotle's genius is, is to see that the final cause is already present within, or inside, a natural organism, and that it is serving as the brains behind the operation.
In later thinking in the Aristotelian tradition, for instance, when we find Thomas Aquinas, a thousand years hence, using this Aristotelian idea, it will be Aquinas' position that it is the God who created us,
who was the one who designed our nature, and put the end already inside the organism, so that the end is directing the operation, directing the unfolding of the creature, directing its various developments,
the unfolding of its structure, the making possible of its operations and activities. Aristotle himself does not envision a creator God, as far as Aristotle is concerned.
All the natures of things that exist in this world are eternal, but even though he has no creator God to design these natural organisms, he does have a strong sense of their telos, of their end-directedness.
He simply finds it evident in all the plants and animals that he looks at, and his solution proved extremely successful, perhaps not ultimately successful because people rightly raised the question,
how is it that natural organisms are able to operate always or for the most part for the end for which their own structures are designed?
How can there be this much design unless there was a designer? And hence you will see that there is a great reason why later theorists required an intelligent designer, a God, who organizes the nature.
In that respect Thomas Aquinas will think about God as the creator having an eternal law, a providential design, which he has brought into every nature, so as to make the means for all of this accomplishment so steady and so secure.
But Aristotle's solution is extremely attractive and was the basis not only for the science of ancient Greece, but I think is the basis for the recovery of the progress of science in the late Middle Ages and into the early modern period.
A strong sense that this division between the various types of causes and an appreciation for the way in which the structure is fitted together to unfold gradually and in a way that will really prosper the agent, that this made for the possibility of natural science in the way that we know it in modern Europe.
Now as a philosophical solution, the real genius involved here is talking about being in a way that is not just static. When Parmenides had spoken of being, one had the impression that being is what is.
By including Heraclitus' insight, being as dynamic, then particularly locating the force and the focus of that dynamism in the notion of final cause, Aristotle devises a solution that will be useful both for natural science and will eventually be useful for ethics.
To contribute to his solution, Aristotle develops the notion of a substantial change versus an accidental change. Two important kinds of change which lets us make sense of our universe.
A substantial change is that sort of change when their dominant form is replaced, when for instance a new being is generated or when a being is destroyed and dies. There, the matter and the form that are these two co-principles are destructed, destructured.
On the other hand, an accidental change, it's a curious term I think because when we think of accident we tend to think of car collisions, but what Aristotle meant by an accidental change is a change in one of the properties or another of the properties within a substance that remains the same throughout the change.
Growth is for Aristotle an accidental change. Not accidental in the sense of happenstance, but rather accidental in the sense of the size is what is changing, the added complexity of the unfolding of the creature, and yet it's the same basic creature.
This allows Aristotle to suggest that the changes involved in a thing's growth, in the expansion of its powers, in the unfolding of its structures, these are changes which do not alter the nature of the being, but rather let the being unfold, let the being develop, let the being mature and come to complete actuation.
By focusing on the nature of these accidental changes as true to the nature, as flowing from within the nature, it is possible for Aristotle to explain all of ethics, all of the unfolding and the development and the dynamism that will be necessary to be accounted for in the course of our ethics as having a root right within our nature,
that as he looks at, for instance, the way in which children grow up into adults and their powers of knowledge and their powers of choice increase, he can see that these are ways in which our own native flowering unfolds.
He can articulate, for example, a theory of virtue in which virtue is not something that is imposed from without as if it were the craftsmanship that an agent external to the being is now forcing upon the being,
but rather he can understand virtue as the flowering of our own natural powers.
He can understand, for example, the virtue of prudence or practical wisdom as the way in which our own system is designed to make choices after having deliberated over our possible alternatives,
that our prudence is a matter of seeing something realistically and then learning how to choose in a way that will foster the development of the whole being.
And his contention is that our virtue in this respect, our real excellence at using those powers of understanding and using those powers of choosing, that those virtues are excellence of our natural powers.
Invariably, the powers will begin to be unfolded in the course of life, but whether they really blossom into excellence of human character comes with how we in turn start to fashion them.
Now, as a method, Aristotle's account of nature is very empirical.
One of Aristotle's strong concerns, I think, was to make sure that he had the evidence from observation and reflection upon a sufficiently wide number of examples.
In proposing this theory of nature for his basis of ethics, he is insistent that one has to look at the many groups of people that there are.
Aristotle himself is not a native of Athens but comes from a different part of Greece, and in the course of his travels had wide-ranging account with the various Greek cities.
But beyond that, he has a strong sense of the other parts of the world, and he loved to do research upon the other cultures of his period.
And then, courtesy of his own famous student, Alexander the Great, he received reports from wide-ranging quarters of the world, and he found these common similarities among all the many human cultures that he had the opportunity to know and to study.
That just as when he is categorizing and classifying the various kinds of plants or the other kinds of animals, so too he notes that there are these basic commonalities in human culture.
And it is from noticing these similarities about the way children grow up, about the way language commences, about the ways in which we are tool users,
about the ways in which sexual reproduction occurs, about the ways in which human friendships form, about the ways in which human beings associate themselves into societies,
he is all the more confirmed that there is a common human nature.
That one gets to this nature, not by starting with a platonic idea like his own teacher Plato was, but rather that one forms this idea on the basis of comparison and contrast among the many examples that one sees,
so that one will gradually come to this discovery and to this articulation of what human nature is on the basis of the comparison and contrast of as many samples as he could possibly imagine.
His own theoretical account of nature in terms of the four causes of the three principles of change and then primarily this wonderful notion of potency and act is the result of his long standing study in this.
When he applies it to questions of human nature, he is very articulate about insisting that human nature is rational animal or perhaps political or social animal.
In this sense, he is coming to a firm resolution that the rationality, which is the specific difference within humankind that makes us a different type of animal from any of the other sorts of animals,
even the primates with whom we are so close, can be a scientific description of what it is that is the specific difference common to our species.
Our rationality will be found in adults, especially in the form of language, and in the course of Aristotle's reflection on language in his book The Rhetoric,
he has a tremendous appreciation for the ways in which our language is a contribution that human culture makes us,
that the various languages, say the Greek that he himself spoke or the Egyptian that he had heard about or the various languages that Alexander encountered as he moved farther east in the course of his travels,
that our language in terms of their specific words and specific forms of grammar are very much of human devising.
But the powers of language is something that is native to our own human nature, is something that is essential already to our own human ways of expressing ourselves.
And he gives an account of language which expresses so much about our rationality.
Let me spend a minute or two describing his appreciation for the different elements that go into our language as an example of how he eventually discovers and reveals something about our nature.
Aristotle would insist that our language is made up of words and of judgments and then patterns of reasoning.
And he thinks that each one of these, the words that we use, is a way to express the various concepts that we have.
The ways in which we put these words together into sentences express our powers to synthesize, our powers to unite or to divide.
And then the chains of reasoning that we enter into when we're discoursing at some length, making paragraphs or writing whole essays,
is an example of the reasoning in which we put these particular judgments together.
Now for Aristotle, these are three very different activities of the mind. Let's consider each one in turn.
When we are grasping something in a word, we have already managed to make an abstraction.
When we're, for instance, taking a concept like yellow, and I speak the word yellow, it might suggest various shades of yellow to your mind and various items which you have seen and designated as yellow.
There's nothing about the word itself which suggests the color, but we only come to make those associations in the course of our education.
But we're able to make a kind of abstraction, whether it's that we see a yellow banana, whether we see the kind of yellow that's in a giraffe,
whether we see the sort of yellow that occurs on a traffic light.
We are making progressively an abstraction by having the same name applied to very different instances,
and so that we begin to appreciate that quality distinct from the various forms that it might take.
We do the same thing with our nouns and our name for substances.
So when I'm thinking about, for instance, bananas, and I might see them still as green, or I might see them now as yellow,
and we're able to make the abstraction of the form or substance that is intrinsic to the banana or intrinsic to the giraffe.
In doing so, I am exhibiting something about the power of mind that is crucial to appreciating our nature,
namely this ability to know things in their essence.
It's the ability to know the structures of the shapes which things have.
But my mind does not stop with just this appreciation of structure or shape or any of the properties.
My mind is able to make judgments.
I'm able to unify these concepts, unify these words into sentences which make sense,
sentences which can be true or false,
sentences which can reflect reality better or worse,
and the sentences that I make, not only the affirmative sentences in which I'm asserting that some property belongs to some object,
but even the negative sentences when I deny that a certain property belongs to an object,
that bananas are not blue or that giraffes are not here.
I'm communicating meaning and communicating in an even more sophisticated pattern
than comes about merely when I apprehend or grasp some structure.
In doing so, Aristotle is alert to the fact that the powers of our mind as they grow and develop
are capable of expressing meaning and of discussing the reference,
whether or not the meanings that I propose in meaningful speech do in fact record the reality,
do in fact explain what it is that I'm seeing, understanding, and stating as a part of reality.
The third aspect of our rationality, our powers of linking together these various sentences,
these various judgments, these various statements into long patterns of reasoning,
make it possible for us to go more deeply into the nature of things,
so that we not only get logical snapshots in which we see things as they are right now
and judgments in which I distinguish between the various aspects of that reality,
but the patterns of reasoning in which I can trace the developments of things
and see the causality occurring within things.
For Aristotle, this appreciation for our native powers of rationality
not only show us something about the life of the mind,
but show us something about the way in which we can appreciate and reason to the natures of things,
not looking merely at the way things happen to be with snapshots,
presuming that things are the way they are,
but appreciating these developmental characteristics and reasoning that things require causes,
that when one is trying to understand the development of any natural object,
that one has to look at those powers and potencies that are within
in order to explain the activities and the operations that a certain being has.
Sometimes I like to put this in a kind of slang philosophy.
You can't give what you ain't got.
One wouldn't see the various activities.
One wouldn't see the end coming about so regularly and with so much effectiveness
unless there were a basic power within the nature of the very being.
Hence Aristotle's appreciation of nature is an appreciation that emphasizes
the natural development of powers that are latent in creatures from their very inception,
that even before the powers are manifest in the activities, the powers had to be there,
or else we wouldn't see the development of these powers into activities and structures
and the real flourishing of adult examples of the species in the way that we so regularly do.
Now with that metaphysical background, that appreciation of natures,
we'll turn in the next lecture to how Aristotle uses this in matters of ethics and politics.
applause
music
Lecture 7, Aristotle on Justice and Politics
applause
The contribution that Aristotle makes toward natural law theory
in the course of his moral and political writings is enormously indebted
to that very flexible and dynamic notion of his nature that we were discussing in the last lecture.
Namely, by envisioning human nature as being like all the other natures of things in the world
as having a certain dynamism that is already found in a being at the very beginning of its existence,
a dynamism toward the complete flowering of the full form of human nature,
Aristotle can account for a tremendous variety of the various parts of our moral and political and social lives.
What I'd like to do in this particular lecture is to use some of the concepts that we were discussing
in Aristotle's metaphysics in the last lecture, and use them by considering two of his writings
on the subject of ethics and politics, namely his book, The Nicomachean Ethics,
in which he elaborates personal morality in social context,
and then his work, The Politics, in which he is envisioning the state and the society in which we live
as part of the natural outflowing, as part of the flowering of our human nature.
And we'll be making extensive use of this concept of nature, as well as of the notions of potency and act,
which are crucial to his understanding of absolutely anything.
Now, Aristotle is not strictly speaking a natural law theorist, and I need to make that clear here at the beginning,
because in the retelling of this history, it is a history that itself has tremendous progress at certain points
and then needs to stop and reflect and gather its forces.
Aristotle, I do not think of as strictly speaking a natural law thinker, largely because he does not articulate his ethics in terms of law.
That will require the Stoics, whom we will consider in a subsequent lecture.
But he is very much a natural virtue theorist, and the central concept of his ethics is this notion of virtue articulated in terms of nature.
And let's do a moment to just review his general sense of what virtue is and then start to use the language of nature
in order to see his deeper explanation of the subject.
Aristotle gives, in the Nicomachean Ethics, books two, three, four and five, an account of the various virtues.
And he thinks about human virtue as being a matter of a human habit, which is well reinforced,
a habit which is developed out of practice, but more and more chosen so that we can operate on the basis of this habit
in a way that is easy and efficient and with a certain pleasure.
Now, the various habits that are involved in the course of our moral life are for him primarily four.
There is first a habit of prudence, that is, the ability to see a situation realistically, the way it is,
and an ability to deliberate upon our options and alternatives, so that in a certain reasonable period of time
we come to make a good choice about the matter.
Secondly, there is the topic of courage.
This is the matter of dealing with our emotions, dealing with our feelings, particularly our feeling of bravado in the face of danger
or equally our feeling of fear.
And he thinks of courage as that habit of responding to fear and to excitement in a way that is reasonable,
neither cowardly nor excessively rash.
Third, he thinks of the virtue of temperance, that virtue that is the habit of choosing well with respect to the fulfilling of our desires.
It might be the desire for food, the desire for drink, the desire for company, the desire for sexual intercourse,
any of the things which are bodily desires, we can desire them in the right way so that we will get the fruition of what it is we desire,
but we will not either become a slave to those desires, or on the other hand, we will not become insensitive to those desires.
Finally, he thinks of the virtue of justice, and in the case of justice, it's a matter of getting what is fair,
getting what is due, and learning how both to give and to take with respect to those quantities.
Neither giving away excessively, nor taking excessively, not being inclined to hold everything in the mode of a miser,
nor, on the other hand, being someone who is very superfluous with his money.
Now, in all of these virtues, Aristotle discerns a central and common structure, and it's the structure of excellence,
which he envisions as a kind of a peak, an excellence of response, neither excessive nor deficient.
But he regards these virtues, that is, the habit, the tendency, the reliable disposition, to make the right response in a given situation.
He regards these virtues as a kind of second nature, and when he calls them our second nature, he is obviously contrasting this state of development,
this state of excellence, when we have accustomed ourselves and habituated ourselves to responding in ways that are right for the circumstances.
He calls these second nature in contrast with first nature.
That is, our first nature, much as we were describing it in the previous lecture, our first nature is what we're born with.
Our first nature refers to our bodily structure and to the activities that are typical of us.
So, the animal activities that we have to preserve our lives by taking in nutrition, by receiving the right amount of stimulation and activity,
by taking the right amount of rest and repose, sleep and other kinds of refreshment.
But in addition to these basically animal activities, all the other sorts of higher activities are senses,
so that each of our powers of sensation, our sight and our hearing, our taste, our touch, our smell, our powers of locomotion,
our ability to walk around and to move and to use our bodies.
Each of these natural powers also has a certain natural or primary disposition, the way we find ourselves,
in the way that sometimes people find themselves throwing balls well, or perhaps not so well,
in the need of much training, or people who speak well, or people on the other hand who need some training and speech,
that we find a certain natural disposition, the way we just come,
and then by virtue of careful parental training, by virtue of our own choices,
by virtue of the kind of reinforcement and further discipline that comes with schools, that comes with sports teams,
that comes with habits of association when we're with others and they egg us on to do better,
we can take any one of these natural physical abilities and the tendency that we have to operate and to act in a certain way,
and we can make it better by habituating ourselves, seeking out real excellence
and learning the techniques for improving our natural operation.
Aristotle considers both on the natural level of physical activities and on the natural level of our intellectual activities,
our patterns of knowing, our patterns of understanding, our patterns of knowing how to do things in the way of the arts
and as well as our patterns of knowing how to understand things in the various sciences,
that in any of these spheres we take a certain natural ability and we can hone it to that point of excellence
so that we will someday have second nature or virtue.
Now in so calling it, Aristotle is I think making a very interesting and sophisticated distinction,
namely that these points of excellence, even though they are developments of what we find given in us,
are still natural.
They are natural in the sense that he had been describing things that have a nature or are natural,
namely that whatever the thing starts with, whatever basic structure is found in its genetic code,
whatever structures and operations are typical of it, simply on the basis of the matter and form combination
that forms the basis and the substance of anything, also embedded in that initial nature is final nature,
that is also embedded in that initial organization is an end or a goal,
the goal of being a full mature instance of the species, but also the goal of acting well according to that species.
Hence these excellences that we develop by our repeated exercises so that we develop a habit and a second nature
so that we're really good about the use of our bodies or really good about the use of our minds or really good about the kind of choices we make,
all of these things are natural to us in the sense that they are realizations,
they are ways in which we can actualize the native potencies that we have.
As such there could be a tremendous, almost an infinite number of these possibilities for virtue,
but Aristotle further discerns in the course of his study that there are certain virtues which are extremely important
and that set of four that I mentioned at the beginning of the lecture, prudence, courage, temperance and justice,
are given a sort of privilege standing by him because when he surveys both his own Greek culture and the various other cultures that he comes in contact with,
he can see that these are points of excellence, that these are aspects of human living and living well
that will be necessary for any kind of living in society, for any sort of social living.
Consider each of them in turn and how they contribute for the natural flourishing,
for the natural fulfillment of what it is that the possibilities for human nature originally entail.
In the case of prudence, it's a matter of seeing a situation realistically.
Whether we've ever developed the habit of prudence, we do spend so much of our time trying to figure out what the situation is,
but we've got a real habit there, a real virtuous habit,
if we are able to make the distinctions between what appears to be friendliness but is really just flattery
and what is real friendliness, a person who's really willing to look out for our good or our willing to look out for their good
and that prudential discernment between mere appearance and the genuine stuff is a crucial virtue to have if one is to succeed.
Likewise, in the case of courage, there are people who are very spontaneously and natively rash, they're bold, they're ready to face any danger.
But real courage, as we know, sometimes requires hanging back and waiting until the appropriate moment.
It's not simply a boldness in the face of any danger, but it's a prudent boldness,
a boldness that responds in the right way at the right time under the circumstances as they are.
Similarly, in the case of temperance, we have to know much about our own bodies and what pleasures we're attracted to
and how we deal with pleasures as they come, if it be the pleasure of drink, for instance,
that we have to know how much it is that we can use in order to achieve the pleasure of drink
and what would be excessive, what will feel real good, but in fact will lead us to lose consciousness
and to lose control and to be in some way or other intemperate and out of control
so that we're unable to make other good choices.
And of course, in the sphere of justice, in dealing with all the goods and services
and the various kinds of exchanges that we make with one another in the course of living together in society,
justice will be that habit of seeking excellence at giving and taking, absolutely indispensable for social living.
Justice will be a matter of the habit of doing this rightly,
neither giving away everything we have, appearing generous, but now impoverishing ourselves,
and the mean or the point of excellence between that, and on the other hand being too greedy,
being too inclined to take everything for ourselves, finding ways to manipulate the situation,
but rather real justice will be this excellence at finding what is proper and fair and what is truly due for the other.
In Aristotle's account of all of this, we see the virtues in each of these cases,
prudence, courage, temperance, and justice as being real contributory factors,
really important constituents of what it is that makes for human flourishing.
Now, in the effort to identify these, Aristotle, in the Nicomachean Ethics, very early on,
associates each of these with nature and with natural function.
This is a part of his argument that is extremely important to natural law theory,
and so I'd like to spend a little time on it before I move on to the rest of the consideration of his political theory.
It is basically this. He starts with the same kind of example that he started with
when in the last lecture we were considering his analysis of the four causes.
When we were doing that, we used an artificial example first, a bronze sculpture,
and we were suggesting that in that artificial example, we had bronze, which got put into a certain form,
buy a sculptor from the outside for an end that was in the sculptor's mind.
Likewise here, he starts with an artificial example, a tool.
You might take, for instance, a hammer, or you could take an instrument like a piano,
and he notes that tools are designed by their maker to have a certain goal,
to do a certain thing well, that hammers are designed for pounding nails,
that pianos are designed for playing beautiful music.
They can be used for other purposes.
I could use hammers for trying to put screws into walls,
but hammers won't do well with that because they don't take advantage of what is native to the design of a screw.
In the course of analyzing artificial objects and noticing the particular function
for which the structure is so well designed, it's easy to see how this works with artificial objects.
But then he starts his review of natural objects, and he takes note of plants, for instance,
and plants are designed for the continuity of the species.
All the seeds that any plant produces are there for the sake of the continuity of that plant species,
and the other things that take place in a plant, it's growing, it's spreading out its leaves,
it's phototropism turning a bit toward the sun, it's roots that ranch out into the soil
in order to get moisture or to get minerals.
Everything seems to be designed and put together so that the seeds will develop
and ensure the continuity of the plant species.
The plants don't particularly take care of their offspring,
but everything about their own structure is designed for this natural end.
Now, when we move the situation, move the analysis up to the next level,
and look at animals, we see that all animal species have a same basic program.
They too are designed for the continuity of their species,
and Aristotle notes that animal species responding to the challenges of their environment
can do so well because of their design.
If the environment overwhelms them, they will not survive,
but they're designed to meet the normal challenges of the environment.
And yet look at the added factor, all the taking in of nutrition,
all the activities and the growth, all of the various operations that they perform
are designed not only for the continuity of the species in the sense of the generation of offspring,
but increasingly with more and more complicated animal species.
The offspring need not only to be produced, but they need to be reared.
There needs to be a certain training.
Even little birds in the nest cannot fly right at the beginning,
but need good tender loving care until eventually they're pushed out of their nest on their own
to begin flying, and so too with other species.
When Aristotle turns to the human species, he cannot help but notice the continuity
as well as the difference, namely a strong sense that the human species is designed
so that there will be a continuity of the species, that human procreation will develop offspring,
and like the rest of the animals, these offspring will need care.
In fact, need considerably more care than normal animal species need.
And yet everything is designed about them, not only to generate the offspring,
not only to provide for their initial rearing,
but all the patterns of love and affection and of social bonds that are within us
reinforce the tenderness and the good feeling, at least in the normal case,
that will generate offspring and will see them reared and see them educated,
because individuals of our human species need not only the kind of rearing
and the kind of education and the kind of formation that is example,
but also the kind of education and the kind of formation that is cultural,
the providing through language of a sense of our tradition and of our history,
a sense of what our family is and a sense of what our city is
and a sense of what our state or nation might be,
that all of these things take place precisely by the proper use of the function,
the abilities, the structures that are proper to us.
Now in Aristotle's analysis, this occurs in Book 1, Chapter 7 of the Nicomachean Ethics,
what that proper function of humankind by its nature is, is rationality.
Namely, our powers of knowing, as I described them in this last lecture,
and our powers of choosing, especially as I was speaking of them in the beginning part of this lecture,
talking about those various kinds of virtues.
Our rationality for Aristotle and anyone in the Aristotelian tradition
always has to be understood in terms of knowing and choosing,
and it's a matter of being a proper function, proper in the sense of distinctive of the human species,
that is, it's a greater power, a more developed power, in fact a different kind of power
than present anywhere else in the animal kingdom.
It's a power that is proper to our kind, our rationality.
What we can know so far exceeds the intelligence of even the most intelligent of animals,
and our ability to choose so far exceeds any spontaneity, any freedom of movement that they exhibit.
Aristotle contends that this concentration on the power of rationality as our proper function
shows us the basic dimensions, the basic outlines of our ethics and politics,
namely that our own life as individuals and our communal life as political organizations,
as societies, as states, all needs to be designed in order to make good use of these natural powers
and to assist others in their use.
Hence Aristotle's strong concentration on virtue.
We have these powers natively, invariably we will use them and start to develop them in some way,
but if we really want to flourish as individuals and if we want our community to flourish,
this is the place where we must spend our time in developing the habits
and engaged in deliberate human training.
Now it is two books that I mentioned, the Nicomachean Ethics and the Politics.
Aristotle takes this natural base and uses it as the foundation for developing a morality.
In his account of individual ethics in the Nicomachean Ethics,
one has a long section on the names of these virtues,
the descriptions that I gave them as accounts of what second nature in its very best sense will be
and they culminate in the virtue of justice.
The virtue of justice as he understands the matter is always rooted in natural justice,
that is rooted in our own sense of what is fair and what is due.
This can be encoded in legal justice and so you find within the fifth book of the Nicomachean Ethics
some account of law, but the kind of law that he is thinking of is largely the law of human devising,
the kind of laws that go into the constitution of any of the Greek city-states,
and then in addition to the constitutions that they make,
the various forms of legislation that there are various councils and elected bodies,
that there are kings and that there are various rulers devised for the sake of social order.
He is not a natural law thinker in any explicit sense,
he will wait for the Stoics and for subsequent Aristotelians,
but he does articulate a notion of a natural justice that has to stand behind any form of law
and in this respect he makes a tremendous contribution toward what is eventually going to be natural law theory.
By natural justice, invariably he means this sense of what is due or what is fair
and it is his great hope, it's a hope that I think he shares with Plato and with Socrates
and in sharing it with them he stands in considerable opposition to the Sophists
who were so skeptical about the matter.
It is his fond hope and his reasoned conviction that most communities do manage to do this well
and so Aristotle has a strong respect for the law that given communities have devised,
but he always tempers that respect with a sense that laws as they are made by human beings
need to reflect real justice, this sense of real fairness.
Sometimes in the course of the history of natural law one will find strong relativist objections,
objections such as the Sophists made, but I find that even in the present day
when one finds a relativist in theory there are very, very few relativists in practice.
I'd like to tease with my students that some of them take a strongly relativist position
when they are trying to argue for a position in ethics, but somehow when their grading comes
they don't like the grading to be relativist, they want to get exactly what was, it was fair and it was due.
I think that sort of insight that even when one doesn't want to accept that there is such a thing as a natural justice,
that which is really true and really fair and really due, even when one doesn't want to accept that in theory
we have a spontaneous natural inclination to want to be treated fairly
and it's that insight that Aristotle records when he's arguing in favor of natural justice
as the standard by which one tests the laws that get made and tries to see how each of them embodies
this sense of fairness and justice in practice.
At the same time there is a good reminder and a healthy reminder that we find for natural law in general
when we look at the texts of Aristotle.
Just as we noted early on in this lecture series, the articulation of natural law theory is always done in the midst of a culture.
It's always done in the midst of assumptions of a social nature and often we can be blind to some of the limitations
that our culture exhibits.
So too with Aristotle, that even though he has such a strong sense of natural justice,
such a strong sense that there is an ideal of fairness and equality and rightness that must stand behind any law,
Aristotle doesn't question an existence of slaves in his society,
that he is, in fact, he even tends to justify the notion of slaves on the basis of nature,
suggesting that our analysis of the various kinds of human beings that we meet in the course of life,
it doesn't, for him, suggest that everyone's equal.
That's going to be a theory that we'll see in the next lecture when we meet the Stoics,
and we'll see that developed in much greater measure later on in this course.
But for Aristotle, his observation of humankind suggested to him a natural inequality.
That is, there were some people who were really capable of virtue in the highest degree,
others who were capable of independent living,
and a large group that he thought were not capable even of independent living.
Hence, he proposes, not only in the ethics, but especially at some length in the politics,
he even proposes that there are such things as natural slaves.
It's a bit embarrassing to some later Aristotelians who have an egalitarian presumption that they bring to the text.
I'm not going to try to defend him on that, but I would at least like to explain what it is that he's maintaining there,
because it's a question that is often asked of Aristotle and his ethics and his politics.
Namely, that his approach to the matter does not assume that everyone's, for example, a child of God.
He doesn't presume that there's a basic equality, but rather, using the best that he can do by way of reflection upon what he's observed,
he would argue that there is a natural inequality, and hence that natural inequality has to be accepted,
has to be articulated, has to be granted if that's the way things are.
But he argues that this is not for the sake of domination, that this is not for the sake of power.
He urges that this is actually for the good of those individuals who are inferior.
His idea here seems to be that a person who cannot control himself, a person who is given over to pleasures,
a person who cannot make a proven judgment about how he should conduct himself so as to get anywhere in the world,
or a person who cannot even get through the day because he's constantly distracted, because he is unable to make good decisions.
Aristotle thinks that that person ought to be under the control of someone who can look out for them.
It's a very paternalist attitude in a way, but it's not an unkindly paternalism.
It's a sense, I think, that as near as he could tell, some people are incapable of the kind of rational activity at even a minimal level,
let alone activity at the level of virtue.
Hence, in his judgment, the best social institution that could be imagined for this is an institution of natural slavery.
I find myself in considerable disagreement with that, and I think that there's a very far different ways of handling
people who are unable to make such good decisions for themselves without resorting to slavery.
But this is what he says and why he says it.
The balance of the politics is not about that, however.
Right from the very beginning of the politics, book 1, chapter 10, one sees Aristotle coming as close as he ever does in his texts to a notion of natural law.
At one point, for instance, chapter 13 of that first book, he talks about a common law according to nature that actually exists and that can be known by everyone.
And he makes reference to that very text in Sophocles' Antigone, with which I began this lecture series.
He makes no particular use in the politics of the notion of a higher law to criticize normal human legislation, but he does give us the tools for doing that,
and many a natural law thinker will return to this early part of the politics for some justification for the practice of judicial review.
Rather, what he insists upon and makes his strongest contribution to the theory of natural law is by his insistence on a teleological ordering for all of our considerations of ethics and politics.
To call it a teleological ordering is to emphasize that notion of final causality that I was discussing at some length in the last lecture.
Namely, his sense that there is a final cause already embedded in the nature of any given individual, and likewise he thinks that there is a final cause embedded in the state.
Here, too, we have a difference from our modern notions that needs careful consideration.
The ancients tended to think of individual human beings as parts of a social whole, and Aristotle is strong in that attitude.
Hence, the goals of individuals are subsidiary to the goals of a state, and for Aristotle, as for Plato, the goals that we have in terms of virtuous activity,
manifesting all of our powers, bringing them to the peak of excellence by developing steady habits, reliable dispositions so that we'll be prudent and courageous and temperate and just.
All of those things, nice as they are, important as they are for individual flourishing, for him are less important than the good of the state.
Because the good of the state will ensure the good of its various citizens will make possible a life in which they flourish, but that it has certain greater demands.
It has certain greater importance than any individual does.
For this reason, Aristotle articulates that notion, which has been frequent in the rest of the history of ethics, that individuals must be willing to sacrifice themselves for their states,
working for the common defense and working for the common good, because the state itself is conceived on the model of an organism.
Just as our organism, our bodily integrity is important, so, too, he thinks of cities and of states as being modeled on that organic analogy, modeled on that organic basis.
Here you see a considerable difference with much of later political tradition.
By the time we get to say to John Locke in a later lecture, we'll see that his model of the human being is definitely the model of the individual and that even the state has to be created by individuals for the sake of the individual good.
Or, in the balance of Christian history, one will see that tremendous devotion and importance according to the notion of person, and that person has an inestimable dignity,
a human dignity that is unable ever to be violated so long as we are conducting ourselves morally.
There will be a greater sense of the importance of the individual person later in history.
With Aristotle, I think we see, rather, the individual exists for the sake of society, states have a nature like persons do,
and that both politics and ethics should be handled on this model of the flourishing of nature, letting its end come to free and complete fruition.
In the next hour, in the next lecture, we'll be considering the Stoics and their contribution to natural law.
Lecture 8 The Stoic Idea of Natural Law
In his work The Republic, the Roman statesman Cicero provides the first really thorough going treatise on natural law as such,
where the term is used and where we have both the components of a naturally based system of ethics and a sense that this is to be handled in terms of the category of law.
But much of Cicero's work is depended upon various Greek Stoics, and so I'd like to devote this lecture to some of that Stoicism,
which are articulated ideas which are crucial for Cicero, and then to Cicero himself and some of his ideas.
The Stoics are both Greek and Roman, and they have some very interesting ideas, and then when we turn to Cicero toward the end of this lecture,
we'll consider three of his works in which the idea comes out so clearly.
The Stoics are a movement that begins in Greece after the time of Plato and Aristotle.
We could date it perhaps to the philosopher Zeno around the year 300, and Zeno and his followers championed a notion of self-reliance,
which was very, very strong, and in fact the very notion of Stoicism as present today, I think, emphasizes that self-reliance,
that grittiness that we have and a willingness to face pain and face difficulty with a stiff upper lip.
But it's a characterization in the modern period which certainly has its justification from the way the ancient Stoics conceived the proper form of life.
In addition to that general approach to life, what I'm interested in talking about with you today is their strong sense of right reason and right reasoning according to nature.
For this is the contribution they make to natural law theory.
The Stoics generally tend to be materialists, that is, they're very, very suspicious of any of these immaterial notions such as Plato had championed with his notion of the soul,
and yet they are extremely high-minded and have no difficulty talking about high-minded ideals like justice and even including God in their system.
Zeno, for instance, at one point, urges that right reason is something which he says pervades all things and is identical with Zeus,
the Lord and ruler of everything that exists.
Now, in articulating that notion of right reason that is identical, equivalent to Zeus, he is trying to bring together that long Greek tradition of thinking about God as the origin and source of the universe
with the long traditions in Greece of thinking about human culture and arranging for a politics which will promote the virtues and the good living possible in rightly ordered culture.
Notice, even in that sentence that I just quoted, that he has got there a connection between two ideas which are extremely important in the whole history of natural law.
The first idea is the idea of right reason.
It's a sense that reason can operate rightly or wrongly.
Reason will operate rightly when it's discerning the truth about things and then when it's figuring out how matters that are open to our choice can be selected well so that we will achieve a kind of harmony.
It's not just a matter of purely instrumental reasoning.
It's not just a matter of figuring out how to make out of everything else a tool to get to our end, but a sense of right reasoning,
a sense of conforming ourselves to a basic pattern and to a goal that is built within us.
And he identifies this as equivalent to the notion of Zeus, ruling over as Lord and ruler, ruling over everything that exists.
He is not one much for mythology, but rather he takes this name of Zeus to be the very incarnation of what justice is.
We see this continue in subsequent Stoics.
We could mention for instance, Crispus, who lives in the later in the third century BC, to quote from Crispus,
for all beings which are social by nature, the natural law directs what must be done and forbids what must not be done.
Now here too we see not only the usage of the language of natural law, but we see that strong sense of our human association with various kinds of animals.
Not all animals are gregarious, not all animals are social, but some animals are.
And Crispus, in line with Zeno before him, thought of our natural law as something that we share with lots of animals,
that animals which are naturally social, animals which live in herds, animals which stand together for common purposes,
will have a natural law directing them. If they are going to cooperate on the hunt, if they are going to cooperate living peacefully together,
there must be something within them that inclines them to this harmonious way of life.
And so he suggests that while for most animals it's going to be a matter of a spontaneous inclination, a natural directedness,
for us it's going to be a matter of right reasoning about this, following out our inclinations toward living together,
feeling a friendship with one another, feeling inclined to one another,
but figuring out how to do this so as to promote the harmony in matters of choice.
This raises for the Stoics the question about whether civic orders should be promoted,
or whether one should be those staunchly defended personal Stoics, that sense of self-reliance above all.
And while the Stoics cultivate self-reliance, they are also extremely strong in urging civic devotion.
Penetrius, a later Stoic, for instance, argues that our social institutions are quite thoroughly natural,
and that they are never based on merely self-interest, but always have to be concerned with the common good.
And he takes up many of Aristotle's argument for natural justice, claiming, and here we see it,
originating in the Stoics in a way that we did not see it originating in Aristotle,
the claim that all human beings possess the same basic capacity to participate with this reasoning,
and a fundamental equality and universal kinship among all human beings.
To sum up then, the Stoics find themselves strongly urging self-reliance, this is the key to virtue,
but strongly seeing self-reliance as a suitable subject for promoting the common good,
that if everyone is self-reliant, and in particular, if the whole society is devised in such a way as to promote that self-reliance,
there can be a common happiness, there can be a real harmony in the human community, like there is a harmony in nature.
The second point of emphasis with the Stoics is that they connect this idea of moral obligation, this sense of right reasoning, with God.
And here too, it's worthwhile for us to review for a minute what the Stoics have contributed to this discussion.
As I was trying to paint the story of the understanding of God, that the various Presocratics, Socrates, and Plato had suggested,
increasingly it was an abstract vision of God, that Thales, and Anximonies, and Eximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides,
all of the Presocratics, tried to get away from those mythological gods of the ancient world,
charming gods and goddesses who were often acting in ways that we humans would consider naughty.
In the course of seeking a first principle, a philosophical explanation, what they tended to do was to treat that first principle as a deity,
to treat it as the source and origin for all of physical nature, for all of organic nature, for all of humankind,
and yet they made it increasingly impersonal, precisely in order to get away from the vagaries of human willfulness,
because those charming gods and goddesses of Greek mythology were so willful and sometimes so extremely jealous
and doing things which seemed to offend against morality, this strong sense of natural morality led the early Greek thinkers
to a notion that the first principle, the deity, and they did recognize a deity, had to be an impersonal deity.
One sees this in Plato when we were considering the Republic.
The chief idea is the idea of the good, and there are various other perfect forms like equality,
or the perfect form of human nature, or the form of beauty, and all of these forms and these ideas stand superior to the God
who is busy creating the world, that the God has to be a good, reliable craftsman, but he's not truly in charge.
Aristotle too is a religious man and has a notion of God, but his God is the God who is pure mind, mind thinking itself,
and Aristotle's God is not a creator devising plans for the world.
Aristotle's God thinks only of himself.
Nothing else is quite worthy, but everything else is moved by a kind of attraction to the God.
They are, I think, perplexed by willfulness, and to a certain degree their theories are influenced by this notion
that God has to be so perfect that we can't have God in any way willful or in any way subjective,
and that our morality has to respect that.
Our morality has to concern itself with nature, with that which we do not create, control, or alter,
but that which we can discover as an eternal essence, as an unchanging, immutable structure or form.
What we see in the Stoics is a different picture.
We are now, again, seeing the language of God, and God's spoken up by a personal name, Zeus,
in a way that Plato and Aristotle never did, and it is this move back to a personal God that is within the Stoics system
that does two things to their ethics.
First thing it does to the ethics is now to let ethics be considered in terms of law rather than in terms of purely virtue.
The Stoics still have virtues, and they got lots of them, but now there is another category,
and law can be an all-embracing category for considering ethics in a way that it never quite amounted to be the right category in Plato or Aristotle.
The Stoics do that.
Secondly, the Stoics open up this dimension of personality in a way that we do not, frankly, see it opened up with Plato or Aristotle,
that even though they are preparing the way by emphasizing nature, their sense is that politics is more important than ethics,
and that individual morality is something that is in service of political morality,
that the individual good must always yield to the higher common good.
Granted that important theme, what the Stoics managed to bring out by focusing in on individual self-reliance,
and by focusing on this role of God in ethics, is that there is opening away for the development that will be very fruitful in the course of natural law history,
the importance of person that will come when we see the development of that very notion of person in Christian culture,
and a role for God as law giver which Christians will borrow heavily from the Stoics when they have a chance to read and consider their matter.
But that's jumping ahead of the story a little bit.
We were in reviewing the history of these Stoics for the sake of the contribution they make to Cicero,
because Cicero, that Roman statesman of the first century, uses these Stoic ideas for his own purposes in Roman culture.
Cicero was a statesman who was also a philosopher, and both during the time of his greatest activity,
as well as on those periods of his life when he was in more philosophical retreat,
he liked nothing better than to try to put the ideas about the common good, about the political order, into thoroughgoing philosophical form.
We owe tremendous depth to Cicero for the communication of Greek ideas into the Latin-speaking world.
In particular, I'd like to speak about three of Cicero's works.
The first is his book, De Repubblica, translated as the Republic, or sometimes as On the Commonwealth, from around 54 to 51 B.C.
In this book, we see him very directly borrowing from the Stoics on the connection between law and reason that will be central to natural law theory.
For example, in Book 3, Chapter 22, he says,
It is a universal application, unchanging and everlasting.
It is wrong to abrogate this law, and it cannot be annulled.
There is one law, eternal and unchangeable, binding at all times upon all peoples.
And there will be, as it were, one common master and ruler of men, God, who is the author of this law and its interpreter and sponsor.
Now, this passage of Cicero enunciates what will be main themes for natural law theory in the course of the rest of its history.
This association between nature and right reason, we saw him picking that up from the Stoics with this concentration on reason,
not merely as instrumental, not merely as figuring out how to get where we want to go, but reason as discerning, reason as extremely receptive,
reason as trying to be open so as to understand the truth about our natures and how those natures ought to develop.
But secondly, we see Cicero in this passage talking about reason as linked to law,
that what reason must especially discern, that what reason must especially appreciate and be open to,
is a moral obligation that is of divine origin.
If anything, I think we see something that goes back to, say, the insight of antiquity in the play by Sophocles,
where she has a sense that there is a God who is behind all this, that there is a God who has devised all these things,
set them up, and that what we must do is to appreciate this divine law if we intend to have personal harmony and political harmony.
But likewise, in that same passage that I just read, we also hear some of the other themes that natural law theory will make
in its claims about the nature of this moral law. It says, it is wrong ever to abrogate it, and it cannot be annulled.
A sense that even when we do devise situations that are otherwise, the law will come back to haunt us,
that there will be a kind of a natural law sanction. One sees this, for instance, in something like drug abuse in the modern day,
namely that one can override what is really and truly good for our bodies,
but there will be effects and a kind of a natural sanction or punishment, that no matter how we may try by our wills to make it otherwise,
there is invariably something that is a law that we must respect and that we cannot but help but experience if we should violate it.
He also says, in the middle of the passage, there is one law, eternal and unchangeable, binding at all times upon all peoples.
This is that tremendous stoic appreciation for the universal fraternity of all human beings, a fundamental equality among them all because of their common nature,
and it's a strong sense that's a kind of a corrective to that Aristotelian sense of natural hierarchy in which there can even be natural slaves.
Curiously, though, there is a kind of a blindness in Cicero, for even though he has such strong statements about universal equality,
he also tolerates slaves. It takes an enormous effort of the mind, I think, to see the full implications of some of the principles that they're able to enunciate so clearly.
Although Cicero does not articulate the details of the natural law in the course of his book, The Republic,
he does mention a few of them that are worth noting here for the influence that they will have in subsequent generations of natural law thinkers.
He makes it clear in that third book that there are various duties of natural justice, that we must respect the lives and the property of others,
and that we have obligations to contribute to society.
Now, I mentioned in particular the respecting the lives and the properties of others,
and I do so because he sees this as an insight about the nature of law and the nature of morality, which stands as a corrective to any theory of human nature,
which puts human nature largely in terms of power.
When one is asking as Callicles or as Thrasymachus did in the course of our review of Plato, aren't some people just naturally stronger?
And if they're naturally stronger or naturally more clever, well, why shouldn't they have rule over those who are naturally weaker?
Cicero's entire and complete conviction is that the analysis of our nature will give a corrective to this incentive to use stronger power merely at our whim or merely at our will,
and that there is an obligation on all part to respect the lives and property of others.
Later on in the history of our review of natural law thinking and the history of ethics, we'll see this articulated as the notion of right.
We say, for instance, from our American Declaration of Independence, that we have the right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness,
or in the language of John Locke, from which so much of the declaration is borrowed, a right to life, liberty, and property.
That language of rights is of much later derivation.
We do not find these ancient thinkers talking in terms of rights.
What we find them talking is in terms of duties, that is, we have various obligations because of nature.
Now, rights and duties are always correlative.
It's more a matter of whether the given author in question, at a given period in history, finds a term, finds a way to express this correlation.
In these ancient figures, the emphasis is far more on duty, and the very word right that is sometimes used, yes,
it's sort of the basis of our terminology about jurisdiction or jurisprudence.
That initial phrase comes from a notion of right in antiquity, which Cicero is strong on, but it's more that which it is right or correct for us to do.
And the very notion of law in antiquity can be spoken about in terms of the term jus,
that is, this term which is the basis of jurisprudence, or in the terms of lex, which is the origin of our word legislation, legislature.
Both of those terms suggest a law, whether it's a law we create, as in the word lex,
or a law in which we are focusing on what is already right, and that's when we're speaking of jus, in the sense of a jurist or jurisprudence.
Cicero is very, very strong on seeing our obligations, seeing our duties to respect the lives and properties of others and to contribute to society,
and his strong sense of our duties in this respect will be enormously important for later articulations of rights in the sense that we use the word in modern day.
Also in Book 3 of his book, The Republic, we see in Chapter 23 references to just and unjust war, and that's something which I think is very rare in antiquity.
There was a sense that war was something that was hateful, something that we had to do, but war I think tended to be envisioned largely in terms of power.
But with Cicero, war too is here being brought under moral circumspection.
He says in Chapter 23 that there is a difference between just and unjust war, and in response to the charge that states are simply the result of force and conquest,
sort of a real politic in the ancient world, Cicero argues that Rome has been much more careful,
that Rome has waged wars only to repel invaders or to restore justice.
Now that may be overlooking a few of the wars that Rome actually conducted, but at least in theory, Cicero is articulating a standard which he as a statesman felt the need to try to apply.
And he insists that for war to be justified, it has to be formally declared, and that it may never be waged until an explicit demand has been issued
for the redress of the grievances experienced.
Unless that formal demand has been made and rejected, one may not go to war.
This I think may be Cicero the statesman trying to shape Roman policy, trying to inculcate a pattern of high virtue in Rome's political and military decisions,
but he articulates it on the basis of this same approach to natural justice which he borrows from the Stoics under the heading of natural law.
A second book by Cicero, at which we should look for a few minutes, is his book Deofekies, translated On Moral Duties, which he writes about the year 44 BC.
Here the focus is on personal ethics to a much greater degree, and Cicero is busy stressing the duties that we have to one another by virtue of being human and being social in our humanity,
by invariably needing to live in one or another form of society.
His stress throughout this book, Deofekies, is on the fact that we may not conduct our lives purely on the basis of self-interest,
but always must be looking out for the other, for the other is another self.
In book 3 of Deofekies, he says at chapter 5, the following,
To take away wrongfully from another, and for one man to advance his own interest by the disadvantage of another man,
is more contrary to nature than death, than poverty, than pain, than any other evil.
Now, once he's in a sentence like that, certainly some rhetorical appeal to a sense of nobility and to a sense of honor,
I would urge us to consider it, especially in light of the Stoicism to which Cicero was so deeply devoted and to which he was so deeply indebted.
The Stoics that Cicero so much loved had a strong sense of the need to make a very rigorous distinction between what we can control and what we cannot.
They would urge us to make a strong dividing line, and to put on one side of that line anything that really is in our control.
And on the other side of that line, anything that is outside of our control.
When you start to make that distinction and that division, well, what is truly outside of our control?
Well, the economy is outside of our control. We can have certain influence upon it by the decisions we make, but a lot of it's outside of our control.
Our health is ultimately outside of our control, maybe not immediately, for we're able to have a good diet and do good exercise, be restrained and temperate in our intake.
But nonetheless, diseases can come and afflictions can come, and certainly what we've received by genetic inheritance is outside of our control.
How about the honor that we have?
Well, yes, there's a little bit that's in our control if we act honorably. We would expect to be treated honorably.
And yet I think we all know that even when we have acted most honorably, it is quite possible for people, even when they've acted honorably, to be sabotaged, for calamities to be asserted, and for things to be said, the damage reputation, which it is extremely hard to defend oneself against.
For all these things, Cicero urges in this book, Deofikis, he urges that we have that stoic self-reliance and that with anything that's on the side of being outside of our control, what we have to do is cultivate a kind of indifference.
We can't let ourselves be determined by what other people think or by anything that we cannot thoroughly and completely control.
Instead, what we must do is to take note of what's inside our control and focus on that because only there are we the true masters and do we have that sort of self-mastery that is so typically associated with virtue.
But what is it that ultimately is in our control perfectly?
And he, like the other stoics, would insist the only thing that is perfectly in our control is our choices, is our decisions about how we act and about how we feel, that we can choose to repress a feeling, we can choose to transcend a feeling, that we can choose to act or not to act.
We can choose to act honorably even if others will mistreat us for that. We can choose to act honorably even in situations that are extremely dangerous or overwhelming.
Here in this book, he urges that strong stoic sense of self-control, and if I may read the passage again, will see his sense of why this is the highest thing our nature is capable of.
He says, to take away wrongfully from another and for one man to advance his own interest by the disadvantage of another man, he says, is more contrary to nature than death, poverty, pain, or any other evil.
Now, to say that and to mean it, requires that stoic self-reliance, namely that the most noble part of ourselves is that which is within our own self-control.
And to do that and to cultivate honor, he thinks, is natural, is fulfilling the highest part of our nature, where to act dishonorably, what to act against that which is most important to us because that which is most human in us.
Cicero, of course, in his focus on self-reliance, is still the statesman.
And in the course of this same book on duties, he has enormous praise for public service and enormous praise for political participation.
I personally suspect that the Roman Empire, which was just at this point beginning to take shape at the end of the Roman Republic, Cicero lived in the days of the Republic,
the Roman Empire was capable of such great civic things, was capable of achievements around the world precisely because so many of Roman statesmen, Roman administrators, and Roman bureaucrats shared some of Cicero's ideas,
this sense of doing what is good, what is for the common good, even if there will be some personal disadvantage, some personal sacrifice that is required,
even if it will take me away from beloved Rome and out into the provinces for years, I can find ways that will be truly honorable and will build up the human community and will make it possible for others also to rise to the best of their nature.
Later on, when Augustine is writing his own book, The City of God, and commenting upon Cicero, he has nothing but praise for Cicero, even though he thinks that there is something to matter with the Ciceronian Republic,
namely that it doesn't seem designed to give praise and honor to the true God.
Augustine nonetheless finds in Cicero something which is so high-minded and so virtuous, precisely because of this concentration upon that which is best in human nature and not best in terms of mere self-interest,
but best in terms of the common good, focusing on patterns of institutional living which will provide others that same opportunity for real integrity.
In a third work by Cicero, the book called De Legibus, or On the Laws, which comes from 43 BC, shortly before Cicero's death, one finds Cicero articulating another important stoic notion that I called attention to at the beginning of this lecture,
namely the moral equality of all human beings on the basis of their common nature. This is a fundamental insight which natural law theories will never depart from,
and while we have earlier anticipations of it, with Cicero we have a very clear and explicit teaching.
And yet I notice, cannot help but notice, that cultural blindness can still remain for just several chapters later after he has enunciated this wonderful phrase about the common moral equality of all on the basis of their nature,
Cicero lapses into a defense of the institution of slavery. One finds it very, very hard to understand, except that sometimes we do not see the implications of the principles that we have enunciated.
And yet, earlier on in his book, he gave one of those principles that I am so delighted and want to share with you.
Book 1, Chapter 10. No single being is so like another as all of us are to one another. Reason, which alone raises us above the level of the beasts, is certainly common to us all,
and though varying in what it learns, at least in the capacity to learn, it is invariable. This is Cicero I think at his best, not when he is justifying the institution of slavery, but when he is trying to think about that common human nature.
As our lectures proceed from here, I'm going to be making a diversion in the next two lectures to another tradition that is important, namely to the biblical tradition in which we start thinking in terms of creator and of creatures and how this plays out for morality.
And then I'll consider early Christian teaching in the period that is called the patristic period. But in the lecture after that, I will return to these stoic ideas and the Ciceroanian ideas as they enter into the realm of law and as we have the grand synthesis beginning to emerge.
The tradition of nature from classical antiquity, the tradition of creature from biblical history, focused in now on this notion of natural law as devised by a creator of our natures in the way that the God known to Judaism and Christianity can serve as this creator of our natures and founder of natural law.
Lecture 9 Biblical Views of Nature and Law
Another important channel of thought that has been extremely influential in the history of natural law thinking comes from the Jewish and Christian scriptures. Here we depart from the world of Rome and Greece and move to the Near East, to the realm of Palestine.
And we consider in particular a religious tradition which is very strong on the notion of revelation, the revelation that was made by God to the Jewish people over centuries and then the special revelation that comes with Christ.
In both of these cases, Christian and Jewish scriptures, we will see themes that are of enormous importance for the doctrine itself of these religions as well as for the history of natural law thinking.
And it strikes me as having just the opposite direction to it that we saw in the Greek and Roman thinking that we have been examining, where for Greek and Roman thought nature was a category first and only slowly and gradually did we start thinking of morality in terms of law.
In the Biblical perspective, the trajectory is just the opposite, namely that law is a much more important category for much of the history of revelation and that nature is not much of a category at all until nearly the end of that period of revelation.
So we'll be going in just the opposite direction. What I'd like to do in this lecture is first to consider the Jewish scriptures, the Old Testament, and especially to consider one aspect of them, namely the importance of law as a Biblical category.
And then after we finish there, I'd like to look at something from what is sometimes known as the inter-testamental period, and particularly from the wisdom literature tradition, making a philosophical contribution to this.
And then thirdly, we'd like to turn to New Testament, and again, impossible to do all of that in but one lecture, but to turn to the writing of St. Paul on the Romans as being a place where this natural law theme has special prominence.
First then, the notion of law as a Biblical category. If one looks over the vast number of books that constitute the Jewish scriptures, one finds as a central idea the notion of law. It occurs in various forms.
For instance, there's the notion of bereave or covenant, and I think in many ways this is the central concept of Biblical revelation. The bereave or covenant refers to an arrangement that is more solemn than any human contract.
It is a very consecrated relation in which God stands toward the chosen people, the people of Israel, by a covenant or very solemn form of agreement.
The Bible records a series of these solemn covenants as taking place. One looks back at Genesis, for instance, and finds a very formal relation between God and Adam at the time of the creation of the world.
And even after the removal of Adam and Eve from the garden, Adam is still the steward of all creation and is envisioned as commissioned by God with a kind of stewardship over all creation.
We see a second form of this covenant at the time of Noah after the flood, that even though the entire world has been destroyed because of the vast amounts of evil, a new covenant is established with Noah.
And in this new covenant, the just and the unjust will live together as the scriptures say God will reign upon the just and the unjust alike.
And only later on will God sort out the problems of injustice and justice, but the covenant has been established and Noah knows what he and his successors are supposed to do.
Thirdly, there is a covenant that is mentioned with Abraham. If we try to date this historically, it seems to come from around 1850 B.C.
When God takes Abraham from the city of Ur in the Caldees, the area of land that we nowadays associate with southern Iraq, and chooses Abraham to be the father of this people to make his great trip up the rivers, across the Fertile Crescent,
and then down into the Promised Land, the area that is nowadays called Palestine. And he does so under the aegis of a covenant which God has made with him.
Fourthly, there is the covenant that is cut between God and Moses at the time of the exile in Egypt after they have been in Egypt for many generations, some 400 years.
And God is now ready to free his people from that servitude. He leads them out into the desert and at Mount Sinai, he establishes a sacred covenant with them.
This is perhaps the best known of the covenants. It is the source of the Ten Commandments, the actual stipulations of the covenant that occur both in Exodus and Deuteronomy.
Fifth, there is a covenant that is made with King David in which we renew the promises that God had made and renew the stipulations of the commandments.
But God makes a further promise. He makes the promise that there will always be a king from the house of David and that he will specially rule Israel by virtue of this king.
And then in the book of Jeremiah, there is the promise at Jeremiah 31-31, the promise of a new covenant, an everlasting covenant. Christians will later take this to be the covenant with Jesus.
In the course of this review of biblical history, all I mean to suggest is that among the important items that could be enumerated from the biblical texts,
this notion of covenant is a recurring notion that occurs in text after text and is regarded as the most sacred concept because it is the establishment of a relation between God and human beings.
The most elaborate descriptions of the establishment of this covenant are found in the books of Exodus and Deuteronomy.
And one of the interesting things that scholars have noticed about those texts in Exodus and Deuteronomy is how the actual establishment of the covenant
follows the rubrics that are typical of Suzerainty treaties in the ancient Near East, namely that these treaties always begin with a superior and his vassals, his inferiors.
And they recall both the names of the parties and the history of their families, how they've been associated with one another.
And then at a certain point, they stipulate what the covenant requires, in this particular case that God is God and will be a God for this people.
And the people are to obey various commandments, hence the importance in Exodus and in Deuteronomy of those 10 commandments, which are the central portion of the covenant.
And then finally, there is a set of blessings. Here's the blessings you will enjoy if you indeed honor this covenant and a set of curses.
Here's what's going to happen if you violate it. The only thing that's not present in these biblical texts that is present in the other texts of covenants in the ancient Near East is that there's in those other treaties, they always swear by the gods.
But of course, this is a treaty between God and his people, and God can swear by no one other than himself.
But in every other respect, the structure of the treaties recapitulates a political form that was known in the ancient Near East.
This particular treaty between God and his people has as its center the Torah.
Torah is a name which means the law, and in a way it consists of the first five books of those Hebrew scriptures, Genesis, Exodus, Leviticus, Numbers, and Deuteronomy.
But it can also refer not just to the collection of those five books, but it can refer to that portion of the covenant, which is the law, namely the 10 commandments.
When taken, for instance, in the form of Exodus, we find it in chapter 20, Deuteronomy repeats this in chapter 5 and gives these set of 10 commandments.
These are the 10 stipulations. It is the central concern about how people are to behave.
It is not only something that God has chosen, but it is the great source of morality for the Jewish people.
One also finds within Torah in the larger sense, namely in the sense of the five books of the Bible, one finds that book known as Leviticus.
And Leviticus, which is a collection of laws and precepts, for especially pertaining to worship and ritual and sacrifice.
I'm especially fond of chapters 17 to 26 of Leviticus, which is the holiness code.
What it is that you must do in order to be holy according to these covenants.
Now, while much of the book of Leviticus is devoted to a record of priestly traditions and analysis of purity rules and ritual forms,
there's also, and this very important for our natural law considerations, there's also a very careful enumeration of the types of creatures that God has created.
And the reason why I say this is important to natural law reasoning is that we have seen already in the first lectures in this series the importance of nature and natural kinds,
namely in Greek philosophical analysis, by identifying the kind as distinguished from any other kind.
One can start to see the teleological dimensions of this kind and how you devise an ethics based on the end that is already embedded in the nature of the being.
Once you understand the kind and its natural end, you can see how to get from beginning to end and how to devise and appropriate morality for the human natural kind.
Well, the Bible doesn't talk in terms of nature, natural kinds or philosophical analysis, but you see in Leviticus some of the same kind of reasoning under another name,
namely a set of distinctions among the various kinds of creatures and a sense of what's good for this creature and what's good for that creature.
In a way, it's very close to some of what is natural law thinking.
You also find in Leviticus and in Deuteronomy a set of all the many other statutes and precepts and laws that must be observed.
There are more than 500 of them.
And the way in which the Jewish people understood these additional laws and statutes was as a kind of fence around the Ten Commandments.
The idea was these Ten Commandments are so sacred and they so define how you ought to conduct your life.
Law is the central moral category.
But to avoid getting anywhere close to violating any of the Big Ten, there is this picket fence of five and six hundred other little laws of ritual purity which you must observe.
And if you are sufficiently attentive to never violating any of those small detail laws, then you'll never get close to violating what it is they guard, the Ten Commandments that are at the center and within the picket fence.
To step back and reflect for a minute, what many a thinker in the natural law tradition has seen here in biblical tradition is a correlation between those divine commandments and natural law.
Clearly within the biblical texts, this law is the law because God said so.
It is the law that is obligatory because the divine source has commanded it.
And yet natural law theorists have regularly seen a correlation between what the divine commandments specify and what by our reason reflecting on our nature we can come to understand as morally right.
Let's just do a couple of examples but we'll see more of this in the lectures to come.
Those first three commandments that all pertain to the worship of God, namely that there is only one God and only he should be adored, that one should never take the name of God in vain or try to make an image of God because God is spiritual and can't be captured by a material image,
or that one should honor God by observing the Sabbath while they get to a level of particularity.
For instance, the Sabbath, every seventh day we should honor God by truly worshiping and not by working on the day of the Sabbath.
That's probably a greater degree of specificity than natural law could come to.
I don't think that natural law by itself would ever get us to the conclusion we should worship God on every seventh day.
But natural law itself can say if there is a God we should worship it and these three commandments are telling us to worship that God and to honor it by a conduct that is appropriate to worship.
Or if we take the other commandments that the Ten Commandments exhibit, things for instance such as honoring parents, a positive commandment, or not committing murder, not committing adultery, not stealing, not bearing false witness.
Any of those positive or negative commandments that are explicitly stated as commandments in Exodus and Deuteronomy have been thought by natural law theorists to reflect on what conclusions we should come to when we look at our natures.
Our natures invariably involve relations of dependence to our parents and not just when we're small having to obey them in a way that a child needs to obey one's parents,
but when our parents are aged and in need of care, we must continue to do what honoring those parents requires and that there's a natural obligation to honor one's parents which can be determined by reason reflecting on our nature just as there's a commandment to that effect.
Or the commandment against murder, adultery, commandment against stealing. Those commandments are also reflected upon reason reflecting on what the social obligations we have must be if we're to live peaceably.
That there can be no private license to kill, even though there is a right to self-defense, that we cannot abandon our marital promises, that we cannot arbitrarily steal the property of one another.
Exactly how we're going to organize property relations or exactly how we're going to organize marriage ties will have considerable cultural contribution, but the basic fundamental natural law obligation is the same in natural law reasoning as in these divine commandments.
Hence a strong sense of the correlation here between the biblical category of law and what natural law theorists are inclined to recognize.
Let me turn now to another part of biblical literature, the sapiential books or the wisdom books. This is arguably the most philosophical part of the Bible.
These are the books that begin with Psalms and Proverbs and then go on through Job and then Kohalith, sometimes known as Ecclesiastes, Sirach, sometimes called Ecclesiasticus, the Song of Songs, the Book of Daniel, and ultimately the Book of the Wisdom of Solomon.
Now, in this tradition of biblical literature, what one finds is something very philosophical. Consider, for example, the book of Proverbs. It's one of my dad's favorite books of the scriptures and what dad likes to do is the right way to read Proverbs.
You can't be reading through Proverbs straight through. Very quickly, I think you'd just be overwhelmed by the vast number of Proverbs, but rather what he loves to do is to take two or three of them and then just sort of chew on them all day.
And I think that's how they're meant to be read. They're intended to teach a person, especially a young person, what the moral life and what the religious life should be by reflecting in these pithy sayings on what the wise in the community have discovered.
But there's a certain philosophical problem that emerges, and it starts to emerge already in the book of Proverbs, and then we see it coming to full fruition in the book of Job. Namely, the book of Proverbs gives you the impression that if you are good and do what these Proverbs suggest, you will be rewarded with much blessing.
Whereas if you are in some way or other a transgressor of the law, you will suffer the consequences of your transgression. But we all know the problem that sometimes bad things happen to good people, and sometimes the wicked seem to prosper.
What are you going to do with that? If you had only the book of Proverbs and its relative optimism that the good will be rewarded and that the evil will be punished, there seems to be something incompatible in daily life that goes against the grain of Proverbs.
I take Proverbs to be a matter of moral exhortation, a matter of encouraging us to live well, and not necessarily a promise of exactly how it's going to work out in this life.
The book of Job brings that out in tremendous complexity, namely a strong sense of an innocent person, a good man who is afflicted by the loss of his children, the loss of his servants, the loss of his property, and yet who refuses to curse God.
No matter what his wife urges him, curse God, won't you? Or what his erstwhile friends encourage him, namely, if you're suffering, you must have been guilty.
Job insists that he has done nothing wrong, and that he himself will never curse God, rather he must have the attitude, I've received these things as blessings, if now they are taken away, they weren't mine, they weren't something that I was owed.
In a way Job has understood the change in the covenant that came with Noah, because where the covenant with Adam had suggested if you are good you will stay in the garden, but if you misbehave, out you go.
There there was an immediate correlation between reward and punishment.
Whereas with Noah we find that the world has been destroyed and that God is establishing a new covenant, and the covenant as it was established with Noah was God will reign upon the just and the unjust alike, but never again will there be a flood that will overwhelm even the evil in the world.
And as a sign of that there will be the great rainbow, a suggestion that God will honor this promise and will allow the just and the unjust to dwell together alike.
It gives us no incentive to merely tie ourselves up within ourselves, if there's rather still a strong suggestion that we must work for justice in this life, work for justice in our own personal lives, and work for justice in our communal lives,
but we cannot expect that things will always work out and must still have faith. That's Job.
Ecclesiastes, or sometimes called Kohaleth, reinforces that position. Kohaleth is the book that begins vanity of vanities, all is vanity, and it gives a sense that we won't necessarily be able to figure it out.
I rather like to think of that book of Kohaleth as rather like existentialism in the Bible. Life may seem absurd, and yet we must still have faith.
But the wisdom literature continues. The book of Sirach, sometimes called Ecclesiasticus, holds a position rather like the book of Proverbs.
God will ensure that it will all work out, but he won't necessarily ensure that it will all work out in the short term. It will work out in the long term.
And the book of Sirach adds a sophistication. It adds a tremendous profundity about this problem of evil, namely that sometimes evil comes as something which will stretch us and force our characters to grow larger.
Sometimes evil will be a test to see if we are going to be faithful. And sometimes evil will simply come because God is so intent upon preserving our freedom.
And freedom means that actions will have their consequences, even if the consequences are sometimes the suffering of the innocent.
God will make it up to the suffering of the innocent, but meanwhile will allow tragedies and crimes and other things to occur. This is what is required as the metaphysical framework for freedom to be possible.
Sirach therefore gives a certain encouragement, but doesn't entirely solve the problem. The book of wisdom at the tail end of the sapiential tradition is a book which tries to handle that problem of evil and the problem of law and that problem of morality,
precisely by a recurrence to nature and to immortality. In the book of wisdom, it's set with the figure of King Solomon, even though it's really a thousand years after the original King Solomon.
It's set with the figure of King Solomon talking to his fellow kings and urging them that they need to be just. It pictures a group of Jews who have been killed for their fidelity to Torah, now waking up in the afterlife,
and those who had been persecuted now become the judges of those who had persecuted them. But they must judge justly.
And Solomon, later in the course of that book in chapters 9 and 10, engages in a long prayer for wisdom. Solomon, who was known for his wisdom, especially from the time when the two harlots brought to him their children, one dead and one still living,
both claiming the living child. And Solomon devised the strategy of cutting the living child in half, illustrating the shriek of the real mother, at which point he knew who that real mother was and could award her the child.
Solomon admits that his wisdom didn't come simply from his own brilliance, but came from God. A God who, Solomon then explains in chapters 11 through chapter 19, a God who uses nature to aid his people, a God who uses that natural
sanction that natural law has always envisioned to try to cultivate real honesty and real justice and to ward off evildoers. In short, it's a biblical appropriation of some of that natural law theory in the words of King Solomon.
Now that tradition in the wisdom literature is not a philosophical tradition. And yet it's as close to a philosophical tradition as the Bible ever gets so far as I know. It's a willingness even to use that category of nature in combination with that category of creature.
We still don't have a philosophical treatise, but we have a willingness to appreciate and to appropriate philosophical ideas such as the writers of the Book of Wisdom and other late sapiential books had yet experienced them.
In the portion of the Bible that is written only with the coming of Christianity, we see that same theme developed yet further. Most of the New Testament is not philosophical. Rather, we have the Gospels, the records of Jesus' life and Jesus' teaching, and it's much more in the style of those biblical prophets.
Again, the enunciation of a new covenant and the enunciation of a new law, the love of God above all with all one's mind and heart and soul and strength, and the enunciation of a law dealing with human beings, namely we should love our neighbor as we love ourselves, the law of charity.
But there's also, for the point of view of this course, an interesting way in which the natural law tradition manifests itself. I think it can be found in various portions of the New Testament, but for the sake of simplicity here, I'd like to concentrate on just one writing by St. Paul, namely his letter to the Romans.
After explaining himself in his own basic perspective, a follower of the law, but one who sees the completion and fulfillment of the law in Jesus, he then turns to the subject of the pagans and the Gentiles and how they could possibly be expected to act morally.
In chapter 1, verses 17 to 23, Paul writes as follows,
He says,
And they exchanged the glory of the immortal God for images resembling mortal man or birds or animals or reptiles.
The point I think here is that Paul is thinking about those first three commandments of the decalogue, commandments which require the real worship of the true God.
And he is suggesting that not only do the Jews who have received these commandments find themselves bound by them, but rather that there is a kind of a natural law obligation to worship the true God.
Because by our reasons reflecting on all the things that have been made, one should be able to see that there is a God, an intelligent designer who has made these things, and hence one should never create an idol or a false God,
but only honor a God who is superior, who is invisible, who is immutable and unchanging.
Although it is impossible to detect a specific philosophical school from which Paul is borrowing, perhaps there is in Stoicism some of the basic assumptions and some of the basic concepts that he is using.
A little later in that chapter, verses 24 to 28, one sees him showing the moral implications of this point about the worship of the true God that I just finished reading, starting in chapter 1, verse 24.
Therefore God gave them up in the lusts of their hearts to impurity, to the dishonoring of their bodies among themselves, because they exchanged the truth about God for a lie, and they worshiped and served the creature rather than the Creator, who is blessed forever, amen.
For this reason God gave them up to dishonorable passions, their women exchanged natural relations for unnatural, and the men likewise gave up natural relations with women and were consumed with passion for one another,
men committing shameless acts with men and receiving in their own persons the due penalty for their error.
Now at one level, this is a kind of moral psychology. I think that what Paul is urging is, if you have the true God, you will want to do what the true God wants you to do, and he's built enough right inclination into your nature that you'll do it.
But if you've taken a false God, there will be implications for the way in which you live your life, and the dishonesty or the lie or the error that has been committed will, he thinks, result in a kind of a licentiousness, a willingness to follow out things that justify you.
At a certain sense there's a moral psychology here about how a fall away from true divinity can lead to a disorder in one's loves. But one can also see here, quite apart from that suggestion of moral psychology, one can see that he's making an argument based on nature,
in this particular case dealing with matters of sexual intercourse, although natural laws by no means can find just the questions of sex, but his idea is that unnatural sexual intercourse is dishonorable, namely when it is directed to someone of the same sex.
There is no argument here, and so I admit that this is not a philosophical treatise, philosophers need to provide arguments, biblical writers are in the tradition of revelation and are simply professing and are being prophets witnessing to the truth, but nonetheless the language that he's using is the language of what is natural and unnatural.
Let me quote one more passage from chapter 2 of St. Paul's letter to the Romans, again to sense how he himself envisioned himself in this early natural law tradition. He says, verse 12,
He's not the hearers of the law who are righteous before God, but the doers of the law who will be justified, a sense that merely having had the law doesn't solve our problem, one has to obey it.
When Gentiles who do not have the law, do by nature what the law requires, they are a law unto themselves, even though they do not have the law. In short, even though they don't have revealed law, they nonetheless have a law within their very natures, this is natural law thinking.
They show that what the law requires is written on their hearts, while their conscience also bears witness, and their conflicting thoughts accuse or perhaps excuse them on that day when, according to my gospel, God judges the secrets of men by Christ Jesus.
There is here in Paul's language a sense of a natural law written on people's hearts, and then, as we heard at the tail end of that particular passage, a sense of conscience. This will also be a theme of enormous importance to the natural law tradition, namely a sense that we have within us as a part of our nature.
Already, the basic principles of natural law, able to be observed by sufficient inspection. With Augustine, it will be a matter of introspection, of reading the law on our heart. With some other thinkers like Thomas Aquinas, it can also be external, looking at patterns of what are fruitful for human life, patterns which are in some way frustrating to human life.
But the claim is that our nature already bears such a law, because the author of our nature has already written it there, not written it in so many words, but written it in that pattern of inclinations toward the natural end, toward what will fulfill us.
There will be need for a much greater elaboration of this theory of conscience, but we already see with St. Paul a willingness of religious writers operating under revelation to embrace some of the same categories that the Stoics and Cicero were propounding philosophically.
In the next lecture, we'll turn to some early Christian thinkers who were concerned with this notion of natural law, but found the additional problems coming from being in a fallen or wounded nature.
With that in mind, what Augustine finds is that the natural virtues, the prudence and the courage and the temperance and the justice, say that Aristotle or Cicero had championed, that those were wonderful things.
But in a memorable line in The City of God, Augustine insists, virtue without faith is false virtue, that the natural virtues alone are unable to sustain us, that these natural virtues have to be directed toward true religion and real faith.
If they are not, they will invariably, he thinks, be affected by pride, and those natural virtues will in fact be our ruin, precisely because they make us proudful, thinking that we can save ourselves on our own, thinking that we can even live morally, purely on our own.
Hence, he's extremely skeptical about the prospect of purely natural virtue and extremely appreciative of the supernatural virtues, faith and hope and charity, faith that gives us a sense of humility, knowing that God is the source of all the strength we have,
hope because there's a reward, a project, heaven, that is beyond the powers merely of our own natural strength, and charity, a way to reorder our loves so that everything will be rightly balanced.
This is in fact the central concept of the mature Augustinian ethics. It's called the Orto Amorum, the order of loves, and it basically consists in this idea.
It follows that law of Jesus about the two commandments, that one should love God with all one's mind and heart and soul and strength, and one should love everything else in a lesser way than that.
One should love one's neighbor as oneself, precisely because all of us are made in the image of God, and one should love everything else in the world according to the order of its use, insofar as it is useful for getting us to love neighbor as ourself and getting us to love God above all.
Notice what this does to his sense about nature. It immediately brings him to the conviction, following upon that other part of Genesis on which he has reflected equally as well as he has reflected upon the story of the fall, the story of creation itself.
When we hear the story of creation, and especially hear it with Augustinian ears, what we hear is, on the first day God made such and such, and he saw that it was good, and on the second day he made some other things, and he saw that they were good, and so on down through the six days of creation.
It leads Augustin entirely to repudiate that Manichean notion that matter is evil, that body is the source of our trouble, and to insist instead that absolutely everything in the entire universe is good, precisely because a good God made it.
Instead, evil has come in, not because it's a positive substance, not because it's something that the evil God made in the way the Manichees or some of the other Gnostics had suggested, but rather evil comes in because on the sixth day of creation, when humankind is created, we are not created necessarily automatically good, we are created good with freedom.
We are created as more like God than anything else in the rest of creation because we share with God an intellect and a will.
And with the creation of a free will in us, a will that can freely choose among goods, sometimes we will choose the highest good and love it most, and then choose the next level of goods and love it next, and finally choose other goods and love them well,
but sometimes we will get the order of goods confused, and we will start loving earthly things as if they were the highest, or we will start loving human beings as if they were goods that we should use, and sometimes we'll even blasphemously try to love God, not in and for himself as the law of Christ suggests, but we will try to use God and to merely make him an object that we can appropriate.
For Augustine, there is a strong sense that the order of loves is discernible, especially under the order of grace, as it comes to illumine the darkness of our minds and comes to restore the freedom that has been weakened when our wills were weakened by the original sin that we bear because we are the descendants of Adam.
We cannot trust to nature alone, and I suspect that it is for this reason that natural law doesn't get as much play in a figure like Augustine. Nature is wounded, nature is weak, and much of the subsequent history of Christian religion, Catholic and Protestant and various divisions, comes in the disagreements that occurred about how wounded our natures are, how serious this disability are,
but we are all the heirs of Augustine in accepting that there is some woundedness to nature, and yet the woundedness is not so complete that we cannot discern some of the moral law.
That will be the tradition that natural law thinking will emphasize, and we'll see it, especially when we come to Thomas Aquinas, some lectures from now.
Our next subject will be to turn back to Roman law and follow out the historical progress of this in the law courts.
Let's get started.
Lecture 10 Early Christians, Nature and Law
When one is mindful of the wonderful development of natural law idea that will occur when we come to Thomas Aquinas in the 13th century, a question can occur, why did it take so long?
What happened that it was not so immediately seized upon and used?
This lecture will be about the initial Christian appropriation of the idea of nature from the Greeks, and the immediate problem that surfaced from the biblical commitments that those Christian thinkers had,
a commitment which led them to think about nature differently than the Greeks had thought about it, and to see a problem that did not immediately allow for a natural law solution.
It's the idea of original sin.
What I'd like to do in this lecture is to consider that general notion of original sin first, and then take as a representative thinker, a very important figure, namely Augustine,
and to consider his own particular understanding of original sin, and then the implications this has for his ethics.
It's an attempt to do some justice to the entire patristic period of church history and thinking.
Patristic refers to the age of the fathers of the church, the patres ecclesiée, and the figures here are wide and various and have many thoughts on many things.
So I will not try to cover the entire scope of their thinking, but rather will concentrate on just this one notion because of the enormous problem that it presents for thinking about natural law within Christian religion.
The notion of original sin is associated with the book of Genesis.
That is, the telling in the story of the book of Genesis that those original human beings, Adam and Eve, who were created with what might be thought of as a pure human nature, fell by their own choice, and that this fall was communicated to their offspring.
It's a notion of a fallen human nature then, not that Genesis talks in terms of fallen human nature, but rather that these early Christian thinkers meditating upon that book of Genesis, and yet mindful of the Greek ideas of human nature in a way that we have seen it develop philosophically,
found that the coalescing of the tradition initially suffered this first problem. Can one use it effectively, or does the fact of the fall preclude thinking in terms of a natural law or natural goodness?
The story of creation to which Christian thinkers returned again and again was simply intrinsically interesting, but it also was an enormously important part of their self-understanding as Christians.
That is, when they were asking themselves, what is it that Christ came to do?
They certainly understood that he came to save humankind, to redeem humankind, but they also speak about the way in which Christ came to restore humankind.
And the favorite theme, the favorite concept for explaining this idea is the notion that Christ is the new atom, that there was an old atom who was the first creature made by God, and that Christ is a new atom, that he has the fullness of human nature like Adam did, but he is the one who is going to restore all the rest of the race after Adam's fall.
This controlling idea within the patristic period is known as the concept or the doctrine of recapitulation. The idea here is that Christ is the head of the race, like Adam was the head of the race, and the Latin word for head is kaput, like our word capital.
It's the head of the country, or the place where the country is seated, or the very word in Latin for the chapter of a book is a capitulum, spelled in the same way.
And so the idea here is this is a recapitulation, a going back again to the head of the human race, Adam, and finding a new atom who recapitulates the life of Adam.
But it's actually a little more complicated than that. This doctrine of recapitulation, which comes from St. Paul's letter to the Ephesians especially, but can be found in many a text in the New Testament, is the notion that one should see the Scriptures in terms of the life of Christ.
It is told in the Gospels and commented on in the various New Testament epistles.
And that life of Christ recapitulates the life of Israel, but where the life of Israel was stretched out over many generations, the life of Christ in one lifetime recapitulates that life history of Israel point by point.
Accept that Christ corrects what was incorrect, that he sanctifies what is sinful, that he completes what is incomplete, and that he in general restores what had been fallen about that original lifetime and all of its successive history.
What the Christian is supposed to do according to this doctrine of recapitulation in our lifetime is to recapitulate the life of Christ.
But we only get one lifetime just as he had one lifetime, and hence what we need to learn to do is to find in our infancy a way to learn from his infancy and as children to do what he did as a child.
And then in our adulthood to make that same commitment, have that same sanctification in life which he himself gave in the period of his adulthood.
So we're supposed to recapitulate his life as he recapitulated the life of the history of Israel.
This, I think, is the controlling idea of the protristic period.
It's a sense of how Christ did what he did and why it was so important for him to come.
It's a sense that not only did he save us by correcting the original fault, by rendering an obedience where there was disobedience, and embracing us in that salvation by having us participate in his mystery,
but it also asks for moral life.
It asks us to do what he did to take him as a model for our own activity.
This is proposed by the fathers of the church as the answer.
What was the question?
The question that was proposed is what to do about the human race in its sinful and fallen state.
And in order to understand that, what the fathers of the church reflected upon was that story in Genesis in which the original fall occurred.
Now, curiously, if you look over the history of Jewish revelation, that is, if you look at the Hebrew books of the Bible, what I would call the Old Testament,
one finds that the Old Testament rarely returns to the subject matter of the fall.
There are occasional references to it, for instance, in Sirach, but for the most part it's told in Genesis, and then life goes on.
Christian authors are much more inclined to return to that story of the fall of Adam,
and I think that the reason why they're much more inclined to give an emphasis to that story, to erect it into a central problem and a central doctrine,
is precisely because they're trying to understand what Christ came to do, what he came to correct, what he came to sanctify.
In so doing, they see his passion as a matter of a suffering that he undergoes for us in order to begin this process of our restoration from the fall.
Hence, when these Christian writers turn to the opening accounts of Genesis, what they see is a life in paradise.
What they see, if they are somewhat more philosophical, is pure nature.
And in this pure nature they see where temptation was found, namely that a being, a human being, with an intellect and a will such as Adam and Eve had,
are capable of understanding what the goods that are possible in paradise are,
and they're also quite capable of hearing, according to that first covenant, what the commandments God gave were.
The commandments that God gave, of course, were for them to not to eat of the fruit of the tree of the knowledge of good and evil.
And while some commentators, taking that extremely literally, have thought it to be literally a kind of a fruit, an apple is usually suggested,
what most commentators in the patristic period understood was that it is a divine command of God to use their reason and not to try to be divine themselves.
That what God does is that God establishes what is good and what is evil.
God decides what is right and what is wrong, and that it is not our place to decide what is right and wrong,
rather it is our place to try to discern what is right and what is wrong.
It's quite permissible, in fact, encouraged for us to understand right from wrong,
but not to put ourselves in that God-like position of trying to decide what is right and what is wrong.
Hence, what the early Christian writers, reflecting on Genesis and reflecting upon that initial fall discover,
is that Adam's problem, Eve's sin, is a sin of disobedience, a sin of wanting to be like the Creator in deciding what morality is,
rather than in being true creatures and respecting the morality that God has, in fact, decided and established.
When these early Christian writers become more philosophical, they find in the language of the Greeks, the language of nature,
a way in which to discuss this problem that the creature suffers, namely that there is pure nature,
Adam in his pre-Lapsarian or pre-fallen state, and then Adam in his fallen state, Adam after the decision to eat the apple and to disobey God.
Without in any way wanting to diminish or mitigate the personal responsibility that we individual human beings now bear with respect to the use of our freedom,
what they find in this story of the first part of Genesis, what they find is an explanation of human weakness,
namely that Adam and Eve in their pre-Lapsarian state could at least see correctly.
Their wills were not yet in any way disordered or disoriented, but they understand in the story of Genesis as it explains the fall,
a reason why the rest of us now do not have such entire and complete clear-sightedness,
and why there is sometimes a weakness of will, an inclination to be self-pleasing,
an inclination to manipulate, an inclination in one way or another to take advantage of our situation
and a willingness to transgress the divine law or the natural law out of a weakness that we have that our wills do not have the strength
that someone in an unfallen state might have.
The story of Genesis, therefore, is used repeatedly by these patristic authors to explain how the events that occurred at the beginning of human history continue to reverberate.
I do not mean to suggest that all of them understood it in exactly the same way.
In fact, when I ponder the patristic period and consider how many of them turn to writing about Genesis,
it always strikes me that it's rather like nowadays in universities people have to do dissertations on something or other to show their expertise.
In the high Middle Ages, the great scholastic theologians and philosophers had to write about the book of Abelard in order to try to show their own expertise.
But in the patristic period, one of the texts that they needed to deal with in order precisely to show that they were thinking with great sophistication about the problems of the Christian mystery
is this problem of the original Sin and Genesis, and there are many interesting accounts.
They also found some fruit in the writings of the Stoics, and there are among the patristic authors any number of Christian Stoics.
The figure that they especially loved I think is Seneca, whose own version of the great moral virtues was extremely influential,
a sense that Christians like those ancient Stoics have to be self-reliant, not as entirely self-reliant as the Stoics made them,
but rather with the help of grace, reliant upon what God has given each one of us for the sake of making our choices in this life.
The Stoics, Seneca in particular, write to reflect back on a golden age at the beginning of history.
They do not know the story of Genesis, they do not tell it in terms of the fall of Adam and Eve, but they tell similar stories about the fall of humankind from a golden age,
and early Christian thinkers see in the Stoics like Seneca, thinkers after their own heart who give an explanation that is in some ways like their own religious explanation.
Now let me pause here for a moment and make a clarification, because this is a subject on which there is much misunderstanding in the present day.
What Christians mean by original sin is not what we mean by the actual sins for which we bear personal responsibility.
The only persons for whom original sin was an actual sin is Adam and Eve.
They were in the position, when no other sin had yet been committed, that they by themselves chose something which was the first and therefore by definition the original sin.
What Christians mean by sin in ordinary circumstances is not that.
What instead Christians mean by sin is a transgression of the law of God, a violation for instance of one of the commandments,
and the requirements for something to be a serious sin within Christianity are that it be a serious matter, for instance a violation of the commandment,
that one know what one is doing and that one still deliberately choose it, that if for instance one did not know, then we say responsibility was mitigated or diminished,
or if we say we didn't really choose it but we did what we did under enormous pressure or perhaps under force of habit,
well there too there is some mitigation of the responsibility.
So sins as we normally talk about the word refer to serious matter done with knowledge and done with intention.
But the notion of original sin which Christians hold is a claim not that we have in any way personal responsibility for what Adam did,
the claim is rather that there is a certain weakness in us that we find, a certain sense in which something is missing.
The way in which most Christian authors have handled this is that what is missing is clarity of the intellect and strength of will,
a sense that we don't always see things the way we should or a sense that we don't necessarily love the way we ought to love spontaneously.
You can see this perhaps if you reflect for just a minute on the way in which human love works.
We tend to love things that are good. We love good food. We love interesting people.
We love wonderful courses from the teaching company. We love things which in some way or other please us, the Yankees when they're winning.
But we tend not to love things that don't strike us spontaneously as good or attractive.
We don't love the bowery bum. We don't love the alcoholic uncle. We don't love things that are going to require pain or sacrifice.
The way in which Christian thinkers in the fashion say of Augustine understand this then is that we don't love in quite the way that God loves.
The way in which God loves is not just loving what is already good, but God loves by putting the goodness in.
In creation, for instance, it wasn't that there was anything already there to love, but that God puts the goodness in by creating these various creatures.
Or when Christians say that we believe that God so loved the world that he sent his only son to suffer and die, we don't hold that humanity was so good that God just missed us.
The claim, rather, is that God is putting the goodness in again by what his son does, Jesus, in suffering on the cross.
A great mystery to be sure. All I'm trying to bring out from this is the way in which God loves is a little different than the way in which we love.
And yet Christians, especially these early Christian thinkers, reflecting on the way in which we seem to have some disorder in our loves,
they trace this back to Adam and they say, original sin isn't an actual fault. Original sin isn't anything for which we'll ever be punished.
But original sin is a failure. It's a weakness. It's something missing that needs to be corrected so that we will love in the right order again.
Christian thinkers enunciated a whole notion of the sacraments as a way to try to put this goodness back in, a participation in the mystery of God through Christ.
But a need for both sacramental participation and a need for moral exemplification and for good moral action. Original sin, then, is intended in a very careful sense to designate especially a weakness.
Let me turn back, though, to my topic, namely how this affects thinking about natural law.
The figure that I've chosen to concentrate on for our consideration today is a custom, namely a fourth century father of the church, a native of North Africa who was initially a great teacher of rhetoric,
first at Rome and then later in Milan, where he eventually experiences conversion to Christianity.
He had, before that, been attracted to philosophy, especially Neoplatonic philosophy, but at the age of 30 he comes to accept Christ in his life and everything looks differently.
He then returns to Northern Africa, where he serves as a priest and eventually a bishop in Hippo, governing the church and writing works of theology that to this day remain among the most influential that have ever been written within this tradition.
I'd like to concentrate here on just his moral doctrine and, in particular, on the way in which this notion of a fallen human nature affects his moral doctrine and slows down the acceptance of the tradition of natural law that it will not be until the 13th century
and Thomas Aquinas that it really comes into its own as a doctrine which Christians tend to accept.
Among the points of Augustine's moral writings that we need to consider, the first is a strong sense of the freedom of the will or, to speak a little bit more strictly, the free choice of the will.
Even before his conversion to Christianity, Augustine had been extremely perplexed by the problem of how it is that people do good and how people do evil.
And he thought he had found some explanation for this in the beliefs of the Manichean religion.
The Manichean religion is a very strong dualism, a notion that there's a good God who created all the spirits in the world and an evil God of sort of equal force and equal strength who created all the matter in the world, all the bodies.
And that these two were in an eternal cosmic conflict of which we human beings were simply players at one level while these gods were in a vast conflict.
It was an attractive religion to him for certain reasons, I think especially because it promised salvation by knowledge.
And Augustine, a heady, intellectual young man, thought that they would finally teach him the secrets that he needed to learn.
But he eventually came to reflect on the fact that there was something badly askew in this Manichean position.
The Manichean position allowed him to say there was a good spirit in him, the better self, which did the nice things he did.
But that the devil made me do it, that is that this body made him do all the evil things.
That sense of the conflict between body and soul led him for a while attribute the nasty things, the things he wasn't so proud of, merely to the body and to matter.
But as he came to reflect on that, and even before he had accepted Christianity, he came to understand that's just not fair.
If I'm going to claim the credit for the good that I do, I must also accept the responsibility for the evil that I have committed.
And this Manichean division of labor is not going to be intellectually honest.
There's a sense of the need to honor and to accept the fact that our will is capable of making free choices.
As Augustine comes to have his conversion, he never abandons that insight, namely that our will can make free choices and therefore we bear a certain responsibility for any choice that we've made that is free.
However, he finds himself, as he nears age 30, unable to make himself, unable to really decide for himself to do the honorable thing.
As we all know, I think from Augustine's life, he has a mistress whom he very much loves, and by whom he has a son named Adeodotus.
And even when he sends the mistress away on the promptings of his mother, he goes and takes another mistress,
and then at one point you see him praying in the garden in one of the most funny prayers ever created.
God, give me chastity, but not yet.
He's just got a strong sense of the fact that he wants to behave and to treat these women honorably and to live a moral life, and yet by his own strength, he can't manage to do it.
He experiences, at age 30, a tremendous conversion in life.
He experiences grace in a way that he never thought possible.
It lets him make the decision that he himself will live in a celibate fashion, eventually seek priesthood and accept ordination as a bishop.
But he didn't plan on that, and rather he needed to come to terms with how to reorder one's will, especially when one's will is disordered or damaged.
And Augustine is a tremendous aficionado of grace, a sense that God's divine help has to come to help us make decisions rightly and has to come in order to reorder our wills.
Now Augustine in suggesting that by ourselves we cannot live rightly, but we need the help of grace, is not abandoning moral responsibility, but rather suggesting that it will take more than just willpower to do so.
And when he accepts the Christian religion and starts to meditate upon its scriptures, in particular the part that really strikes him is this notion of original sin.
And so Augustine, much more prominently than almost any other of the patristic thinkers, enunciates a doctrine of original sin, suggesting that we are truly wounded in our nature, that our minds have been darkened, that our wills have been disordered,
and that we desperately need the grace of God to correct this. We need the grace of God even to make our wills more free.
There's a wonderful line that occurs at one point in his writings to this effect that freedom from crime is only the beginning of freedom.
A sense that when we put aside evil deeds, that's only the start of the liberation, and that there's so much more to freedom that we eventually need to comprehend.
But Augustine is reflecting with great sophistication and profundity about how we are able to gain that wonderful freedom.
And he finds that original sin is an explanation for why we are so bound.
It gives his whole philosophy and his whole theology a bit of a pessimistic coloring, namely a sense that there is a way in which we are really at a severe disadvantage by our nature,
and that our nature cannot be trusted in a way that, say, an Aristotle might have trusted it, or even a way in which the Stoics might have trusted it.
One see this in various of Augustine's writings. Let me simply mention one here for the sake of brevity, namely his massive volume called The City of God.
As a whole, this is a book written to defend Christianity against the charge that Rome fell because it abandoned its pagan gods.
Augustine insists instead that Rome fell under its own weight, that Rome was a noble idea.
He praises Cicero, for instance, for talking about what the Roman Republic was all about and what the Roman Empire was able later on to achieve.
And yet he thinks there was a problem there.
And the problem was especially the problem of being dedicated to false gods.
When Christianity finally came and when Rome, in person of its emperors, accepted worship of the true God, Augustine thought we are on the right track.
But it won't necessarily be with the continuity, with the unbroken perseverance of the Roman Empire.
It will rather be with the establishment of a city of God, as best we can, a city of this earth which will be ordered as well as we can according to the natural virtues,
and a city of God consisting of all the citizens of all those who have accepted this particular religious commitment.
The two should be in harmony, but that if there is some division between the two, that if the earthly city turns a scantz,
one must remember that one is still of the true city of God and made so by grace.
Lecture 11, Roman, Canon, and Natural Law
In the last lecture, we were noticing that Augustine has a tremendous appreciation for the Roman Republic,
and that it gave him a strong sense of what the possibilities of natural law were.
Even though he himself is inclined to attribute more to grace when dealing with how one becomes moral and how one becomes virtuous,
his own appreciation for what Rome had done was unabashed.
A part of that appreciation comes from what Roman law had achieved.
I'd like, in the course of this lecture, to spend some time with that movement in Roman law that was already in full blossom by the time of Augustine,
the work of Roman jurists in the preceding centuries.
Even though Roman law was very pragmatic and not terribly philosophical, its great jurists were often philosophers and were highly indebted to the Stoics.
Roman law, as they practiced it and as they wrote about it, does provide an enormous contribution to the subsequent history of natural law.
Our topic then today will be to focus on law, and particularly civil law, as it tries to embody various concepts of natural law.
For the sake of our lecture today, I'll divide the work into three parts.
First, a consideration of the Roman law, such as a person like Augustine knew it, as already developed.
Secondly, to Roman law, as it gets codified by Justinian in the century after Augustine.
And then I'd like to move ahead to the development of canon law that takes place in the High Middle Ages,
especially in the 11th century, with the monk Gratian, who does a tremendous work of bringing together the church's emerging law.
Frequently it's the case in civil law that the body of law has to come together over the years and after there has been much jurisprudence,
and that's certainly the case with both Roman law and canon law, and we'll have a chance to look at some of that.
So those will be the three parts of today's lecture.
First then, the subject of Roman law.
Roman law was a body of law in the sense that there are many pieces of legislation that emerged from various Roman authorities,
and then there are an enormous set of precedents as Roman jurists were required to decide various cases.
And in the course of their various decisions, the accumulation of precedents form part of law.
There's a much stronger unity, you might say, to the composition of law than we ourselves experience.
I think in our situation we're inclined to say that only legislatures have the right and the privilege to make law,
and that the judiciary is charged with ensuring the conformity of law to our existing constitution,
but that in general at least the courts ought not to be making law.
With Rome that was not the case, there was not such a strong and strict division there,
and so one finds a fair amount of judicial legislation in the course of trying to answer problems about which the civil law had not yet spoken.
It is in this department especially, as well as in the efforts to try to give a reason why particular cases need to be decided the way they are under existing law,
that Roman jurists use the concept of natural law.
They rely upon the Stoics, especially because the Stoics were extremely eclectic in their philosophizing, taking a little bit here and a little bit there.
The Stoics were not such rigid purists about the sources of law, the sources of philosophy.
They were rather insistent upon taking wisdom where they could find it and cultivating the idea of the sage who had good sense about some particular topic.
I think the Roman lawyers appreciated that and they were equally eclectic, often borrowing from the Stoics,
and the concept that they borrow from the Stoics especially is the notion of a real universal equality among all human beings.
But the Roman jurists also are extremely acquainted with Aristotle's teaching on ethics, courtesy of Cicero,
that after the time of Cicero, Roman jurists become more and more philosophical, figures like Gaius and Paulus and Ulpian and Marianus.
These Roman jurists take a lot of what Cicero had to say and expand yet further upon it.
But the other philosophical source to which they are particularly indebted is Aristotle's theory of justice.
We covered most of that a few lectures ago, but I'd like to focus for just a minute on one part of his theory of justice from the Nicomachean Ethics,
which the Roman jurists found especially useful.
It's the concept of equity, Iquitos is said in Latin, and the Roman jurists found enormous use of this concept from Aristotle.
It's that part of justice which comes at the end of his treatment of justice in Book 5 when Aristotle is considering the fact that
legislatures, when they make law, have to make law for everybody under all possible circumstances,
and that legislatures can't possibly envision all the circumstances that might come up on which their law will be dependent for rendering good decisions.
And hence Aristotle offers the notion that there must be, on the part of judges, a certain commitment to equity, a certain commitment to equality,
and that this commitment to equality will mean figuring out what the legislator would have said if the legislator could have envisioned this particular circumstance.
It's a sense that the way in which laws are written might sometimes produce great injustices,
not because the laws were badly designed, not because the legislatures were self-interested or committed simply to the interests of their own party,
but simply because law has to be general and new circumstances will come up.
The Roman jurists loved that concept in Aristotle and they use it frequently.
In some, then, what I find in the studies of Roman law is that Roman jurists were willing to make a commitment to natural law and they were willing to defend it in so many words.
It seemed to them to have the real splendor the truth has when they think they've figured out something.
Secondly, it offered what the Stoics had most proposed, namely a sense of conformity with nature, that there would be a harmony if this natural law principle is used.
And thirdly, and this is very distinctive of Roman law and is not true at all of Greek law, it gave them a way to transcend various cultures and societies.
Greek law was always city law.
In fact, the Greeks in the ancient period never coalesced as one nation or as one state, but rather they were always individual states and they've much cherished and valued and defended their individual laws.
But as Rome came to have an empire, there was a need to look beyond the boundaries of just the city of Rome or just those cities in Italy united with Rome,
but to look to Greece and to Egypt and to the Near East, as far west as Spain, north into Gaul and Germany.
And what the Roman genius in law included was a sense of the need to preserve local institutions and local customs as far as possible with regard to the law,
that they were willing to tolerate any number of legal customs that were highly unique to one particular culture or others.
What the natural law gave the Romans was a way to say, we can look for what is common, what is the identical element or at least a very similar element in these many law codes.
This is a concept which has the formal name of Jusgencium, translated the law or the right of nations.
It's a concept which Cicero articulated in his Deo Fichis, which we studied together, and which the Roman jurists,
Opium and Gaius and Paulus, loved to comment on precisely because it was a way in which to see in these great varieties of legal customs that the Romans encountered in the process of forming their empire,
a native healthy respect for the standard of natural justice. Whatever the other trappings of law in any one of these particular cultures or societies,
fine, let them have their own particular diversity. But insofar as their law respects life and respects property and has other instances of natural justice,
for the Roman jurists, this is a sign that there has to be a kind of a natural law behind any given civil code.
They call it the Jusgencium and make tremendous use of it.
Now among Roman jurists, there still is disagreement with regard to the natural law, and I think it would be useful for us to spend a few minutes on that subject.
There's an extremely important third century figure by the name of Opium.
He is very clear about saying that natural law, the standard of complete and objective justice, is partially but only partially recorded in Jusgencium.
He is much more inclined to say that what natural law means is the law that is within any given animal species,
whether it be humans as animals, whether it be the laws of the lions or the laws of the bears, not a moral law in those cases,
but a way in which they operate. And he associates natural law with the way our bodily instincts, the way in which our biological organism is structured.
He's willing to hold that there is a Jusgencium, but he's a little bit more of the positivist, a little bit more inclined to say that Jusgencium is a matter of human construction.
In this respect, Opium is taking one theme in natural law, namely the notion that the natural law, if it's natural, will have to be biologically embedded.
His fellow jurists, however, will disagree with him.
The jurist I have in mind in particular is the man named Gaius, who stressed that the natural law and the Jusgencium were one and the same.
A very strong sense that what it is that a lawyer needs to know about natural law can in fact be culled from the survey of other legal institutions.
And this common element of justice that is found in the law codes of these many cultures will in fact show you what the natural law is.
When these jurists, Opium and Gaius, are reading their Cicero and are trying to reflect the natural law at the beginning of their own comments on the body of Roman law as it grew up with legislation and with president,
they are quick to point out where some of the main areas that natural law touches civil law will be found.
They quickly find it in areas of kinship relations or questions of marriage and family, which they seem in all the various cultures which their law codes have to concern.
Likewise, they find it in an area like contracts, namely that contracts don't have to be made, their voluntary associations, but that if they are made, they need to be made in good faith and that that's a natural law requirement of a contract.
Likewise, they have a sense that promises must be kept.
They have a sense that when contracts are violated and these matters come to the courts, what the jurist has to do is really to weigh the advantages and the disadvantages that were present in the initial contract.
Frequently enough, the violations of contract come when one party has fulfilled the obligations that were undertaken but now feel that the recompense is inadequate, situations have changed.
Or perhaps I should say that situation is still the same, that's still the origin of much contract dispute in our own time.
But the natural law jurists, among them, Opian and Gaius, found that there are natural law obligations which they need to respect.
Likewise, they have a strong sense that you can't and you shouldn't be bound simply by the literal terms of the contract if the terms are badly phrased and that one needs to understand the intention of those contracting.
In all of these respects, they have a strong sense of the way in which natural law has a great impact on the civil law and they try to record it.
One finds these debates, of course, continuing into our own time and I couldn't help but think of the questions now that circulate about same-sex marriages that are being debated in the halls of our legislators.
I think those debates would probably profit much by asking the question a little bit more deeply whether there is such a thing as a nature or a natural standard to marriage.
I think that that would aid at least the debate as it needs to go forward because at least some of the parties are urging that the kind of association, the kind of contract, the kind of union that is involved in marriage is simply something of human production, simply something of human institution and hence can be altered at human whim.
And this is a way in which I think a good understanding of the natural law might aid that debate.
Roman jurists also were extremely inclined to make a distinction between two terms which are useful for our knowledge of the natural law, the term us and the term lex, lex as in legislation, us as in jurist or jurisprudence.
Generally by the term us what they mean is a whole system of law and a system of right, so Roman law or Athenian law, we might say American law.
By lex they are inclined to think of the particular legislation that is coming down the pike, so a law about taxes or a law about the military or a law about property.
And it's this strong sense that they have that the various cultures that they are meeting and trying to deal with each of them has a us of its own, a body of law.
And their interest is in seeing whether this body of law that the Greeks have and that the Egyptians have and that the Romans have and any other culture which they meet.
Whether this us that any one of the nations has can generate for them a common us that is a natural law which will be common to all of them and so they are willing to undertake that very notion of a law of nations as being part of the natural law.
To them it struck them I think as though there were a happy coincidence between the very strongly inductive maneuver in which you're comparing various law codes to try to see what is common or whether you're operating philosophically and thinking about the natural
indirectness of our nature and of our being and of our biological structure and then metaphysically inferring what the obligations that are part of morality are that must come from this.
Now this code of this body of law that the Romans had articulated does eventually break down with the fall of Rome.
But as emperors squabble and there is tremendous civil strife in the period of the empire after the fall of Rome, eventually there is a reunification and Justinian is to be credited with the political reunification of Rome and with the recovery of Roman law.
He makes in the year 533 a codification of law with the aid of many legal scholars who are in his service and as such right at the very beginning of his digest which is the beginning of the book, the corpus of civil law that is written, there is an appreciation for natural law as being the first and supreme and an utterly telling moral norm that must be set before the legislature.
Let me point out the significance of the way in which he stated that. He is not allowing natural law for the purpose of judicial review. He's not suggesting that natural law will give jurists a license to go correcting law.
Rather, he is insisting at the book, the very beginning of the book in which he codifies Roman law, he's suggesting that natural law ought to inspire the legislature.
In short, it ought to be a reason why in politics people think of the natural standard of justice, why people think in terms of what is right and argue about it because it is not infallibly or intuitively clear what is right and one needs to argue admittedly using this moral standard.
But he would urge that that moral standard, natural law, be the source for legislators.
Jurists, on the other hand, in the understanding of Justinian, have to be extremely faithful to what the law formally says. In short, he's a very strict constructionist and implies that all jurists have to be simply faithful to the law as lawmakers make it, but that lawmakers ought to be subject to the natural law.
One sees on that very first page of the digest, no less than three, I think, incompatible understandings of what natural law is. Let me read the text or two to hear and then discuss them.
But what I'm driving at in looking at these texts is the ways in which natural law had, by this point in history, 533, come to be understood, and Justinian and his legal team, being entirely faithful to the historical record, are mindful of the fact that there are plural laws.
One understanding is the understanding of opium, namely, natural law is that which all animals have been taught by nature. This law, says opium, is not peculiar to the human species. It is common to all animals which are produced on land or sea and to fowls of the air as well.
From it comes the union of man and woman called by us, matrimony, and therewith the procreation and rearing of children. We find, in fact, that animals in general, the very wild beasts, are marked by acquaintance with this law.
I don't think his point is that all animals have to be moral in the way we do, but rather that there's a biological basis for morality in us, just as there's a biological basis for very regulated activity in animals.
That was the opium sense of the basis of natural law.
Secondly, he cites the jurist Gaius, and Gaius is of that Eustensium tradition, as I pointed out.
He says, all nations which are governed by statutes and customs make use partly of law which is peculiar to the respective nations and partly of such as is common to all mankind.
Whatever law any nation has established for itself is peculiar to the particular state and is called civil law as being the peculiar law of that state.
But law which natural reason has laid down for mankind in general is maintained equally by all men and is called Eustensium as being the law which all nations use.
What I take from that text is that the Roman jurist Gaius is being quoted by Justinian to say, natural law is the Eustensium, and the Eustensium, or international law, law of nations, is the common element in all these law codes which makes any of them reasonable.
Third, he cites the jurist Paulus, and here I think one has a sense of whether a given law code has it or not, reason requires that there be natural justice.
Let's listen to Paulus.
The word Eust, he says, is used in a number of different senses.
In the first place is in that in which the name is applied to that which is under all circumstances fair and right, as in the case of natural law.
Secondly, where the word Eust signifies that which is available for the benefits of all or most persons in any particular state, as in the case of the expression civil law.
And there you have a sense of whether a given civil law incorporates the right or not reason can discover what natural justice is.
In short then, Justinian's work is not necessarily to sort out all of these discrepancies in a way that a philosopher would, but rather to reconcile them in a way that a jurist wants to.
Namely, let's use all three and we'll use one now and use another at a second time and use the third where it proves pragmatic.
And this is the very pragmatic, very highly differentiated sense of the jurist that what we need to do is to solve problems.
We don't necessarily need philosophical consistency.
We'll find later on as we go, in particular Thomas Aquinas in the next lecture, a concern for trying to actually integrate and not merely juxtapose these three understandings.
For the remainder of our time in this lecture though, I'd like to turn to a third group of lawyers, this time church lawyers, sometimes called canon lawyers, lawyers who are dealing with ecclesiastical law.
Law within the church as it emerged in the Christian period was very much an organic growth, namely the church as it was found in Rome, the church it was found in Gaul, the church as it was found in Spain, the church it was found in various countries of the east.
And each of them developed various laws for the sake of the problems which there emerged.
As there came to be a certain emphasis upon referring cases to the sea at Rome, that is to the popes, there was an effort to standardize this.
But I don't think that it resulted in a complete standardization until the 11th century, at which point the popes commissioned a monk by the name of Gratian, who was teaching law at the newly founded university in Bologna.
And in the course of his investigations, he came to publish a book called The Harmony of Discordant Canons around the year 1139.
Very much in the fashion of Justinian for Roman law, Gratian tried to do for ecclesiastical law the same basic reconciliation.
He too found it necessary to consider the topic of natural law and does so very near the beginning of his volume.
He adds a fourth source of natural law.
So besides the notion of natural law as equivalent to the animal nature that we have, secondly, natural law as equivalent to the Eustentium or common element of various law codes,
thirdly, natural law as what reason requires reflecting on nature, Gratian adds a fourth, namely, natural law is virtually equivalent to divine law.
His sense is that the law that is given in the scriptures, what we were talking about when we examined Exodus and Deuteronomy,
the law that is given in the scriptures is natural law because it is the law that God intended for the governance of human nature.
This too will prove problematic to the philosophers and we will see in the next lecture.
Indeed, we saw it a few lectures ago when we were considering the four kinds of law that Thomas Aquinas distinguishes and organizes into a hierarchy.
Aquinas will try to say there's an overlap between divine law and natural law but that they're different kinds of law, the one being explicit and revealed,
the other being reason reflecting on our nature.
Gratian is very inclined simply to coalesce them and to state that they're virtually equal and this will be true of much of the tradition of canon law
to take natural law and divine law to be virtually equivalent.
Gratian does begin the distinction though, namely that some of the things that are mentioned in Leviticus, some of the things that are mentioned in Deuteronomy are truly ceremonial law
and are no longer required to be observed and so he's got the beginnings of the distinction which Thomas will continue to exploit.
In the very first part of his book the section is called the Decretum and it's a sense of the various decrees that have been given and that need to be made clear.
Gratian cites a figure by the name of Isidore of Seville who had lived shortly after Justinian's time and he starts to talk about natural law in Isidore's words.
Let me quote a moment.
He talks about the natural law as requiring the possession of all things in common and requiring one freedom for all.
Now those two points are things that are not usually stated in Roman law but these are rather Isidore reflecting the whole patristic tradition
that is a reflection upon Genesis under the Christian dispensation, that is the Christian interpretation of those Old Testament scriptures
and they will be sources of great insight but also sources of great philosophical perplexity.
Let me comment on both of those things in turn.
First he's saying that the natural law requires the possession of all things in common.
Now this is if it's taken entirely and literally is an attack on private property.
It's a suggestion that at the time of the Garden of Eden God gave the whole world to Adam and suggested that everything in this physical world is designed for Adam and for his progeny
and what Isidore and here Gratian picking up on Isidore is suggesting is that this remains true namely that the whole world is basically given for all of us.
Where do things become private? How is it that private property emerges and this will be a source of enormous philosophical intrigue as we move on
because by this time by I think early times in history private property is already something that people cherish.
We'll especially see when we get to John Locke how important it is to try to identify what the source of the privacy involved in private property is.
Gratian is here largely suggesting something that will be very true for the whole Christian tradition namely that property is primarily excuse me that physical goods are primarily for everyone's use.
If they are taken for private property mine or yours that's perfectly fine especially if there's an abundance but in a situation of great emergency
if we have someone who desperately needs to feed their children and cannot find any other recourse and has tried everything may that person take what does not belong to that person because there is tremendous need.
The scholastic figures who follow Gratian will be happy to assert that they may indeed in the time of dire need they may indeed take such physical goods because they are primarily common and only secondarily private.
With us to get ahead of our story right here we simply have Gratian taking his lead from Isidore and asserting something which will be the source of thinking as we go along.
Secondly there is the assertion that Gratian is quoting from Isidore that the natural law requires one freedom for all.
Here too it's a matter of thinking about freedom and slavery and Gratian goes on to explain that like private property slavery too was introduced into the world not as a good thing but as a result of sin.
And that Christian category of sin coming into play it's a suggestion that there really is something deeply wrong with slavery it's the very sign of a fallen world.
It will take a long time before this is fully fleshed and people will now start to do anything about slavery but a strong sense that each individual human being because of human nature because of being a creature of God because of being a child of God will rightly have a freedom that belongs to each individual.
And hence that there's something deeply wrong with the institution of slavery.
What Gratian adds to the patristic heritage something that he doesn't find simply in his patristic sources is a sense of using natural law for purposes of judicial review.
And this too will be an increasingly prominent part of our lecture series as we move to the end of it.
Namely whether you may use this standard of natural justice this standard of right however it is obtained whether it is obtained by reflecting on biological nature.
Whether it's obtained by reflecting upon the common element in diverse law codes whether it's obtained by reason reflecting on what is fair and equal or our common reflection upon what the scriptural law holds from Exodus Deuteronomy and various points of the gospel.
The question is not so much where is it coming from but how strongly may we use it and we see for instance at Decretum number eight by Gratian the following quotation.
Anything which is against natural law is null and void.
Now that's a very very strong sense. This is not just a direction to legislators about how they ought to proceed in making law but it's a directive which can and will be used by jurists for overturning existing law codes.
As one follows out the history of ecclesial law of canon law they did not until the 16th century until there was a whole new kind of slavery that came in with the discovery of the Americas and that the subject of slavery again returned to ecclesiastical courts.
They did not until the 16th century use it to overturn laws about slavery but rather they did use this at any number of points to overturn local laws and local customs for instance pertaining to divorce legislation that had been introduced in certain parts of Europe.
The strong suggestion of the candidates is that there's something indissoluble about all marriage and hence they would use a phrase such as anything which is against the natural law is null and void to overturn local laws in some of those marriage institutions.
On this subject let me close by just recommending an excellent book. It's written by Harold Berman and it's called Law and Revolution.
It's a wonderful study of how these canon lawyers took up both the natural law tradition and the Roman law tradition to create the institution of canon law and to change the social footing in which the church found itself.
Absolutely brilliant book and I'd like to commend it to you.
Lecture 12 The Thomistic Synthesis
Lecture 12 The Thomistic Synthesis
Our subject in this lecture is Thomas Aquinas, a natural law. Aquinas is perhaps the single greatest exponent and theorist of natural law and hence is given a complete lecture here.
He is a man of the 13th century, a Dominican priest who is particularly responsible for the renewal of Catholic theology, Catholic theological thinking in a way that put it on a very different course,
gave it different reasons for holding some of the same positions that it always held. And he gives his account of natural law within a book called the Summa Theologiae, the Summa of Theology.
It occupies only one small portion of that but it is a very complete and demanding treatise on the natural law and I would like to spend the balance of our lecture on that.
For the purpose of giving an adequate account, though, of his thought, I'll divide today's lecture into three parts, namely first a bit of a segment on Thomas Aquinas' life and why it is that he is so known for the recovery of natural law.
Secondly, a short segment on what he understood about law and about morality in general so that we can see where natural law fits into his system. And thirdly, some remarks about natural law as such.
Aquinas was a Dominican theologian. The Dominicans are one particular order within the church and they were founded just one generation before by Saint Dominic.
Thomas Aquinas taught in the papal courts that sat in various places in Italy, not only Rome but Viterbo and Orvieto, as well as teaching at the University of Naples and at the University of Paris.
What particularly distinguished him was the way in which he incorporated the thought of Aristotle into Catholic theology. Up until his time, the most prominent strain of Catholic theology in the west is the strain that follows Augustine who is relatively platonic in his philosophical commitments.
I think all of Christianity led by Augustine but much of the patristic period and the early portion of the Middle Ages was so highly appreciative of Plato, more so than of Aristotle, precisely because Plato seemed to be a person who defended things like the immortality of the soul where you weren't at all sure that Aristotle would have agreed with that.
Likewise, there are places in the works of Plato where he seems to encounter a creator of the world. It isn't quite the creator of the world, the Genesis and visions, but it's close enough and so they envisaged Plato as someone who was almost a Christian.
And the lines that most of the theological development followed were Augustinian. It's a certain pessimism about human nature and its possibilities unless aided by grace.
But what happened in the late 12th century and the early 13th century was a recovery of the texts of Aristotle. The thought of Aristotle had been almost forgotten with the exception of his works in logic.
The works in logic were known continuously and were the subject of much fruitful reflection in philosophy and theology.
The name of Aristotle and some of his positions were known, for example, his thoughts on justice so I think were always clear, but they literally did not have the text. They did not know exactly what it was that he had written and did not have a text available to consult.
The source of the recovery of Aristotelian text, curiously, is Christianity's contact with Islam. The various Muslim theologians, Muslim philosophers, had known of Aristotle more continuously.
And when, especially in Spain, there was contact between Christian West and Islamic theorists, the texts of Aristotle were translated from Greek into Islamic into Latin.
And then, once the discovery of Aristotle began and they saw how tremendously powerful these were for natural science especially, the Christians began to translate directly from the Greek bypassing the Islamic route and there were schools of translators.
But when Aristotle's texts began to be known, they weren't universally appreciated. In fact, it was thought that this was very dangerous, that the Aristotelian schools and especially his Islamic commentators, people like Averwes, seemed to be holding views that were antithetical to Christian teaching.
For example, on whether there is an immortal soul or on whether the world is eternal rather than created. And so Aristotle was thought of as rather dangerous and his Islamic interpreters all the more dangerous.
Thomas Aquinas, studying under Albert the Great, began to find ways in which if you change Aristotle just slightly, you can make it not just acceptable to Christianity, but in fact make it an even better defense of certain very traditional Christian teachings
than the Platonic-Augustinian route. And that is what I think Thomas Aquinas is best known for in the history of philosophy as it were baptizing Aristotle.
Now, in his own thought making use of this Aristotle, we find avenues toward natural law. The general rubric under which so much of Thomistic philosophy and theology is done can be contained and suggested by this sentence.
Grace, God's grace, does not destroy but builds on nature. It's a thesis I think that Augustine would have been very uncomfortable with, with his strong sense of original sin, the ways in which our nature was corrupted, the ways in which our original integrity and innocence were cracked.
Nature did not seem to be a very reliable base. It seemed to be a foundation that was extremely wounded and weak. This varies a little bit with how severe you read the wound that was received with Adam and how you take your Augustinianism, full dose or only partial strength.
But there's a sense in which his Augustinian thought is just extremely nervous about building on nature and suggesting instead that God's grace has to come and overwhelm you, much as it did in Augustine's own life, where he could not manage to persuade himself to do what it is that he knew with his intellect that he needed to do until grace overwhelmed him in that moment of conversion in the garden.
What Aquinas finds in Aristotle is a way in which to appreciate nature much, much more. Still to think that we do need grace. Aquinas is, is still committed to the doctrine of original sin. He still has a sense that our minds have been darkened, that our wills have been weakened by original sin, let alone the history of sins individually and, and as they build up within a culture to cultural blindness.
But he has got a better sense, a stronger, a more optimistic and hopeful sense of how much that nature can be relied upon. Even though nature won't be enough to save us, it can at least be a sufficient foundation upon which grace can come and grace can build.
Hence Aquinas regards grace building on nature. He regards it differently. It's not so much that grace has to come and overwhelm nature, but rather that grace will come and will enter into a person and will heal nature.
It's very much a difference with respect to, to how you understand the, the way in which grace works and how you understand salvation when it comes. And Aquinas is emphasizing grace as healing this corrupted nature, but building on something that gives a sufficient foundation and a sufficient strength for that building.
In this regard, Aquinas can have a, a much greater appreciation for the natural virtues. I quoted that line two lectures ago from Augustine, namely that virtue without faith is false virtue. And what he seemed to mean by that was no disrespect to the Romans whom he so much admired, but rather a sense that there's something in any one of those natural virtues,
prudence or courage or temperance or justice, that if undertaken without the grace of faith, could very well blind a person by pride. One would think that one can accomplish too much on one's own strength.
Aquinas, building on Aristotle, will have a much healthier appreciation for those natural virtues and will simply put them in tandem, natural virtues and supernatural virtues, that in addition to prudence, courage, temperance and justice, we'll also be talking about faith and hope and charity and other things like humility and regarding these various supernatural virtues as building upon the basis that nature sets.
Hence, to summarize, grace does not destroy, but rather perfects nature. Grace comes and heals what is wounded, but what is not mortally wounded.
Now, in the course of his thinking, Aquinas is also extremely indebted to the canonists, those ecclesiastical lawyers, and we were discussing in the last lecture.
The debt here is primarily by way of method, namely that the lawyers, as is still typical in law schools today, like to compare and contrast cases.
They will take what this lawyer and this judge said about a case and what that lawyer and those jurists said about some other case and see that they're in conflict with one another and then try to find a resolution.
Aquinas reading Gratian and reading these other canon lawyers makes this a new method for doing theology, that where an Augustan or theologians in the tradition of Augustan had tended to be scripture commentators,
had tended to develop a theory of theology based especially on extremely ascetical practices that were typical of the monasteries, Aquinas has great interest in commenting on texts,
both the texts of Aristotle and the texts of scripture, but he does it dialectically. He does it by setting up one opinion against another opinion and then trying to outdo the lawyers,
not just to juxtapose these things and to take the solution which he prefers, but finding a way to reconcile them where possible.
This is general stance of his method and it's the stance of scholastic method in general and he is in a way the greatest of these scholastic figures, the philosophers who belong to the schools, to the newly emerging universities.
In the course of making these distinctions which are so crucial to progress when one is proceeding dialectically, we can examine how he does this with law.
In an earlier lecture I already commented on the fact that he did so, distinguishing between eternal law, namely God's providential plan for the whole universe and the building in of natural systems and natural ends into each kind of being,
secondly divine law when God reveals explicitly what it is that he needs humankind to observe by way of morality,
third natural law in the sense of natural moral law, our reasons participation in the eternal law using our own noggin to try to reflect upon our own nature and to articulate the demands of morality,
imitating the divine providence in figuring out what will lead to real human fulfillment and on the other hand what would lead to human frustration,
and finally human law or positive law, civil law, the kind of law that human legislatures make when they make constitutions or legislation or some kind of judicial review.
Now in making that distinction Aquinas will be very, very dependent upon an Aristotelian sense of nature, that is nature defined not as the birds, the bees, the fields and the trees,
but rather nature in the way that Aristotle and the philosophers in the tradition of Aristotle have been accustomed to understanding nature.
Nature is that inner principle of a things growth, of a things development, of a things typical activity, and what Aquinas will do is to suggest reason has to reflect on that nature,
it has to reflect on the structure of our bodies, but also the structure of our soul, and it has to reflect not just on the existing structures as they're found in the mature adult,
but has to reflect upon the development of those structures from the incipient stage of a human life through its natural death.
It has to look at the natural end directedness, the teleological dynamism of our natures precisely in order to share in this God like project of using providence,
of being far sighted and foreseeing, looking to what it is that human nature really needs for the accomplishment of the end for which it's designed.
Hence, Thomas, with a certain optimism that comes from this newly rediscovered Aristotle, thinks that we can participate in the divine project by reflecting on our natures,
and even though those natures are wounded, they're not as innocent or as integral as perhaps the Greeks, perhaps Aristotle conceived them,
that even though we've got wounded nature, even though we've got original sin as somehow a deficiency that we have to overcome, something that can distort our appreciation,
nonetheless there's enough solidity, there's enough of a basis for us really to know the natural law obligations that we have and to defend those natural law obligations to people of goodwill
and to show the things that are very typical of any natural law theory, namely the objectivity, the universality, and the intelligibility of these moral claims.
Thomas has a strong theory of divine law as in conformity and cooperating with natural law.
The divine law in Genesis and especially in Exodus and Deuteronomy, the divine law as it's revealed by Jesus in the Gospel,
the divine law is that which can help confirm the natural law, that is if we're trying by our reason to understand what it is we must do,
God has said so, at least in certain respects, and in the places where the divine law makes something clear, one can see a confirmation of this natural reason.
On the other hand, one will see a new avenue, a new opportunity for trying to reach moral decisions on those areas where the divine law has not made things explicit.
If the divine law showing that we were right in these areas of the natural law where it became obvious that one should not arbitrarily take innocent life in murder,
where one should not violate one's marital vows by any kind of adultery, where one should not remove property that does not belong to us unless in those cases where the physical good has reverted to common ownership because of dire need.
In those cases where the natural law has exhibited an obligation that the divine law has explicitly stated the same point, we have all the more reason to trust our reason,
and we can now with much greater confidence, with greater hope, with greater optimism than Augustine or the theology that followed from Augustine,
we can trust reason for articulating a natural law where here to for reason had been a little bit under suspicion as being insufficiently powerful,
as being too darkened or perhaps too much under the sway of those impotence of will that we had seen as a result of original sin.
In the course of articulating his theory, Aquinas also has some important distinctions with respect to morality.
Namely, I am anxious at showing Thomas Aquinas as a proponent of natural law, but I do not want to misrepresent him as holding that natural law constitutes the whole of morality.
Rather, he places natural law within the Summa of theology and within that section of the Summa of theology that deals with morality,
and he thinks that there are some other crucial aspects of morality. There is, for instance, the divine law which makes things clear, which are otherwise not clear,
but there are also huge matters of virtue. One can see all those natural virtues as rooted in our own strengths, rooted in our abilities to be just, be courageous, be temperate, be prudent,
and that these make an enormous contribution toward the whole of morality.
Notice that as soon as we start contrasting law with virtue, we've got a different take, we've got a different sense of what the project of morality is.
When one is focusing on law and morality, one is focusing on the minimal standards, what everybody must do in order to be moral.
When one is focusing on virtue, one is talking about excellence, on the ideals to which one should try to reach, one should try to obtain.
This is a lovely combination. It's a suggestion that when we need to discipline the wrongdoers, we will use law and suggest they aren't even meeting minimal standards.
But we shouldn't content ourselves with minimal standards. We should range up and seek excellence in the course of the virtues.
Some of the virtues will be natural, but other virtues can only be obtained by divine grace, those supernatural virtues, and this too is a part of morality.
Likewise, not everything is covered by law and not everything is covered by virtue.
Sometimes what one has to look at is human custom and moral suasion.
That is, at some point in the course of morality, one must look at those things which one couldn't possibly enforce by law, gratitude, for example.
But it isn't necessarily one of the classical virtues, and one must rather depend upon human training.
One must depend upon elders. One must depend upon the wise in the community to point out what compromises need to be made for us to live together.
And on the other hand, what sorts of things will be extremely beneficial to a community, ways to determine our common life that might not otherwise be thought of or might not otherwise be developed.
To summarize then, Aquinas puts his notion of natural law within the context of a morality of a sense of ethics that includes both a divine component with divine law and supernatural virtues, a natural law, but also natural virtues, moral suasion with a healthy dose of grace.
Now, his own particular theory of natural law, he articulates it much as the lawyers do, and what he wants to tell us in that little treatise on natural law is that we need to make some distinctions between the levels of natural law.
And as far as I know, he is the first theorist to set up the matter in this way.
The first point is this, namely, that there is one natural law principle that is absolutely innate in us, that we cannot not know.
And that first principle of the natural law is this, do the good and avoid the evil.
Of course, it's so general that it doesn't help us much, what is good and what is evil in this particular case.
And yet, he thinks of it as a very fundamental principle, in fact, a principle that is self-evident.
That is, can you imagine anybody, if they ever got around to thinking about the subject, who thought that it would be a good idea to pursue the evil and to avoid the good.
That is, nobody would be willing to accept that.
It's a principle that is absolutely fundamental and will make it possible to have an ethical science, make it possible to have a series of deductions in the realm of ethics,
if we can reduce any other particular idea or any other particular moral claim to that fundamental status of do the good in this case and avoid the evil,
then we've got an absolute fundamental case, an absolute fundamental principle that nobody will be in the position to deny.
In the process of articulating that fundamental principle, do the good and avoid the evil, he is relying upon a certain point of moral psychology,
namely that the way humans work is that we are automatically constructed in such a way that we'll automatically be attracted to the good.
Think about it for a minute, if you will.
When we find something attractive in life, whether it be good food at a restaurant or whether it be a matter of pleasant people or beautiful faces,
whether it be a matter of lovely paintings, lovely outdoors, if there's something good, we can't help but be attracted to it.
Our freedom doesn't consist in being attracted.
Where our freedom kicks in is whether or not we'll go along with that attraction,
whether we'll exclude the other things that might be attractive and go with this particular good or that one.
He roots his own sense of the first moral principle in the way we're made.
We're made to be attracted toward goods, where our freedom consists in is which good we'll go with, which particular option we'll select among the goods that are possible,
or conversely, which evil we'll flee from.
Secondly, he needs to specify this, and so at the second level of the natural law, in order to give us a little bit more helpful advice,
what he proposes is that we try to realize our own natural potential.
And in the course of describing this, he notices that there are three particular areas where we feel a natural inclination.
That is, some of the inclinations that we naturally feel, some of the attractions to which we are naturally drawn, are things that we share with all beings.
Others are going to be attractions that we share with all animals, and some are attractions that we experience only within the human community.
He thinks that an analysis of these very diverse groups of natural attraction, natural inclination, will yield greater insight at the secondary level about our natural law obligations.
Let's take each of those in turn.
There are those inclinations which human beings share with all other creatures, the desire to continue in existence, the notion of ongoing life.
He thinks that if we reflect on this, what we'll see is that life and existence are goods, and hence you can eventually, by thinking about it, see that there is a natural law obligation that prohibits murder,
that prohibits suicide, that prohibits mutilation.
Or if you want to put it positively, there's a command to do what is necessary in order to continue to exist and allow others to continue to exist.
So he thinks that the first specification of the natural law comes when we reflect on those inclinations we have simply to continue to live.
A second group of inclinations are things that we share with other animals.
You can see here how he's using the Roman jurist Ulpian, who had been inclined to take natural law as something like the instinct in animals.
He notices that all animals have a desire to grow, to reproduce, to use their powers of sensation, their curious, to use their powers of locomotion.
And he thinks that when we reflect on how that works in us, in human beings, that there's corresponding natural law obligation which can be drawn.
Namely, an obligation to care for whatever offspring one has.
A prohibition on doing anything which would imperil the propagation of the species.
That there's something wrong with that which would prevent the species from going on, just as there's something very right with making sure that you do take care of whatever offspring you generate.
Thirdly, he thinks that there are certain natural obligations that come from a third group of natural attractions or natural inclinations.
Namely, we humans have an inclination to talk.
I've been doing it here for hour upon hour, and we all have that sense of a desire to communicate.
Likewise, we have a desire to live in society.
We have a desire to have friends and to be sociable.
We have desires to choose things and to make various promises and commitments and to make various decisions.
Well, he thinks similarly, if you reflect upon those natural inclinations, and again, if you sort out what the good inclinations are from the bad inclinations, you have to have a lot of experience.
Test this by history as well as by the experience of one's peers as well as one's own experience.
When one tests these various inclinations, one will likewise find various moral obligations.
If it's a matter of speech, for instance, he thinks that there's an obligation not to lie, or if there's a matter of living together in community, he thinks there's an obligation never to offend those with whom we must live.
It's one of those obligations that come precisely from our life in common.
Since humans have such a long-standing dependence upon their parents and upon elders, he thinks that there's a natural obligation that comes directly to honor one's elders to whom one owes such great debt of gratitude.
Now, I've given these only by way of example, and his own texts, when you have the opportunity to look at them, go into far more examples of the various duties and the various prohibitions that he mentions.
I do not present an exhaustive list, but rather simply a set by way of illustration and example. Even so, those things are fairly general.
Let me take just one case that's a very frequent set of objections coming from it, namely the obligation that we have not to lie.
But of course you've got to make further distinctions, and so not only is there a first level of natural law, do the good and avoid the evil,
and a second level, namely don't lie but tell the truth, but then you've got to go to the third level and start looking at the particular circumstances.
Do you for instance need to tell all the truth you know about everything all the time?
Of course not. I mean there are things that are properly kept secret and other things that must be told.
And then there's also questions about need one tell everything to everybody when they ask.
Well no, some people do not have a right to the truth. One thinks about those proverbial stories of soldiers knocking on the door asking if you are harboring fugitives.
And it's not necessary to tell the soldiers everything that they want, especially if what they're seeking is an unjust request, if they're seeking the life of someone who deserves protection.
Hence, one shouldn't content oneself at the second level of natural law.
One has to consider all sorts of factors about circumstances and the ways in which these questions arise at the third level in order to be sure one has correctly stated one's natural obligation.
Now the discovery of these levels of natural law, primary level that are so general, always truthful and always known but very, very general,
and then a discovery of a secondary level of natural law which gives us the main areas where we find natural law obligation.
And finally a tertiary level when we really get down to the specifics of any given situation.
For Aquinas, this is precisely good use of our reason, the reason that God gave us, reflecting upon our God given nature.
Namely, we have a tremendous talent which God gives us.
He too has given us some level of detail in those ten commandments, some level of specificity, but he has still left a tremendous amount to us to try to figure out.
This is one of, I think, Thomas Aquinas' greatest insights.
It's the insight about where our freedom consists, what our freedom consists in in this world.
Remember he had said about the human will, that the human will is highly determined.
It's determined to be attracted toward a good that we perceive.
We can't help but feel the attraction of a beautiful face.
We can't help but feel some attraction toward good food.
We can't help but feel the attraction toward nice temperature or just a change in our surroundings.
But we're not forced to choose any one of the goods that we do perceive as good.
Now, if you will, do a little thought experiment with me.
Bring God into the equation.
What would happen if God himself were present before us?
We would feel now an infinite attraction.
It wouldn't be against our nature because it would be a genuine good.
We would be spontaneously drawn toward that God, but we wouldn't have any particular way to exercise our freedom.
We wouldn't have any of the options, any of the alternatives, any of the possibility of going otherwise.
It wouldn't be against us, but on the other hand, we wouldn't have any options left.
What Aquinas thinks is that part of the mystery of God's plan is that God in his own wonderful and complete divine self
is not present to us in this life, but that God remains in heaven.
Aquinas thinks that he sent his son, but he sent his son in a human form who did not appear to be God.
He looked like a regular man.
And it's precisely this distance that God is not present to us in his fullness in this world which keeps us free.
Freedom is not a matter for Aquinas of choosing whatever we want.
Freedom rather refers to our power to choose what we will.
We can't help but be attracted to the finite goods of this life, but no finite good in this life overpowers us.
Rather, we, at least in principle, are stronger than any finite good, and we can increase our willpower if our willpower has been a little weak
so that we can always say no to lots of possible goods.
And yet there is a moral order, a moral hierarchy of things that we ought to prefer, things that we ought to choose.
For Thomas, this is the natural law, a set of directions and obligations about what we ought to choose,
given that we are still free to choose as well as we can and that we are responsible for what we choose.
We genuinely hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our Great Courses series.
Our courses are now available to order online.
Visit our website at www.teach12.com
or call our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12.
That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you very much.
Lecture 13 Late Medieval and Early Modern Views
Lecture 13 Late Medieval and Early Modern Views
Philosophers in the early modern period progressively liberate themselves from their connection with theology and with the authority of the church,
since the theory of natural law had been such a very intricately woven part of the church's understanding of morality,
this will require a new stance on the question of natural law.
What had been a part of the vast hierarchical vision of the good of the universe descending all the way from God to the lowest creature
now becomes a theory in the early modern period which can be a revolutionary ideology for massive transformation of the political and social order.
But this does not come about unprepared.
I would like to talk in this lecture about the late medieval and early modern approach to natural law,
and particularly to some of the reasons within the late medieval period which gave rise to this very different understanding of natural law in the early modern period.
In general, this is called nominalism and volunteerism, and that will be the first of the three topics I covered in this lecture.
Secondly, I'd like to spend a little bit of time with a brief revival of Thomism that occurred in the Baroque age,
and then finally I will turn to one typical example of early modern philosophy,
and then I'll continue with other early modern philosophers in the next lecture.
First, then, the question of late medieval philosophy, its nominalism, and its volunteerism.
I suppose it's to be expected that any good idea will provoke a reaction, and sure enough, in the 14th century there was a great reaction against the Thomistic synthesis for a variety of reasons.
But we can cover this reaction in general by considering nominalism and volunteerism.
This is the stance on the famous problem of universals, which we noted earlier in the course of this lecture series, but which really deserves study in its own right.
The problem of universals is the question about the reality of essences, the reality of natural kinds.
We noted it all the way back as far as the lecture on Aristotle when we were talking about the natural kinds as distinct from one another,
whether one species is different from another species, by virtue of having a different essence, that is, a genus, a larger group,
and then a specific difference, some particular set of traits which are characteristic of that group and that group only.
The technical name for this is that each species has its own essence, but are these essences, are these universal terms,
merely terms in our language that are used universally, they're used to describe every member of the set we want to describe,
but that the burden is on the person speaking to see the similarity, to find a common term, and that these universal terms are nothing more than parts of our speech.
Or are these essences something that really belong to things?
Is there some foundation in reality that lets us make the distinctions that we make when we articulate different essences for things?
The very exaggerated form of these universals is the form found in Platonism, where the ideas, or the forms, are universals that are in fact actually separate
and they exist in a distinct world, and this world is merely a set of imperfect copies of each of those perfect essences.
On the other extreme is nominalism, the view that these universal terms are simply universal terms, they are simply universals in our language,
but that they don't correspond to anything in reality.
What Aquinas had tried to maintain was a moderate realism, a notion that there really is something that is truly common to all the members of a natural kind.
The essence doesn't exist in a separate world, the essence rather is exactly the same structure in each of the members of the natural kind or the set we're trying to describe.
That stance of moderate realist stance is what is questioned in the 14th century.
It's a radical break from the Aristotelianism and the moderate realism that Aquinas had maintained, and if one makes this radical break,
if one denies that there are real essences in things, it will prove absolutely impossible to have a natural law.
It will be impossible to argue that because of the structure, because of this common nature, because of this essence that is recurrent in every instance of a set like all human beings,
that we can argue from the set, excuse me, we can argue from the essence of that creature to the moral obligations that unfold as the ways to fulfill,
the ways to foster that individual's development.
As a typical example of the nominalist movement, I would like to call upon the figure of William of Occam.
This is an English Franciscan, so he's a member of a different religious order than Aquinas was.
He taught at Oxford in the later part of the 13th and the earlier part of the 14th century, and he undertook this position of metaphysical nominalism,
which entailed the denial of any real essences.
Occam is perhaps most well known to people for the phrase Occam's razor.
One is to shave away any unnecessary entities, that for the purposes of explanation, one should seek the simplest explanation possible,
and that one should not postulate any hypothetical entities that one doesn't really need to explain this.
Occam's razor is really a two-sided razor, namely it does allow us to shave away any unnecessary entities,
but it also requires that we postulate a hypothetical entity, which we cannot do without.
If we need it really for an explanation, then we may use it, in fact we must use it,
but if we can explain it in a simpler way, we should.
Now, Occam is not the one to invent this, although the device is usually given the name Occam's razor, Aquinas,
and in fact many figures before Aquinas had used it, but it's a wonderful principle of parsimony that urges us to simplicity in our explanations
and not to produce any unnecessary hypotheses that we really don't need, and that's a very good rule for all of science and all of philosophy.
The question at issue, though, is about real essences. Should we save those essences, or should we shave away those essences by this principle of parsimony?
There's no need, I think, for Aquinas or for Occam to say that these essences are really separate in the way that Plato thought that they were really separate in a distinct world.
The question, however, is not that. The question is whether there has to be a foundation in things, an essence, a natural kind, in order to generate these moral obligations.
If we find that there are no essences, if Occam is right, how will we generate any theory of morality, and that's where the second big idea comes in, namely the notion of volunteerism,
where Thomas Aquinas' theory of the natural law had been a very intellectualist vision, that is, it was God's mind who, in his providence,
created these natures with a built-in end and a built-in directedness toward that end, and then it was the human reason, the human intellect,
which was to reflect upon this nature and to try to discover what that natural end-directedness was, very intellectual process.
For Scotus and then for Occam, whom we are speaking about here, there's a volunteerism, namely a sense that one cannot depend upon our own human reason for the source of morality,
and in fact one may not depend upon the divine reason for the articulation of morality. Rather, one must depend upon the divine will.
It is because this is the command of God and God's choice that things are moral or immoral, and as further thinkers carry out the implications that are latent within Occam's idea,
it will be not only God's will, but it will even be human will that is the source of obligation. We'll see that by the end of this particular lecture.
Now, paradoxically, and I mention this just in order to be fair to Occam, Occam does still talk about natural law, and he uses the term natural law in three distinct senses.
First, he uses the term natural law to talk about certain things which are unchangeable divine commands that human reason can know about.
For example, Occam has a long discussion on the Sixth Commandment, never to commit adultery, and yet he never does tell us how we are to know this by merely human reason.
Rather, in line with his basic nominalism, his suggestion is that we impose general moral names upon this forbidden practice which God has forbidden and it's forbidden because God thought it wrong.
Now, either Occam is being a little inconsistent here, continuing to use natural law, when in fact his theory has made natural law impossible,
or else he needs to invoke some kind of divine inspiration. Maybe we know that adultery is naturally wrong, but we know it not by a natural process of human reason, we know it by God telling us so.
This will be an intractable problem for all subsequent nominalism. How do you justify moral obligations as really objective, really universal, and really intelligible if we're unable to know these common natures,
and they will wrestle with that throughout the history of nominalism. And yet they want to assert that nominalism for reasons that are understandable, namely the things that really exist are all quite individual, all quite distinct from one another.
And one doesn't ever find anything that they, strictly speaking, share in existence. Each one has its own existence. So they ask, how can there be such a common nature? Where does it exist?
A second sense in which Occam uses the term natural law is to talk about some of those precepts of the divine commands in which there is natural equality.
So we, for instance, should respect everyone's life according to the Fifth Commandment. We should murder no one. And his idea is that before the fall, before Adam's disgrace, then perhaps human beings could know these things by a natural law,
but that after the fall, these natural law precepts are no longer binding on us. That is, we can't see enough of them. We can't understand enough of them to feel the natural law obligation. Hence, what we depend upon and what we trust in is the divine command to explain this to us.
In every respect, Occam is at least being consistent here. From his nominalism, there follows a volatilism with respect to morality.
This, however, raises questions of its own. The perplexities that troubled medieval logic were not just questions about how many angels can dance on the head of a pin, a question that no medieval philosopher ever raised.
That was one of those canards that the Enlightenment cast upon the Middle Ages to try to discredit it. But they did have really genuine logical problems. They asked, for instance, questions like this.
Could God, in his absolute power, have damned Peter and saved Judas? There they make a comparison between the two apostles, namely Peter, who even though he denied our Lord at one point, nonetheless repented and hence is saved.
Judas, who betrayed the Lord, went out and hung himself. And they asked the question, couldn't God, in his absolute power, have determined otherwise, determined in a way that the Judas should be saved and Peter should be damned?
Now, in that, I think they are trying to be extremely docile and extremely humble, trying to give us a sense of God's absolute power.
At best, when trying to answer that question, they make a distinction and they say, in his absolute power, of course, God could have.
But God has chosen to restrict his power in certain ways, namely to restrict his power and to allow us our human freedom, so that once we have freely chosen in the way that Peter did or the way that Judas did, then God now conforms himself to the way in which we have freely acted,
so that God will only condemn Judas if he does not repent, and God will save Peter if indeed he sins but then repents.
But what they're asking by putting the question that way is the question about, is God in any way restricted? Does the nature of things in any way require that God determined morality in accord with the nature of things?
And figures like Occam want to suggest that God's power is in no way limited.
Hence, he's a little weaker on whether there could be such a natural law, and is stronger on the notion that things are moral because God said so, and things are immoral because God said so.
It's an effort to have a healthy respect for divine power. I think it may be too strong a sense of divine power in my own estimation of this.
A third way in which Occam does still speak of natural law, and it's a very interesting way, we've seen in the previous lectures how great a dependence these scholastic thinkers had upon Roman law and on ecclesiastical law.
Well, so too, Occam is alert to this awareness of that legal tradition in which natural law has been associated with the Eustensium or the law of nations.
And Occam suggests in a way that will prove very, very important for the subsequent history of early modern philosophy that we may call natural law, the Eustensium or law of nations, acting on that law of nations as if it were natural law.
Now, this is to insert that word as if, but to do so in order to try to bring out that we cannot ever know the natural law merely by our reason, we at best will know morality because God has commanded it so.
But since we find ourselves in a context where there are very diverse laws from very different human communities, and some at least similarities among these different communities in what they have held,
perhaps that's our best way of getting at the source of morality from human experience, namely to treat the Eustensium or the common element within various human communities as if it were natural law.
And yet to take that as the only sense of natural law would be to evacuate natural law of much of its normal meaning.
This I think is the situation by the end of the 14th century. The Thomistic synthesis is deeply under attack. Logic is reigning supreme in the universities.
Hair splitting is now the order of the day. And this older tradition has come under attack. Is it really intelligible? Can we ever really know these natures?
But the Thomistic synthesis has a revival in the Baroque period, namely the 16th century, where certain Dominican thinkers and certain Jesuit thinkers come to the aid of Thomas Aquinas and try to re-understand his own metaphysical synthesis.
Among the Dominicans are wonderful thinkers like Coucherton, Bonyez and David Toria. David Toria is especially interesting because he's alert to the problem of the Indians in the New World and alert to the fact that they are truly human beings and may not be enslaved.
And his natural law theory comes precisely in order to handle the problem of the slavery that is being imposed upon certain of the peoples found in the New World and natural law he thinks will give the only adequate defense of these poor people.
There are also a number of Jesuits, Bellarmine, Lusius and Suarez, and I will take Francisco Suarez as my example here. He is the author of a number of works in politics and in morality as well as in metaphysics.
I will concentrate on one particular work called On Laws and God the Lawgiver, and one can see here a tremendous depth to the Thomistic synthesis that we were explaining.
What Suarez tries to do I think is sort of to be a Humpty Dumpty, sitting on the fence and trying to recover as much as he can of Thomistic intellectualism, but at the same time to bring in as much of Occam's volunteerism as he can.
And he's going to try to do both. We all of course remember the problem with sitting on the fence like Humpty Dumpty does, that if you fall off it's going to be a very nasty display of a shattered egg.
Suarez tries his very best and I appreciate his efforts to try. I'm not sure that he's ultimately successful in all that he undertakes here.
What he attempts to do is to say that there is an order of nature, and in this respect he's being a good Aristotelian trying to follow Aquinas, an order of nature on which human reason may reflect in order to discover the natural law.
Why? Because that natural order of things, that wonderful hierarchy of beings, is a reflection of God's immutable and rational nature, and a reflection of the divine will, and there we're hearing the Occamist sense of this.
When push comes to shove, Suarez tends to urge that the obligatory force of natural law is the will of God, and his reasoning is this. Law wouldn't be law unless a law giver commands it.
The law giver has to exercise his will in order to make a directive or to make a command. Granting that law giver may be reflecting on the natural order of things and may be trying to make the commands of his will reflect the natural order which his reason discovers,
but nonetheless the source of moral cogency, the source of, the real biting source of obligation of law and morality comes from the will of God.
Hence he attempts a two-pronged approach which is attempting to be intellectuals like Thomas was, and yet is in a way very pragmatic and dependent upon a divine will in order to see that natural law really does have some force of obligation and cogency upon us human individuals.
In this respect I find that Occam is perhaps more responsive to Occam, that Suarez is more responsive to Occam and the nominalists than he is to the Aquinas that he's trying to maintain, and he puts the burden of proof more and more on the logician.
He wants us to ask that question about divine omnipotence, God's power, and he wants us really to think through carefully the notion that divine omnipotence cannot be limited in any way.
He asks for instance at one point, wouldn't we be denying God's omnipotence if it weren't possible for God to command us even to hate him?
And it's that rhetorical question, I don't think he expects us to give an immediate direct answer, but he asks that question because he has such a strong sense of divine omnipotence.
Where this takes Suarez is to long an elaborate commentary on troubling scriptural passages.
Maybe you've reflected in one time or another on that passage in Genesis in which God commands Abraham to sacrifice his son Isaac, or the time when God commands the prophet Hosea to have intercourse with a prostitute.
And in asking these question of the interpretation of these passages, Suarez is saying, is God really being reasonable here?
Is God conforming himself to the nature of the thing?
Or is God asking for something that sure seems to us to be immoral?
There are various ways of handling those difficulties.
We would probably profit well by a session on scriptural interpretation to think out what the right answer is.
My point here is simply to focus on the fact that Suarez is forced to elaborate complexity of response and forced to the position of saying God will is the source of morality.
So that while normally it's wrong to have intercourse with a prostitute, while normally it's wrong to slay your son in sacrifice, God could command the opposite of those things and in no way be acting immorally.
Why? Because what morality is, is what God commands.
It's not right already and therefore God commands it.
It is right only because God commands it.
When Suarez turns to politics, one finds that he is indebted to figures in the scholastic tradition, people like Nicholas of Cusa, who make natural freedom the basis for political legitimacy.
This is a theme which we will see coming out in tremendous detail as we enter the early modern period, namely that unless there is consent by the governed, there can be no political legitimacy, Suarez grounds that on human freedom,
grounds that on a sense of the importance of our wills in giving consent to a government, giving consent to an authority, if that authority is to have any moral cogency.
This is also to start to treat the concept of the Eustensium, the law of the nations, not as natural law, but rather as simply a record of the voluntary consent which different populations have given to government in the course of their various histories.
Hence one can see a trend that will develop very strongly in the early modern period beginning here, taking Eustensium, the law of nations, not as equivalent to the natural law, but taking Eustensium in the modern sense of international law.
That is, what various governments have now agreed to do in common, and there's no hint of a natural law basis to it.
We turn for the last part of this lecture to another figure of the early modern period who represents the split that has occurred within Christianity by this point.
The earlier figures that we had been referring to were Catholic figures, but I'd like to turn now to an early Protestant figure on the subject of natural law because as the church unity was split,
we find that there is a need to have each of these traditions take a stance on what the source of morality is.
Where the Catholic tradition continued to try to have a philosophical and a revealed source for any moral theology, the Protestant traditions were much less comfortable with using philosophy.
The Protestant traditions tended to emphasize scripture, namely that the faith is determined by the scripture alone, and that each person, or at least each confession, has to interpret and determine that scripture.
And yet very, very quickly in the course of intellectual history, these various Protestant confessions each found the need to be asking some of the same philosophical questions,
to be asking whether one could know anything about natures and whether these natures would tell us anything about morality, especially on those topics where divine command, where the divine legislation didn't seem to express itself.
This had traditionally been a place where theology turned back to philosophy and sought for what was equitable, what was equal, and what was fair.
The figure I'd like to use as an example here is a Dutch Armenian Calvinist by the name of Hugo Grotsius.
Grotsius saw enormous possibilities in natural law for dealing with the question of international relations precisely in a split Christendom.
When you had some confessional Catholic states and some confessional Protestant states and then various forms of Protestantism,
natural law, he thought, would be a wonderful way to resolve some of these international difficulties.
His 1625 book, The Law of War and Peace, defines natural law in a manner that at least anticipates if it doesn't quite yet reach that stress on human autonomy and human freedom
that will be later typical of the deists whom we'll be dealing with in subsequent lectures.
His idea here is that the natural law should be considered a dictate of right reason.
That is, we should use our reasons where divine law has not spoken and try to find ways that will bring us into conformity with our rational nature as individuals or our social natures
precisely to show how morally based certain patterns of conduct are and how absolutely morally necessary they are.
But in the course of reading this next quote, I'd ask you to listen particularly to the way in which Grotsius has reversed the direction of God's involvement in this matter.
He says, the law of nature is a dictate of right reason which points out that an act, according as it is or is not in conformity with rational and social nature,
has in it a quality of moral baseness or moral necessity and that in consequence such an act is either forbidden or enjoined by the author of nature, God.
Notice, this is to suggest that something is wrong and therefore forbidden by God.
It's a restriction on divine power rather than as the volunteerists had said it, namely something is forbidden by God and therefore wrong.
Grotsius is becoming more and more rationalist, but in the effort to become more and more rationalist, he doesn't follow out the lines of the Thomistic synthesis.
He rather initiates a line of thinking that will bring us more and more to a secular version of natural law and to the use of natural law as a revolutionary ideology which can transform the political and social order.
I think he may well do this because of the scandal of the wars of religion and the scandal of those wars of religion will provoke enlightenment thinkers to more and more secular versions of morality.
One of the most important but extremely controversial claims that Hugo Grotsius makes is that natural law would still have validity,
quote, even if we should concede what cannot be conceded without the utmost wickedness, namely that there is no God or that the affairs of men are of no concern to him.
Now, this is a very interesting way of putting it. It's asking us to do another one of those thought experiments.
In the last lecture, I asked you to do a thought experiment. What if God showed up? But now I'd ask you to do the opposite thought experiment. What if there is no God?
Would natural law still obtain? And Grotsius asks that question explicitly. Would natural law still be in force if there were no God? And he answers it unequivocally in the affirmative.
Namely, even if there were no God who established these natures, even if we returned as it were to now a very secularized version of Aristotle where there simply are eternal natures, would there still be a natural law?
And his answer is unequivocally yes, granted the difficulties of our reason in coming to know what that law is.
He's got enough of the Protestant in him to be very worried in the pessimistic Augustinian sense about whether we can figure it out.
And yet he's got enough of the rationalist in him to say there would still be such a law, which is at least in principle accessible to us, in principle intelligible.
The difficulty is with us, not with the nature of things, and that a rationalism can eventually bring this out.
He does this in a way I think that is not impious. He is still a believer, but historically this opens the way to a very secularized version of natural law theory.
In some respects, the work of Grotsia seems to be an effort to devise a system of natural law that can deduce all of the various truths of moral obligation from just a few self-evident premises.
It tries, I think, to remove from us the burden of a lot of inductive work.
If you remember our discussions about Aristotle and Aquinas, they were very, very strong on the notion that it takes an awful lot of observation in order to come up with an idea of nature.
That one has to do a lot of comparing of the various examples of the individuals within a species to articulate what a real nature is here.
And then, if you turn to Aquinas, it takes an awful lot of knowing the natural inclinations that we share with all beings, or that we share with all the animals, or that we share with everyone in the human community.
And it takes a lot of reflection inductively upon that experience in order to bring out what the natural law obligation is.
For Grotsias, I think there's a sense that that's too much metaphysical baggage to be carrying around.
And he proposes, I think, a much more strongly deductive system.
One will see a trail of this in, say, a Spinoza, where all of ethics is cast in a deductive geometrical mode.
Grotsias here tries to simply suggest, we have to rely upon certain self-evident principles.
Again, let me quote briefly from him.
Just as even God cannot cause that two times two should not make four, so he cannot cause that that which is intrinsically evil be not evil.
Grotsias is very happy to reduce the scope of divine omnipotence precisely in order to bring out a highly rationalized system of mathematics or of natural law.
There are other ways of handling that problem, namely the suggestion that such contradictions are not in any way restrictions on God's omnipotence.
They are simply projections by us of phrases that no longer have meaning.
For Grotsias, it's a matter of seeing this as a system of deductions and then creating a politics that flows from this.
He thinks, for instance, that the right to wage a just war flows directly and immediately from the right to self-defense.
He is willing to even suggest that there can be political absolutisms so long as sovereign and free people consent to them.
He offers a natural law justification of slavery and does a tremendous amount in cultivating the notion of US genciam, law of nations as international law rather than as natural law in the scholastic sense.
In our next lecture, we'll turn to other figures of the early modern period.
Lecture 14, Hobbes and Locke
Lecture 14, Hobbes and Locke
In our review of the history of natural law thinking,
we have noticed that this moral theory has taken some very diverse forms in the course of the years.
The period of the 16th to 18th century is no exception and in fact is a very strong example of how different this theory of natural law can look.
The early modern period in Europe is a period in which there emerged a very strong streak of liberal individualism.
We see this in figures like Thomas Hobbes and John Locke who will be the centerpieces for this particular lecture as we focus on what natural law theory meant given that liberal individualism.
For Thomas Hobbes, it was I think a matter of a very radical individualism that it leads him to assume a state of nature in which there was no government, no social organization, but only a very strong drive for self-preservation.
And that very strong drive places one in competition with others who are also operating under a strong drive such that the state of nature is a state of war, a war of all against all.
Natural law in the theory of Hobbes then is rather a practical set of rules for survival.
By contrast, John Locke, figure who is so important for the history of political thinking in our own country, follows out the thinking of people like the Anglican Richard Hooker and Samuel Pufendorf.
And he offers a theory of natural law that gives natural law yet another different cast, namely natural law as natural rights theory.
Locke assumes a very strong form of the natural equality that prevailed in the original state of nature, but he envisions it not as a state of the war of all against all, so much as a condition of real peace and goodwill, so much so that people were willing to establish a social contract.
And in the course of establishing that social contract, they're willing to give up some of their natural rights, for example the right to punish those who transgress the natural law, transgress our right to be left in peace, in order to get a more secure protection for our other natural rights.
This lecture then will be a lecture on natural law in the early modern period, and what I'd like to do first is to review some of the characteristics that are typical of natural law thinking throughout this period, then to turn to discuss Thomas Hobbes in some detail, and to conclude with a more detailed view of John Locke, and we'll have a fine sense, I think, of natural law in this historical period.
By way of overview, it seems to me that there are three strong characteristics of natural law in this period, and they grow out of that late medieval nominalism and the reactions to the Thomistic synthesis.
First, this natural law in the modern period is very rationalistic. I use that word in the sense in which it tends to be used within the history of philosophy, namely that claims about knowing the truth are restricted to things that are entirely and completely within the realm of human achievement.
We human beings have to figure it out. We have to divide and analyze and re-synthesize. Things are true when we can break them down and understand why they work. Things are true when we put them together.
On the other hand, this is very definitely anti-supernaturalist. That is, there's a great suspicion about claims to supernatural truth. I personally suspect that this stems from the wars of religion in which there were strong claims being made in the name of religion, Catholic and Protestant, such that there were wars over those subjects.
And the grave suspicion that came about to whether there could be any truth about supernatural, whether one could know the truth in matters of religion or in matters of transcendence, and this suspicion that one can't know the truth about God or about the church or about matters of religion tended to work over into the area of morality.
And it's something I think that's still very much as a part of many modern mindsets, namely that one can't know the truth about morals, whereas we have seen in all the lectures up until this time that those ages were very much inclined to think that one could know the truth about morality.
Granted that there were differences of opinion about what that truth was, but I didn't sense that there was much of a skepticism about the possibility of knowing truth in principle. Rather, there were simply problems in practice.
This age is very deeply rationalistic in which claims of faith, claims of revelation, claims of religion are privatized, are things that people may hold, individuals may want to believe, but about which one cannot have any strong truth claim made.
Second basic characteristic of this period is that it is deeply individualist. I have been trying to emphasize throughout the lectures so far that Aristotle, Thomas Aquinas, Augustine, and the various canon lawyers all understood society to be natural.
They understood human beings to have a deep sociality in their nature. They stressed the dependence relations, and they had a strong sense that we invariably find ourselves in context of family, in context of states and nations, and that this is natural.
Now, not that there is any one specific way in which families are organized or political communities are organized, but that it's natural because we naturally need it. We cannot get along without it, that we are social by nature because of our natural neediness.
This age, I think we'll see as we start to review Hobbes and Locke, tends to be very deeply individualist. That is, society is envisioned as a matter of human agreement rather than something that has a nature to it or is in any way natural, and we'll see social contract theory having a tremendous place of importance.
It is not the case for these thinkers that society is an entity with its own nature. Hence, there will be increasingly appeals to the consent of the governed for any forms of political legitimacy, as well as for moral consensus.
Thirdly, it is an age which was politically radical in the sense that there were tremendous transformations in the way in which human society would be governed and human society would be organized.
One sees this, for instance, in the overturning of aristocracies. One sees this in the rise of bourgeois society. One sees this in the rise of the democracies. But natural law plays a part in all of this as an ideology, a revolutionary ideology, which will serve as a justification for these vast changes in economic, political, and social relationships.
Let's turn to the two figures in question. They both are making a radical break, but making it in very different ways. First, the earlier figure is Thomas Hobbes, whose famous book is the Leviathan in the year 1651, and with Hobbes we see a radically individualist form of natural law.
Consider, first, Hobbes' basic assumptions. He assumes that there is a state of nature. I suspect that he gets the idea probably from Christian reflection upon the Garden of Eden. If anything was a state of nature, it was that, which people were pure and innocent.
But Hobbes' state of nature is different from that. It's a state in which not only is there no government, no organization of society at all, but life is ultimately individualist, and life is in the famous phrase that is always associated with Hobbes, solitary, poor, nasty, brutish, and short.
What we find, then, in Hobbes' state of nature is a whole set of human individuals who are dominated by an inner drive for self-preservation, and this drive to live a little longer, to find a way to make life better, given the conflicts and given the enormous pressure of dealing with other individuals who are similarly motivated, puts any individual person necessarily into conflict with others
because all are operating under the same drive. The only viable solution, according to Hobbes, for a person in such a predicament, is that one should seek peace by a social contract. So the problem is we're in a state of war and we can't do anything about it.
We want an end to the state of war, and the way to do this is to form a society. But how should we make such a society? The society is not a natural thing at all. It's not an entity which has a nature. It's rather something that we have to give a nature to, that we have to decide upon on the basis of a calculation of our own self-interest and a willingness, perhaps, to surrender some of our natural freedom of movement, some of our natural liberty to a sovereign.
If that sovereign can guarantee us some of the peace, some of the protection of our own existence that we so desperately desire.
When we choose to do this, says Hobbes in the Leviathan, we will submit to a sovereign and we'll expect that this submission will be complete, that the sovereign whom we decide upon when we organize a society will now have absolute authority in everything except for the form, except with respect to preserving the life of the citizens.
That is, there will be no arbitrary right on the part of the sovereign to exact the lives of the citizens. That was the very reason for entering into the social contract and that drive of self-preservation governs even this.
But in every other respect, in our economic relations and our political relations, in what we may do and what we may not do, we may have to yield some of our freedoms to the sovereign.
This, for Hobbes, is a very vast curtailing of the natural right of freedom because it is the thing which is so basic in the state of nature, namely, one may do absolutely anything, precisely in order to preserve one's life.
And if that absolutely anything means giving away virtually everything, one may be tempted to do that. If one can get away with less, so much the better.
But there's no intrinsic restriction on what the sovereign may ask of us. This, in a way, is a justification of absolute power. It is a perhaps a borrowing of Machiavellian politics.
What does natural law mean for Hobbes? He does use the term, for example, in the 15th chapter of the Leviathan. And yet when he speaks of natural law in that 15th chapter, the laws of nature that he envisioned are, I think, not laws in the strict sense at all.
For Hobbes cannot envision law as binding unless it is backed by sufficient force. Power is the name of the game. And it is only in society where there are sovereigns, where there are authorities that have been created by human construct, that there will be a sufficient power of the enforcement of rules by the sovereign.
Morality is nothing natural. All of morality is likewise constructed, a matter of human invention. And at best what it is is a set of practical rules that an individual may devise for the sake of surviving and protecting what of natural liberty he is able to protect,
given the kind of deal that he can make, given the fashion, the function, and the particular form of the social contract that he enters to try to gain greater security for his life and perhaps to end the war of all against all.
Hence, for Hobbes, natural law reduces to just one law, not in the sense that Aquinas had reduced natural law to that single principle of doing the good and avoiding the evil, and then multiplied natural law at the secondary level, depending on the set of natural inclinations we were considering for the sake of the specification of the principle.
Rather, for Hobbes, natural law is a single law, namely, at all costs, do what you need to do to preserve yourself. Here, prudent reasoning, that is, reason considered not so much trying to understand the nature of the human being or the nature of family or the nature of government,
but rather reason envisioned purely as instrumental, reason as calculating the means necessary to get to our end, practical reasoning in this sense may well involve deciding to achieve one's self-preservation by being very respectful of the social order we devise, being very humble in that respect.
It will allow others to protect themselves as well, and even if it means some vast curtailing of my liberty to do lots of other things, I will do that if it will allow the sovereign to maintain the social order in which my existence is more secure.
In effect, then, for Hobbes, natural law has but a single principle, and is extremely pragmatic. It does not involve reflection on the nature of things, but rather involves the calculative use of reason to try to preserve my existence, and if that preservation of my existence brings me to choose certain things for the good of the community,
it will do so because the community's good coincides with my own long-term interests. This has to carry weight over any impulse to seek a short-term interest, and morality is simply going to be cleverness and prudence and success in observing this one single principle.
The sense in which Thomas Hobbes' theory is still natural law is that he presents moral principles as derived from what he regards as the most important facet of human nature.
You could say this is just power politics, but he's still thinking and still using the term natural law because I think of the venerable tradition and reputation that this term has.
Where traditional natural law in any of the forms that we've examined always assumed just a tremendous vast order to the universe, hierarchically arranged,
Hobbes is strong that human artifice alone is what produces order out of the chaos and out of the war, and given the fact that there will inevitably be conflict, this is the best that we can do.
Hobbes replaces what had been a hierarchy of goods, the sort of thing that Augustine had so emphasized and that Aquinas repeated.
He replaces that hierarchy of goods with a single basic good, namely self-preservation, anything else that we can get on top of that is certainly frosting on the cake.
Natural law theory had had a very different view of human reason. I need to stress this a little bit because of the vast difference we have here and merely to say the word reason can easily give the wrong idea.
In the classical sense, reason that they were referring to, the reason is deeply receptive to goods that are already built into the system.
Natural law used the term reason in its ancient and medieval versions always to refer to our participation in what is ultimately something divine, it's in a way the most God-like part of us,
but it's our ability to understand that natural teleology, our ability to understand the essences of things, the natural kinds that there are, and the way in which those natures have an inbuilt end and even an inclination to that end.
Our reason is not what is creating or altering or controlling the system, our reason is primarily receptive to start with.
It then turns practical, devising ways to foster those ends, devising ways to make sure that the frustrations do not occur, but it is first receptive and then practical and creative.
This vision of reason is vastly different than that. It's very much instrumental given the fact that we have a strong impulse and we'll see that readiness to trust impulse and that instrumentalization of reason continuing with figures like Rousseau or Nietzsche where there's a strong sense that our impulse is really governance.
Now, the vision that I'm giving is a very radical vision and needless to say, Hobbes' ideas provoked an enormous and vigorous reaction by people who perhaps hadn't thought about it in a while but could clearly see that they needed to say that people are more reasonable than that
The reason isn't just instrumental, that reason has an ability to discern natural goods and natural ends, that there's somehow got to be more to morality than that.
One finds, for instance, in a figure like Samuel Pufendorf in his 1672 book, De Jure Naturae Agencium, notice how he's putting together some of those medieval themes on the law of nature and of the nations, he argues for the existence of various natural inclinations, a natural inclination towards sociability as well as a natural inclination to self-love.
That's a very strong reaction to Hobbes. Even more so though, and I'd like to concentrate in the minutes that remain for this lecture, upon John Locke, who uses Pufendorf and also uses others in the Anglican tradition, such as Richard Hooker, to devise a natural law theory that is much more friendly to nature, nature ideas, much more balanced in its focus upon natural rights,
and tries to derive an objective, universal, and intellectually accessible theory of natural law in a way that counters that which is offered by Thomas Hobbes.
Locke's famous book on the subject is Second Treatise of Civil Government in 1691. That data, I think, is particularly significant. It is just three years after the glorious revolution in England that brought William of Orange to the throne.
And what was so inspiring about the glorious revolution to English eyes was that it was a bloodless revolution. It seemed to be a great triumph of reason, instituting a new form of order that was very reasonable and respected as nearly as it could the interests of the mercantile class, the interests of an economic sort,
but one which focused upon the English individual and tried to preserve his rights. John Locke's theory in 1691 is, I think, an effort to justify that particular revolution that was so bloodless in 1688.
I mention this because Locke had earlier on, back in the year 1664, written a work which he never published in Latin, and it was a book called Essays on the Law of Nature that had a much more traditional view.
It was a view much more like Aquinas. It was a view that was very, very close to Hooker, who is an Anglican divine who is very indebted to Aquinas.
In 1691, he adopts an entirely different stance, retaining the name natural law, and this is part of natural law's very diversified history, and retaining some aspects of traditional natural law, but now using the notion of social contract.
If Aquinas baptized Aristotle, perhaps we could say that what Locke does is to baptize or at least to transform Hobbes and the notion of a state of nature and a social contract.
Following a suggestion about the need to consider pre-political society in the way that Hooker suggests, Locke urges that pre-political society, that state of nature that Thomas Hobbes had talked about or the Garden of Eden that the Book of Genesis suggests,
requires that there be some consent by the inhabitants to any form of society that would emerge. Locke articulates this using the language of social contract.
He envisions a state of nature, but it's not a state of nature like Thomas Hobbes in which there was a war of all against all, rather the state of nature for Locke is a state of peace, goodwill, mutual assistance and preservation.
There's a sense here of a fundamental natural equality of all the individuals, and that what these individuals in the state of nature do is that they consent to a form of society which later on will involve consent to a certain form of government.
So he's making it a two-stage process, namely first of all we decide on a social contract about how we're going to organize ourselves, and then within that social contract we will subsequently consent to some particular form of government.
He also envisions the problem of successive generations, that is, that's all fine, individuals can give their consent in the state of nature with respect to what form society will take and what form government will have, but how about those in successive generations?
There he urges that as long as we don't protest, we're still giving our tacit consent. It's not a brand new idea, in fact Socrates had used it. When Socrates was on trial so many hundreds of years before, he discourses with his friends who are urging him to flee the city and they're willing to provide him a way to escape, but Socrates himself had insisted,
I never gave any particular approval to this government, but since I've accepted its largesse over so many years, since I accepted its education and protection, I have tacitly consented to this. So Locke stands in the tradition of Socrates in making that particular suggestion.
Now, for Locke, even though the purpose of government is to render our freedom more secure, what each individual has to give up in entering into the social contract is a portion of natural freedom.
Namely, when someone else comes and acts against us in a way somehow to deprive us of hard work that we've done that has resulted in property or perhaps has injured or risked our life, any transgression of our natural rights is something that we ourselves ought to punish.
If someone's done me a wrong, I ought to see to it. But given that some individuals are weak and they will be taken advantage of easily, especially by a stronger person or by an armed band, it is precisely this sense of our right to punish the individual, which we will have to give over if we intend to have more secure possession of the rest of our rights.
Hence, Locke's idea is that we form governments precisely in order to give them the power to punish. Again, there's a lot of good sense here, I think. We are very, very poor judges in our own case, and so it's always been helpful in anyone's theory of justice to have a neutral, impartial administrator of justice who can decide upon the merits of a case, who can try innocence and guilt, and then enforce the decision that has been made.
For Locke, this need to resort to an impartial authority precisely in order to have more secure possession of the rights that are so much in danger is the very reason why we would enter into the social contract and the first of our rights which we give over to government.
But thereafter, the government should be very minimal in terms of how much else it asks us to give up. And Locke is the source of the line that Jefferson will use eventually in the Declaration of Independence, namely that we have, by our nature, the unalienable rights of life, liberty, and for Locke property.
Jefferson will modify that in a later draft of the Declaration to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness. For Locke, however, thinking, I think, of the glorious revolution in England in 1688 and the tremendous importance of property, a property class, and the ability of the individual to have full and complete, or as complete rights as possible, over property, Locke envisions there to be a natural right of property.
Now I had stressed a few lectures ago that when the canonists, Gratian in particular, were trying to articulate what the natural law required, one of the interesting theses that they understand and that they profess and that they reflect upon as the philosophers take over in the 12th and 13th centuries is the notion that all physical goods are primarily common and only secondarily private.
Locke has a version of that too, namely that all the goods in the state of nature are there for anybody's possible use. His claim is not that we have a natural right to this property or to that property, but rather we have a natural right to acquire property.
And one finds in Locke a very interesting and sophisticated theory about how private property emerges. It's a theory that will of course be influential not only in the justification of the liberal regime, such as we're finding here, the justification of the results of the glorious revolution, but it's something of course that will be enormously influential when we find later on Karl Marx sitting in the library of the British Museum and reading John Locke for his own theory of property.
One Locke's theory of property is this, namely that with all of that set of physical goods that are available to us in the world, something becomes our own. Property emerges when we put our labor into it.
For example, if we have taken and plowed a field, that field will now be able to generate enormously more grain and feed many more people than the grain that is harvested from growing in the wild, that by nature the field would yield only what is gathered, what is happenstance to be produced.
Whereas if we till the field, we can make that field much more productive, but that we are entitled to the results of our labor and hence we may claim that grain as our own.
This for Locke is the ultimate basis of any particular property we have. He claims that it's a natural right because it's our labor and hence as a matter of natural justice, we are entitled to whatever it is that is our own.
It's a matter of mixing our labor with any of the goods that were initially common that now makes them especially ours.
Is there any limit to this? Locke asks the question at various points in his second treatise on government and he finds that there's only one intrinsic limit to the right of property and that's spoilage.
So that if we're thinking for instance in an agrarian society about the fruits that we might gather from our trees or about the livestock that we might have on our land and that we might come to butcher, about the grain that might grow in our fields,
his claim is that one is entitled to as much property as one can in fact produce by the introduction of one's labor into these physical goods, but one may not be wasteful.
So that if the grain would spoil, if the fruit would spoil or the meat, there there's a limit to what it is that we may properly take from this common stock.
Of course the answer to that problem is money and the invention of a currency, the invention of a means of exchange so that if we should grow or manage to produce by our livestock more than we can use,
nonetheless we can get the value of our labor so long as we can transform the livestock or that set of fruit or grain into a form like money which can be exchanged with others who are in need of such.
Now this of course is a justification for the enormous increase in wealth that was just at that stage in England beginning to be the case by virtue of the new royal and economic arrangements.
And so there's a way in which I think luck can also be seen to be trying to justify a particular economic arrangement.
This stands in some contrast to the notion in the Middle Ages and it's part of what it is that the modern economic system is when it comes under the perspective of natural law that we need to be considering natural laws and justice even about these newly devised means of exchange.
Back in the Middle Ages there had been a worry about for instance charging any money at usury, any money at interest precisely because of those biblical injunctions but also for natural law reasons namely a sense that money by itself doesn't produce anything.
Money by itself should be purely a means of exchange.
Whereas in modern capitalist systems even having money on loan or money invested in the market, money invested in the various forms that have now been devised, money can generate new money.
And Locke's system is the beginning of the natural law justification of what in the Middle Ages I think had been something that was regarded with suspicion.
As if the charge of any interest at all was usury where in modern forms I think we're accustomed to say that usury is a matter of excessive interest.
Finally one last point on Locke. Locke is very alert to that glorious revolution in England and he's pondering philosophically the problem of revolution that is may one set aside a form of government that had been previously chosen that had been previously consented to by an earlier generation.
He argues that there is such a thing as a right to revolution when, if one's natural rights are seriously violated and if no other way to adjudicate the problem remains.
I think we can easily see how influential this will be for the American colonists in the justification used in the Declaration of Independence and we'll consider that in a coming lecture.
