Lecture 15 Natural Law and the Founding Fathers
So far we have been pursuing the theory of natural law as it has been evident on the continent of Europe.
But in this lecture I'd like to turn here to America, for the theory of natural law has played a very interesting role in the thought of our founding fathers as they created this very interesting experiment in representative democracy upon these shores.
Our founding fathers knew of the theory of natural law, and not only from John Locke whom we were discussing in the last lecture, but also from the use of natural law in the long tradition of English jurisprudence.
Our Declaration of Independence, for instance, cites at one point nature and nature's God, and then proceeds to an enumeration of various natural rights.
Likewise, the U.S. Constitution bears some of the signature marks of natural law theory, as well as its own Bill of Rights where there are a specific enumeration of the rights that John Locke himself would have talked about in his theory of natural law.
In addition, one finds natural law theory evident in the Constitution and in its subsequent history, where we have given to the Constitution such a supreme role in the notion of law as it's understood here, not just because it has been something that gained the consent of the people in the states,
but I think out of that natural law recognition that this Constitution in certain important ways embodies the eternal and immutable principles of natural justice.
What I'd like to do in this lecture then is to focus for a few minutes on some of the direct sources of natural law theory as our founding fathers knew them,
and then, secondly, turn briefly to the Declaration of Independence and then for a slightly longer period to consider our Constitution and a bit of the development of constitutional ideas in this country.
First, the Declaration of Independence and its sources. It was written by Thomas Jefferson and then adopted by the Second Continental Congress, and that Declaration of Independence relies very much on one specific version of natural law, namely the theory of natural law as articulated by John Locke.
Not only because of the way in which the natural rights claims are enumerated in our Constitution, but also because of a very specific natural right which John Locke had talked about and which we were discussing at the end of the last lecture,
namely the natural right of a people to rebel when there is no other way to redress violations of that people's other natural rights.
I point out, though, that in commenting and saying that John Locke's theory is so influential for the Declaration and for the Constitution, that this is one version of natural law.
And as we have seen earlier on in this course, there have been some other very strong versions, in particular the one championed by the Stoics at the end of antiquity, and then the one developed by Thomas Aquinas at the height of the Middle Ages.
When I try to think about natural law and its history and try to locate the American founding fathers within that tradition, I think it's helpful to think about this as being yet one more species in a much larger genus.
It's clearly recognizably the same sort of animal, but there's also something particular and distinctive about it, and what I think is so particular and distinctive about the American version and puts it squarely in the camp of John Locke
is its emphasis upon natural rights, and when you see that tradition, you can, I think, be fairly secure in saying that this is one species, but a different species of the larger theory of natural law.
Now, what were the sources of our founding fathers?
Besides Locke, whom they had read in his second treatise on government, there are also a number of British jurists who are extremely important to understanding the American use of natural law theory.
In particular, the British jurists, Edward Cook and William Blackstone, they discuss at some length in their various commentaries on British common law the possibility of having the judiciary enforce certain natural law limits on legislation.
That is, they don't have anywhere nearly the activist jurisprudence that later emerged at points in our constitutional history, but they certainly raise the prospect and the possibility of having the jurists have having jurisprudential limits on legislation.
In doing so, what we find in the course of their writings are particular claims about natural law, which our American founding fathers knew.
Always, I think we should balance these British jurists with the theory of John Locke, and from John Locke, we see in the Declaration of Independence and in other writings, references to a set of inalienable natural rights.
As our constitution has it, a right to life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness, and we hear there, I think, the echoes of John Locke who spoke of the natural rights of life, liberty, and property.
Now, it's interesting when we hear that language from Locke and echoed in these other writers of British jurisprudence, it's interesting to think about that term inalienable for a minute.
Inalienable is one way in which to talk about these rights as natural, that is, they come to us not by virtue of a gift of the community, they come to us not by virtue of law or legislation itself,
they come to us not because of power, they come to us not because of a claim we're making. The claim of an inalienable right, it is that it is inalienable.
That is, it is something that cannot be taken away from us by force of power or by legislation, nor is it something that we can voluntarily surrender.
And when one thinks through that claim of these rights of being inalienable, one will see how deeply steeped we are in the tradition of nature.
What are we to make of that difference between the Locke and formulation, life, liberty, and property, as opposed to Jefferson's formulation, life, liberty, and the pursuit of happiness?
It may be that the difference is simply rhetorical, that Jefferson thought that he could gain a greater sway and find a formulation that would be more easily acceptable to those who were property owners and to those who were not.
On the other hand, it could also be that Jefferson is making some particular significant statement in the matter.
And so we look elsewhere in the writings of Jefferson and look in terms of who he's quoting to see what he may have meant by choosing happiness rather than property.
One finds, for instance, that before the Continental Congress had convened, and when Jefferson was still thinking about the language he was intending to propose,
that he didn't discuss that these rights in terms of inalienability, rather he spoke of them as being sacred and inviolable,
and then later turned to the notion of an alienable as well as chose the language of happiness, perhaps echoing even the Aristotelian tradition and its strong sense of happiness as a natural end of human species.
And when one looks at those jurists, for instance, Sir Edward Cook, one is going further back in history and seeing some of the sources that were well known to these American jurists.
Edward Cook's book is called The Institutes and then later The Reports.
It's a very standard work on British law and was very prominent until the publication of Blackstone's own commentaries.
In particular, two cases come up again and again when American founding fathers are reading their Cook.
One is called Calvin's case that comes from the year 1608.
And just to read an important line from that tradition, it says,
The law of nature cannot be changed or taken away and, quote, should direct this case.
Another case that he cites and which our American founding fathers read up and talk about in their own literature is Bonham's case from 1609.
This is a very interesting case about the practice of law within the city limits of London and whether the equivalent of the British Medical Association at that period had to license a doctor
and whether there could be a law against practicing medicine without a license.
And in deciding in favor of the doctor and against the claim that there could be a law preventing the practice of medicine without a license, the case was decided on this principle.
The common law will control the acts of parliament and sometimes a judge them to be utterly void.
Now this is important because it's a sense that there is a higher law than statute law.
A sense of natural right and natural wrong, something that is recognized by the common law and is in fact the basis of the common law.
And for a person like Edward Cook to cite it and then American jurist to cite him is a recognition that they're thinking in terms of this higher law tradition.
A little later on Sir William Blackstone wrote a book called Commentaries on the Laws of England.
It's published in 1765 and when one thinks of the dates, this is a new hot ticket, a best seller in legal circles in the time just before our American Revolution.
And one finds in Blackstone both an advertence to natural law as well as a sense of the utter and absolute supremacy of parliament.
Now those are irreconcilable positions and sometimes in I think in lawyers' minds, it's okay that you have irreconcilable traditions and that the jurist will assent to one or the other of these traditions as they need in the pragmatic order.
One finds in Blackstone both traditions. For example, at one point he says, this law of nature, being co-evil with mankind and dictated by God himself, is superior in obligation to all others.
No human laws are of any validity if contrary to this.
Now again, that's a very strong natural law assertion and Blackstone is citing it and our American founding fathers at the time of the Revolution like to cite this precisely because it was a sense that the British laws which they thought were unfair and further complication,
the lack of any representation that they had before the British parliament now gave them under Lockean rules a set of a right to revolution precisely because the higher law was not being observed and in fact the laws made by parliament were directly against their own natural rights.
On the other hand, one also finds in Blackstone a strong sense that the law of parliament is absolute and that it may make laws on any subject whatsoever. Here I think one hears in Blackstone and in this tradition of British jurisprudence, one hears the echo of the enormous importance which British law has always accorded to the Magna Carta and to the restraint of the powers of the king by increasing the powers of the legislature.
And hence since they don't ever want to go back to a power of the king which surpassed the legislature, they end up asserting the absolute supremacy of the legislature, hoping I think with good British optimism that the legislature will behave itself and will observe the natural law and hence that there will be no conflict.
But in fact, there is no intrinsic resolution to this conflict within their system and you simply have principles which are at the furthest extreme incompatible.
What might Blackstone have meant when he's thinking about this natural law or higher law tradition? This is hard to say because Blackstone is enough of a philosopher to be quoting Stoic authors at various points and quoting Aristotle.
And yet to be given this tradition of the happiness which Jefferson eventually includes replacing the language of law, namely the natural rights of life, liberty and property, replacing that with terminology about the natural rights of life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness, one finds in Blackstone the frequent use and reference to happiness as being a natural end of humankind.
On the other hand, when he does so, and one reads a relatively, I don't have a quotation, but the relatively voluminous part of his works on that, one finds that he has emptied happiness out of any particular Aristotelian context where there is a natural end for humankind and he's emptied it of any theological sense.
It's not that there's a happiness in the next world for which this life is a preparation. There is rather a much stronger sense in Blackstone that this is personal happiness. It's the happiness that comes from doing as we will, from doing as one likes.
Hence, there's just a bit of a range of possibilities there in Blackstone that one can interpret these passages in either way.
Jefferson does pick up on the language and takes a very high moral note when he sounds the theme of an inalienable right to life, liberty and the pursuit of happiness.
Interestingly, Blackstone does envision some strong limits on the rights of property. When one thinks, for instance, of property rights in this country, one of the places where property rights come to be curtailed is in the practice of eminent domain,
when a government may take land, for instance, for a highway or for some other government institution where they need a given person's land.
And Blackstone is one who justifies the practice of eminent domain so long as proper compensation is paid, and he does so on an interesting natural law line of reasoning, namely that the consent of the property holder has been given to the government if the government is legitimate.
Even if the consent has only been given by one's representative to the legislature. So Blackstone is trying again to balance these things and I think comes up ultimately with a natural law kind of reasoning to justify a limit on property.
And I think this was probably fairly influential for Mr. Jefferson.
Now, when we turn to the text of the declaration itself, one finds their natural law language, especially in the opening phrases with the reference to nature and nature's God.
And one of the great questions, of course, that has come to scholars about our American Declaration of Independence concerns whether this is, for instance, the God of Christianity, or is this perhaps just a very vague deist vision of God.
I won't try to settle that question here since our project is largely to consider natural law, and hence I find it simply interesting that we have a reference to nature first and then to the God of nature.
This allows the notion of a creator, but it doesn't particularly specify which theory.
My own view on the matter is that Jefferson recognized that America, the American colonies at this time, were a relatively religious set of communities, but that there was a variety in American religion.
That it ranged across quite a considerable range of Christianity, and I think that what he was doing was looking simply for the most acceptable possible language.
What would draw in as many of the colonists to the revolution which was now being declared, and so we have a relatively generic approach.
And interestingly, natural law allows that common basis, and this has always been one of natural law strengths, namely that it doesn't claim particularly to have any one ecclesial backing,
but rather is something that is accessible to any person who have open mind and reasonable inclination to see that there is a God who ought to be worshiped and to see that there is a nature within us,
which is the source of various moral obligations, including obligations of a political nature as well as rights of a political nature.
On this subject, I'd like in particular to recommend a very, very wonderful volume by Edward Corwin, written earlier in this century.
Corwin's volume is entitled the Higher Law Background of American Constitutional Law, and he gives a wonderful account of the Declaration as well as of the U.S. Constitution in terms of some of the natural law concepts that are found in the Declaration of Independence.
What one sees in that Declaration is a tremendous assertion of natural rights, rights which the American colonists thought to have been historically theirs on their basis of being Englishmen, as well as on their basis of simply being human.
That is that they balance the notion of the common law of England and the natural law precisely in order to stress the legitimacy of their claim and the illegitimacy of legislative control, of legislative activity without the consent of the governed,
and that is the situation in which they find themselves.
One interesting question, though, that comes out is how about slavery? On natural law grounds, as we saw a lecture or two ago, there was, at least in Baroque scholasticism, among some of those Dominican and Jesuit authors of the 16th and 17th centuries, a readiness to condemn slavery as against the natural law.
Jefferson's first draft of the Declaration actually does condemn slavery, and this is very interesting given that Jefferson himself was a slave holder. Perhaps it was a recognition in his own part, on his own mind, that slavery was a violation of the natural right to freedom and liberty.
But the passage got removed by the Second Continental Congress, presumably out of a desire not to weaken the cause of independence by alienating slave owners. In a way, this shows the problem with legislation by committee and a strong sense of the difficulties that come when one is forced to compromise on moral principle.
When one makes a compromise, especially of this magnitude, one may be simply building in conflict later, as we saw in the history of our republic, with the war that was eventually fought on that subject, among other reasons for the Civil War.
Jefferson may well have had a stronger sense of this, but was unable to maintain his position in the Congress, and at one point, in the course of his letters, he tells us that the fact of slavery in his country haunted him, quote, like a fire bell in the night.
Indeed, he says, I tremble for my country when I reflect that God is just and that his justice will not rest forever. A strong sense, I think, in Jefferson of his trouble over that particular issue.
Let me turn now to the Constitution of the U.S., for it, too, reflects a number of important natural law concepts. But in addition to the fact that there is explicit reference to some of these concepts in our Constitution, I'd also like to keep our minds focused on the fact that the Constitution enjoys such a tremendous supremacy, such a tremendous high regard,
and ask the question about whether this is out of simply a social contract devotion to a document that we've agreed on, or, as I would rather suggest, not only that, but also that this supremacy rests on the fact that the Constitution embodies principles of natural justice.
And I would want to contend that that is actually the more important and significant factor. When one is looking at any country's basic law, whether it be in the form of a written Constitution such as ours is, or an unwritten Constitution such as England has,
whether one is looking at a code, for instance, as was long the case in France, or is still the case in Louisiana, one finds a basic, a fundamental nature to this law. But one can always ask about that country's history and to see, does that basic law have a really high regard?
Is it something that is venerated? And in our country, I think the answer to that is yes, it clearly does. As one reads the history of jurisprudence over our 220-some years, especially in the first 80 years, it had a regard that was tantamount to being sacred.
I think that after that first period of 80-some years, I think you see the language of jurists being tempered much more, and especially as you see activist courts emerge, then there's a much stronger sense that we need to adapt to this document to new conditions.
Now, whether that's a good idea or a bad idea, it's a change in any case in the original understanding of it.
Let's consider for a moment the opening lines of the Constitution, and near the beginning, one finds the language that this Constitution has been ordained by the people of the United States.
Now, that can be read in an entirely voluntary sense. And as we were stressing a couple of lectures ago, in the history of the tradition of law and thinking about law, there are intellectual strands and voluntary strands.
That is, law might be right because it embodies what reason directs us for the common good, the reason of God, the reason of the human legislator.
Or it can be voluntarist. Law can be law because chosen by God, or chosen by the people, or chosen by the legislatures as an act of strength and will.
This language, near the beginning of our Constitution, ordained by the people of the United States, can of course be read in an entirely voluntarist sense, as if the law were simply an expression of the commands of the human lawgiver and an expression of the will of the people,
the highest possible source for legitimacy and autonomy.
Especially in the tradition of law and of Montesquieu, I think you have a sense that the voluntarist tradition is strong here, namely that societies are organized by a social contract when people in a state of nature come together.
In the other and older traditions of natural law that we were considering, even states and governments and societies have a nature, the form of it may be devised by human institution, but it's an entity with a nature in its own right.
So one way of reading this is to say that this is a commitment to the voluntarist sense of the legitimacy and authority of our government and of our Constitution.
But I would submit to you that the claim that the real supremacy and legitimacy of the U.S. Constitution as coming solely from its rootedness and popular will is a theory of more recent origin.
It's a theory, I think, that is subsequent to the American Civil War and much more prominent in our recent jurisprudence, and I think it's forgetful of the higher law background from Cook and Blackstone and the tradition that is antecedent to John Locke.
Because I think that higher law background was operative for the founders of the American Republic.
For our American founders, the supremacy of a Constitution, and I think the reason why they wrote a Constitution rather than simply rest upon an unwritten Constitution such as England had,
the supremacy of a Constitution comes precisely from its content.
That is, from the way in which a given Constitution, and they had many from which they could have chosen, the way in which a given Constitution embodies in so many words the essential and unchanging demands of justice.
And then what the people do when they choose the Constitution is give witness to how good a job that Constitution does in embodying the principles of justice.
And so I would maintain that that phrase from the opening of the Constitution, ordained by the people of the United States, is not so much direct social contract language as fundamental affirmation that we believe that the Constitution, which was written,
does embody these principles of natural justice and the longstanding and older tradition of the natural law, and especially when one reads the Federalist papers, one sees them making these philosophical arguments all the time.
Among the natural law concepts that are most prominent in the Constitution and in subsequent constitutional history are the following four, namely, the superiority of the rule of law to rule by power, secondly, the practice of judicial review,
thirdly, the separation of powers, and fourth, the assertion of fundamental human equality. Let me discuss each of those in turn.
The rule of law, in contrast to any volunteerist assumptions about government and society, assumptions which inevitably lead to rule by power and by the strongest power, the American Constitution outlines a program for rule by law.
And it's a program for rule by law, where law is always superior to political party or political power. It's a program that depends upon an intellectual appreciation of the greater likelihood of natural justice and objective fairness when all parties
know in advance how the law is going to treat them. That is, it's a sense that there's going to be a tremendous fair play here precisely because we will respect rule of law at all costs and not be changing the rules of the game when another party enters into power.
And insofar as one thinks that the founders of our country in establishing this system of government envisioned plural parties which could operate even when power shifts occurred by fundamental rules of law rather than by a fundamental rule by power,
this is a sense that intellectual appreciation of the demands of justice is what is envisioned by those founding fathers. And I think that it's very, very strong for how we conduct all the public business as well as the public restrictions and public regulation of private enterprises.
Secondly, the notion of judicial review. I've called attention to this a number of times in our lectures. This is the power of some branch of government, the judiciary, to supervise legislation, to supervise another branch of government, and then to nullify anything that is inconsistent with the Constitution.
Now, some people would say that that power of judicial review simply rests upon the assertion of various justices in our history. In fact, the matter is, it is nowhere explicitly stated in the Constitution, nor did any court in England explicitly have the power.
We saw in the quotations I read earlier in this lecture that Blackstone and Cook had envisioned such a role, but no one court in England had the role which the U.S. Supreme Court eventually took to itself.
Rather, the practice of judicial review was inaugurated by Chief Justice John Marshall, and the case that is rightly associated with the beginning of that practice is the 1803 decision in Marbury versus Madison.
Even though the power of judicial review is not explicitly bestowed by the founders, nonetheless, I think you can make the argument that the power of judicial review flows from the nature of the judicial office.
In England, I think that it was too often blurred with the notion of judicial legislation. But here, when they had separated the powers of government more strictly, this power has to belong to somebody if there's going to be an appropriate check and balance.
And the alternative would be to say that only the executive checks the legislature by choosing what to enforce and checks the judiciary by appointing the powers of the judiciary itself.
This is an assertion by John Marshall, which I suspect flows simply from the nature of the judiciary.
Now, in the course of our history, there have been various interpretations of how strong the power of judicial review should be.
Many of the justices over the course of history have restricted themselves for testing whether statutory and administrative law, strictly speaking, conforms to the Constitution.
So it's a purely formal test, and they don't employ any natural law standard over and above the formal test of does this conform to the U.S. Constitution.
It's on that basis, I suspect, that something like Red Scott was decided, where they refused to invoke a natural law standard and simply asked, does this law or does this law not conform to the U.S. Constitution?
As such, this is in accord with the spirit of Blackstone, who I think was very much anxious that the courts would simply find a law which was in discrepancy with the Constitution and then take it back to the legislatures to correct it.
And so a much weaker sense of judicial review simply has the court in the role of identifying what is, in some way, inconsistent, but leaving the legislature to be the legislature.
In other periods, jurists have assumed a much closer relation between the Constitution and natural law and have been much more willing to be activists in uprooting legislation that they thought in some way violated the law.
The civil rights legislation of this century isn't a great example of that.
The third and fourth matters where our Constitution reflects natural law. Third is the separation of powers into the distinct branches of government.
This is indeed a new political idea. It's not something I think that any government had ever managed before our experiment.
And yet the justification for so separating those powers comes with a sense that justice requires it and that this particular device will give us a better chance at keeping justice and avoiding rule by power.
So the natural law sense of this is simply because natural law demands that there be justice, we need to devise some appropriate remedy so as more likely to ensure the actual conduct of the various powers of government because power does tend to increase.
Finally, there's the sense of inalienable rights and we'll have occasion to discuss those as we turn to some other moral problems in the later part of these lectures.
Here I simply noticed that even the Bill of Rights beyond stipulating a number of personal and state rights also in the Ninth Amendment goes on to say the enumeration of certain rights in this Constitution shall not prejudice other rights so enumerated and a strong sense that there's a vigorous natural rights tradition here.
We'll turn to further moral subjects in following lectures.
Lecture 16, Descartes, Rousseau and Kant
In the last lecture we were considering the fortunes of natural law theory here upon American shores. In this 16th lecture I'd like to return to Europe and return to somewhat more technical philosophy precisely in order to investigate for just a bit the fortunes of natural law within the tradition of philosophy more formally speaking
because there is much in the history of modern European philosophy that cast doubt upon the entire project of natural law in any of its forms, whether in the form of the Stoics or the form of Thomas Aquinas or the form of Locke that found establishment and institutionalization here in the American Republic.
In the European philosophy of the early modern period there are various trends which are antithetical to the whole project of natural law, in particular the mechanization of the world picture.
We saw earlier on in our study of natural law that one of the most important concepts was the notion of teleology or end directedness, an inbuilt end within our nature, something that we didn't decide upon but that was already there and there was the pattern for our development and was a natural goal for the individual and the family and whole culture.
But the mechanization of the world picture that is that tendency in modern science and modern technology to reduce all kinds of causes to efficient causality to the way in which human agency is able to structure and restructure things drives out the notion of final causality or end directedness and that is antithetical to any form of natural law.
I'd like to discuss in the course of this lecture some of the philosophers who are very prominent in that tradition of mechanization and then the ethical implications of it.
I'll begin with a short discussion about Descartes and the change that happens in modern philosophy and then for a greater length of time I'd like to focus on Rousseau and on Emmanuel Kant who were extremely influential for thinking about ethics and about human freedom and about political organization
and who do so in ways that change natural law certainly perhaps make it impossible or if they make it possible at all make it possible only under a very, very different rubric.
Let's begin however with Descartes.
As we were saying, the notion that was typical of causality in say Aristotelian philosophy or in much of the realist philosophy of the Middle Ages was a notion of causality that was differentiated.
There are the internal causes of matter and form that is the structure and the stuff that makes up anything whatsoever in the universe.
Anything has a certain basic matter and it has a certain form that that matter has.
These aren't two things but rather they're co-principals, structure and stuff.
In addition causality refers to the agent, the efficient cause, the person or the object which is imposing a new structure on stuff.
And finally and most importantly for natural law theory there's the notion of final causality, the sense of a goal or a purpose.
It's something that's so obvious within say human artistry and human invention when we have our purposes, we have our goals.
The claim of Aristotelian philosophy is that in addition to our imposed goals or our imposed purposes there are also natural goals or natural purposes.
The things that one can see when for instance acorns only grow up into oak trees and never into dandelions or pear trees.
Or the fact that tadpoles always grow up into frogs and never into any other kind of creature.
So too it was argued the human being from the time of conception through the time of natural growth has as at least one natural goal developing into the complete adult mature human.
Things can go wrong, diseases can interfere, there can be actions by other human beings.
But that these effects upon our natural programming are extraneous and that there is at least a natural end that should be provided.
Some figures would be quite willing to say that there's an end that transcends our life in this world, a supernatural happiness.
But that even if one is confined to this world there's a sort of a natural happiness for which we are well designed.
In the course of modern European philosophy one finds all of this brought into doubt by the mechanization of the world picture.
Mechanics and the mechanization of science means the elimination of final causality.
A sense that what we'd explain when we explain something in natural science is explaining its mechanics, its matter, form and efficient cause and that we rid ourselves of the notion of final causality.
The philosopher who I think is best representative of that tradition is Rene Descartes, in many ways the founder of modern philosophy.
And one finds that very quickly in Descartes all of the Baroque scholasticism that we were discussing with those especially the Dominican thinkers who had opposed slavery of the Indians on the basis of natural law that all of this Baroque scholasticism is gone precisely because he so compartmentalizes the theoretical sphere
and the practical sphere. The theoretical sphere now has to be handled in these instrumental and mechanical terms. The practical sphere will be what we decide upon, not what we in any way find as rooted in nature.
In the course of doing so there's a great division between all of ethics and all the rest of philosophy and if you divide ethics from the rest of philosophy you can no longer use nature which is a category of metaphysics in your ethics.
So what for Descartes and the rest of the tradition of modern philosophy, this strong separation is invoked and it will mean that if we're going to have any objectivity, any universality, any intelligibility, those three strong characteristics of any ethical theory,
if we're going to have intelligibility, universality and objectivity we're going to have to get them from a different source other than nature.
One of the thinkers who I think follows up the ideas of Descartes and wants to find a new way to establish objectivity and universality is the figure Jean-Jacques Rousseau, figure of the 18th century.
He is very strongly opposed to natural law in any form of a deductive system. He wants no part of the notion of deducing natural law obligations or for that matter natural rights either from the historical state of how things have come to be or from some primeval state of nature.
Rather, he is very, very strongly interested in the course of his works on talking about human autonomy and human freedom. So he will still use the categories of human nature, but it can't be used to found a system on any natural law.
Jean-Jacques Rousseau is a very difficult figure I think to understand, primarily because so many of his works involve constantly a retelling of his biography, except that every time he retells the biography one finds it's a slightly different biography and we practically got a new individual.
But in his most prominent political work where one sees some elements of that biography combined with a lot of interesting philosophizing, in his book The Social Contract he deliberately and thematically attacks the notion that it is possible by reason, the thing that was so useful for all of the natural law thinking we've been considering,
it was impossible for reason to learn the principles of natural law by reflecting on the state of nature or by reflecting on the law of nations, what is common to the law of so many different cultures or what is found in a given constitution trying to analyze human nature and what anthropology requires.
In fact there's even a strong suspicion against civilization as corruptive and corrosive. He attacks all the intellectual traditions that are in natural law, he attacks Roman theorists as well as some modern figures whom he considered to be unfairly and inappropriately
representing those Roman theories. By name he attacks Grosius and Hobbes whom we considered about three lectures ago and in particular what he's suspicious about in them is their justifications of slavery.
He finds himself torn agreeing with Rousseau because slavery is so inimical to what human nature demands and yet also finding him attacking the claim that by an intellectual pattern, that by an intellectual process one can reason to this conclusion.
Well you say, if he doesn't think that reason can get us to natural law, how does he think we should get there? One finds in a book like Emil from 1762 that Rousseau argues that the real way to get to it is by our feelings.
He suggests in Emil that the vicar of Savoy is a good standard for this and at one point he has the vicar of Savoy praising, quote, the inner light of conscience whose judgments are not judgments, excuse me, whose commands are not judgments but feelings.
Likewise in Rousseau's book The Discourse on the Origin of Inequality, that complaint about civil society and civilization as he knew it, it's a 1754 volume.
Rousseau very openly defends an emotive view of morality, that it requires that we stress human feeling, sometimes human sympathy with other humans, or at least our sense of feeling, of what we feel is right about a situation, what we feel is wrong.
Technically speaking in philosophy this is an intuitionist approach. It's a sense we may not be able to provide the reasons which will convince anybody else, but for ourselves the ultimate basis for our assertions, the basis for our confidence is our intuition about a situation.
Hence it's emotivist because it's dependent upon feeling and the justification is intuitionist, either you see it or you don't.
Now Rousseau does treat human nature and so he's still the philosopher, you can take I suppose the philosopher out of philosophy but you can't take philosophy out of him, and he does treat human nature considering topics like true feelings of the heart, pity and altruism,
and he urges that these true feelings, these reliable feelings, can be a useful guide for learning the fundamental principles of morality and the fundamental principles of politics.
He doesn't think that reason can do this and he again stresses his opposition to an intellectual theory of natural law, but he strongly advocates that our better and nobler feelings, feelings such as the primitive might have, the noble savage, the true innocent who has yet been uncorrupted by civilization,
that these true primitive, original, noble, savage like feelings can help us discover our true nature as free individuals living according to laws that we impose upon ourselves.
So there you see I think the real clarion call of Enlightenment thinking, a sense that what are we primarily, we are primarily free individuals who have to trust something in ourselves, that which is deepest in us, our feelings, and that when we create something in a social contract,
when we create a set of laws, we had better do it in ways that are somehow fundamentally conforming with these deepest and truest and noblest part of ourselves.
Hence his theory will be something we'll try to cultivate freedom as much as possible and yet acknowledge the fact that sometimes we must make these social contracts corrosive as they can tend to be if they can provide us some of the benefits and some of the advantages that we so desire.
Curiously in Rousseau's writings, especially in his book Social Contract, but also in that discourse on the origin of inequality, he uses some of the very same language that John Locke and Samuel Pufendorf had employed, the state of nature for instance, or the very term social contract.
But he uses those terms for vastly different purpose. The chief emotions of someone in the state of nature for Rousseau are pity and self-love, and these he thinks flow from a spontaneous natural goodness.
One sees this coming up frequently enough in our own contemporary discourse from some ethical quarters who want to suggest the things that are most basic to us ethically are our feelings.
One sees I think in Rousseau a fundamental root of this notion that there's a spontaneous natural goodness. If only we would let it emerge and trust that that will occur.
One sees of course how very vastly different this is from that long Christian tradition that we had been examining a few lectures ago, a sense of original sin, a sense of the defects of our natures, a sense of the way in which there's still a basic goodness, yes,
but that too much of our problem is precisely that our loves get badly ordered, and hence this is the thing which is not in principle recoverable except with the aid of grace.
Rousseau would insist this is the very thing that needs to be recovered and the one thing that is trustworthy.
Virtually all of Rousseau's writings are about education in one way or another, programs of education, and in this way I think he resembles Plato than almost all the other modern philosophers.
But in the course of writing about education, what it is that I think that he emphasizes is that we need education in social relationships in such a way that these spontaneous natural goodness can emerge, that we need habituations of spontaneity.
It's a curious paradox, but we need to find ways in which people can be themselves, then it will all work out.
Civilizations, however, are something to be feared. They can corrupt individuals as much as they can improve them, and so much of Rousseau's literary energies go into proposing specific ways that we can try to retain all the advantages that government and culture bring us while rooting out some of those evils that have come in in the course of history,
inequality, self-deception, and exploitation. In short, I think Rousseau is trying to cultivate the sort of life that is possible in society and at the same time maximize the original freedom of the state of nature prior to society and prior to the introduction of government.
It's a desire to have the advantages without the cost. One can see why he wants to do this, and I can't complain about that.
But the preferred way for doing this, the preferred way for reducing the tensions between all of those constraints which live life in civil society require of us and the natural freedom that was ours in the state of nature and that he would like to recover,
For him, the way to do this is the social contract. Again, I point out the way in which this is now changing for very deliberate purpose. This is changing the understanding of a society or of a government.
It's a way in which I think many modern people understand the matter, as Rousseau does, that society and government come about and have a legitimacy only because of human convention and human invention.
Whereas an older theory, and the natural law theory that we have been studying most of this course, viewed even government and society as having a nature.
And they could say that admitting that the particular forms that government or society take will be matters in which human creativity and human intelligence have intervened.
And yet they intervene to produce some forms of government and some forms of society which will be more helpful in administering natural justice and natural need.
For Rousseau, I think there is a sense that social contract is precisely that. It is a contract and as such a human invention.
Rousseau envisions the social contract as the surrender that everyone makes to the general will, quote unquote, by which impartial laws for the common good will be made by the participation in everyone in a directly democratic process.
That is, I think he's suspicious of representatives and representative government. And he hopes that this will somehow freely apply to everyone.
Of course, doing such on a grand scale, anything beyond a small city quickly proves to be impossible.
There is, however, one point of connection here in this part of Rousseau's theory with traditional natural law theory, namely the conviction that Rousseau clearly has that individuals who will the general good unselfishly,
that is, as somehow part of the general will looking for the common good, will produce a natural harmony.
And in that respect, I think he's calling upon the Stoic tradition, who had always insisted that there are things one must do if one expects there to be a harmony of the whole of society.
As such, I think Rousseau can call upon that Stoic tradition that just as in the order of the universe that the Stoics had championed, so too for Rousseau, submission to the general will can bring about a natural harmony.
What he most hopes, however, to come from this situation is natural freedom, as much as possible the restoration of the kind of freedom that we had in the state of nature.
And for Rousseau, in all of his books, this is at the very center of his ethics.
For him, both moral and legal obligation can only be understood if an individual gives free and uncoerced assent to the principles which are going to apply to everyone as matters of law.
Hence, it's a strong emphasis upon the consent of the governed as the main condition for the legitimacy of a government.
Now, when one turns and asks, well, what effect did all this have? Who bought Rousseau's ideas?
And I think the person who is most indebted to them in the history of philosophy and whom we need to consider now for the last portion of this lecture is the great figure of Immanuel Kant.
There in Kant we see someone who accepts Rousseau's commitment to freedom and autonomy as the purpose of ethics.
There is someone who accepted Descartes' separation between nature and practice, a sense that what we can perhaps understand in the realm of natural science and philosophy will always be of the phenomenal order.
It's something which comes about through space and time and can be processed through the various filtering systems that our own bodies and the forms of our sense organs and then the very categories of our mind make possible.
But all of the things which can be known to science and to philosophy will be things of the phenomenal order, whereas things like God or freedom are never phenomenal.
That is, they are never things which are in space and time. They are rather things which transcend space and time and hence are, if not supernatural at least, trans-phenomenal.
As such, the realm of the practical order, the realm of ethics, the realm of politics cannot have a basis in nature. It will have to have a basis in reason.
Now, as we step back and before we look at the details of Kant, that is to accept natural law tradition in a way and to reject natural law tradition in a way.
What I have been trying to emphasize about the non-negotiable core of natural law ethics is that it's a matter of reason reflecting on nature.
But notice there are two parts. There's a nature to be reflected upon, but it's also a reason doing the reflecting and trying to discover the natural order, the natural end-directedness, and what it is that will most accommodate the accomplishment of that end.
Both of them are non-negotiable reason and nature.
What we find in Kant as the heir of Descartes and especially as the heir of Rousseau and his cultivation of freedom as the very central value, what we find in Kant is a strong sense of the commitment of ethics, the dependence of ethics upon reason.
Reason has to establish principles. He's distrustful, I think, of Rousseau's natural spontaneous human goodness, but he wants the value that Rousseau most emphasized, natural freedom,
and he thinks that the way to get it is by the cultivation of pure reason.
The central concept that Kant will use in his ethics is the concept of the categorical imperative.
This is an effort to try to find a way to state ethics in terms of law or command or imperative, and yet to do so by stressing the rational source of this categorical imperative.
As such, we will see the tremendous difference between Kantian and the ancient and classical and medieval views of philosophy in which nature and ethics were not so separated.
What does Kant propose? Well, in particular, he proposes that moral theory cannot be rooted in a special notion of human nature as theoretically known, but rather must be rooted on reason reflecting upon our pattern of choices.
That we have to avoid considering merely the ends of our choices, that would be utilitarianism to which Kant was strongly opposed, and instead focus on that which is most basic about our reason, namely our ability to understand the implications of the choices that we make,
especially as pertaining to the maximizing or the minimizing of the freedom that is so essential to practical reasoning.
Rather than link the goal of ethics, the goal of human life, to any specific end, which is external to us, rather one wants to link the goal of human life to the cultivation of our freedom, to maximizing our choice and doing it in a way that will always seem to be reasonable.
In the course of doing so, Kant proposes this interesting theory of the categorical imperative, and it's an imperative, it's a notion of a command or a directive, it's a source of obligation, and yet he thinks that the categorical imperative will be the precise way of grounding our ethics in a way that does maximize our freedom.
It operates basically in this way, namely that whatever one feels that one wants to do, one should make a general rule out of it and say, here's something I would like to do, if I'm going to have permission to do this, I must give permission to everybody to do this.
If on the other hand, what I'm considering is something I wouldn't like done to me, I've got to make a general rule that forbids it and include myself within the scope of that general rule.
Now as such, we have an advertence here to a notion I think that is familiar to us from biblical morality. One remembers it in the form of the golden rule, do unto others as you'd have them do unto you, or perhaps in the silver rule, don't do unto others as you'd rather not have them do unto you.
Notice how different this is from the Wall Street version, do unto others before they do unto you.
This is an idea that is attempting to focus our ethics on a precisely and purely formal aspect. There's no content in that, so that if one conceivably were interested in doing something that somebody else considered nefarious, as long as you're willing to suffer the same thing that you're giving, there's no reason why you should not make it a general rule of conduct.
It's an effort to trust reason to say that nobody in their right mind will do such a thing that is heinous. Nobody in their right mind will do such a thing that will be so offensive.
And so it's trusting that human reason will itself rule out things which are in fact injurious, things that make social living impossible, things that frustrate our nature, but it doesn't in any way force us back onto an analysis of nature.
It doesn't require any anthropology. It's an effort to say there's a way to be reasonable and a way in fact to accomplish our human purposes that doesn't require an analysis of our human nature.
Any analysis of our human nature would be presenting a rule which were somehow goal-based and hence subject to the utilitarian calculation of values.
Instead, this is an effort to say reason can ground ethics purely on its own terms. In the shortest possible compass, I may never make an exception for myself.
What I command others to do, I must myself feel commanded to do. What I forbid others to do, I must also forbid to myself.
As such, Kant thinks, and I think he has rightly achieved this, he has gotten a vision of ethics which is universal. It can apply to everybody.
It's certainly objective in the sense that it can be articulated in so many words and discussed, and it's something which is intelligible. It's something that's able to be understood.
Whether it has enough meat, whether it has enough substances is a matter for great discussion. It does certainly achieve his own objective of focusing on freedom as the grounds for morality rather than focusing on nature or some natural end.
Now, despite the great differences between this system of ethics and traditional natural law theory, as we have been describing it earlier in these lectures,
I find it very interesting to note that as Kant is trying to explain his theory, as he's trying to give a philosophical justification for this categorical imperative and this ethics of duty rather than, say, an ethics of nature or an ethics of virtue,
he does, however, still refer to any number of formulations that have a kind of a natural law subtle implication, that there's sort of a quiet advertence to it.
And so furiously and paradoxically, there's a way in which even Immanuel Kant can be thought of as part of the natural law tradition.
In the original formulation of the categorical imperative, there's no hint of it. It's purely formal. Let me read it to you.
Act in such a way that the maxim of your action can become a law for all mankind. That's merely suggesting that what you've got to do is be universal about it.
If you command it to others, you're yourself under the command. If you want to permit it to yourself, everybody else must equally be permitted it.
So it, for instance, tells us not to lie because we wouldn't want people lying to us. And it can apply to any particular example that we might come up with.
But in his subsequent formulations of the categorical imperative, what formulations which he urges are equivalent, are the same thing.
He claims he's not introducing something new. I find that there's a subtle reference to that substantive tradition about human nature.
Let me read you the formulation that occurs a little bit later in his text.
So act as to treat all men not simply as a means, but always at the same time as ends in themselves.
Now this is to focus on ends and means. That is, it's to focus on what is something that's so important that it's a goal or a purpose or something that has an intrinsic dignity.
And what, on the other hand, is something that's a means to that end, that which has a purely utility value.
And it's a suggestion that while we can use lots of things, money, property, food, paintings, all sorts of things in this world, we may legitimately use them as means for our chosen ends.
What this principle is suggesting is we may never use a human being as a mere means. We must always respect that human being as an end.
It doesn't forbid us to use a human being as a means so long as we respect them as an end.
And so, for example, if I have employees in a company of mine, admittedly, they are the means for making profit for my company.
What this formulation forbids is that I merely treat them as slaves, merely take them as agents for the profitability of my company or myself or my particular party.
That's so long as I'm respecting them as human beings, as ends in themselves, I may also use them and collect their energies together as means toward our common end, but I never may treat them as merely means.
As such, one is invoking now not a pure reason claim, but I think one is invoking a nature claim.
Why is it that all human beings should be treated as ends and never mere means, where everything else in the universe may be treated as a mere means?
This is, I think, subtly to be recognizing the intrinsic dignity of the human being as a separate kind.
And hence, in a way, it invokes some of the very substance and basis and fundamental principle of the natural law without saying so.
It manages to bring into the ethics that which we all agree on without forcing a fight about metaphysics and how much we're willing to grant about natures and natural ends.
One then, I think, can try to form a balanced assessment of Immanuel Kant as someone who, in fact, supports and gives us a new way to think about natural law,
even if it's not the whole and complete tradition of natural law, such as we found it in earlier thinkers.
He does give us reason to think in terms of a common human nature, precisely in order to ask the questions of what reason will find reasonable.
What is it that a human reason trying to think about ethics will find to be universal and intelligible and objective so as to promote the goal of as much freedom as possible,
and especially to promote freedom in a way that enhances our human dignity rather than in some way detracts from it?
Hence, he proposes something that is new and very interesting for the history of ethics.
Now, in lectures to come, I will forgo trying to tell the rest of the history of natural law, for as we enter the contemporary period, there are so many thinkers who contribute to it in a number of ways.
And instead, for the remaining eight lectures in this series, what I will try to do is appreciate contemporary dimensions of natural law, not by attempting a historical approach, but by taking a topical approach,
looking at problems, because I think we'll find them very interesting.
Thank you.
Lecture 17 Can Rights Exist Without Natural Law?
Up until this point in our series, we have been focusing on questions about the history of natural law.
From this point on, lecture 17, through the end, I'd like to try to embrace consideration of natural law in our contemporary world by focusing on some of the great problems about natural law,
rather than trying to do an historical review of the many important and interesting figures who have been involved in that discussion.
For today's lecture, I'd like to focus on the question about rights, and whether there can be natural rights or human rights, any kind of rights, without natural law someplace at the base of it.
I ask that question mindful of the fact that it's not the specific wording, but it's rather the thought and the concept and the ultimate justification that we need to be concerned about.
The natural law history that we have been reviewing proved, I think, that natural law theory can use quite a considerable variety of terms.
It has some preferred terms, like the very term natural law, the term natural end or teleology, the notion of reason reflecting on nature.
But it does not need to use any one of those terms for the theory to be still working in people's minds, for it still to be at the real core of what the discussion about ethics is.
This lecture will be devoted to, I think, one of the most frequent instances of natural law thinking today, and yet one that almost never invokes the language natural law, namely the concern with human rights and with natural rights.
We have seen international organizations during the 20th century regularly appealing to the notion of natural rights or human rights or human dignity, and they incorporate this in their charters and their declarations.
Likewise, discussion about human rights in some social movements, such as the civil rights movement, have often appealed to the human dignity of the individuals as the ground, as the real reason why we should respect one another.
Whether it be a question about the right to life or questions of right to liberty or pursuing happiness, or about much more specific things like access to education and jobs and communications, that the real basis, the foundation upon which arguments turn at some point or other,
consists of what human beings are and what it is that is so important about that.
I would want to argue, and we'll try to do so in this lecture, that fundamentally this is natural law thinking, for it is a case of appealing to a higher and unwritten standard that is rooted in the type of being we are,
and that whether you actually invoke the term nature and carry around the metaphysical baggage is irrelevant if long as that is really at the core of the ethical argument.
I think one can see that this is at the core when one considers the vast disagreements that exist about what should be counted on the list of natural rights or human rights.
And as we try to debate the whether a given claim is one or is a civil right or something accorded simply by virtue of living in this political sphere rather than some other,
we are using the concept of natural right based on nature all the time and distinguishing it from what is merely contractual or what is somehow or other civil.
I'd also point out, as just a general introductory point, how important it is to be asking the question about what natural law is in itself as opposed to how a given community at a given time under given conditions understands that.
That even in a given community, if we understand only some part of it, that may be enough for our purpose and there may not be an explicit thinking about the rest of it.
That doesn't alter what the natural law is, it alters what we think about the natural law and how useful it will be to us or how we'll need to reinvent it as so often has been the case in history.
What I'll be doing in this lecture then is beginning the lecture by talking about rights in general as a rhetoric and then focusing on some of the great social movements of our century.
Secondly, I'll be looking at some of the international movements that the charters that have invoked natural rights and human rights and finally I'd like to ask some philosophical questions that will concern how all of this is ultimately founded.
But first, just the phenomenon of rights.
Mary Ann Glendon, a professor at the Harvard University School of Law, recently composed a book called Rights Talk and I think she's got it exactly right in her title of her book for one so frequently hears the language of rights today.
Sometimes under the formulation of human rights, sometimes civil rights, sometimes human dignity, very seldom natural law.
Rhetorically, all of these references to rights in any of their formulation strike me and certainly appeal to Glendon as trump cards that we hold in our hand that are supposed to overwhelm other considerations that are somehow supposed to be decisive in political and legal discussions.
The question that emerges when we are mindful of this phenomenon of so frequent a use of the language of rights is whether the current romance with the rhetoric of rights, whether it has anything to do with natural law or not.
And I would point out that sometimes there's a hesitancy or perhaps a premature readiness to move on to debate the issues without reflecting enough on what the philosophical implications of this are.
The very use of different adjectives, human rights, civil rights, natural rights.
The adjectives are extremely important because I think they're trying to give us a sense of what the ground of all this is, namely our participation in citizens when we have civil rights or our being human when we have human rights or our having a nature when we talk of natural rights.
And that those adjectives make an enormous contribution to the hint, the what else we're thinking about when we're trying to ground these trump cards and assert that they really do have such heavy moral and political weight for us so that when we reflect on what the basis of those are, we will have a readiness to philosophize and in fact have a better and stronger claim.
Whereas if we simply focus on hearing rights and are oblivious to what the adjective is communicating, not only do we lack an adequate ground for what it is we're saying, but there can be great confusion about what the real limit and extent of the right is.
Just by one interesting example of that, in the controversy that has erupted over the detention of various foreign nationals during the campaign against terror in the course of the year 2001, one has found that there have been foreigners who have been detained by our government and are not being given quite the same treatment that American citizens are given.
Some people have raised the alarm. Is this an attack upon their natural rights? But I think it's a good question whether it's actually a natural right that is being violated or whether there has been a suspension of civil rights because civil rights only properly speaking belong to citizens and that the effort to stem terror and to meet violence in the society might require at least the temporary
suspension of civil rights which even aliens in our country have been given to enjoy because those are so powerful and so wonderful a set of things, but so long at least as the individuals are not being themselves tortured as long as there is not an arbitrary ending of their life or an ending of their health, perhaps the curtailment of their liberty might be justified.
I don't try to settle that right now, but simply urge that a consideration of what a civil right is as opposed to a human right or a natural right might add to that discussion.
As we look in the history of our country for the reason I think why we have this romance with rights, a large part of it goes back to the Declaration of Independence and goes back to the justifications that were offered for this declaration that especially borrowed from the language of John Locke and his theory of natural rights.
It was for him an assertion that individuals have rights including even the right to rebellion and very strong sense that these natural rights are ours by our nature.
I think we value that still even if we have not chosen or have not had the opportunity to consider philosophically the necessity of thinking about nature as actually the ground for it.
But on the other hand, one of the things that bothers me a little bit and I want to raise it as a question for you is whether the set of natural rights that the Declaration of Independence talks about and that we have found so frequently in 4th of July speeches and in political oratory,
whether there is a sufficient sense of the correlation between rights and duties. In that document there is not. There is largely an assertion about rights and frequently rights are taken and are spoken about independently of any particular duties.
I pointed out when we were discussing those chapters historically that this is a divergence from the larger natural law tradition which tends to see duties first.
Our obligation, for instance, to take care of our children, therefore giving us rights to certain property that we need to have as families in order to make possible the care of those children.
Duties in a way came first and rights immediately flow from them. The Declaration and much political oratory does not mention that.
By contrast, there is another document from almost the same time, a document that has a much more bloody and sad and checkered history, the French Declaration of the Rights of Man and the Citizen in the year 1789.
For all of its checkered history, curiously, it does have a strong sense of the correlations of duties and rights.
So even while I am not ready to adopt the French Declaration in preference to the American one, I think there is something that we can learn from it that might help us with our sense about this romance with rights that we are presently enjoying.
The rhetoric of rights has become so extremely influential in our country.
I think that part of the way in which this has come about is that we do cherish the notion of living under the rule of law.
And the rule of law has been a protection for us, a protection from that interplay of party politics and the assertions of power,
that we expect that everybody and every party will still play by the same rules and that we can calculate our options and are likely consequences of our actions because we know what the rule of law will be.
That's a wonderful thing.
But it has also meant a very pervasively legal character to our society.
Laws intrude upon our life far more than they do in most communities, in most cultures, in most parts of history.
Our country has come to have a pervasively legal character.
Various authors have noticed this.
I refer to one author near the beginning of our republic as well as to a more recent author.
Alexis de Tocqueville, a very astute French commentator from near the time of the beginning of our republic, was skeptical about whether law had sufficient power to exert much influence upon social behavior.
And even though he was skeptical about whether law could do so, he had to notice.
It was one of those insights that he writes about in his Reflections on America in which it went exactly opposite to the way he expected, namely that he couldn't help but noticing that the American people were starting to have a character formed by their law.
Likewise, in a more contemporary vein, Mary Ann Glendon, to whom I referred a moment ago, in her book, Right's Talk, notices that how far the domain of law reaches in our society and that now, for us, law probably exerts more control over how we envision ourselves and how we act than does shared religion or a shared culture.
I mean, we have been a melting pot in which many, many cultural traditions from Europe and from other parts of the world have come, and how many different religions have come.
And we have no real commonness in that.
Perhaps there are some basic abiding groups that are persisting in this, but she notes that law has come to have a much more significant impact as the carriers of our values, whether that's for good or bad.
She doesn't think of it as a sub-scepticism about it, but she's trying simply to observe the fact that in terms of giving us a way to understand why we think of liberty or equality or justice as so important, probably law is carrying much more of the burden now than it used to.
One can see this, for instance, in our recent history in the struggle for civil rights that occurred, especially during the 1950s and 60s and since.
The landmark case here is a case in law, namely, in 1954, a decision by the name of Brown versus Board of Education, in which there was a reform with respect to the way in which blacks and whites were to be integrated in our educational system.
Not only was this a matter of social reform, but it was an effort by justices to insist that there had to be extra constitutional reasons for making the decision they did.
It is a departure from the point of view of judicial review and a much more interesting and aggressive force on behalf of the court using natural law or natural rights, human dignity, human importance to say we need to overturn something for the sake of social reform because legislative activity is not going
forward fast enough or far enough, is dragging its heels and is perpetuating a certain injustice. There is not only the fact that it was such a tremendous influence of a moral vision upon the state of our law, but the law itself began to change.
That is, the justices in 1954 voted unanimously and therefore gave an enormous moral weight. This wasn't a 5-4 decision where you say there's simply a power of politics still shaping the court, but rather an effort by the court to say the law has to determine how we will arrange our social policies because there isn't sufficient progress at the level of popular understanding, at the level of gradual organic social reform.
I point out that until that time, American constitutional law had had a much stronger sense of the division of authority between what the states were to do and what the federal government was to do, and a much stronger sense of the way in which the power of the federal government was to be allocated among its branches.
That is, there was not anywhere nearly the strong sense that justices should use their discretion under judicial review to argue for a campaign of social reform or even to argue for personal liberty. It was rather, I think, as I read the history of our jurisprudence, it was presumed that personal liberty would be protected by the structural features of our government having a division of the powers.
And it didn't need any particular attention by the court overturning laws so as to protect personal liberties or new social programs. But since then, since that decision of the court in 1954, a decision that was, I think, very helpful in achieving social reform, the courts have taken a liberty that they found in that particular decision and carried it so as to remove from local and legislative control all sorts of other issues.
They have found very new and relatively broad constitutional protections for various aspects of personal liberty. And this, it takes the whole range of issues. I don't think it's even liberal or conservative so much, but it's a new activist court.
The issues range as diversely as the protection of children from abuse, treatment of the mentally and physically handicapped, the diversity of lifestyles, consumer protection, cruelty to animals, how we administer our prisons and our hospitals, how school systems should work, and even the environment.
Now in that range of things, I think you have some very conservative interests and some very liberal interests, but there rather is a sense that somehow the courts under the rubric of finding natural rights can overturn all sorts of legislation.
And it's so fascinating to watch how these things get argued by the courts as well as how these things get argued for in the domain of public reason.
Sometimes the argument will tend to consist in utilitarian arguments. That is, let's simply look at the law under a very pragmatic consideration and simply see what are the likely consequences.
Are we somehow going to promote greater values, things that we find more important at the cost of less pain, or shall we turn to considerations of natural right?
And very frequently I think the justices have used both prongs in the argument. Sometimes people are oblivious and will try to argue the point simply on a utilitarian calculus.
Whereas as near as I can read the dimensions and directions that the court has found in its decisions, there has been increasing reliance upon rights and the need somehow to ground them in human dignity.
It has even meant, I think, in the last 50 years, the reconceptualization of what a right or an entitlement is.
It's not just a matter of taking a relatively narrow list, Jefferson's list, for instance, of life, liberty in the pursuit of happiness, or Locke's list of life, liberty, and property, or perhaps the list that's in the Bill of Rights.
But now it's an extremely expanded list, rights to education, rights to health care, and such. And it's not just a matter of extending the scope, but it's a matter of asking what the law is telling.
Mary Ann Glendon likes to talk about the story that the law is teaching. And I think that she's right in trying to indicate how this works in the course of our legislative system.
One of Mary Ann Glendon's other books is a very interesting comparative study. It's called Abortion and Divorce in Western Law. Let's consider, for example, the divorce question.
What she notes is that the change in the divorce laws in our country, in the liberalization of those laws, occurred right around the same time as the change in the insurance laws.
So that when there was no fault insurance coming in, that you didn't need to prove who was at fault in the collision, the insurance companies will sort that out later when they fight it out.
But there will be an already payment, because the people have a right to go on with their lives, and that's what the purpose of insurance is.
It was about the same time that a change in the divorce laws occurred, and one had what was called, at least in literature, no fault divorce.
So that if the parties were both at least generally agreeable, there could be a divorce settlement without finding fault.
And what Mary Ann Glendon does is to show how different that form of jurisprudence, how different that way of the law teaching its own story is from, say, Western European jurisdictions,
where even where there has been a comparable liberalization of divorce laws, the story that the law is telling is usually different,
because there is still a different kind of fact finding and fault finding in the European courts.
And even more important, there is usually a schedule of child payments that is required by the court in the European jurisdictions,
where frequently here in the U.S. jurisdictions, it's become a matter of compromise and bargaining, and has led, in fact, to the feminization of poverty,
when women sometimes are willing to trade away some of the rights of child payment for the sake of having child custody, thereby impoverishing the children and the women themselves,
and I think to a great tragedy.
But my point is not to discuss the details so much as to show what has happened when the court starts to tell a different story.
Civil rights legislation in the 50s and 60s, I think, was the beginning of this particular trend, and it has had broad reaching effects on other areas of life.
The Bill of Rights, for instance, until the 1950s jurisdictions, jurisprudence, the 1950s saw a change in how we understand the Bill of Rights.
That is, until that time, I think that normally those rights that are listed in the Bill of Rights, and even the vast open-ended Ninth Amendment,
where there are other rights not so enumerated, those rights were primarily taken to be the rights of the states against the federal government,
things that the federal government could not do in order to preserve states' rights.
However, increasingly, the court has been operating under the incorporation doctrine, namely, to incorporate the first eight amendments,
which had dealt primarily with the states, to incorporate it under the Due Process Clause of the 14th Amendment,
and to suggest that these are rights which are personal liberties, and so are personal liberties which the court must protect over against even state legislation.
That may be a good idea. I'm not trying right now to debate the merits of what they did, so much as to point out the fact of the change in what they did,
namely, to enormously enhance the role of rights and rights talk and rights argument, individual freedoms and individual liberties,
keeping them and protecting them from intervention by the states as well as by the federal governments, and the federal court has been seeing itself as the arbiter of that movement.
In the international arena, there has been a similar interest in the dominance of rights.
One sees, for instance, in 1948, the United Nations making its universal declaration of human rights.
The European nations, at various points in time, tried to imitate that.
One sees, for instance, in 1965, the European Social Charter, and in 1966, the International Covenant of Civil and Political Rights.
Even now, as there are movements to try to establish an international court again, one sees some of this kind of documentation,
but it is not yet clear exactly what form that legislation will take.
But in general, these international documents try to stress some balance between duties and rights.
In a way, I think they are more mindful of that 1789 French Declaration than they are, say, of our 1776 American Declaration.
But what is also interesting, even as they try to articulate a notion of rights and usually put them in correlation with duties,
they almost never make an argument about why human beings have these rights.
Now, perhaps this is simply good politics, and perhaps this is simply a good sense of how rhetoric works as opposed to how philosophy works,
but as a philosopher, I can't help but notice the lack of a philosophical argumentation,
namely that they are treating these various rights as simply self-evident.
And we ask ourselves philosophically, what is it to be self-evident?
To be self-evident, I think, is to be simply obvious that any reasonable person will see it.
Any reasonable person will be willing to admit it, and that those who are unwilling to admit it,
and are willing to, in fact, violate it, are not being perfectly reasonable,
because they are unwilling to see what the rest of us see as so obvious.
But that is a reason, I think, why it's important to give a philosophical justification,
and to try to bring people into being reasonable for reason, philosophical precision in this matter,
can at least do the hard labors of trying to bring people to agreement,
where there is disagreement about what is intuitively obvious or what is not intuitively obvious.
So while the documents, such as the 1948 UN Universal Declaration of Human Rights,
or the subsequent European agreements, are admittedly legal documents,
or political manifestos, and not philosophical treatises,
it is important, I think, to ask about what is it that's so important here,
and if we are not, rather, in a stage where we're simply presuming some things about human nature,
which the larger natural law theory in itself finds the need to make obvious,
and hence we're doing a part of the work of natural law, even though we're not calling it that,
and perhaps for some good reason.
In claiming that this is a legitimate philosophical question, namely,
what is the ultimate basis for this declaration of rights,
or these various rhetorical uses of the term rights,
and why might it be useful to have a philosophical basis for it,
I'd like to try to make five points.
First, to make a claim about rights and entitlements for one group or another,
it is certainly necessary to specify the group.
So if one wants to articulate a notion of civil rights,
as in the questions of how people who are defendants against crime should be treated,
even defendants against charges of terrorism, one needs to identify what the group is,
and if one is claiming that these are rights that come only on the basis of citizenry,
well, so be it, then they are admitted the only the rights of citizens
and the aliens should not necessarily be expected to have them.
But if what we are claiming is that there is a right that belongs to someone on the basis of their being human,
and which a given regime, for instance, is not willing to admit,
we're saying that there is a natural right, but the regime won't admit it as a civil right,
then we've got to identify in so many words what the group is and what the basis for the right claim is.
But to say that the entire human race, the race as a whole is given certain rights
and that every member of that race has rights, well, ultimately that's to make a natural claim.
It's to make a claim on the basis of our nature and saying that humans have it, animals don't,
and that humans have it regardless of regime.
That's to say that it's a right that is higher than merely civil rights.
It's a right that precedes a constitution or some declaration of power.
It's the claim about universality, which we've seen to be so important about ethics
throughout the entirety of this lecture course.
Second point, appeals to human rights and to human dignity are often used not just by courts,
but are often used by legislators.
They're used as arguments trying to ground legislation.
And as such, they can be used to try to correct what comes to be perceived as bad legislation
or bad policies and bad customs.
In this respect, the appeal to rights is often taking the same course that appeals in judicial review do,
because judicial review doesn't necessarily mean we have an activist court.
It could mean simply that the court is pointing out, as it does in Germany,
namely that there's some problem with this legislation against our fundamental law,
but we're not going to be legislative about it.
It's simply a matter of throwing it back onto the legislator.
But when the legislator has to make a good case trying to make the argument
that such and such a right ought to be codified within a given country's law,
what is it that's going to be the ultimate basis here,
except that the legislator is concerned about all the citizens,
even about the weakest citizens and those who cannot speak for themselves.
But that, again, is to enter into natural law thinking,
whether used the term or not is quite irrelevant.
Third, the adjudication of apparent clashes between rights, sometimes when one finds this claim against that claim
and how do you put the two together?
The right, for instance, to freedom to choose how we'll live and yet the ties of matrimony.
Should there be such a thing as a legal toleration of divorce
or any of the issues where rights claims and freedom claims and autonomy claims come into clash?
There is a matter, I think, of thinking through not only our rights and our freedoms
and what we want to do, important as that is, but there's also a need to consider what duties we have
because we never find ourselves living as pure isolated atomic individuals
and that to think that we do is to risk gray violations to those who are unable sufficiently to voice their rights.
Again, to just use that marriage example for a moment, given all the tremendous hard cases
that there are to be considered in that domain,
there are also matters of children and of families and that at least a consideration of duties and rights together
will help to make a reasonable case and lead us to reasonable public policies.
Fourth, even without explicitly invoking the language of natural law,
the various rights claims and the approach to morality that takes place by considerations of right,
it actually bears tremendous similarity to the tradition of natural law ethics
because, as we have tried to focus in the earlier part of this lecture course,
natural law thinking is not committed to any one set of terminology.
What it's committed to is a set of concepts under whatever terms we invoke those concepts
and the concept that we are so committed to and which I think that natural rights language in its best sense is committed to
is the sense that there's something distinctive about human beings.
Granting, sometimes in our short-sightedness, we may not be willing to do the long and difficult work of anthropology,
trying to appreciate the fullness of that nature, especially as we think about how long and how many years
that that human nature requires careful cultivation in order to unfold well,
that sometimes we're inclined to a somewhat more short-sighted approach because of the immediate liberty interest that is at issue
or because of some of the immediate benefits of the short term.
But when one thinks about, say, the security that a person needs in order to grow up well
and for good maturation and psychological health, that one needs a real security,
it may be that we need the longer standing view and need to bring in all that anthropology
in order to think about rights and make sure they're balanced rather than arbitrary.
Finally, merely to couch a claim in terms of rights doesn't settle it.
It doesn't amount to a trump card, even though many groups claiming rights would like them to be trump cards.
Just as in the case of natural law, so in the case of natural rights,
what one is trying to do is to make an argument that will convince the proverbial impartial spectator
about what is good and bad, right and wrong, obligatory, forbidden or permissible,
and do so in ways that are intelligible and objective and universal so far as possible.
And for this, we do well to make sure we have a sufficient nature thinking
in order to make a good ethical case.
Lecture 18, The Question of Evolution.
One of the important presuppositions of classical natural law theory is the presence of such a thing as human nature.
But modern biology has raised all sorts of interesting questions for natural law theory,
particularly associated with the theory of evolution.
Does the theory of evolution, for instance, simply negate all natural law theory whatsoever,
as well as natural rights claims, by reducing us to just one more animal species,
maybe something that's more intelligent, more clever, more powerful, more funny,
but in short, not any different in kind?
Among the related points that I think we need to cover in this series on natural law vis--vis evolution
is the very assumption of evolutionary theory, materialism,
that is often really just assumed without proof by evolutionary theorists,
as well as some of the other claims they make.
I mean, to assume materialism is to assume there is no such thing as an immaterial or a spiritual reality.
Is that justified?
But it will also be helpful to distinguish between natural law,
as I have been using the term throughout this course, as a moral term, the natural moral law,
as distinct from the laws of nature, the things that are regarded generally as laws of science.
We got nature and law in the same phrase, but we've got it in some very distinct ways in which we're using it there.
My claim will be that natural law, when used in ethics, and laws of nature,
as we tend to use that term in science, are in fact related but distinct,
and it's important to see that distinction as well as see their commonness.
The imperatives that are typical of natural law theory in any of the senses of which we've been using natural law theory
always involve evaluation of human conduct,
whereas the laws of nature are matters of observing and commenting upon regularities in nature,
regularities in the physical universe.
But moral conduct might be just one of those in which these two spheres combine.
For this lecture, then, what I'd like to consider is natural law and evolutionary theory
and begin to talk about the status of evolutionary theory for just a bit,
and my reason for doing so is that it makes a difference to natural law theory
whether evolution is true or whether it's not.
That is, it has a different implication for natural law theory, so I need to consider both options.
And then finally, toward the end, to try to articulate some defense of natural law theory, whichever way we decide the question.
First, the status of evolutionary theory.
I think that there are good cases that can be made both for and against the theory of evolution,
and I'm not going to try to settle the matter during this hour.
Much depends on exactly what one means by the theory of evolution, what one is including and excluding.
It's one of those terms I think that everybody thinks they know what it means,
but as a matter of fact, in the technical literature, there is a number of theories that are involved here,
and they have different implications.
So I will attempt to discuss it only as far as I need to for the sake of natural law.
Perhaps the dominant theory of evolution goes under the name of Darwinianism and Neo-Darwinianism.
And the two main principles that are invoked by all forms of evolutionary theory that are Darwinian and Neo-Darwinian
are random variation and natural selection.
Random variation, of course, refers to how novelty comes into the world.
The kind of novelty that can produce new species from time to time.
Various mechanisms have been produced to try to explain this variation.
Sometimes it's radiation from the sun, sometimes it's the way in which chemicals by chance interact with one another and so on,
and these have been proposed as explanation for how the novelty springs up,
so that we really do have variety.
That's one of the key components of an evolutionary theory, random variation.
That is, variation without any designing intelligence, without any God who is arranging the system,
or without intelligence in any other sphere, but truly random.
Second principle that is key to Darwinian and Neo-Darwinian explanations is the notion of natural selection,
the winnowing process by which some species succeed and procreate and develop,
while other species manage to fall by the wayside.
They fail to adapt to their environment, fail to meet one of the challenges that arise,
somehow fail to reproduce themselves.
It seems to me that whether or not this is true, there are implications for natural law theory.
So I need to discuss both points.
That is, first I'll begin to discuss a strong objection that has been raised to evolutionary theory being true.
And obviously, if evolutionary theory is untrue, then the effect is that natural law can just go on as it's always gone on.
Whereas, in the second part of the hour, what I'll try to consider is supposing evolution is true.
What effect does that have on natural law theory?
I think that one can make a strong plausible case, I don't know that it's a definitive case,
but one can make a strong plausible case against the theory of evolution that doesn't beg the question.
Sometimes I find that arguments against evolution, for instance, creation science,
are simply begging the question because they assume already the answer
and are trying to construct an argument that will repudiate the opposition.
But invariably, there is some question about whether the science really meets the claim of science.
But I think that you can make an interesting case against evolution even from the best of contemporary science.
Namely, I'm inverting to the writings of a contemporary microbiologist and a biochemist by the name of Michael Behe,
who is a book by a very charming name, Darwin's Black Box, the biochemical challenge to evolution.
The Black Box idea refers to something like your television.
We all know how to flip the channels using the remote control,
but do we really understand what's going on in the Black Box?
And, of course, most of us haven't got a clue.
And Behe's idea is that evolutionary theory often makes the same kind of use of a Black Box,
namely to produce the random variation one assumes that the biochemistry works.
The part that's more easy to see is the natural selection,
and one can see how a challenge in the environment that's a new species coming into play or a new chemical process.
One can see how the natural selection works easily enough,
but that the random variation is the thing that deserves our investigation
because it often operates like a Black Box in the theories,
providing random variation when perhaps it is actually unable to do so.
Random variation, by definition, means that there is no guiding hand
that in advance knows the purpose for which the process of development is somehow headed.
This is absolutely crucial to a theory of evolution in the strict sense of the word.
Now, granting in a looser sense of the word evolution, one can have an evolution with a guiding hand.
One could imagine, for instance, God designing a set of steps
so that ultimately we'll get to where evolutionary history has headed us,
but that's not strictly speaking evolution.
That's design, intelligence, somehow providential control of the process.
What we're referring to here are those stricter senses of evolutionary theory where there is no guiding hand.
But the problem at the biochemical level is that living organisms all have biological structures
of enormous sophistication, enormous biological complexity,
and they need a very careful assembly at each level from the level of atoms,
the level of molecules, and all the way up through proteins and enzymes and cells as well as organs.
Hence, the philosophical question emerges as we're dealing with the fact that the little structures
are enormously detailed and are very complicated,
building bigger structures, being building yet bigger structures, building yet bigger structures,
and eventually making a cell or eventually making an organ and eventually producing an organism
is that we've got an awful lot of structure there.
And it's not just random structure, but it's very interestingly efficient structure.
In fact, as Beehe likes to claim, it's complexity in the technical sense of the word.
To claim that a structure is complex philosophically is to say that a structure is composed of irreducibly different kinds of parts.
Now, the phraseology here is extremely important that it's to say we're not just dealing with, say, Legos,
where we've got the basically the same building part and we're adding lots of them together into different shapes
that I'm making out of the same basic part, but rather that the parts are also different in kind.
And in the case of an irreducibly complex structure, all the parts have to be there for the whole to work.
Consider by way of a very simple example, something like a mousetrap and the parts that are involved in a mousetrap.
At very least, one has a platform and one will have a spring and one will have a sort of a hammer and a catch
and a holding bar and a couple of staples, other fasteners to keep things in place.
Now, we've got parts there doing different jobs. Admittedly, we could make them all out of the same material.
I suppose we could make them out of wood and yet they don't work quite as efficiently as when we've got the made out of different substances.
So we've got steel in the bar in one place and we've got something else that's more pliable that can be the fastener
and we've got something nice and stable that can be the platform.
What the purpose of bringing up this example of a very artificial object like a mousetrap is, is that you've got parts of different kinds
and the parts don't just evolve into one another. That is, no matter how much you start tinkering with a platform, you don't get a spring.
And no matter how much you start tinkering with a hammer, you don't get the catch.
You've got something that has a very different structure.
And when one considers the biochemistry of all this, one has similarly different kinds of structures
so that you have not only the building block atoms that are hydrogen and carbon and nitrogen and so on,
but you've got the various kinds of molecules that they form and the various kinds of proteins and enzymes and such all the way up the ladder.
Without all of the parts being in the right place, the whole structure does not yet function.
Organic objects of even the simplest kind, so you don't have to deal with something anywhere nearly as complex as a human being or a dog or a cat,
but if you're dealing with an amoeba or if you're dealing with a very simple kind of virus, you still have enormous biochemical complexity.
They are made up even at the most basic levels of different kinds of atoms which have to come together under the right circumstances
to form one kind of molecule rather than another, and then the molecules have to come together in just the right quantities and arrangements
to form the proteins and so on up the biochemical ladder.
Now, the constituent structures here are of enormously long chains and are of very different kinds of proteins and enzymes that need to come together.
And remember, if we're going to be strict constructionist evolutionists, they have to come together without any kind of assistance that a mind could offer,
not just my mind working in the chemical laboratory or the biochemical laboratory, but God's mind organizing a universe.
And they have to come together in just the right amounts and just the right quantities in order for even a simple biological structure to be present
so that it will perform a certain function that will be advantageous for the organism as a whole, because it's only when we have the function in place
in an organism that is already existing that it can meet the challenge of natural selection.
Often in the course of evolutionary displays, what one will see is imagination, imaginary presentations of a long string of animals
in which something like eyesight is gradually developing.
And the suggestion is that eyesight, of course, gives enormous advantage in the evolutionary struggle providing for natural selection,
because once it's in place, of course, the creature can see and can see things that other creatures can't and it can succeed in the great evolutionary struggle.
But the problem that Beehe is raising is that no sight is present at all until sufficient structure is present,
but that there's no particular reason why the structure would develop, because the biochemical permutations that have to occur are in such enormously long chains
of 17,000 and 25,000 and 50,000 units that there's no reason to think that the first, second, third, fourth, 17th, 135th, 288th changes
and permutations would have continued to develop toward that end unless there were a mind designing
and knew what the purpose and the function that the organism as a whole needs to have in this constituent organ made of these constituent parts.
It's worthwhile reading the book on its own.
My point here is not to say that this utterly makes evolutionary theory impossible.
My point is rather to suggest that challenges can be raised about evolutionary theory on a purely scientific basis and deserve to be handled.
Michael Beehe's arguments are right now being very hotly contested in the current literature.
And it's interesting to me to watch the vigorous exchange within the community of scientists in this very crucial but insufficiently scrutinized part of the theory of evolution.
Needless to say, the debate remains open and I am not capable of settling at all, let alone capable of settling it here.
But my point for the purpose of this lecture is, is that if evolutionary theory were to fall on the basis of science, for instance, on the basis of biochemistry
and require some different theory to explain the incredible complexity and the incredible differentiation among species, all objections to natural law from that quarter would fall.
On the other hand, it seems to me that it's only appropriate to note that evolutionary theory may be true,
whether it's a guided evolution or whether they solve the problem of biochemical complexity and the vast variety that is needed for random variation.
And so for a few minutes now, let's consider the other possibility.
Namely, if for the sake of discussion we are simply to accept that evolutionary theory is true in any of its forms,
we still need to ask about the implications for natural law thinking and ethics.
It will be important, I think, to divide the question so as to give proper consideration to both the question about natural kinds,
as well as the question about morality, such as natural law theory likes to present.
So first I'd like to consider assuming evolution now, not in any way questioning it,
but to consider the question about natural kinds and then in a minute I'll turn to the properly moral questions.
Supposing there has been such a thing as evolution, what is it that it has produced?
Has it indeed produced different species?
I think that most evolutionary theorists would be inclined to say, yes, that's the whole point of evolutionary theory,
is that in the course of history we have seen by this purely random development and random process,
we've got creatures which are truly different in kind.
Hence the philosophical question comes up, well, what is a difference in kind as opposed to a difference in degree?
Earlier on in our course I raised this question and cited the works of Mortimer Adler to whom I am enormously indebted
in what I have to say next, namely that to say that we have two things, two groups that are different in kind,
is to say that we have identified a group, all of which, every member of which, has a certain property or trait.
Maybe it has that trait in wonderful maturity and in complete form.
Maybe it only has that trait a little bit less.
Maybe it has the trait much less.
Maybe it has the trait only in germ.
But our very reason for saying that there's a difference in kind is that every member of the group has a certain trait,
a certain set of properties to some degree.
Whereas if we have a difference in kind, everything else will lack that trait or lack those properties.
That is what it means in anybody's philosophy to say that we have a difference in kind and not merely a difference in degree.
Clearly we have differences in degree all over the place.
But if we have, by evolution, true difference in kind, then what we've got are natural kinds produced by an evolutionary mechanism.
In his book, The Difference of Man and the Difference It Makes, Mortimer Adler gives us a wonderful way to apply this sense of the difference in kinds
to question of the human species and to ask, all right, maybe we have in general differences in kind in evolutionary theory.
Do we have a true difference in kind with regard to the human species?
And he reviews the options that are available to us for asking about whether we have a true difference in kind for the humankind.
He notices, as any good Aristotelian is, and any Aristotelian would do, and Mortimer Adler clearly is an Aristotelian,
he notices that there's lots of ways in which you can consider the similarities,
the similarity that we have, for instance, in bodily structure to many of the primates,
the similarities that we bear with many of the mammals with regard to processes of reproduction.
But he notices that there are certain properties which are present in the human species,
and he particularly directs our consideration to the focus on language as a manifestation of our rationality.
This is to admit that there will be human beings, that is, creatures produced by other human beings
and who are at least biological members of the same species, who do not yet have language, the unborn or the smallest children,
and there will be members of the species who will not get language because of some genetic defect
or because of some injury or some accident where they lose the powers of speech.
And yet he asks the question, is the phenomenon of language itself rationality, or is language a manifestation of rationality?
And so that some creatures, some human creatures, which are not yet possessing language
or are no longer capable of language, or in which language never managed to develop the cases of autism
or questions at some point in some children with Down syndrome or various kinds of accidents that have occurred.
Do they manifest their rationality in other ways?
And I think what he's been finding and what other behavioral psychologists have certainly found
is that one can manifest one's rationality, for instance, one's discrimination in powers of loving,
knowing how to love one's parents and how to be afraid of strangers,
that one can manifest even in one's patterns of likes and dislikes,
one's patterns of love, of giving love and receiving love,
one can manifest one's rationality even when powers of language are gone.
But that, as we noted in those very first lectures that we did together,
the privilege of the normal case, the way in which we identify what is normal and natural and appropriate for our species,
is not by looking at things at the very beginning or things at the end,
not looking at the really hard cases, but looking at what is typical of the normal case.
Not trying to insist that every time we lack the function, we lack a membership of the species,
but rather that we look at the normal case to contrast the species as a whole with another species.
In this respect, almost all of our psychology, almost all of behavioral sciences,
almost all of the social sciences, utterly depend upon the recognition that we have a true difference in kind
that is present precisely by virtue of rationality manifested, for example, in language.
And one can consider the details of language and can understand yet new things about our rationality.
There is, for example, the fact that other animal species manifest something like language,
that is, they have some forms of communication.
And whether we're dealing with the dolphins or dealing with the chimps or dealing with the honeybees,
there certainly are patterns of communication that they exhibit.
What is so typical of human language and that lets it be this property that is present,
at least as a power in every instance of the humankind,
and lacking even in other animal species that do indeed have means of communication,
are things like its flexibility, its ability to express so many different kinds of thought and to do so abstractly.
Or, as I recently saw in a book by Alistair McIntyre called Dependent Rational Animals,
even the ability to say no, the ability to use negations,
the ability to do intentional conscious deception of others, to tell lies, to make jokes.
That even this phenomenon registers something about the kind of rationality that is behind our powers of language.
Not only a flexibility, but a capability for error and for deception, as well as for truth and for insight.
They show us something about how distinctive we are.
Now, for Adler in that book, The Difference of Man and the Difference It Makes,
he is willing to grant that neither rationality nor language absolutely definitively decides the question
whether this difference in kind was produced by divine creation or by some evolutionary theory using random selection and natural variation.
But supposing, in fact, that it was produced by an evolutionary process,
supposing that there was no guiding hand of some divine creator,
even if evolutionary theory proves true, this does nothing to attack natural law theory in so far as natural law theory is based on the difference of kind.
And an analysis of what that difference in kind, our rationality, our ability to make free choices, includes within the scope of its rationality.
Even if, for instance, we should find that the dolphins or that the chimpanzees are our kissin' cousins in ways that we had never imagined,
even if we were to find that out, I think all it would do is move the line of what species are protected by rights precisely because of their rationality.
So that, while I right now do not yet see compelling evidence to say that dolphins or chimpanzees are persons in the sense of being moral subjects,
the bearers of rights precisely because of their rationality, even if we discovered that they do possess such rationality.
Or perhaps that creatures from outer space, some of those proverbial aliens that show up in science fiction movies,
even if we should, in fact, find such a culture, it would simply move the line of what it is that deserves moral protection rather than to erase the line.
It would not do anything to erase the fact that there is a difference in kind.
It would simply give us other creatures who are different in kind and also deserve such moral protection.
Hence my claim is that whether the human species is the product of random variation or not, I think it is obvious beyond the shadow of a doubt that we are a distinct natural kind,
and that rationality is our specific difference, distinguishing us from all other animal species, even those who are similar to us in all other respects.
Among the activities that are specifically distinctive of humanity as a natural kind are thinking and choosing,
and it is precisely on the basis of the powers of thought and the powers of choice that we make any moral assertions whatsoever,
and in particular that natural law theory finds its basis.
We are only culpable morally for what we know and for what we have chosen to do or to have refrained from doing.
To the extent that we did not know enough to make a deliberate choice or to the extent that we were forced to do something,
whether forced by physical coercion or by an addictive habit or by psychological pressure or by some other factor,
our responsibility is only diminished or perhaps removed altogether if that power were too strong,
and it does not in any way deny or negate the fact that we are responsible for what we have chosen,
even if what we have chosen to do comes about as a result of our nature that is the product of an evolutionary scheme.
It is precisely because no animal of any other species, so far as we now know, has either that kind of knowledge
or the power of making deliberate choices that are needed for entering into the whole sphere of morality and immorality
that we do not hold any of these other creatures praiseworthy or blameworthy.
One could imagine, I suppose, if one were trying to think of an instance to the contrary,
of a tiger who was retiring to its den and saying to its mate,
gosh darn, I'm going to go have to see a shrink.
I just can't get over that proclivity I have toward eating human children, much as I know that it's wrong.
Of course, they do know such thing and it's a wonderful example for comic strips,
but I think it brings out the point about what it is that we mean of the sphere of our own rationality
and the sphere of our own morality.
But sometimes we are inclined to praise the loyalty of our fido or of some other dog,
but upon reflection I think that what we have to say when we're praising Fido's fidelity
is that we're appreciating the devoted affection that these pets show.
We're not praising their moral judgment.
Rather, we have a sense of how much we have come to love them and they have come to love us
and how dogs in particular are so willing to embrace danger.
But we do something that is actually misconstruing the animal
if we think that the animal sat and thought about it, if the animal deliberated upon it.
At least the burden of proof is on those to show that an animal is capable of such deliberation
and, if I may reassert the point, if we should find on the basis of interesting experiments
in animal psychology that Fido did really sit and think about it and decided for himself
that we were worthy of embracing danger, that would be reason for including Fido
in the realm of protection as persons, as opposed to blurring the line between those creatures
which are persons and deserving of moral protection rather than those that are not.
But using the proverbial Occam's razor, I think that we're able to explain animal behavior,
even the kind of loyalty that we love to praise, on the basis of simpler explanations
and hence we do not need the more complicated hypothesis.
We do increasingly hold human beings morally accountable as they grow,
as they come to the age of reason and start manifesting some ability to show discrimination
and some ability to be responsible for their choices.
For those human beings who are unable to think those things out for themselves,
whether children or people who have severe emotional problems or mental difficulties,
even so they remain members of our species and we treat them with the appropriate sympathy
and the appropriate sense of inclusion within the human community
even while we excuse them from moral responsibility.
And I think that this too is a measure of our own level and sphere of morality
that to which we are challenged constantly to rise.
So to conclude, my question at the beginning of the lecture remains,
does evolutionary theory invalidate natural law ethics?
And I'd like to make five points by which to try to bring this together.
First, natural law ethics in any of its forms,
and I'll happily grant the diversity of forms that natural law takes.
Natural law theory stands or falls with the claim that there is a distinctive human nature,
not with the claim of whether that nature has evolved or been created.
And although I think that there are some grounds to question whether evolutionary theory is in fact correct,
I don't think that natural law theory stands or falls with deciding that question.
Second, natural law theory claims that there are certain patterns of activity
that intrinsically frustrate our natural ends, the things that are intrinsic to us as human beings,
just as there are certain kinds of conduct that foster the fulfillment of those natural ends.
If that is not true, if there are not such ends, then indeed natural law theory has been defeated
and I will happily have to hang up the lecture series at this point
and go on and sign something else to do.
But thirdly, I would contend evolutionary theory does not invalidate either the first or the second assumption,
namely the assumption that there is a distinctive kind and that there are natural ends.
There are admittedly some evolutionary theorists who make sweeping assertions
that now we can understand that morality is only a matter of custom
or perhaps that morality is only the imposition by one group of another group
of sufficient force so that they are willing to understand allegedly moral claims.
But I don't believe that those sweeping assertions are in any way intrinsic to evolutionary theory
and in fact I think that there are arbitrary assertions which are made by experts in one field
when they start speaking about a field other than their own expertise.
I tremble myself, I hope I haven't said anything wrong about evolutionary theory
lest I be an expert in one field commenting on a field which is not my expertise
but I've tried to be cautious.
Fourth, natural law students, like all students of human history,
have observed again and again that there is no biological determination
that human beings always act morally.
In fact, it is just the contrary.
I think that what we would expect if evolutionary theory could explain morality
in the ways that some of its proponents want, that there would be an automatic human moral response.
But I would reassert that acting morally always requires making a choice
in all of those circumstances where individuals need to make choices
and the fact that people make immoral choices as well as moral choices
goes to show, I think, that even if evolutionary theory is true,
it has not determined us to a particular morality.
Finally, what natural law theory offers is not a description of how human beings necessarily act
but rather some prescriptions rather than descriptions.
Prescriptions for how they ought to act in order to fulfill their end
as rational animals of the human species.
It is for this reason that we study it.
Applause
Music
Lecture 19, The Paradox of Cultural Relativism
Applause
Cultural relativism or a standard for measuring cultural progress and regress?
Throughout the 20th century the thrust of anthropology as a discipline
was often to show the irreducible diversity of cultures
and that idea of irreducible diversity proved rather appealing to those who wanted to
demean the idea that there were moral standards that were universal
as something that was provincial at best.
But at recent studies in the area of anthropology
have cast doubt on the accuracy of some of even the most famous researchers,
Margaret Mead, for instance, and the tide seems to be turning toward a position
closer toward what natural law theory has long claimed
so long as that natural law theory is alert and alive to the fact of cultural diversity.
It is not that there is any one form of government or one form of child rearing
or one form of marriage ritual that is natural and alone is right,
but rather human beings do need to devise appropriate forms
and that where natural law comes into play is in the healthy respect
for a sense of the natural need we have that it isn't a need of artificial construction.
Further, in noting the enormous diversity that does exist among human cultures,
it will be appropriate to try to reflect on some of the limits
as well as some of the powers of natural law theory to settle questions in ethics.
For just as I have often been criticizing those who were attacking natural law theory
and will today try to meet some of their objections here in the name of cultural diversity,
I think there's also a need to be cautious about natural law theory
and not to claim too much for it because to claim too much could bring the subject into disrepute.
There's no quicker way, in fact, to bring an ethical theory into contempt
than to claim that it can do what it cannot and then when it falls,
the whole theory is repudiated when in fact it had use
so far as it was given a more restricted and rational approach.
What I'd like to do then for this lecture is to consider the claims
that are made generally in the name of cultural diversity
and associated with that the claims that are made in the name of moral subjectivism
and to try to make an adequate response to those claims
on the basis of what I consider to be a measured and moderate view of natural law theory
and then to try to propose some distinctions that I think will help us
to sort out some of the more particular questions when those particular topics arise.
First, then, it's a matter of trying to appreciate cultural differences, not to deny them.
At the scholarly level of professional anthropology,
as well as at the popular level of primetime television,
there is, I think, a widespread mindfulness of the huge differences
that exist among the world's cultures.
It is not just that there is sort of a mutual amazement that takes place
when an American encounters ways of life that are very different from our own,
the ways of life of sub-Saharan Africa
or the type of life patterns that are customary in the Orient,
whether Korea or Japan or China.
There's not just those amazements we have that are typical of National Geographic specials,
but sometimes there are rather violent clashes of culture.
We see this, I think, in the recent terror campaign
by certain fundamentalists sects within Islam,
attacks that have been directed not just against the liberal West,
but in fact have also been directed against
what those particular and extreme sects have perceived as mainstream Islam,
or perhaps mainstream Islam is attempting to deal with questions of liberalization
when they try to confront modernity,
that there are enormous cultural clashes here and trying to understand them is so hard,
because we often just do not grasp right off what the assumptions of these different cultures are,
just as the other cultures do not understand our own assumptions.
Whatever one makes of the particular encounters,
whether the friendly encounters where we just express our mutual astonishment at difference
or the violent repudiation of what seems not just different but actually dangerous,
these things give us pause in our considerations about natural law ethics.
There is actually something very astonishing about natural law claims
to be able to get to objectivity and universality and intelligibility in matters of ethics,
given the wide divergences among cultures that we can observe in the world.
Cultural relativism is a particular point of view
that suggests that there are no absolute or objective moral standards
that apply to all people everywhere and at all times.
And when people make the claim that cultural relativism invalidates natural law
or any other form of objectivity and ethics,
they offer a number of reasons that I'd like to investigate now.
First reason that they typically offer is that societies, human societies differ so much
in what they consider to be morally right or wrong,
that it is impossible that there would be universal moral standards held by all societies.
In short, the fact of having different moral evaluations seems to some people to say,
well, there simply are different moralities,
moralities that are irreducible and perhaps certainly incompatible.
Second reason that is offered is that the relativists assert
that the decisive factor in whether it is right for an individual to act in a particular way
depends on that person's society.
The focus is not just on the fact of difference,
but trying to account for why it is that in any given culture we're so committed to saying
that it's this way or that way, that we're morally right or morally wrong,
and the claim is generally made that the reasons why we hold something to be right or wrong
depend on the society that we're in.
This is to say a point that I think that natural law theorists would readily agree with,
namely that morality is never found in a vacuum,
but rather morality, a certain sense of morality,
a certain level of appreciation for morality,
is always found in a context and a social context,
and that one's appreciation for morality insofar as one has it
very much depends upon the beliefs and the history and the goals and the desires of a given society.
I've been trying to bring this out for natural law ethics
when I've been attempting to make the distinction between
what natural law theory in a philosophical purity would hold
and what any given culture understands about natural law theory,
because I very much want to try to hold the position
that there can be different levels of appreciation for what the natural law demands.
The example that we've often enough given, starting from the very first lecture,
had to do, for instance, with the appreciation that only grew over the centuries that slavery was wrong,
and that this seems to me to indicate not that slavery was ever right,
but rather there were times when people did not sufficiently appreciate that slavery was wrong,
and hence that a person might not be culpable at that time or in that culture,
that a person might not be as culpable for holding the position,
and yet that it is possible to distinguish among the cultures
and to argue that there is really such a thing as moral progress,
just as there really is such a thing as moral regress.
Well, how are we to meet these objections and meet these reasonings
that the cultural relativists provide?
It seems to me that in the debates that presently dominate the academy on this subject,
cultural relativism often seems to many people to be a rather enlightened moral stance.
It seems to recognize the social matrix of any moral values,
and it seems to avoid any hint of ethnocentricity
by implying inappropriate tolerance toward other points of view.
So it seems to be just a measure of our enlightenment,
acknowledging perhaps that there are ways we do things
that would be inappropriate to do it otherwise here,
but to acknowledge that there can be different ways of doing it in other cultures,
and that's the more enlightened thing.
And then the conclusion quickly follows from that
that even within our own culture that there are appropriate stances we take
in which we grow more and more tolerant of difference and of diversity.
Now, I'd like to try to meet those challenges and do it in a respectful way
because I think that there is a certain element of tremendous truth here,
namely in moral diversity, in the fact that different cultures have different approaches,
but I would urge that position from the point of view of progress and regress
and to say that the toleration that we need to exhibit in order to live together rationally
and the sense historically we have of the possibilities of moral growth
allow a different explanation of the phenomenon that the relativist so quickly leans upon.
First, I'd like to ask the relativist exactly on what basis one would ever dare
to criticize those who are intolerant.
Now, this is a sort of a self-referential argument that a philosopher likes to make,
namely that if a relativist needs to insist that we need ultimately to be intolerant,
on what basis can you ever criticize those who choose not to be tolerant?
That is, it's another point of view and that there's some internal contradiction right in that point of view
unless they're willing to say that the principle of tolerance is absolute and not relative.
And so it's a kind of exception to relativism.
But I think that there's a problem there that needs to be met.
More substantially, however, I'd like to raise a second kind of problem, namely
how would a cultural relativist ever rationally criticize someone for a rather heinous position?
Here, the idea, I think, in terms of moral argumentation
is to start not with a hard case, but to start with an easy case.
So, for example, if one were to take Adolf Hitler's genocidal policies
or if one were to take a policy of blatant racism
or if one were to take an institution like slavery
or if one were to take wars that were fought purely for conquest
which offered no other rational consideration as justification,
on what basis can a cultural relativist oppose any of those?
That is, if it's something for which there is a tradition within a given culture
to be, for instance, prejudiced against certain groups
and not to regard them as included within human protection
or if there are opportunities to enslave certain kinds of people
if there are ways in which we can simply make for class systems
so that some people aren't enslaved but they are deprived
and not given the privileges of the rest
or if wars may be fought simply because this is natural
that the stronger should try to succeed,
on what basis could a cultural relativist oppose these?
And I find it difficult to imagine a consistent position
that a cultural relativist would maintain.
I think the cultural relativist would be in the position
of simply asserting that there are cultures of different strength
and that there is no such thing, no way, rationally, to criticize these
but rather that they are merely patterns of domination and contrasts of power.
Linked to the second objection is the third one, namely
the very curious problem about finding a justification within relativism
for social reform.
Because social reform is something that is, I think, highly important
and needs to be considered in every age, however enlightened we think we are
because what is enlightened by one generation may be not so enlightened
from another generation's point of view
when other insights have occurred about human nature and its needs.
But for cultural relativists there's an enormous problem in principle
about how one is ever going to get social reform within a culture.
It's not even criticizing someone outside the culture
but right within the culture how one is ever going to justify social reform
if it means going against prevailing cultural standards.
Considering our own culture, for instance, in the 18th century
in which a number of people of great seriousness and intelligence
supported slavery in the culture.
Or if one were to go to a different culture other than our own
one might consider, for instance, the practice that was current in India
of the sati, the burning of widows on the funeral pyres of their husbands.
Or perhaps just to take something that has been common to the entire West
the notion that I think that we would all subscribe to
namely that one should give women equal pay for equal work.
All of these strike me as in some way or other challenging a position
that is within one's own culture
and for which there is tremendous social support
and for which there has been long cultural tradition.
How on the basis of cultural relativism could one ever say
that the practice in question needs to be challenged and needs to be changed?
I think from the point of view of a natural law theory
or other theories of objectivity and ethics
it is possible now to debate any of those issues
and I don't think that natural law would immediately assume that
the old system was right or that the potential reform was right
but that rather you have to decide the question on the basis of the analysis of human nature
asking whether women are human as much as men are
presumably we say yes, maybe more so
whether any given group of people by their race or by their religion
are equally human and deserving of equal human protection, of equal human respect.
Hence, social reform strikes me as having necessarily a foot in the analysis of nature
and while it can be profitably promoted
in terms of what is advantageous and economically beneficial reasons
which can be given of a consequential nature
nonetheless there has to be some basis in human nature
for the very possibility of social reform and principle.
In short, unless we have an objective moral basis for law
it is difficult to see why there is any justification for reform
and even any justification for obedience to law in general
and unless there is a universal priority for moral law
it is hard for me to understand how there could ever be a basis for civil disobedience against unjust laws
the kind of thing, for instance, that Dr. Martin Luther King or Gandhi was so well known
all there would ever be would be power struggles
and if that's all there is, then morality in fact makes no sense
and we should give up the game.
Now, allied sometimes to cultural relativism
is the more particular form of relativism in matters of ethics
that generally goes under the name of subjectivism, subjective ethical relativism
and this is the position that morality always, ultimately, depends upon the individual
as if morality, like taste, were always in the eye of the beholder.
One sees this frequently, let me read one of my favorite quotes to try to bring this out
namely Ernest Hemingway, a great novelist but an ethical relativist if I ever saw one.
He says,
So far, about morals, I know only that what is moral is what you feel good after
and what is immoral is what you feel bad after.
Judged by these moral standards which I do not defend, he says,
The bullfight is very moral to me because I feel very fine while it is going on
and I have a feeling of life and death and mortality and immortality
and after it is over, I feel very sad but very fine
and that comes from his death in the afternoon and it wouldn't be hard to multiply other search quotes.
On a basis of anything like this, whether Hemingway expressing it in fine literary form
or on the basis of the much more immediate reaction that the college sophomore has,
morality is simply useless for there is no possibility of interpersonal criticism.
I do not mean that any of us should stand on a soapbox or stand in a pulpit and assume that we're right.
My point rather as philosopher here is to say that morality depends upon interpersonal criticism.
The suggestion that we need to examine our own presumptions and the things that we spontaneously and intuitively feel are right
and the things that other present to us as intuitively right.
Things that are somehow in their gut needing to be objected to
or things that with their feelings they need to support and to emphasize and to assert.
There is need for rational argument and there will be some limits to what rational argument can figure out
and there especially one will need to have great tolerance and great respect
for what rationality cannot figure out where there are many things in life
I think where it needs to stop short and be humble.
But if we took the position of a Hemingway or the position of any ethical relativist
then morality will simply be a matter of how we feel and it will make no difference
that a Francis of Assisi or a Teresa of Calcutta or anyone might feel differently.
Now in a philosophy class when I meet this I try to bring out the inadequacy of the point of view
by suggesting that alright I too may take the position of subjective relativism
and so when tests come back I mark them in great detail what I liked and what I disliked
what I thought was good reasoning and what is bad reasoning and then I give everybody F's.
And in the course of giving everybody an F there's of course enormous outrage
and they're unsatisfied by the notion that I have adopted subjective relativism as my standard.
Invariably they have a sense at this point that such a standard is objectively unjust.
I don't think that that's a full philosophical refutation it's more the practical refutation
which sometimes there is need when one is adhering to the subjective relativism
for reasons that are actually not the stated reasons but for reasons of seeing the consequences
that are going to come if there is an objective morality.
But how philosophically does one establish a more adequate response?
It seems to me that a more adequate response requires that we are mindful of some crucial distinctions
about what natural law in any of its forms does hold and what natural law does not claim.
The claim to objectivity and universality that I have been urging all this course
is not a claim that there is an absolute identity around the world in matters of morality.
In fact natural law I think tries to be attentive to the realm of creativity that is legitimate.
In fact it is to be expected given human understanding and all of its possibilities
and given the real factor of human freedom that is there are many ways in which we can try to sort out
how we arrange our families, how we arrange our governments, how we arrange our economies
and that it is only appropriate to mention that there needs to be certain limits on natural law claims.
There needs to be certain limits on how much we think we can settle
and I suspect that it is better to think in terms of a range.
This is one of the great contributions that virtue theory always adds to natural law theory
when the two of them are put together as a moral theory.
Namely that there are certain things which will be excessive and will be wrong regardless of who does them when.
There are certain things which will be deficient and will be always wrong no matter who does them when.
But that within the range there is a virtue that is possible.
There are things that are permissible on either side but that one can come to a peak of excellence
and understand by virtue what would be a truly excellent response
because it most brings out human maturation and human flourishing.
But we acknowledge that there is a bit of a bump,
that there is a bit of a range of excellence within a larger range of what is permissible.
The question then as I see it is not whether there is a range of legitimate human responses
to some of those basic and recurrent questions that life presents
such as how to take care of the needs of the young
or the needs of the old or the needs of those who have been rendered exceptionally dependent
or on questions about how to govern ourselves, how to arrange economics,
not only how to provide bare necessities but how to improve the standard of living.
Rather, the question that natural law or other allied theories need to face
is whether there are certain actions, certain practices and customs
and indeed certain character traits which are unacceptable at any time, anywhere.
If this is so, then natural law will have established against cultural relativism
or against ethical relativism that at least there is a set, however small,
there is a set of precepts, universal and kind but negative,
of things which are objectively injurious to human nature
and will be objectively injurious at all times and universally.
Likewise on the positive side one may ask if there are certain duties
that individuals and groups in any culture whatsoever will necessarily have
when they find themselves in a given set of circumstances,
recurrent situations that they have to face.
If, when a given circumstance, for example, now children have been generated by me,
if I find myself in the situation where children have been generated,
don't I bear the need somehow to make sure that they get educated,
that they get reared, that they get raised, that they are taught how to love
and how to receive love. The ways in which I do it might vary
but the natural obligation to make sure that I take care of what I'm responsible for
seems to be a positive duty that is obligatory always and everywhere,
even if the ways in which that obligation is answered are extremely varied
and human creativity allows a certain number of options.
These options might vary considerably within a culture
as well as varying from culture to culture.
Further, in the range of what is permissible,
there is also, I think, a question about whether certain policies and certain practices
might be preferable for human development,
whether preferable because they produce really virtuous individuals
or preferable for cultures,
precisely because they will allow the culture to make better progress
at providing for the material circumstances within which people may be free
and don't have to spend all of their time scratching out the daily necessities,
granting that a culture is still quite legitimate and moral
if it is arranged in such a way that people scratch out their daily necessities
and don't have time for the freedom that is necessary in politics
or in literature or in the devising of great accomplishments
or raising up heroic standards,
but nonetheless there will be something intrinsically better about a culture
which provides for the material necessities in a way that gives us the opportunities
that leisure and culture in the higher sense of high culture make possible
as well as gives us patterns of development
which increase our moral character,
which stand better for making us honest and virtue and even generous.
It seems to me that it is quite possible to identify
certain ways in which cultures may experience moral regress
and even be suffering from a kind of moral blindness.
Now with that said, I think that the test has to come
by examining the particularities of human nature
and I think that there is a certain body of evidence
that has been growing in the community of sociologists and anthropologists
which is refuting the cultural relativism which was so prominent
in advocates like Margaret Mead and such.
The sociologist Clyde Cluckhorn writes,
quote, every culture has a concept of murder,
distinguishing this from execution,
killing in war, and other justifiable homicides,
the notions of incest and other regulations upon sexual behavior,
the prohibitions upon untruth under defined circumstances,
of restitution and reciprocity,
of mutual obligations between parents and children.
These and many other moral concepts are altogether universal.
Likewise, the students of Margaret Mead
who have gone back to investigate
some of her detailed investigations in New Guinea
have found that she was often outwitted by some of the inhabitants of New Guinea
that she was investigating,
that the people were much more sophisticated than she thought that they were
and that they were unwilling to disclose some of the private practices
that they had and cherished so much in their civilization.
But as people have gone back and researched the very same groups which she investigated,
they have found that, in fact, people had precisely the moral standards
adapted to their culture and forms of expression
that she denied they're having,
but which she never saw or came to understand
precisely because they were unwilling to include her
within the range of their experience.
Certainly within my own religious order, the Jesuits,
many of our missionaries have found that it is very difficult to understand a culture
until one starts the practices of the culture.
One has to live long enough within the culture
and be trusted within the culture,
undertaking some of their rituals
before one will understand yet other rituals
to which they will never give access to someone who comes from outside the culture.
And as missionaries have had experience,
one finds that a missionary who comes into a country
full of his own ideas will get almost nowhere.
But rather, there requires a deep appreciation
for what that culture most treasures
and when one examines what that culture most treasures
and has a deep receptivity to it,
there is frequently a natural all basis to it
because they are dealing with humankind
and some of the need to formulate a response
to life's recurred questions about how to raise one's family,
how to care for the dependent, and how to govern oneself.
One can also see evidence of a negative nature.
The sociologist Colin Turnbull has done research on tribes in northern Uganda,
and I found some of his studies very illuminating.
One is called the Mountain People,
and he's commenting upon how a tribe self-destructs
in a very sadistic manner.
He argues that a people like the Iqt people of northern Uganda,
a people who which have for reasons that are largely
the result of their interaction with other tribes
when they were losing ground and became extremely frustrated,
that when they lose principles such as kindness,
loyalty, and cooperation,
they will swiftly fall into a state of nature
very much like Hobbes described,
in which there is war of all against all,
and that this reinforces the notion
that there are certain moral principles which have to be respected
if the tribe is to last, if the tribe is to succeed.
Now it seems to me as we ponder these questions philosophically
and try to appreciate what the sociologists
and the anthropologists have been discovering,
it seems to me that a philosophical distinction
has come to great effect here,
namely that the cases that are usually brought up
as instances of cultural relativism
can be handled better if we distinguish more carefully
between questions of moral principle
and questions about how to interpret the facts.
If we grow confused about those,
we will take difference in the facts
to indicate difference in moral principle.
But if instead we distinguish those a little bit more carefully,
there are ways of handling some of these great cases.
Let me try two or three and ask you to judge
and see if you think the distinction makes sense.
Hindu refusals to eat the flesh of animals.
Clearly contrasts very sharply with our western carnivorous diets.
But the difference seems to me to turn on a question of fact
and not a question of principle.
That is, neither culture tolerates cannibalism
as a matter of moral principle.
Where we disagree is whether the flesh of animals
could be the repository of human spirits.
For the reason that Hindus give, as near as I can tell,
that they will not eat certain kinds of animal flesh
is that they could be the repository of human spirits.
The principle in question is the same,
a refusal to in any way undertake cannibalism.
Even when one deals with those isolated cannibal tribes
who do eat human flesh,
what the anthropologists have discovered
is that they never eat members of their own tribe,
but only those of other tribes,
which they have by a certain kind of verbal semantics
to consider not human.
In my judgment, they are mistaken as questions of fact
and how to interpret the fact of their nature,
but they still have an understanding,
however limited, of the principle.
Even within our own culture,
I think you can use the same distinction
and I propose this next example
in light of the fact that we shouldn't just consider
our difference with the Hindus or our difference with the cannibals,
even when our own culture
when we have such enormous moral differences sometimes.
On a question as contentious as the permissibility of abortion,
there is, I think, this much of a common moral principle
in those who favor legally permitting abortion
and those who are opposed to it,
namely that we should never kill innocent persons.
But what we disagree about is a fact,
namely we disagree about whether the unborn really are persons
and whether zygots and embryos and fetuses
deserve protection as persons.
If this is true that what we disagree about are the facts,
then I welcome all further investigation
and all further consideration about the natures of
human embryos and zygots and fetuses
for a resolution of the question of the fact
if we indeed agree upon the question of principle
will help in the discussion.
In the next hour, we'll turn to yet other interesting questions
that natural law must face.
APPLAUSE
MUSIC
Lecture 20, The Problem of God
APPLAUSE
In our lecture series,
we have been considering some of the problems
that contemporary natural law theory must face,
things like question of evolution,
things like cultural relativism.
Today I'd like to take up yet one more topic
in that particular line,
namely the question about religious commitment,
whether natural law is a religious philosophy,
whether natural law necessarily presumes
belief in the existence of God.
The existence of a natural moral law
does at least seem prima facie
to suppose the existence of a law giver.
How can you have a law without someone
who promulgated that law?
And I suppose it's for this reason
that many religious traditions have sensed
some kind of very deep-seated compatibility
between a basic natural law ethics
and their own beliefs.
And yet there have been a number of thinkers
in various traditions who have not made
this particular connection.
One thinks of Aristotle, for instance,
whose God is just so remote and distant
and doesn't seem to play much role
in his explicitly ethical writings.
One thinks of the Stoics in antiquity,
who had a sense of a cosmic God,
but it's a very pantheistic sort of universe.
It's not a personal God.
In the early modern period,
atheists, whom we discussed,
who at least raised the question,
wouldn't there still be a natural law
even if there were no God?
And then there are some explicit atheists
who are natural law thinkers.
I consider, in particular,
Ernst Bloch, the Marxist to be one of those,
who is explicit in his denials
of the existence of God,
and yet is a natural law thinker
in many respects.
On the other hand, there are some thinkers
for whom the very existence
of natural law is something
that demonstrates the existence of God.
Cardinal Newman is one of those
whose argument for the existence of God
from conscience seems to work
in just the opposite direction.
So what we do well, I think,
is to consider, for this lecture period,
various questions pertaining
to religion and natural law.
I'd like to divide up our time in this lecture.
First, considering just the nature of the questions,
because it's a very complicated issue, I think.
Secondly, I'd like to propose a distinction.
A distinction between the way in which
natural law is grounded itself,
as opposed to what we must know
about the natural law and about its ground.
And I think the God question is relevant there.
And then, thirdly, I'd like to consider
some of the ramifications of this set of positions.
First, then, just some general questions
about how God is related to natural law theory.
Some of the questions that are raised
pertain to the reality of the matter,
whether there is a God.
So, for instance, we could ask,
does natural law obligation
rest upon there being a God
who is the source of the obligation?
What if there is no God?
Is there still natural law?
I think that's the first set of questions.
And that's a set of questions dependent upon
how the reality is.
But there's a second set of questions
about one's knowledge of all this.
And one could ask, for instance,
suppose a given person doesn't believe in God.
Now, that's separate from whether there is one.
We're now talking about the subjective side.
The person doesn't believe in God.
Can there still be a knowledge of natural law,
or at least of objective morality,
for such a person?
Or what if the person is not
in the state of actual disbelief,
but rather is more agnostic
and seeking and searching?
What if a person just doesn't know about God?
What will be the likely stance
as regards to natural law?
Or, finally, with questions of knowledge
and questions of the subject,
what if you have two people in a discussion
or several who have different assumptions
about God?
About what kind of God there is,
or how active and involved this God might be?
What is the relation of that to natural law?
It seems to me, in the study of this subject,
that there is absolutely no doubt
that there is some sort of connection
between the problem of natural law
and the problem of God.
But I think it really is difficult
to establish exactly what connection there is.
The way I'd like to discuss this
is to ask you to think about direction.
Some of the thinkers in our survey,
some of the thinkers like to move
from morality to God.
Others, on the other hand,
like to move from God to morality.
And I think that will help us at least divide the question.
First, is the study of morality
and the study of natural law
a way to come to know that there is a God?
Or does one already have to know
that God exists before one can show
that there is such a thing as a really binding
and obligatory natural law?
The first figure I would consider with you
is John Henry Cardinal Newman,
who was a great British thinker
in the end of the last century,
and he certainly preferred the route
of going from morals to God.
That the acquaintance we have
with objective morality
is something that will give us a reason
for thinking that there is a God
even if we're unable to establish
the existence of that God philosophically
in any other way.
The argument here is that we might very well
come to a sense of moral duty,
a sense of moral obligation.
But for that moral duty
and that moral obligation
to be entirely and completely and absolutely true,
there's got to be someone to whom we are obliged.
Let me read a short passage from his book
A Grammar of Ascent.
He says,
If, as is the case,
we feel responsibility,
if we are ashamed,
frightened at transgressing
the voice of conscience,
this implies that there is one
to whom we are responsible,
before whom we are ashamed,
whose claim upon us we fear.
And from that point,
Newman goes on to try to make his argument
for the existence of God.
Other thinkers, however,
starting from that same position,
namely the fact of conscience,
the inescapability of moral obligation,
others come to a very different stance
on whether or not we must
then come to a knowledge of God.
Immanuel Kant, whom we were discussing
a few lectures ago,
is one of these.
He holds that we can indeed
be very, very certain
about the nature and strictures
involved in morality,
but he is so insistent at the same time
that we can never transcend
the realm of space and time
to a spiritual or transcendent entity
that we can still not rely upon
their being a God on the basis
of our morality.
Rather, we must postulate
such a God.
And so he is famous for the theory
of postulatory theism,
saying, although we can't know for sure
that there is one, we must live
as though there is one.
And so it's a philosophy of the as-if.
But in just the opposite spirit,
the existentialist Jean-Paul Sartre
contends that we have to be
postulatory atheists
because of morality.
His idea, I disagree with it strongly,
but it's only fair to represent it,
his idea is that the very
existence of a God
would compromise our freedom,
would compromise our liberty
because it would restrain
and restrict and confine
human autonomy to a set of
external standards in such a way
that he thinks that we could never be
adequately free.
I'll return to that question of freedom
a little bit later in this lecture series.
Many theorists, on the other hand,
I would say the mainstream
with regard to natural law thinking
would hold that we should really
change the direction, not from
morals to God, but rather
from the existence of God to morality.
And in so arguing,
they think that it is
necessary to clarify what sort
of God this is.
Those figures who have a sort of
an impersonal cosmic deity,
not in any way loving or just,
come to a certain stance with regard
to justice and virtue.
Other figures think that we
must start from God and know
that God is a personal God,
that this God is someone who is truly
loving and deeply concerned
and that that makes a difference for
how the nature of morality is set up.
Thomas Aquinas, for instance,
who we have been citing throughout our series,
is very much inclined
to a personal notion of a God
who has created the world
and loves this world, and he thinks
of natural law very distinctively
as our human participation
in God's own providence.
That God who set up the world
and set up all the natures of things
within the world, each one having
a natural directedness
toward their end, similarly
has given us human beings
a nature with an end directedness
to which we are naturally inclined,
and yet we share
even more deeply in God's
own loving and providential
and personally directed plan
by having personal intelligence ourselves.
For us, it's a matter
of sharing in the work of divine providence
by coming to realize
what the natural law is,
thinking out how to get to this
end, and not just thinking it out
for ourselves, but being immediately
responsible for our families
and for our communities, even for all mankind.
One thinks of Aquinas'
own great source in the matter
of ethics, which is as frequently
Aristotle as it is the Bible,
and one sees in someone like Aristotle
a thinker who has
a notion of God,
who has a notion that natural
law is as eternal as God is,
and yet his God is so distant,
so cool. Aristotle's God
is pure mind, and mind
not thinking about the world, but mind
thinking about itself,
only concerned with thinking
about the very best object.
In a way, this is part of the reason
why the sage for Aristotelian
philosophy has, as his own
natural and pure contemplation,
and only secondarily, the world of action.
There are, however,
a number of natural law thinkers
who fall in the category
of thinking that the question of God
and the question of natural law
are simply utterly separate.
Hugo Grotzius, I suppose,
falls into this category,
for he was the one who, at the beginning
of the modern period,
very mindful of ecclesiastical
debates and for
separation of the churches,
thought that perhaps natural law would be
a wonderful way for
reconciling these religious divergences
and finding practical ways
to work at social harmony.
And at one point in his book
on the right of war and peace,
on the law of war and peace,
he writes, what we have just said
about natural law would
still hold, even if we granted
that there is no God, or that
he is not concerned with human affairs.
There you have a thinker who is not denying
the assistance of God. In fact,
to think he is a very God-fearing man,
he simply thinks that morality
is independent of the God question.
The ancient Stoics, in a way,
are sort of in this category,
for although they have a God,
the God is so impersonal,
their system is so pantheistic
and so deeply material,
that there is no particular relevance
that the God has, except that he is
part of the system, and that somehow
our own moral living and use
is a participation, a seeking
of harmony in this divine system.
But one could do the thought experiment
and ask what difference it makes
in practice. And then finally,
as I mentioned in the introduction,
there are a number of contemporary Marxist theories,
and this might be a little surprising,
because we don't tend to associate
natural law with Marxism,
except when we think back
to the way in which Marxism
invariably tends to think of
the nature of the entire species.
They would consider, at least in their pure
theorists, they would consider
human nature to be the decisive
category, because you're thinking of species
being, rather than thinking
of individuals as having
the greatest worth. And
for Ernst Bloch, religion is simply
one of those tools by which
there is oppression of the weak
by the powerful, and
that natural law instead is part of the way
to rescue this, by remembering what the
nature of the species is. He writes
about this in a very interesting book called
Natural Law and Human Dignity.
Another group that
I should mention here briefly to conclude
this part of the survey are the people
who want to urge that one
cannot get to a natural law ethics
at all, but rather that one
must look to God as the source of morality.
So instead of someone like Aquinas
who thinks that these are overlapping
sources who both can give
you the same insight, whether the insight
about morality comes from God
or whether the insight about morality
comes from nature, there are a number
of figures for whom
it is not possible to get from
God to a natural law claim,
but rather one must depend upon
God for a set of divine
commands, that this is the
only realistic and reliable
source of moral obligation and
our only source of knowledge
of those moral obligations.
The two or three books that I've seen come out
in the last two years on this
try to make that case that God
is the source of our obligation
and yet it's interesting to me that a work
like John Keeks or some of the other theorists
who've tried divine command
morality actually come down
to something very close to natural
morality in the way in which
they depend so heavily upon
the way God has established humankind
and therefore given appropriate laws
it's almost God
conforming himself to human nature
for the expression of these divine
commands. Well after
that survey let me turn more to the
philosophical problem, namely
I think that we can make some progress
by making a careful
distinction between the natural
law and how it is grounded
what it really rests on
as opposed to how we
know what natural law is grounded on
so the second
part of the discussion there is
about what our knowledge contributes
to this and how our knowledge is obtained
in my judgment there are
simply irresolvable
problems and internal
contradictions within
some of the positions I named above
in particular the Stoics and the Marxists
so I regard them as
insufficiently attentive to this
distinction and unable really
to meet its demands.
Stoic materialism for instance
seems to me to be unable
to provide an adequate
philosophical explanation
of how we're free, let alone
an adequate explanation of how there can be
moral responsibility
because of that freedom and not just
the pragmatic counsel of wise people
in the community. That is the problem
is in any materialist
system how do you ever
account for something being
free? A materialist system
is one in which there is complete
determination, complete causal
determinism so that the
material things in the
system are causing other things
in a very closed system
and what freedom requires is that
there be something that is not
caused by a causal chain
exterior to the being we say to be free
so I find an internal contradiction
in the Stoic system, an assertion
of freedom but no grounds
within a philosophy that is completely
materialist for managing this
let alone how there could be
a God who's outside the system
and of course for Stoicism there is not
likewise in the system of atheist
Marxism and there are versions
of natural law when we find
such natural law versions in thinkers like
Ernst Bloch there are
recurrent problems that face any
ethical naturalism here
beyond the mere problem about
materialism which is again insuperable
I think there's also a problem
in a system that is atheistic
how can there ever be a
law without a law giver?
At that point I think you would have
basically transformed the meaning of law
and would have be taking the meaning
of law to be simply our record
for how things normally work
we are stating it in some law
like version but at that point
there isn't a source of real obligation
that you can respond to
or fail to respond to there rather
is an effort to
codify and an effort to describe
what it is that people normally do
but that isn't enough for natural
law purposes precisely
because natural law purposes deal
with those who obey the law
and those who disobey the law
and when we're dealing with natural law
the claim is not that we've got a statistical
majority in favor of the option
that we're naming as normal
but rather we're claiming that there's something
intrinsically right that is not just
normal in fact sometimes
an entire culture may be blind to it
we're not talking about the normal
but the normative that for which
there is an obligation and so I fail
to see a way in which a system
of moral law without a law
giver truly makes any sense
the frequent
recourse that
is had by some of these
thinkers to the question that
natural law if there is a natural
law would somehow be
alienating this is Sartre's
problem and perhaps Kant's problem
namely that if there were a moral law
imposed by a divine law giver
would be alienating to human nature
would somehow deprive us
of human autonomy strikes me
as having a fundamental confusion
about the very meaning of freedom
let's consider that for just a moment at this point
does freedom mean
uncaused activity
if freedom meant
simply uncaused activity
then I think freedom would ultimately be
arbitrariness freedom would be chaos
freedom would be randomness
I grant you that there's a sense
in which we're free if we're not
uncaused but I don't think that that's really
at the heart of freedom
I would rather urge that
freedom doesn't refer to being uncaused
but freedom refers to being
not determined by something outside
rather it's a matter of being
self-caused
self-determined it's a matter of
self-mastery as such
we are not saying that
our free choices have no causality
rather we're saying that when we
human beings make a free
choice what we are doing is
being aware of some
maybe all of our options
A, B, C, D
and perhaps even the option of not
acting at all and then with
that mindfulness whether we have a complete
mindfulness or perhaps only a restricted
limited mindfulness
of several options
what we are doing is feeling the
attraction we can't help but feel
the attraction we're not free
in the sense of
we choose to
we're not free in the sense that we
ourselves cause our attraction to what is desirable
rather our freedom
consists in our ability to say no
to a number of the options
and then to move ahead
with something else that is attractive to us
that our freedom
consists precisely in
our ability to negate
our ability to refuse
any number of things which we do find
attractive it's still
self-caused in that we have to
be the gatekeepers we have to be the ones
who will say no to these things
even powerful as they may be
in the case of an addiction or in the case
of something where there's been a long
standing pattern of association
but our freedom has to be rendered
in terms of self-causation
self-determination to be meaningful
as such this
eliminates a problem that some people
have raised about there being a God
in association with morality
for a God to have laid down
a number of moral claims
saying for instance that God dislikes
murder, that God dislikes adultery
that God dislikes stealing
and cheating and other forms of nastiness
still does not in any way
impinge upon our freedom
we are quite free to choose those things
or to choose against them and to choose
things that are authentically desirable
but that there is a law does not
in any way preclude a freedom
it rather involves us in a much larger
way of having the responsibility
and the obligation
to accept the consequences
for the free choices that we make
hence I find that it is not
something that is alienating
or threatening to human autonomy
it is rather something that makes us rise
to the challenge of responsibility
and gives us a reason for
considering very carefully the consequences
of our actions and asking about the nature
of those choices that we make
now with this in mind
this stream of natural law theory
has tended to find
therefore a way to combine
belief in God and
attentiveness to nature without
on the other hand making human freedom
or the natural law
obligations something that are alienating
to us rather
natural law thinking puts a tremendous
amount of stress on
our innate intrinsic
end directedness
that we are for instance directed towards
responsibility toward looking toward
the friendship of other people
that we are designed for the
maturation of our own organism
and the maturation of our communities
but this end directedness
can sometimes
give us a sense of moral obligation
without particularly
adverting to the God question
but if we choose to go deeper
if we choose to study the matter further
we can well ask question
how is it that we are so naturally
good for things which are authentically good for us
how is it that we find ourselves
repulsed
by things which are actually bad for us
this might well be rooted
in the way in which we have been designed
by an intelligent designer
hence the natural law thinker
often finds that his moral theory
fits very well with the notion
of a divine being
and yet it allows us
from the point of view of theory
to distinguish between the questions
that natural law is ultimately grounded
in God I think you have to say yes to that
and on the other hand
the question of whether one needs
in the course of a conversation
to advert to God
as the ground of moral obligation
for somebody else to know the obligation
and that frequently there is no necessity
to go all the way back
to the metaphysical roots
because it is quite possible
to see at the more immediate level
to see at the level of what is simply evident
and experience what the nature
of our obligations are
one can see for instance that there is
a prohibition
on the deliberate taking
of innocent human life
or one can see that there is a direct
and immediate duty
to care for one's own offspring
without having to think about the source
of this in God
and yet when one is more reflective
and is not immediately under the pressure
of crisis needing to make a decision
why is so important about human life anyway
why is it that human life
deserves such respect
why is it that human life
might be considered sacred or inviolable
and then when one is asking
those very remote questions
those very deep metaphysical questions
then I think it is very likely
that one will see because
the human being is made in the image
and likeness of God in a way
that no other such creature is
but one need to advert to that
to consider a number of
natural law obligations
then we turn in the time that remains
to consider a number of
possible ramifications
that these questions about God
and natural law have
for the organization of society and culture
I'd like first to consider some matters
of political authority and legitimacy
and then secondly to consider
how we ought to write our laws
or have our laws composed
with respect to questions
some thinkers have taken
a very strong stand on the questions
I have been discussing
and they seem to think that we need to know
the existence of God
in order to recognize moral obligation
I've tried to divide that question and say
we probably don't need to know
the existence of God in the immediate sphere
even though we do ultimately have to take it back
to the existence of God
but if one takes a strong stand and say
no to know any moral obligation
we've got to know the source
of the obligation, the God who is obliging us
those people will probably
have to take a stand that
even human authority in government
human authority in society
will need divine support
in order to be legitimate
and there certainly have been thinkers who argued
for the divine right of kings
or for various forms of theocracy
on the other hand
if one is willing to say that
there is a remote and ultimate
dependence upon God for natural
obligation but that one
does not immediately need to call upon that
that one can instead
see moral obligation
without adverting to those questions
then it is quite possible to think of other
justifications for a political regime
including the possibility
of the justification of a regime
by popular consent
even the social contract theories
for instance of Jean Locke
Jean-Jacques Rousseau and others
have very much
adverted to the fact that its
political authority comes
from human consent
from the consent of those governed
but it's a very different system
and this will also make it possible
to consider how various forms
of government in modernity
are very differently organized
namely that we have a much
greater scope and latitude
for what it is that is acceptable conduct
and we regard something like religious freedom
as a freedom to pursue
the truth about God which we
in this country respect so deeply
and enshrine as part of our law
and yet we do not insist upon
a certain kind of worship
as being required by the state
whereas there have been many a state
before us in the course of
the long history of humanity that
insisted that there be uniformity
in matters of religion
because the authority of the state
was grounded precisely on a recognition
of a certain claim about God
which is true.
There are questions besides
questions of political legitimacy
there are lots of questions about
how much of moral obligation
how much of moral value
we should bring into civil law
that is it's a question about
what moral obligations
we should try to codify
obviously there are some
sorts of moral obligations
which it would be impossible to codify
the obligation of gratitude for instance
if someone has given something to us
or done something to us
it's very hard to imagine that there would be
an unenforceable law on that subject
but there's also questions about
the state establishment of religion
because if one does think
that there's a moral obligation
to worship the true God
whoever the true God is
some figures would want to bring in
that obligation into civil law
and there have been states which have had
religious tests
and many of us I think feel
that it's probably a better thing
to keep religious belief in the realm
entirely and completely of freedom
and never to force faith upon someone
and as such what one must do
is to say that pursuit
of the truth about religion
is better protected by not codifying
that part of morality
if we do succeed
in avoiding the temptations
of a theocratic government
nonetheless we need to ask the questions
of morality should be codified
because the moral law
does
remain consistent
and does remain obliging
no matter what our position is
the law for instance against murder
the law against adultery
the law against stealing
but how much of this can and should be brought into law
most of us I think would want to say
that laws against murder need to be part of the civil law
that laws against stealing need to be
but when we turn to questions
there have been much discussion recently
about how much of this should be codified
and how it should possibly be enforced
it's interesting to
think about the great difference between
ancient and modern systems
in this regard because many
ancient law codes always
presented themselves as divine in origin
and they took part of their justification
to be the fact that these were
divine laws which they were recording
I've been arguing that part
of the reason why our own US
constitution has received so much
veneration
has had so much of a sense
of the supremacy of that law
is not just because it was adopted by the people
but because it was recognized
to include all
or so many of the
values that need to be brought into law
without on the other hand
attempting to insist
upon the codification
of every kind of moral value
but it was recognized to have and to embody
a certain amount of justice
a final point that I'd like to make
concerns the very notion of toleration
toleration has been an
extremely important part of the
modern system of government
and society but it has had
two very distinct and different
meanings namely it arose
I think in questions of religious freedom
when people agreed for the sake
of civil harmony
to tolerate differences of opinion
even on ultimate truths like the truth
of God and to allow religious
freedom to be codified in law
as a way to respect the
obligation that individuals have
to try to worship truly
and worship in ways that are fitting
but toleration has come to mean
in some modern discourse
not just the acceptance of disagreement
but it has come to mean even the
direct approval of things that we
might find morally reprehensible
this is a very different sense of
tolerance but one I think that
is imperiled the understanding
of the moral nature that needs
to be embodied in law
a very difficult question
we'll have opportunity in the next lecture
to consider some other things that law will do
applause
music
lecture 21
current applications
jurisprudence
applause
in this lecture I'd like to
turn to the subject of law
and natural law and thereby
continue in a formal way
what we hit peripherally
at the end of the last lecture
when we were considering questions about
God and natural law
the way in which natural law
has an impact and should be represented
or should not be represented
within civil law
in particular there has been a lot of debate
in the last decade and a half
about whether it is legitimate
to bring principles of natural law
into the processes
of legislation
and in particular into judicial review
the subject has arisen
in all sorts of venues including
biomedical ethics
we'll save that for lecture 22
but also things like the congressional
hearings that have been held about
nominations to the supreme court
for example in the cases of
Robert Bork and Clarence Thomas
when nominated for seats on the supreme court
the one was attacked
for an unwillingness to use
any form of natural law
especially a liberal stance
on natural law for purposes of social
reform insisting instead
that he would only argue
and decide cases on the basis
of a purely positive jurisprudence
the other was
attacked for the very
hint that he might use natural law
but natural law of a somewhat more conservative
bent on the application
to the problems facing the court
in addition to questions
like supreme court nominations
natural law is also
a question with respect to
any number of constitutional issues
and legislative issues
things that involve tort law
things that involve penal law
and even questions like the nature
of our tax system the graduated income tax
for the purposes
of this lecture what I'd like to do
is to focus first on the question
of judicial review
and the principle of equity
and then after considering it in terms
of the development of that doctrine
in our American jurisprudence
I'd like to consider the way in which
natural law touches on some substantive issues
in particular things like
punishment and taxation
but first and most
importantly I think here the very
principle of using
natural law in judicial review
repeatedly
in the development of the theory
of natural law its proponents
over the centuries
have made appeal to a
higher law important
that law in terms
of legislation and constitution
must always consult the standard
of objective justice
whether this is called natural law or higher law
there has regularly been such
reference law as
made by human beings
in any of the forms in which we make law
the basic laws that are
constitutions written and unwritten
statutory law
administrative law
sometimes even just a matter of cultural laws
that are cultural specific practices
all of these things somehow
need to be determined
just in order to be law
to be valid law
but on the other hand to recognize the need
for a law to be just
in order to be valid
yet decide in
practice what we are to do
about those human laws
maybe we could call them attempts at human law
that are somehow recognized as
unjust it seems to me
that in the review of the history
there have been at least three different attitudes
to what we do about those that are deemed
unjust one
attitude is that we should declare them
null and void no longer applying
secondly is that
we might have the court
simply declare that
this particular piece of legislation
is somehow
out of conformity with the natural law
and yet refer the matter back
to the legislature and not attempt
to deal with it itself
a third in a much more aggressive stance
is in the form of judicial review
as judicial legislation
in which the court not merely declares
a law null and void
but actually tries to correct it in some way
one saw that practice for instance in the Roman
jurists
whether a judiciary
in any given country is
given the power to overturn
statutory and administrative laws
that are somehow perceived to be
unjust is a matter that
needs to be determined explicitly
in a constitution
or if not the
actual practice of the courts
over the course of history
will have to decide that
in our own situation the US Constitution
does not decide it explicitly
but rather it has been determined by judicial practice
over the years
some cases in some countries
there actually is a more formal determination
in the German
Supreme Court for instance
has a special division that is a
constitutional court deciding on
constitutional issues and only that
the Austrian courts likewise have a little bit more
explicit power in this matter
but in our own country
there has never been an explicit
in the constitution in the matter
it is rather a practice that has grown up
prepared I think especially
by reason of the operation
of some natural law principles
in our history especially the
natural law doctrines of limited government
that government isn't all powerful
and secondly the doctrine of inalienable
rights namely that there are
certain rights that we hold
by virtue of being human and having a human
nature that are always a kind
of trump card
in legal history the practice
of judicial review began with
Chief Justice John Marshall
in the case called Marvary versus Madison
in 1803
but in that first period from
John Marshall's use of it
through about the 1860s
natural law
had only a very limited scope
and judicial review was generally limited
to trying to assess
whether particular legislation
did indeed conform to the
constitution and there was
a great hesitance
about invoking any other
standards of natural justice
that might be used to overturn statutes
so it was a very purely formal matter
it was a matter of looking at
procedure of legislation and only
about the technical conformity
to the constitution but there were
other moves afoot in 1793
Chief Justice John J
in a case called Chisholm
versus Georgia argued
that reason and the nature
of things
was a good reason for trying
to decide a case about
whether private citizens have
a right to bring suits
against various state governments
and what Chief Justice John J
clearly felt was a natural law obligation
is that governments are not just
under the law of the constitution
but that governments are also under justice
and hence the private
citizens may indeed bring suits to them
Justice Cooley
in the course of the 1860s
begins a movement
that I think is very important
for the next segment of this
and the development of the doctrine
if I try to sketch out the history
of the development of judicial review
I would urge that there are
three periods when the natural law
doctrine starts to grow
in judicial review after
Justice
John Marshall initially
begins the practice
the first period will be the 1860s
1870s and in that
portion of the history
of our constitution and our
judiciary one sees the use
by some jurists of
natural law in a very conservative
way to defend property claims
secondly one will see
in the 1930s
a willingness to use another
kind another insight about natural
law for social welfare
legislation and then again
in the 1960s and 1970s
one sees all sorts of
civil liberties and personal liberties
being introduced and defended
by the court on what are
natural law grounds at least
natural law of a certain sort
under the doctrine of judicial review
so to take the first period namely
a relatively conservative period
that I think begins in the 1860s
1870s until that time
judicial review had generally
been limited to matters of procedure
and conformity to the constitution
and hence one spoke of
questions only of procedural
due justice but
with the passage of the 14th amendment
and the reinterpretation
by the court of the 5th amendment
there the
justice is moved from
a notion of purely procedural
due process to questions of
substantive due process
I think this may be very useful to just to think about
for a minute when one is trying to follow
the news about various court decisions
those two terms will
frequently come up and if one is clear
on that I think one has a great purchase
on what the courts are doing namely that
if it's a question of procedural due justice
all they're examining are
formalities about whether legislation
was enacted rightly and whether the courts
proceeded correctly according
to very technical standards on the other
hand when people start talking about
substantive due process
then what is being considered
is not just the technical formalities
of legislation but whether
people's natural rights
or natural liberties
or some kind of social right or civil
liberty is somehow involved and it's
a more heady use of the courts power
it's not always the case
that there's a natural law claim involved
but sometimes there is.
In the 1860's after that passage
of the 14th amendment justice Cooley
wrote a book in 1868
called constitutional
limitations and what he was doing
was commenting on the works of Blackstone
whom we met when we were considering
the natural law sources for
the thinking of our founding fathers
what he urged
in his commentary on Blackstone
was that questions about
private property were
very appropriate for the courts
consideration and that in general
the judiciary had a right
to reverse legislation
that had been enacted by Congress
which in any way interfered
with private property
one especially I think had railroad questions
in those days and questions about
eminent domain the taking
of property for the sake of a common purpose
and in general justice Cooley
and a number of his compatriots were
urging that there's a natural law protection
involved and hence that there needs to be
compensation and not merely the claiming
of the land. Justice Cooley
in his book and then frequently in his
decisions urges that the 5th
and the 14th amendments considered
in light of one another give
judges a far more expansive
power here that is they can determine
not only procedural claims about
whether all the formalities
have been followed but that the court
is right in considering whether
the legislature was
considering rightly the needs of
the government and the needs of the property
holders. When
follows thereafter in the course of the next
30 years an increasing
use of these natural law claims
and I think that they're attributable to
one single justice namely Justice
Steven Field in the course
of the 1870s and 80s that
eventually lead to the famous
1877 case Munn vs Illinois.
It begins earlier though
in 1871
Justice Field writes in a case
called the legal tender case
he writes a dissenting opinion he's not
even in the majority but he starts
to make an argument that the rest
of the justice is eventually by
in the 1871 case he's
attacking a congressional law
that allowed the use of green backs
or green dollars
as acceptable payment for
various debts and he regarded
this as something that
contravened quote the
unchangeable principles of right
and morality without which society
would be impossible. Likewise
he thought it violated quote
fundamental principles of eternal justice
upon the existence of which
all constitutional government is founded
that he has a strong sense of
private property and is very
very suspicious about various
kinds of governmental interference.
Likewise in 1873
Justice Field again is in dissent
so he doesn't win the victory
of the day on the court's decision on that
case but he begins to get the court
thinking in some of these natural
law categories of a very conservative sort.
It's a case called the slaughterhouse
case and it was about a question
of monopolies which the courts were deeply
concerned about then.
Dissenting Justice Field argues
that there is a natural
law basis in the 14th
amendment that guarantees
the quote privileges
and immunities of U.S. citizens
as a way of guaranteeing
all sorts of rights
to our property against
various infringements by the state.
He says they are of right
they belong to citizens of all free governments
and his suggestion is that this
transcends anything that's
strictly in the constitution
that there are natural rights of property
and I think what we're supposed to be hearing here
is John Locke's political philosophy
which he very much imbibed
which he very much agreed with
and he's using Locke and natural law
political philosophy as a basis
for his court decisions in ways
that are extraneous to the strict
constitution. Finally in 1877
with that case of Munn
vs Illinois Justice Field
is the third time in dissent
here he's interpreting the due process
clause of the 14th amendment
as a guarantee against any interference
which the judges deem
unreasonable. Now that's a very
strong claim because it's making
unreasonable into the important
standard that the justice is used
but even though Justice Field loses
is on the dissenting side
the rest of the judges and for the first time
I think there is a majority opinion
that admits in some
circumstances state regulations
may be simply so arbitrary
as to be unconstitutional
and they have a readiness to buy
some of the logic even if they don't grant
him his whole point. Thereafter
for the next 20 years one sees the majorities
using Justice Field's
basic argument in the majority
opinions. In 1886
for instance in a case called
Munn vs the Farmers' Loan and Trust Company
it's a matter of
dealing with questions of railroad
rate regulations. The court
claims that it would be in
that it needs to invalidate
a statute which quote
amounts to a taking of private property
for public use without
just compensation or without due
process of law. But it's not just
a procedural question here they're into substantive justice
trying to reinforce
property rights. In 1890
the case called Chicago, Minneapolis
and St. Paul Railroad Company
vs. Minnesota ended up striking down
a Minnesota statute
for depriving a railroad
of the right of judicial appeal
quote by due process of law
pertaining to questions about
the reasonability of those rates.
This is an extra constitutional standard.
In 1897 the case of
Allguyer vs. Louisiana
not only do a majority of the
justices on this court accept
the view that due process
clause here protects
in a substantive way property
against quote unreasonable
infringement but also
they extend the interpretation of the
liberties that are guaranteed by the clause
to the whole realm of the
liberty of contracts and then
for the next gosh until our present day
tremendous defense of the courts
of these liberties of contract
as a natural law right.
Probably the most notorious case
in the whole series is the 1905
Lochner vs. New York case.
This was one that involved striking down
some
maximum hour laws that is
how much one could legitimately work
and there was an attempt at social reform
to have a certain limited number of hours
that a person would have to work every week
and they struck this down on the grounds
that it was unreasonable interference
with liberty of contract
and hence a violation of the 14th amendment.
Now that whole
domain that I've just been discussing
is an effort to use
substantive due process
on one particular track
namely the track of property and property rights.
It's to
argue not on the basis of some vague
natural law principles but rather
now to make the vagueness
consist in the due process clause
and allow it to have substantive
uses
particular on property questions.
It met its opponents especially in those last
20 or 30 years when the courts
were very inclined to support it
other justices deeply opposed it
the famous Oliver Wendell Holmes
for instance is a severe
critic when he dissents in the Lochner
case he accuses the
rest of the court of using the 14th
amendment to legislate
its own economic and social programs
into the Constitution
and he urges at one point
in the course of that opinion that unless
there is a clear and explicit prohibition
the rest of these justices
will make the law to be
whatever the majority wants the law to be
the debate was getting acrimonious
in the extreme.
In the 1930s the court which was happily
going along on its defensive property
claims met Franklin Roosevelt
and one had a
whole new dimension
and the dimension of the
economic problems that our country was in
which led to a new emphasis upon the need
for various social reforms
even if at the expense of
private property.
At first the court resisted this for the court
I think was newly inconstant in its own version
of how to use natural law
of a certain sort in property
cases and now there was a strong
movement to try to defend
social welfare legislation
and to use this natural law reasoning
that is use the claim that the 14th
amendment calls not just for
procedural due process
but substantive due process
you can make substantive claims
on the basis of extra constitutional
considerations.
There was a need of course to try to find
ways to express this but once
the court backed down and was
willing to grant Roosevelt some of his
social reforms rather than have the court
expanded it's that famous
switch in time saves nine
when the court stayed
at nine justices instead of
becoming 15 but adopted
much of Roosevelt's welfare legislation
they needed to find
rules of law and rules of reason
which could allow them
to approve and to
strike down the legislation
that somehow protected
these new social reform
pieces of legislation. One interesting
case is the case of palco versus
Connecticut in 1937
this is a case in which
the majority opinion
uses the phrase quote these
rights are implicit in the
concept of ordered liberty
here one has a use
of the phrase of
rights and ordered liberty a lot
of natural law terminology
to make the case that natural
law not so much natural law
in the sense of the nature of a human being
but natural law in the sense
of the nature of free society
requires that there be certain
guarantees requires that
there be certain kinds of welfare
legislation which would be
available to those who are
in the past otherwise disenfranchised
and one sees progressively
in the course of the 1930s and 40s
a willingness to do this. In 1938
for instance Justice Stone
in the case of the United States
versus Caroline products
is asking questions about
whether legislation
which would be inclined to
remove certain
social reforms by virtue
of popular initiative
these things should be given
a stricter federal scrutiny
and he argues that yes
stricter federal scrutiny
does come into the court's purview
when you have a 14th amendment case
and questions where
the courts have to require
tests by extra constitutional standard
where the court will use
not just literal formal
conformity to the constitution
but will be concerned with
natural rights especially of
religious groups and it moves
from various social classes to various
religious questions and to other
groups which here therefore
had simply operated in the realm of freedom
now their rights were to be more explicitly
protected. At the same time
one finds justices who disagree with this
in particular Justice Black
is constantly an opponent of it
in the famous 1947 case
of Adamson versus California
he urges that these are questions
about the interpretation of the bill
and whether they pertain to the states
or whether they pertain to private individuals
is the court not using
somehow a
natural law philosophy and substituting
its own particular
understanding of natural law philosophy
for what the constitution originally
intended and one frequently sees
the debate in terms of
should we honor the original intent
if indeed we can know the original intent
of the founders of our constitution
or should we consider the constitution
as a living document which is
in the hands of the jurists
to have them expand and develop
and to grow it in some organic
fashion. The third
case of this comes in the 1960s
especially in civil rights
legislation we've discussed that already
at some length in the ways in which
one saw with 1954 Brown
versus the Board of Education
and then all the follow-up decisions that
continue to defend and expand upon civil
rights but one sees it in other
domains as well. There is the
famous 1965 case Griswold
versus Connecticut which had to do
with the making
available and the selling of
contraceptives and the
way in which the court decided that
there should be no regulation of
contraception with respect
even to married couples let alone to
couples who were not married was on
an argument that justice Douglas
makes in which he uses a certain
kind of natural law reasoning namely
the rights of marital privacy
and very interesting language he says
these rights are in the
emanations that
come from the Bill of Rights
and this is a kind of language in which
the courts have often been
analyzed to be developing
new protections and new liberties
which are not explicitly there
and they root this notion in the emanations
or sometimes the penumbra
of the Constitution urging
that somehow their sense of what
natural justice is requires this
there was an enormous fight in that
case and in subsequent cases in
which some of the justices were writing
separate opinions about the right of
privacy as somehow related to the
liberty rights that are stressed
in the Ninth Amendment other
justices are for instance Justice
Black whom I mentioned a moment ago
were again worried about a
quote natural law due process
philosophy as giving the court
the power to invalidate any
legislative act which the justices
find irrational, unreasonable
or offensive.
This is also the period of course of the
Miranda case the 1966
United States versus Miranda
which required that people be
informed of their right to remain silent
after they are arrested and to have legal
counsel before they undertake
to answer any questions after an arrest
and the justification for this
was certain justices
understanding of what natural law requires
namely the natural law protections
that are codified when we presume
innocence before guilt and must
try to leave a person in that state
of innocence and not extract
confessions of guilt too soon.
Now as you can see I think from
this brief rehearsal of the history
there have been uses
and abuses of natural
law reasoning in jurisprudence
sometimes for conservative purposes
sometimes for liberal purposes
and I have not tried to sort those
out I have tried simply to describe
what is being taken place there
but it has led a number of commentators
in particular professor Robbie George
of Princeton whom I very much admire in this
to urge that perhaps we would
do better to restrict
judicial review
to purely formal and procedural
questions and instead
encourage those who want to use
natural law arguments as indeed Robbie
George wants to use but to restrict
those to the political process
and to get them out of the juridical process.
The alternative of course
is to say that
we depend upon a justice
to have justice in his
or her heart but the difficulty
of course is when in a pluralist society
there are extreme disagreements
about what that justice consists in
one risks being at
the whim of judicial legislation
so it's a very contested problem
and I hope that this account of the history
will at least make clearer where the current
debate is.
The possibilities for using
natural law in legislation
of course are enormous so here
dealing not so much with how the justices
deal with it but how the legislatures
deal with it let me just propose
in the time that remains three examples
of places where
natural law could very well come
with profit into our legislation
and then perhaps be respected by the court
because they have been included
in the legislation it's not something that
justices have to read into the situation
it's something that the legislatures themselves
have assented to.
One is the question about the theory of punishment
various
explanations are given
for what right anybody has
to punish somebody for crime
among the explanations that are frequently given
are deterrence, public
safety and retribution
my point here isn't to settle the matter
but simply to take note that deterrence
is not a natural law justification
deterrence arguments in which
we punish criminals so that other people
won't commit crimes because
they see how badly crimes
are punished is a utilitarian kind
of argument urging we'll get better
consequences in the long run if we do
this I simply point out
that that's not a natural law justification
for punishment because it doesn't speak
to the question of whether this person deserved it
rather all we would be interested
in is how other people later will react to it
whereas the justifications
for punishment that are found
in public safety arguments
and in retribution arguments
are natural law justifications
namely part of the natural law
is that a government
must be responsible for the safety
of its citizens especially
the safety of the innocent, the safety of the vulnerable
the safety of the weak
and precisely in order to secure
that common good of safety
the government has an obligation
to punish those who are in fact
convicted beyond a reasonable doubt
of a crime in a given
situation that the natural
law argument for punishing them
comes precisely because of the
the duty that the government has
in justice to protect the safety of its citizens
likewise the
debt of punishment to
a criminal comes as
a retribution argument namely
that this is in fact what is due
here I think of a figure like
Hegel the great German philosopher
who insisted that this is really
the only justification for
punishment namely to respect
the fact that the person was a reasonable
agent and not someone who is simply
insane whom we would do better
to confine to a mental asylum
to respect someone who does
out of their own free will
an act which is criminal requires
that we punish them when we catch them
and this is what we owe them to respect
their rationality namely some restriction
of their liberty
of course about how far punishment should
go questions about the time to be served
here's one of those places where I
suspect that natural law has to
stand back and say we can't
decide this it now has to be a
determination based upon the
the more specific considerations
of prudence how long the punishment
should be for something what type
of confinement natural law doesn't
on the other hand rule out certain
types of punishment as as
unreasonable and arbitrary as the
why I think we do not torture prisoners
it's a sense that somehow this is
an offense against their human dignity
even though they have so gravely offended
the community questions
of capital punishment occur here of course
because in the case of capital punishment
there is a very very severe
punishment that is being envisioned
for a crime and the question
is whether or not this is something that
is that is just we
might ask for instance what crimes
would be considered to be included
on a list of capital crimes
the biblical list for instance differs
considerably from most civil lists
the biblical list would include idolatry
and adultery neither of which
would be presently punishable under
civil law the civil law on the other
hand tends to focus on crimes like
murder and kidnapping treason
and terror and in doing so
I think is making a very interesting
claim about what the purpose of government
is namely to preserve
the safety of the people and
to identify those crimes
especially crimes which cannot
be undone like murder or
torture or terror and to insist
that in this case a person has
sacrificed some of
the natural rights that would normally
be present to that person
on the other hand I don't go too far
with that argument especially when we
consider natural rights to be inalienable
then even criminals convicted
of capital crimes nonetheless
have some ongoing rights
one could consider other matters
of taxation for instance and note
the distributive justice that's
involved in which we share the burdens
of taxation but it brings
up very interesting questions which could be
discussed here is a flat rate tax
the appropriate sort of tax
or does one require some kind
of a graduated tax is a sales tax
or is a property tax just
these are questions on which natural
law by virtue of its advertence to
the nature of justice the objective
and universal claim could have
an interesting role in our legislation
lecture 22 current applications
bioethics
it is hard to imagine
an area of
moral, political and legal
landscape that is
more contentious
and more fragmented than the area
of bioethics and medicine today
there are such fundamental
disagreements about these matters
that the debates can
seem interminable
this lecture will not try to oversimplify
what is admittedly
a very complex question
but it will attempt to show how
a natural law approach to ethics
would apply to the range
of current issues
including the areas of abortion
infanticide, stem cell
research, euthanasia,
position assisted suicide
I will give the bulk of the time
just to considering one case namely abortion
and infanticide and to
try to show not only what the content
of the natural law contribution is
but also by this example
to show how one uses
a natural law approach in practice
and then in what time remains look at some
of the other issues more briefly
natural law analysis
of the question about abortion
and infanticide
is a question about of course the
permissibility of the taking
of the lives of the unborn
abortion or the lives
of the defective newborn
infanticide and a natural
law approach would urge
that there is a need to consider
the nature of all of
those who will be in any way affected
as well as other factors
that enter into any ethical analysis
things like the intention that the agent
has, the likely consequences
over the long term, the circumstances
this is very typical
of natural law analysis namely
that you have to focus on those
three issues explicitly what kind
of act on whom
is it being done and what is their
nature, what is the intention
what are the likely consequences
what are the circumstances
now in questions of abortion and infanticide
we need to ask
some of those basic questions about nature
and I would like to remind us right here
at the start of one of those
principles that we saw at the very beginning
of this lecture series
and ask you to bear it in mind and consider
in the abstract whether you think this is a good
principle and then see how it seems
to apply here
it's as simple as this that both
legally and morally
there is no justification
for a difference
in the way we treat
individuals unless there is
a difference of kind but rather
the beings that are of the same kind
need to be treated in the same way
arbitrarily treating
individuals of the same kind
differently would be unfair
would be a kind of discrimination
and we saw in those early
lectures it's a point worth repeating
here that there clearly is
a plurality of kinds
of things in the world
denying that there is a genuinely
distinct set of kinds
would entail unacceptable
consequences for instance
again to take as a really obvious case
if there were no such difference
of kind then there would
be no difference between killing a human
being and killing a horse but rather
we say that it's wrong to kill a human
being because of the kind that's there
where to kill a horse or to kill a cow
one shouldn't be arbitrary about it
one shouldn't be trying to torture the poor animal
but that there's not the same
moral prohibition
now in the cases we have at hand here
abortion and infanticide
those who are going to be
most deeply affected
include of course the mother
include the physicians who would be involved
but especially include
those beings whose lives will be
ended and if one can
ascertain and be convinced
that the individuals
who are going to be slain
are innocent human beings
the natural law does not allow
that they would be treated differently
than any other innocent human being
and hence that they be protected by the right
to life this is
of course to insist again
and again that there's a need to be concerned
about all the individuals but
especially to focus on those who are most
deeply affected and in this particular
case since it's a case of killing
they are affected in a way that cannot be
undone now to establish
that those to be affected in this way
are human strikes me as a biological
question namely
it can be shown that they are members
of the human species and this
can be shown in any number of ways
it can be shown by direct observation
if one can see what they're doing
what they look like their structure
one can do this by DNA analysis
one can do this by noticing
that they were conceived and are
in the process of being born from human parents
that even
those who are born with genetic
defects are still human beings
can I think be established by the fact
of continuity in their lives
that is they have
not yet undergone that kind of
transformation that is death
some kind of transformation into members
of another species but rather
are still members of the same species
and will remain so if
given simply normal nutrition
normal care but
death would be a radical transformation
what in the technical language of philosophy
is called a substantial change
were they not alive and alive
indeed as human beings the
question would not even come up
the inability that
a defective newborn might have
to perform some function is
not death it is not the
transformation of that being
into a being of a new species
it is rather the inability
to perform a certain operation
and hence I think you can hear even in the
definitions that I am using those
discussions that we had near the beginning
of our course about the importance
of proper definition namely to try
to define a given species
in terms of its function is something
which can ignore
it can fail to appreciate
some of the structural features
and hence there is a need to make sure
the definitions are definitions in structural
terms and that our consideration
of functions will help us to focus
on what structural features are important
but that the definition can't be
content simply with analysis
of function the
question of species membership then
for the unborn or for the newborn defective
turns on the question
of the kind or nature
one can test the genetic
composition the DNA for
the fact is that every cell in
our bodies contains
our own distinctive DNA
signature that is our
individuality as the specific person
that we are as well as the kind
of creature that we are
the tissues that are involved
in every one of our organs is always
recognizably human it's very
interesting when one has the chance to discuss
these matters with a forensic pathologist
because they are very concerned
with finding tissue
and determining what species it came from
human what organ it came from
the complexity here
and the DNA signatures are
extremely important
now given those biological questions
and when those biological questions
are determined adequately
then one returns to the moral question
and I return to the point about
natural kind and fair treatment
namely there is no
non-arbitrary
demarcation point
for species membership
at any point in an individual's development
from the time when
the gametes the sex cells
have been joined and fused at the time
of fertilization
the new being
has a different DNA signature
than either its mother or its father
whether this is done in the natural
place within the uterus of a woman
whether this is done in a test tube
in the case of in vitro fertilization
all of the changes
that occur thereafter
that newly constituted individual
and a newly constituted individual
which we can know
as a biological fact
by current scientific testing
all of the changes that take place thereafter
are not changes in the nature
not changes in the kind
of being but rather
are matters of the growth
and unfolding of the species
specific determinants
and the person specific determinants
that are already identified
in the structure
now given this I think it's possible
to formulate a natural law argument
and the argument has three steps
first
only a difference in kind or nature
warrants difference in treatment
second point
the nature of the zygote
the embryo the fetus
even though we call these things by technical names
the nature of these is the same
as the nature of the infant
the child the adult
the infant is not a natural human being
and that is the nature of the human being
at one or another stage
of that nature's development
third
there is no private license
to kill an innocent human being
that is there's no license
that we have arbitrarily to take
an innocent individual's life
the conclusion that I think follows from this
by a natural law argumentation
is that induced abortion
that is the deliberate killing
of an innocent human being
at this stage in the beings development
is unwarranted
for it would be a matter of arbitrarily
treating innocent beings
that are the same in kind
namely all human treating them differently
now given that kind of
of analysis the natural law
I think is clear about the point in general
a sound ethical analysis
of this issue like a sound analysis
of any issue
also requires that we consider
questions about intention
and consequences and circumstances
the first point then
I think to be made is that if the analysis
of the nature of this act
had determined that the act
in question were somehow morally permissible
one can ask
with respect to how we care for the young
about the kind of food we give them
the kind of time we give them for play
or the way in which we make them go to school
there we would have questions
about activities which were all permissible
and at that point once we had decided
that the act was permissible
then we would go on to considerations
about the intention that a person has
in doing a given act
but in a case like this
where the action strikes me as intrinsically immoral
because of unfairly treating
of being whose nature has been established
it is impossible to proceed
with the analysis of possible intentions
or likely consequences
utilitarians for instance
like to focus only on consequences
and say there is no act
that is intrinsically immoral
rather we try to weigh the benefits and the burdens
or situation morality
suggests that we focus on the intention
why we are doing something
as though that were the main emphasis
the natural law analysis however
suggests that one may only
proceed to questions about intention
which are important
and questions about consequences and circumstances
which are important
but one may only do so
a permissible act by this first test
the reason
because one may not do evil
so that good may come
even if there are tremendous good consequences
one may not do something
that one knows to be an evil
even if one has a great motive
it is morally impermissible
to do evil that good may come
why? because to do so
would involve directly willing
an evil means
for some end that one desires
whether the end that one envisions
is good because it is
well intentioned
or because one judges that there will be
greater benefit than burden
important as these considerations
about consequences and intention are
the end does not justify
the use of immoral means
now I said at the beginning
and I want to repeat here
that I recognize that these situations
are often very complex
the analysis that I've given so far
is intended as a basic analysis
when the situations become
more complex and we need
to make a moral evaluation
natural law theory
recognizes this and it tries
to handle it by the use
of an additional principle
it's called the principle of double effect
this was a principle which was
historically developed
in order to handle things like self defense
may one use lethal force
in one's own defense
for instance is being attacked
and one is innocent and the person
doing the attacking is somehow
rightly considered to be an aggressor
and the natural law said there's got to be a way
to defend the use of lethal force
force which would even result in the death
of the attacker
this likewise happens in the case
of the defense of one's country
let me talk first about the principle
of double effect in general
and then suggest a way in which it might apply
to some cases of abortion
what you think about the matter
first let me do the principle of double effect
in general the principle of double effect
is a principle that is designed
to be used in moral analysis
when what we do is
foresee that the action that we are intending
has a double
effect or perhaps a plural effect
but for simplicity's sake let's just take two
namely a good effect
that we foresee and intend
and an evil effect
which we also foresee but which we
intend and the question is
may one undertake the action
which has this double effect
according to the natural
law analysis of the situation
there are four conditions that must be met
if we are permitted
to do the action under this principle
first the action itself
that we perform must be good
or indifferent
it must be something which by its nature
is not intrinsically immoral
second the good
the agent intends
must not be obtained by means
of the evil effect
that's the causal line it's a matter of
not doing one thing that's evil
so that another good thing will come
it's a matter of keeping the analysis
in terms of one action that truly has
plural effects
the evil effect is a kind of side effect
a side effect of the same action
third the evil effect
must not be intended for itself
but only permitted
we foresee that it's happening
but we don't ourselves choose it
fourth there must be a proportionally
grave reason for permitting
the evil effect to occur
that's where we get into the analysis of consequences
let me give one simple example
of a different nature just to sort of show
how this works
if for example we were considering a fireman
entering into a burning building
to save the lives of some individuals
entering into the burning building
is a situation of danger
or a fireman undertaking this
can foresee that entering into this
has possible bad consequences
his own death or injury
or the death of his fellow fireman
and yet entering into this
especially if one has the right gear on
and has enough training
well the action itself is quite good
and the entering into the building
is not in any way done for the sake
of trying to have the fireman die
if the fireman had a death wish
this is a person who needs therapy
but rather presuming the reasonability
of the fireman and all the training
and the very careful
rules that they follow in entering the building
the fireman does so
and in doing so
he intends to save some individuals
he in no way intends his own death
he doesn't intend that his family
should profit by the insurance policy
if in fact he is
somehow injured in the line
nor would the evil effect
if it were to occur be the cause
of the good effect but it would truly be a side product
if the fireman enters the burning building
and dies
or is severely wounded
that isn't what saves the party
that he's trying to save
but rather it's a byproduct
it's a side effect it's something that may happen
in the course of things
the evil effect is not being intended for itself
the evil effect is not the cause of the good effect
the evil effect is simply foreseen
the fourth condition
the matter of analyzing
the consequences is extremely important
one may enter the burning building
say to save persons
but one may not risk
grave danger to one's life
to save merely pets
or to save paintings or something of the sort
that is the risk would have to be very minimal
in order to save something else
because the proportions wouldn't be handled well
there are lots and lots of cases
where the principle of double effect
comes into play
my point here in using that example
is simply to try to illustrate the principle in general
namely all four conditions
have to be fulfilled
the violation of any of them
would make the evil somehow
directly willed
and not just an incidental byproduct
for which the agent would still be responsible
the principle of double effect
does not eliminate responsibility
but rather it makes it possible
for us to deal with conflict situations
without incurring
moral guilt or blame
or the evil effect that we are foreseeing
and allowing but in no way desiring
now when we turn to the question of abortion
natural law theorists
have examined the possible
uses of this general
principle of double effect
and often they have agreed that there are some
scenarios where it may apply
this is not going to be a blanket justification
for the permissibility of abortion
but rather for some
foreseeable and well
determined scenarios
for example in the case of a pregnant woman
who is discovered to have a cancerous
uterus
in that particular case
the removal of the cancerous uterus
will certainly produce a good effect for the patient
namely a removal of the cancer
and as such it's a recognized medical procedure
that is a good procedure
the death of the baby that could come
about is handled as a
tragic but foreseen effect
of the hysterectomy
it is not the means to the good
effect and you can prove that
by analyzing
if the baby were killed
but the uterus were not removed
then the good effect that is desired
namely the restoration of health
would still not be achieved
so it's not the death of the baby
which is the cause of the good effect
in the scenario that we are envisioning here
the death of the baby is in no way desired
this of course is often a matter
of what medical technology
at a present time can achieve
there are certain times when
even a baby who is premature
can be saved outside the womb
and that question about viability
is very much a question that has to be handled
in terms of the science
and the medical technology of the day
finally the situation
here does involve
two human lives
and there is at least some proportionality
that would not have been the case if the deliberation
had turned on some other factor
such as weighing the baby
against a future career
or weighing the baby against financial considerations
that we do need to have tremendous care
for the women who are involved
and tremendous compassion
and at the same time in our moral analysis
we have to also have great care for the baby
it's a matter of caring for both
because we have done our analysis
of the nature of both
now my efforts have not been to try
to settle all the questions of abortion
but rather to show in the time allowed
what a natural law analysis
could contribute to the situation
let me now turn to some other questions
that might well be worth discussing
and show how
natural analysis can similarly be helpful
and I think I'll be able to go more quickly
through them because we've
done our work showing how the natural law argument
is made
right now there are great questions
afoot in our country about
physician assisted suicide
for those who have been incapacitated
by age, illness or accident
and I think these are
a group of cases which can be
fruitfully subjected to natural
analysis
the analysis will be very similar
to what was just considered above
in terms of abortion and infanticide
first, once one has established
that those to be affected
are human beings
and indeed innocent human beings
the natural law requires the protection
of their lives as a right
namely it is something which is only good
and true and right because of their nature
but rather than laying
out the entire argument again
I think I've done that in the first part
it may be more helpful to address certain
additional factors that tend to come into
the consideration of this question
these issues of course are very complex
and I have to admit here
that there is no way to cover all the
important aspects here rather
I simply want to stress how one might
let natural law approach the case
unlike the question of
abortion and infanticide
where those who are affected
are not yet able to speak for themselves
it can sometimes be the case
that the individuals who are
ill and are in great pain
may themselves be seeking the
assistance of a physician
to end their own lives or even if
they have lost the power to speak
and the power to communicate
they may already have done so by living will
it is important to note here
a great variety of related issues
but at the broader level of these issues
namely euthanasia in general
as well as in the more specific
issues that are correlated with euthanasia
such as decisions about
those who are no longer able to express
their own preferences
what we have is a case where we're dealing
with human beings and asking
whether there is a right to kill
either to kill oneself or to
commission a physician to do the killing
while those who are inclined
to a utilitarian analysis
tend to argue in favor of euthanasia
in favor of
physician assisted suicide
and sometimes even a policy
to euthanize those who are
terminally ill but who cannot any
longer express their consent
it is my view that a natural law
analysis will forbid all such activity
the utilitarian
case as before will consider
only that fourth factor
namely the relative
products of the action
the relative consequences
and will try to weigh benefit and burden
and will not only try to weigh
benefit and burden something we must do
but will try to insist that the whole
moral analysis is in terms
of benefit and burden
perhaps the
easiest way to understand the point
is to consider how there are
natural rights and wrongs
that are
already decisive for the question
and we in the United States
have a special way of doing this
when we think back to something like
the Declaration of Independence
I do not mean that the Declaration of Independence
has legal standing for us for it does not
our legal standing begins with the Constitution
but in terms of the moral analysis
those lines
in the declaration that pertain
to our basic rights
talk about those rights as inalienable
and they list among the inalienable
rights the right to life
liberty and the pursuit of happiness
well when we focus on a right to life
and call it inalienable
what we are saying is not only that
it may not be arbitrarily
removed by someone else
but also that it cannot be
arbitrarily waived that is it
is unable to be given away
by us just as it is unable to be
taken away by someone else
if either of those things were the case
then the right would not be inalienable
the counter examples
which perhaps come to mind on
whether these rights are indeed inalienable
help us understand the issue
doesn't for instance
the soldier who enters the battlefield
or the religious martyr
someone willing to witness to the faith
even to the point of death
don't they involve giving away our rights
I would say no
that instead they are cases in which
one person will undertake
an action in which one can foresee
that another person
namely the enemy on the battlefield
or the enemy in matters of religion
who is going to make a martyr out of this poor soul
the enemy is somehow taking a life
but the right
is something that does not belong to the soldier
or to the martyr to give away
rather one has to see
those individuals the soldier
who is standing under obedience
for the common good of the country
or the martyr who is standing for the truth of the faith
are simply
witnessing to something else of very high value
and they themselves are willing
to put themselves in harm's way
but they are not yielding their right
one may not have a martyr complex
for instance that seeks death
nor should we rashly toss away soldiers
in a battlefield
natural law then does enter
the question I think by reinforcing
natural rights and urging us
to consider that euthanasia
fails to respect those natural rights
and instead tries to weigh the matter
only in terms of the likely consequences
and in doing so
fails to give an appropriate
analysis of the situation
natural law does not require
never has required
that we use every possible means
to save a life
and so in the case of someone who is very ill
someone who is at death's door
even someone in great pain
it is not required that we use every means
extraordinary means
to prolong that life at all costs
rather what it forbids
is that there be any direct attack
on human life
even an attack at the patient's own request
there is instead a natural law
obligation to try to find
palliative care
to try to find ways to relieve the pain
and in my own studies on euthanasia
it has been a tremendous
revelation to me
of the new possibilities in pain management
that are now possible
palliative care I think is an extremely
helpful development
so too on this question
there may be instances where we need
to invoke the principle of double effect
some forms of pain
relief medication for example
have side effects
and when we've got a side effect we're in that double effect
situation where the action we're performing
the giving of a medicine
will relieve pain but it could also
be something that makes a person more vulnerable
to death
as before one has to examine the matter
carefully to make sure that one's
motives are pure
not trying to bring about the death more hastily
but it's only trying
to relieve the pain
the relief of pain of course
is not a causal factor in producing
the death and hence we are okay
on that second condition
because the relief of pain is not the cause
of producing the death
and hence it may well be permissible
and indeed very prudent
to administer certain forms of pain relief
even though there is a by-product
that means a greater vulnerability
to death so long as they themselves
are not the medicine which turns
out to be a poison and in some way
causing the death.
Let me turn in the time that remains
to another question that is very much
in the news right now and deserves our consideration
the debates over stem cell research
this too I think has the same
kind of analysis and so we'll be able
to rely upon what we have covered
earlier in this lecture
once again I'm making no claim
to have a thorough analysis of this
but only to try to show how natural law applies.
Let us presume
something here for the sake of argument
let's presume that
research on stem cells
will actually be helpful.
Stem cells are those cells
that have not yet become differentiated
in our body our tissue cells
are very different than our nerve cells
are different than our blood cells
are different than our muscle cells and so on
they have been differentiated
in such a way that the structure of the cell
very highly determined
to do a particular job in the body.
A stem cell refers to a cell
which has not yet been differentiated
so as to have just one particular
biological function but these are cells
that are still open to development
in various ways for various
different purposes in the body.
What I'd like to presume for the sake of argument
something which has not yet been scientifically established
is that it will actually be
helpful to manipulate these cells
to remedy various diseases
and afflictions
that are of a genetic order
or can perhaps be cured by a genetic therapy.
I cannot stress enough
that as yet the evidence isn't in
this is even going to work
but let's presume for a minute that it will work.
Natural law analysis can be helpful
when we're considering the source
for these stem cells.
As in any natural law analysis
one needs to consider the nature
of those who will be affected
by the proposed action.
When we are trying to gather stem cells
from an existing adult
for the sake of the research
the cells can be obtained
without any ill effect upon the donor
so if they were to try to take them from me
or from you it would not cause our death
or indeed cause our injury
and this invokes one of the main principles
that is involved in
the moral analysis of medical research.
Namely that experimentation
should either directly benefit
the person experimented on
or if it's not going to directly
benefit the person experimented on
but will affect and benefit
other generations or other people
we should at least not in any way harm
the person who is being affected to the donor.
Experimentation on stem cells
from adults is thus in general permissible
but experimentation
on embryonic stem cells
is different. In this case the stem
cells are being obtained by removing
from already existing
but very very young embryos
precisely those portions
of the embryos structure
the DNA which contains
the determinants of a new person
and which will remain unique to that person
throughout the whole of his life
precisely because the destruction
of the embryo is entailed
in trying to get stem cells
from embryos for the sake of research
in order to do these various
biochemical developments
it seems to me forbidden by the natural law
because the natural law prohibits
taking any human life and this is
a new human life. Hence the argument
relies upon identifying
the nature of the being and
natural law analysis seems to identify
a new human life from the moment
of conception until we experience
that radical discontinuity
that we know as personal death.
For this reason even embryos seem to me
to enjoy the protection of the right to life.
In the next hour we'll try
to turn to yet other moral questions.
Thank you.
The attempt to apply
principles of morality
to our current situations
always is extremely
complex and requires great
consideration, requires that
we attempt to be reasonable in trying
to bridge disagreements.
How does one bridge
the vast differences of opinion
within a secular and pluralistic
society about some of the
really important questions
that anyone must face in life
questions about marriage and family
or questions about the relations
of labor and capital
questions about private property
and the legitimacy of one's control over that
questions about the proper
distribution of tax burdens
this is in general the field
of social ethics and these are
questions that are extremely difficult
I think because there is often
no basis, no common
fundamental agreement
on which one may then attempt more
detailed applications
and try to settle more complex
questions.
Natural law theory has a voice in this
discussion and what I would like to do
in this lecture is to contribute
some of the ways in which natural
law theories has been and can be
used to try to make a
profitable contribution on the subject
of social ethics.
In earlier in the 20th century
figures like Walter Lippmann in his
book The Public Philosophy
and then much more recently in figures
like Alistair McIntyre or Edith
decided to articulate the conditions
that are needed for talking about
morality in a constitutional
democracy such as our own
where there is a pluralist society.
Likewise some religious traditions
have found natural law to be extremely
helpful. Catholic moral theology
for instance in my own tradition
has employed natural law as a
complementary source alongside
of scripture for the purpose of
trying to present a position
that is publicly defensible
to those questions of social ethics
and thus provide a way for
religiously motivated people
to be heard in a secular context
in a way that is publicly reasonable.
In this lecture what I'd like to focus
on is the question of social ethics
by first considering
questions about whether society
has a nature and then
after having gotten at least
a reasonable position on that subject
turning to one of the ways
in which society is found and seems
very natural namely the family
as a way in which natural law can make
a contribution and then at the end
to turn just briefly to some of the other
kinds of social institutions
some of those intermediary
associations in which we
find ourselves as members
in which we consciously join
and then society as a whole
in ways in which we find ourselves in
government or in a nation or among
a people. But first let's consider
questions about simply society
and nature. We have seen
very different answers being given to this
in the course of natural
law's history that in the
ancient and medieval periods there was
already willingness to see
and to argue that societies
themselves have natures.
On the other hand in the early modern period
one saw in John Locke
and in some of the other figures
of the Enlightenment a strong suspicion
that we should think of
societies as having a nature
instead an inclination to
regard society as a matter of
a construct, perhaps a social contract
in which case there is
much less that one can do in arguing
about the nature of society.
But then in the course of our review
of the practice of judicial review
in this country we notice that certain
American jurists of a liberal persuasion
were very inclined to talk about
the nature of free democratic society
as indeed entailing
various kinds of moral obligation.
The question then is does society
have a nature?
And it's a debate I think within natural
law. Does society
have a structure such
that we can make a moral implication
from it? Society does
not seem to me to have a nature
in precisely the same sense
that an organic entity does
when we talk about a squirrel
or a horse or a human being
there we are talking about a biological
entity that has a very complicated
structure both at the biological
level, at the psychic or
psychological level, at the spiritual
level. And this structure
is something that flows right
from the very being from the beginning
of its existence and has an
indirectedness, has a goal, has a
teleology, precisely because
there is a unified organic substance
with a certain nature.
Societies are not biological
entities, they don't have that tight
a sense of unity. But
I think that there is an analogical
sense of the word in which we can
say that society does have a nature
and that the reason for
saying that society has a nature
at least analogously is
precisely because the human person
is so intrinsically social
because human persons
form associations whose
end or purpose is so
closely related to the natural
purpose intrinsic to any
one human being.
If one pursues this line of reasoning
what nature is it that we're
saying that society has?
Well, here we face an enormously
difficult question because of the
breadth and range of associations
which the term society covers.
They vary from the most
immediate form of association
that is the family through
various and diverse levels
of voluntary association, the kind
of clubs we join, the institutions
to which we come to belong. If we
join the military, if we join a religious
order such as I have, or any kind
of voluntary association
these have structures.
And finally we reach up to the level
of a state, the levels at which
we're normally governed, but also
two various forms in which there are
peoples even though there is not a government.
I think in the history of for instance
my own nationality that the Polish
people existed for about
a century and a little bit more even
when there was no state of Poland
nonetheless there was a people that felt themselves
to be together. One sees this
frequently in the case of the breakup
of the Soviet Union where various
peoples have found that they had
a kind of commonness which they think
deserves sovereignty.
Sometimes they have managed to achieve
political sovereignty, sometimes they have not
or at least not done so as yet.
And then of course at the top most level
there are various international
associations and forms of cooperation
and each of these is properly
a society of a certain sort and hence
what we're asking about philosophically
in the question of whether society
has a nature is that we're asking
given this enormous variety
and range of associations
is there something natural about society?
At each level
it seems to me there are
inclinations of a social nature
that is we find ourselves
very spontaneously in families
and attracted to families and we form
families and likewise there's
an inclination of sociability
that we experience when we enter
these voluntary associations
and when we feel national pride
pride in our own country perhaps
a certain delight in humanity as a whole.
How should we define it
in order to bring out this analogous
sense of nature? Let me propose this.
Society I think is
a unity of human individuals
and groups which serves
the purpose of satisfying
their mutual needs
and which relies on their capacities
to provide such help.
This is to put it in terms of the give and take.
There's certain things we get from that association
and certain things that we give
and can be expected to give
from this association.
And yet I'm not trying to define it overly narrowly
precisely because of the vast
variety of societies that there are
we have to keep it at the somewhat general level.
Nonetheless we can assert
that all of these forms of association
are systems of mutual
assistance. They make possible
results that are greater
in number and different in kind
than the sum total
that is possible through separate individual
efforts alone.
And the various societies are rightly identified
on the basis of the ends
which they serve, the purposes
which they have, whether it be at the small
level of the immediate nuclear family
or whether it be at the range
of a slightly greater extended family.
Or in the case of those
voluntary associations, it is
precisely because of some purpose
that we hope to achieve that we join them
at the level of the state.
There are things that we can accomplish
only by our common assistance,
by our common contributions to the
common good and things which we
draw from which will be possible
only because there is a form
of association here. In this sense
we have an entity, I think
which can rightly make
certain claims upon us just
as we make certain claims upon it.
There are entities from which
we may rightly call forth for protection
and which we may
rightly undertake certain
duties. We need to honor them precisely
because of the form of the association.
Now this is a controversial point
and I think that one finds in the history
of the discussion, not only the recent
history in our own generation
but in the course of at least the
entire modern period, that there has
been great sense that societies
are somehow human artifacts
that human societies are of human
invention or in the most recent
terminology of the discussion
that societies are constructed
rather than natural. And I think it's
important to keep that discussion in mind
because it has enormous
significance and influence upon the
moral conclusions that we reach.
If however in that discussion
we keep in mind that all societies
however formed, some of them much
more artificial, some of them much more
natural, that all these societies
are composed of a very
unique type of being, namely
human beings, whose
nature can be ascertained, namely
that nature is a rational nature,
a nature capable of understanding
and free choice, and likewise
a nature that has certain ends
intrinsic to it, certain ends
that are built into us, then the
societies that we form are admittedly
constructed, invented
or at least their forms are devised
in such a way as to promote some of those
ends. At very least they must be
sure not to frustrate them, not
to violate them, but generally
the purpose of the society is to promote
them and to some way fulfill them.
Now the variety that is possible
is just enormous, even
at any one level, let alone at
the vast
diversity of levels. The family,
for instance, certainly can
take very different forms. We think
about the nuclear family and we think about
extended families, and when we reflect
I think on what our own family has meant
and then compare it with what the family
of our friends has been, we notice
the great diversity that is possible.
Nonetheless, all of these families
insofar as they work and are not
simply dysfunctional, are
effective at securing
and promoting a specific end.
At very least finding shelter,
finding nutrition.
Not all the forms that families
take will be equally effective
at serving the end.
Serving the end of providing us with shelter,
providing us with nutrition, let alone
at providing for the
fulfillment of some of the more
advanced ends that are typical
of human beings as rational agents.
That we should get an education,
of course, is enormously aided by having
a secure family structure, and one
can still get an education when families
are dysfunctional. We all admit
how difficult it is, and that's precisely
why we try to remedy the situation
by providing some kind of surrogates
or substitutes or some form of
assistance, because we are mindful
of the way in which the dysfunctionality
of the family makes it very difficult
to get the education that we esteem,
especially for free democratic societies.
There are also matters
of personal character. One thinks,
for instance, about cultivating habits
of truthfulness in families
and ways in which the easy
and steady trustworthy communication
that we like to see in families
is that basic pattern of truthfulness.
I had a very interesting
experience once flying back
from Atlanta, I think, back to New York,
and I was sitting next to a banker
who was very much engaged
in the project of setting up
banking institutions in post-Soviet
Russia, and what he was explaining
to me was the way in which
contracts are written and the way
in which so often word of
honor telling the truth, keeping
one's promises, is important
in doing a business. And what he was saying
was that one of the difficulties
that his firm was experiencing
in post-Soviet Russia is
the way in which word of honor,
promise keeping, telling of truth
had broken down so often, namely
that in certain portions of that Soviet
society, anyone could be
an informer, even someone within
one's family, and as such
one didn't have quite the same
security and the same trust in telling
the truth and keeping one's promises
and the difficulty they were having
in writing the contracts extended even
to the term word of honor.
They tried translating it idiomatically
in Russian, they tried to translate it
in terms of, that were very literal,
they tried to appeal to stories
in Russian literature, and he says
the people that he was dealing with
often just couldn't get it. It wasn't
even that they couldn't now suddenly
start giving a word in honor,
but that they just were unable to grasp
the concept, and at least as far as
me, an amateur anthropologist was concerned,
it was a matter of having had
trust broken down so severely
that word of honor just
didn't make sense. Instead
what they had to do of writing just one
contract in which so much is presumed
about the word of honor, and the
establishment of a whole business relationship
is that they had to write a series of
discrete contracts, and such
that one would not come into effect
until the other had been completely
and entirely satisfied and fulfilled.
One finds that that's sometimes the case
when word of honor or trust has broken
down. My point
for the purposes of this discussion of society
is that our social relations
imply certain moral
obligations for us, and that
granting the great variety of
institutions that can be the social
arrangements in which we live,
some of them do a much better job
at promoting the human development.
Some of them are much more effective
in promoting those virtues of character
as rational beings we need
in order to enjoy the benefits of social
living.
Hence the criteria for examining the
various variety of possible
social forms must always include
their suitability for
genuinely producing
the end for which they're designed,
and it's a matter of appreciating that variety
of ends as human ends.
Let me take as my example for most of this
lecture the question of family structure.
It's an issue I think that is extremely
controversial for there are great disagreements
with respect to how much of this is
natural and how much of this is a
product of nurture, how much of this
is something that natural law can
truly make a contribution to,
and how much of it on the other hand is a product
of history and of social forces
so that we really have
questions of nurture or even questions
of power entering in rather than
truly questions of nature.
I would like to urge that this
discussion, mindful of the controversies
and mindful of the disagreements,
nonetheless can profit by some of the
natural law analysis and at least
be submitted to our common reasonable
investigation in order to try to
see how such moral claims are generated.
I'd like to begin by first
considering simply the question of human
sexual complementarity because
at the level of family what we are
generally dealing with in the traditional
family is a family in which there
are spouses of different sexes.
Here there is certainly contributions
that nature makes as well as nurture
makes, that our bodily structure
is one thing in which there is an obvious
difference, but there are also suggestions
that there are questions
of psychic differentiation,
that is the way in which we see things.
Certainly it's the subject of much good humor
how men see things and how women see
things and what I would like to just urge
for the point of view of natural law analysis
is that it is important to remember
that we are both of the same species
hard as that may be to understand
in certain occasions when we're having a good spat,
but that we are truly members
of the same species and that
our equality as human
beings, our equality as bearers
of rights, our equality as
being subjects which owe duties to one
another should not be fought
in terms of an identity, that just
as there is not an identity at the level
of biological structure, in
mind judgment there is not an identity
at the level of psychological or
spiritual structure either, but that
rather there is a kind of a complementarity
and this complementarity
very evident at the biological
level, I think is also evident at the
psychological level.
Figuring out exactly what this complementarity
looks like and exactly what the
benefits and what the difficulties
of seeing the world differently,
having different habits of judgment,
having some somewhat different habits
of thought, even having some
different habits of virtue, how this
complementarity allows for genuine
human progress and how infinitely
poorer we would be if we fail
to appreciate in our moral deliberations
the extent of this complementarity
so long as we constantly
remember that fundamental natural
law thesis of our human equality.
To put it in the simplest form
equality doesn't have
to mean identity, I think there can be
an equality in which there are
complementary forms. My point is
then that there are natural lawyers
myself included who would like
to argue that this complementarity
within a system of equality
is something that makes families work
and make families prosper. They
aid and assist both the immediate
parties to the family who have made this
voluntary union, the union
of spouses, but they are also of
enormous help to the children who are generated
in offspring and enormously
helpful to the larger
groups and societies in which they live.
The kind of strengths and the
kind of support and the kind of renewal
and the kind of refreshment and the kind
of encouragement and the kind of
challenges that we give to one another
within the family is of
enormous help to people who are outside
the family and are in the larger communities
within which families are found.
Now this is a point I think that has been
made controversial by those
who have a very different take on it.
There are many today I think who regard
gender as a matter of something
that is entirely a social construct,
something that is a matter of
gender rather than nature entirely
and completely.
The mainstream natural law position
I think would regard these differences
as of complementarity
as differences that are somehow natural
and indeed crucial.
I think we had best not get dogmatic
about that, but rather insist
that there is a good legitimate argument
here for which the data of anthropology
and the data of psychology are
extremely important. Consider
for example from a natural law point of
least as I see it, what this
complementarity adds for the sake
for instance of procreation and rearing
of children. I think it is pretty
obvious from the point of view of biology
that male and female make different
but equally important contributions
to procreation. This is a factor
which has not always been appreciated
in history for there were long ages
when it was thought that only the male
contributed significantly to the generation
of children and that all women provided
was a place. The obvious
fallacy in that is now beyond
saying and we are now I think to the point
with biological knowledge of appreciating
the different complementary
but equally important contribution
that each sex makes.
Likewise at the level
of family life there is certainly
a kind of efficiency that comes
from the division in labor
that when some people do one job
some people do another job in terms
of providing food, drink,
shelter, clothing that there is an
efficiency for the family and yet
it doesn't seem to be immediately obvious
that one or the other sex has to
make this or that contribution and
that there is at least a certain variety
that can be made there. There seem to be
options within the legitimate range.
Beyond the questions of providing
food and shelter and clothing
and other such immediate needs for survival
there is the question about how
a child will develop within the context
of the family. There is questions
about learning of language skills
and learning of various kinds of skills
of interpersonal relation. Learning
how to give love and how to receive love.
This is one of the places where I think
it's so fascinating that not just
traditional natural law theory
but even some of the Freudian psychologists
of the present day people who would normally
not be in the same
part of the dispute
debate or discussion as natural
law theorists often make the case
with respect to the latency period
of childhood, the period when we are
still learning our language but are having
such enormously important
relationships with our parents
that some of the Freudian psychologists
that I think of people like Paul Vitz
or Elizabeth Moberley in their works
have brought out so clearly that
the ways in which a child
learns to love mother
and learn to love father and learn
to receive love from mother and
receive love from father have
enormous implications for the way in which
a little boy or a little girl
thereafter be related to figures
of the same sex and figures of the opposite sex.
Elizabeth Moberley's
work for instance with
children raising
and with the problems of
sometimes later on in a person's life
of homosexuality has
discovered to her satisfaction
and to the approval of at least a
significant portion of the scholarly community
that some of the things that are found
in homosexual activity later on
are related at least
to working out early childhood
traumas and I don't mean here to suggest
that all problems with regard
to sexual identity in later years
can be traced entirely to sexual
trauma that's not her position nor is it
mine but rather her suggestion is
is that some people who are having difficulty
in working out later forms
of sexual identity can indeed
be traced to sexual, trace
to childhood trauma in which
there was for example in the case of a little boy
an inability to deal
rightly with father, either not a giving
a love or not a receiving of love
adequately and in the course of working
this out one finds that all of one's life
is spent trying to find the right
relation, trying to establish
good relations with persons of the same sex.
Hence my point with respect
to natural law is the importance
of the complementarity of
mother and father for the sake of children
that they have different things
but equally important things
to teach their children and to teach them
just by way of the explicit teaching that goes on
with formal instruction
but to teach them in all of the subtle
ways in which being loved and giving
love challenged and being challenged
all of the ways in which this
helps to form a person's character
and brings about natural growth.
Certainly questions of more advanced
technical learning when we start going to
school, the acquisition
of various kinds of skills often
takes advantage of a
security at home and a disposition
at home in which there is an encouragement
of natural talent. I think
here we all have our favorite war
stories with respect to the ways
in which we were encouraged or when somebody
else was encouraged or
alternately the ways in which we were discouraged
from achieving something and
here it's so important to see
the importance of secure homes for
the sake of encouraging the natural talents
that occur in any of our children
so that they can indeed actualize
their various potentials.
If on the other hand something is
stunted, something is injured,
a person can sometimes spend much of one's life
in a kind of reaction, in a psychic
attempt to compensate.
This at least is some of the work that
Paul Vitz and Elizabeth Moverly have been doing.
If we turn
to the discussions about the ways
in which this maturation at home
has a contribution to make for the rest
of public and private life, one can
think about even the way in which
home life is a part of this nature
of a family, namely that we
cannot be in public all the time
that we require places of rest
and refreshment, places in which there is
privacy as well as places in which
we can step out on the public stage.
Again, here I think it's important not to be
too dogmatic because the lines of
exactly what are public and exactly what are
private are variable.
There is a certain range within this subject
and yet we all know that we appreciate
a certain privacy, that
we dare not live in a home with purely
private walls, that such people
who are exhibitionists of course
might relish the exhibitionism
but that most of us
find that we need for the sake of
our own rest and refreshment and our
readiness to again to appear in public
that there be places of genuine privacy.
Likewise, we insist
about the need for the opportunities
to use one's powers and abilities.
Hannah Arendt in her book
The Human Condition has a lovely
description of the way in which the
ability to step forth in public and to
try to urge people on
to common effort or common action.
The ways in which we try to convince someone
else of our own opinion and do so
not by the imposition of power
but by attempting to be extremely reasonable
requires that there be a certain
native rest and refreshment
that we attend to the needs of the natural
not just good sleep but also
times of privacy and ways in which
we can enjoy the perfect security
and the unconditional love of those
whom we are associated.
Whereas when one finds reasons for
insecurity because there is something
dysfunctional about a family
or when there has been for instance
an infidelity in one's promises of marriage
there is an insecurity there
that manifests itself and that translates
itself so very easily into the public
domain. We're not as comfortable
we're not as free to act
we're not able to rely upon the same
sources of security as when our families
are working well.
The question is that what natural law
analysis likes to bring out in this situation
is the importance of something
like marriage for the sake of
that security and that harmony
that providing of the place for us
as individuals and the place
for us to act upon the public stage.
Traditionally this has been
the role of marriage for marriage
is to provide not only for a special
form of friendship in which we are
to commit ourselves to one another
but ways in which the marriage itself
brings about our further maturation.
I myself like to think about it in this way
and would be wondering of course if people
would agree on the basis of more experience
but it seems to me that part of
what goes on in marriage is that
a man becomes even more of a man
by becoming a husband and a father
that it is that he is to
have this drawn out of him and elicited
from him precisely by the ways
in which his wife deals with him
and likewise that a woman becomes even more
of a woman by becoming wife and mother
this is not to say that those who have
never been privileged to be married
myself included never been privileged
to have children myself included
cannot be a man or cannot be a woman
but rather that there has to be some other form
of dealing in one's life in my own
case as a priest it's sometimes a matter
of dealing with the students and we educate
at the university dealing with parishioners
and finding forms of charity.
So my claim is certainly that anybody
in any situation can find
other forms to help bring out
some of these more mature responses
as man or as woman.
That wasn't the point. The point was rather
that marriage is a natural institution
that is it's something to which we are naturally
inclined and which natural
law so much promotes and
so much tries to perfect
precisely because it is a vehicle for doing that
regularly. I'm reminded of
the famous story of Mrs. McGillicuddy
talking about the priest who has just finished lecturing
on marriage and said why
that was so beautiful
and if I knew about it as little as he does
of course I'd say the same thing
and I think that brings out a little bit
of the fact that we need to be realistic here
about how this works in practice.
I'm not trying to idealize a situation
that shouldn't be idealized
but should in fact be dealt with
in all of its practical affairs.
My point simply is that this is a natural
institution not natural
in the sense of an organic institution
or an entity like our bodies
but a natural institution because
it satisfies the needs of our nature.
Finally when we come to
questions about our senior years
one finds that this will be a time
of increased needs, increased
demands precisely because
our health is now jeopardized because
our powers are weakened and it is
crucial to see here that this too
is a part of that necessity
and duty that families have
the care of their elders.
On the other hand one shouldn't think
of this as the only time when there is a
renewal of dependence.
Not only was there dependence
of great nature when we were children
but even in the time of our greatest strength
and the time of our maturing
and the time of our real flourishing
there are tremendous needs and dependence
as we have hence the very institution
of marriage as well as the various forms
of friendship that we cultivate.
It is important I think to see
that our range of needs go far
beyond food and shelter.
It is a matter of all the ways
that in order to flourish we need to be
loved, honored, and revered
as well as to give love, honor, and reverence.
On the part of the aged person
and the care for them by a family
there is need to find ways that cultivate
the virtues and the wisdom that are possible
to the aged and to do this all
the way through life. Hence the
importance in a natural law analysis
of the family, the smallest unit
of the society, to be arranged
in such a way as to respect and honor
the inherent rationality
and the inherent sociality of our nature.
It entails I think that we
never treat a person as merely
a means to an end or as a commodity
but value that spouse,
that child, that senior as indeed
an end in him or herself
and to appreciate the various ways
in which these goals can be affected
to allow for human creativity
to give us a sense of the variety
of customs and practices that serve
the purpose but on the other hand be willing
to argue that some forms of this
association do not serve the purpose
and hence natural law tries to make
its contribution.
applause
lecture 24
the eternal return
of natural law
applause
One of the crucial aspects
of any understanding
of philosophy is to
go over again the material that one
has covered and we've now reached that point
in this attempt to consider
natural law theory. It's our
opportunity in this lecture to
look at what we have covered
and to look ahead to the future
to what else it is that needs to be considered
in our study of natural law
in this course we have
tried to investigate some of the general
ideas that are true
of all kinds of natural law theory
we've looked over the history of
natural law to try to
understand the various ways in which
these insights emerged
not just to appreciate the
details of that flow
but to appreciate how difficult it was
sometimes to articulate it
and I have little doubt that philosophy
of natural law is an ongoing
affair that we still have much
to understand about human nature
and human society and so that this kind
of thinking can lead us yet
to further progress in other areas
where it has not yet been applied at all
or where there is still disagreement
and discussion.
When we look in particular at something
like modern political theory we see
the ways in which natural law
theory has sometimes used different
terminology that the
ways that are so important to the
earlier history of natural law
things such as the very term
natural law that focus on
human nature
has yielded in the course of time
to considerations about natural rights
considerations of human dignity
and in these things
the natural law theory still
abides in fact some of the great
books on natural law speak about
the eternal return of the natural law
that is that it's one of those
theories which will continue to be
rediscovered even when an age
has forgotten it precisely
because of the source
that natural law theory uses
namely human nature in
the various ways in which that
human nature manifests itself.
What I'd like to do in this final
lecture then is to concern ourselves
with some of those great
themes the central concepts
that are true of any natural law
theory the ways in which
the central concepts manifest
themselves in some of the stronger
contenders of genuine natural law
the ways in which the terms
are sometimes used or even
abused by those surrogates
and counterfeits of natural law
and finally an attempt to review
some of the important ways in which
this can be applied to practical
questions.
Central to the long but very
tradition of natural law thinking
has been a concern with three
primary characteristics of
ethical thinking namely
objectivity, universality
and intelligibility.
I think that any ethical theory
any natural laws competitors
utilitarianism for instance
or divine command ethics
or canton duty ethics
has to struggle with some of these same
criteria namely how to
make a claim that is objective
something that any reasonable person
can see
and find grounded and is not
just sort of an idea or an opinion
but rather is something that has
a root and a strength and is
objective granting that it's
difficult to get there. Likewise
there's a concern that any ethical
theory worth its salt has with
universality an effort to try
to apply across the board in such
a way that it deals with not
just with me and my own particular
group but as much as possible
deals with all of humanity
and finally a claim about
intelligibility namely that
any ethics that is
truly deserving the name will
find a way in which its concepts
will be intelligible, will be
able to be understood, will indeed
seem reasonable and insightful.
Now for natural law theory
the stress on nature
that is recurrent in this theory
is the effort to provide an
objective grounding for moral claims
it's not always easy
to ascertain, it's not
something that can be read off
easily but rather requires
much reflection, much study
much generalization
with all the appropriate cautions about
generalization from empirical
investigation. Nonetheless
it's a claim to find a certain
objectivity for moral claims
a sense that one will find
a fruitful source of information
here for moral insight
this I think will be solid
ground for natural law theory
as long as the questions
that we are asking as long as the things
that we are trying to settle on this basis
do still stand on that solid
ground. Sometimes
I think however we get on to
the ground that turns into cracking ice
cracking under our own weight
when the kind of uses that we are
inclined to make are simply justifications
of what we're used to
what we're comfortable with
what perhaps is customary
in our society or what may
be habitual for us personally
at that point we are no longer dealing
with nature but we're dealing
with something which is idiosyncratic
which is personal or perhaps familial
or maybe just cultural
and so merely the fact that a person claims
that something is natural is
not its own authentication
or justification but rather what
a natural law theory must do
is to show that it is natural
and hence we find ourselves
locating the burden of argument always
with the affirmative locating
the burden of argument with those who would
claim that something or other is natural
even the word nature
has had many meanings in the course of history
the one that I prefer to use
and that I think is the mainstream
tradition in natural law
is that sense of nature when we use
the term to refer to an
inner source of
intelligibility to an inner
principle that makes
a given being some kind
of being so once human
nature is that which makes us truly
human whereas
those things which make us of one
nationality those things which make us
of one religion or another
those things which make us a member of some
voluntary group are not natural in that
sense those things are acquired those
things are external but rather nature
in this strongly Aristotelian sense
of the word refers to those
inner principles that are typical
of a given kind of being
by which individuals who belong
to that kind tend to grow
so as to have a structure
both a bodily structure
a psychic structure but also
to have typical activities
things that we do as a matter of course
and do because of our
natures obviously
in the course of trying to appreciate this
it is a matter of long study
because frequently we can mistake
merely what is customary or merely habitual
merely what we happen to be comfortable
with but when
one looks more deeply and tries
to analyze natures one finds
that those typical activities
the operations that are recurrent
and present in all the members
of the group or in most of the mature
members of the group and likewise
those typical structures the biological
structures and the psychological structures
they lead us to another
discovery that has been extremely
important for the thinking on natural
law namely a discovery of the
natural ends the goals
or purposes and we saw
in lecture after lecture
from the very beginning of the course
that this is to use a category
the notion of end or goal or purpose
which admittedly comes from
human invention human creativity
that when we are for instance
sculptors we have an end
in our mind an object of beauty
or an object of some kind of representation
that we want to make the goal
that we have directs the activities
but those goals and purposes
of course are highly subjective
that is they are very much a matter
of what I have chosen to act upon
the reasons for which I have chosen
to move or to do or to operate
what we are referring to here
is the use of that category derived
from choice derived from
freedom derived from
purposeful activity that has been
chosen and we apply
that category to the realm of nature
asking whether or not
there are not certain natural
or intrinsic ends certain goals
in the general
sphere of biological nature
one finds that all the
subsystems that are involved in a
given organism contribute
to the good of the organism just as
in the course of the development of that
entities life that entities
existence the early
periods when the being is still immature
move toward maturity
move toward that period when the
being is a full healthy
mature instance of the species
obviously many things can go
wrong there can be disease
there can be sickness there can be illness
there can be accident or cross purposes
and yet there is a natural
development a natural process
and and for this reason
natural law thinkers are always
inclined to say we need to look at nature
but not to look at it in a
frozen frame we need to look
at it rather and to respect the flow
and we need to try to ascertain
what we can fairly claim as
truly developmental and on the
other hand what is something that is only
idiosyncratic or typical of a small
portion this
insight about final causality
that is the kind of causality
that an intrinsic goal or
purpose has for an organism
and for a specific kind within the natural
world joined
with some analysis of the
distinctive goals of human
nature as personal nature
allows us to have a
full blown natural law theory
what I mean by that last remark is
that in addition to our biological
goals in addition to our psychic
drives there are things that
are our ends precisely
because we are persons
because we are beings capable of
knowing and beings capable of
deliberately choosing there's
matters of awareness and appreciation
but there are also matters of our loves
and the deliberate decisions
we make with respect to our loves
all of this requires
that natural law ethics
take into account in the
course of trying to give a sense of
human being, human existence
human values and human institutions
in my judgment then
those portions of the
history of natural law that we were considering
are most authentic and
mainstream in natural law
when there is not only ethics
but when there's a really solid anthropology
and behind that anthropology
a theory about how the being
works, how the universe is
there are principles of metaphysics
on the other hand we've also seen
that the natural law tradition
as a very
wide ranging tradition
includes some theories of natural law
which do not have a metaphysical component
which insists that there's a strong
separation between theory and practice
and likewise there are some portions
of the natural law
camp which only talk about
human nature in terms
of its biological and perhaps its psychic
structure but it's extremely doubtful
about whether human institutions
can be included within the scope of that
and they would prefer to think of human institutions
whether families or
perhaps at the larger level of societies
as things of human construction
rather than of human nature
this is I think a good and honest
ongoing debate within the tradition
of natural law
all of this was said by way of
objectivity on that second
criteria namely the great concern
that one has for universality
a philosophical approach to natural law
tries to
get beyond merely tribal loyalties
tries to get beyond
simply privileged standpoints
it's the sort of thing which in a
religious ethics one has
a claim that one has a privileged
standpoint if one for instance is a follower
of a revealed religion
if God has revealed his will then one has
a special standpoint one has a privileged
access the claim made in
natural law theory is that
while the only standpoint that one has
is the standpoint
of reason reflecting upon nature
and one asks and one tries
to see how far and how
broad one can in fact
get one's ethical theory
it may be that it coheres with a religious
point of view but nonetheless that
special privileged standpoint
that revelation might provide
isn't something that's an intrinsic
part of natural law theory it's
something rather that might come to confirm it
or might come to challenge it
or might come perhaps simply to supplement it
but the claim here in philosophy
is that we try to get
as much as possible
to a universal standpoint that is
to look across the human history
and to look across the human race
to see what sort of things are indeed
really perennial and valid
necessary causes to see
where the insights that are universally
compelling or cogent at least
to a great probability are
for this reason natural law theory has always
tried to balance concerns
about the needs that specific
individuals have in
discrete and particular circumstances
with a concern for
universal principles that apply always
and across the board
but it does so by being willing
to distinguish between precepts
that are really universal in character
most of them are negative things
we cannot may not do
it's sort of the silver
rule do not do unto others
what we'd rather not have done to us
but there are also
a number of positive commands
the golden rule do unto others
as you have them do unto you
and in that golden rule it's a matter
of suggesting that in a given
circumstance one might have duties
and that these duties are universally
recognized even though
they are different and creative
ways of fulfilling those duties
to use for several examples
when one is thinking about what is
bad or wrong for every member
of the species one
can find on the basis of natural law
that some things for instance the
arbitrary taking of
innocent human life are regularly
condemned by one culture after another
that is that there's something wrong there
on the other hand on the positive side
not everybody is in the position
of having offspring immediately to hand
and yet there is a positive
duty that can be recognized
simply on the basis of our human nature
of our dependencies
in the course of our childhood
so that we desperately need
someone to help take care of our needs
and that this normally
and usually falls upon parents
or parents are unable to do so
for some reason unwilling that they still
have an obligation to see to the
care and raising of those offspring
in this respect it is
it is a matter of finding
what is reasonable when we reflect
upon human nature
it allows us to make relatively
great progress about universalization
even in matters that are
touching on things like politics
it allows us to say for instance
that there is a
positive case that can be made
for political authority
not that everything that the political
authority decides is right
by no means but rather that there is
a legitimacy
in the obedience that is in general
expected to authority
precisely because the authority has
an obligation to look out for the good
of the whole whereas individuals
have to look out primarily for
their own good and the good of their family
what implications
this will have will be extremely varied
depending on the creativity
in the ways our societies have
managed in trying to
devise institutions which can
carry out these natural duties
again let me take just one example
capital punishment has always been
a great subject for ethical discussion
precisely because it is
a tremendous and terrible
punishment a punishment from which
there is no recourse
many natural lawyers have argued
that there is at least
correctness to capital punishment
for certain capital crimes
precisely because
the authority has an obligation
to look for the safety of the community
and if that safety cannot
be secured short of the
death of criminals those who have
been convicted of crime there is
indeed a right on the part of the society
to
subject those criminals to capital punishment
on the other hand one can have
a legitimate debate about whether
the public safety requires capital
punishment if there are other
means available to defend the society
societies for instance which are stable
enough to imprison individuals
without threatening the
public good and the public safety
might well be excused from using
such a severe punishment so
the natural law approach to this
matter is to see what it is that is reasonable
reflecting upon our nature
reflecting not only on our particular
nature but on our
special nature and our nature as
in desperate need of various forms
of association and to try to
establish what is reasonable
reasonable across the board as so far
as possible universally but with
attentiveness to where circumstances
and where conditions prevent us
simply from saying one thing across
the board but perhaps articulating
the range of permissible options
the range of alternatives that are
possible given our other
circumstances in the
natural law tradition this quest for
universality has usually
led to a very fruitful distinction
between negative precepts
those that apply always and everywhere
like that prohibition on murder for instance
the prohibition on deliberately taking
innocent human life
and those various positive precepts
that apply only in certain circumstances
the obligation for instance
to tell the truth presuming that people
with whom one is talking have a right
to that truth or the obligation
to care for one's children if one has
children there's no sense that one
must tell all the truth that one knows
all the time but rather that one
must refrain from deliberately
intending to deceive
now on the assumption that one
only bears responsibility
for that which one knows
and that which one has chosen
natural law theory has often
been concerned with talking about
how one knows the natural law
and it tries to meet the third
criterion the criterion about intelligibility
by investigating
how natural law is known
sometimes it's known by teaching
this per venue that the teaching
company offers a wonderful chance
to do it in so many words and explicitly
and yet natural law
is not thought to be
dependent upon such
formal teaching as this
rather the claim that natural law makes
is that we have access
we have an ability
to understand some of these
natural law obligations
even without such explicit teaching
and that the intelligibility
of natural law comes by
noticing two very interesting
aspects of human existence
one is that we're filled with various
kinds of inclination that we're
given in our very nature
we find given the various
attractions and desires to good
things desires to good food
especially when we're hungry desires
to the refreshment of drink and the refreshment
of sleep attraction to members
of the opposite sex that we're
having various kinds of
attractions that are due to our animal nature
but also things that are due to our
rational nature namely we have a desire
to know we have a desire to
to express our affections we have
a desire to form friendships
especially friendships that will last
we have a desire to
to work together in community
precisely because we like the sociability
of others and because we desire
some of the goods that are only possible
with common participation
with a real contribution
by many people no one of
which alone could manage those goods
that source of
intelligibility namely our
own inclinations is thought
by natural law theory to be extremely
important it's a way to reflect
on the fact that we know
the natural law in our very bones
that we at least have a spontaneous
and direct inclination toward these goods
and yet
merely to have an inclination
doesn't by itself prove that anything
is natural law here the problem
is is that as we find
ourselves we are products not just
of nature but also of nurture
that we have not only what is given
but we also have various histories
some of those histories being extremely
helpful other histories
being frustrating being in some
way or other disordered and hence
there is a need to reflect upon
our various inclinations
and to that reason try to test
those inclinations to see
which are indeed valid
and legitimate and helpful and which
on the other hand need to be restrained
which need to be disciplined which need to
be dealt with aesthetically
or perhaps dealt with even heroically
here a second avenue
of intelligibility
surfaces namely that for
the sake of natural law we invariably
look at experience
of other than our own
we look at the wise in our community
we look at the wise in our families
and we ask what is it that really
prospered them natural law
always bears an enormous debt
to history and to story
to the traditions of literature as well
as the formal traditions of recounting
the deeds and the speeches that make up
any of our national histories
as such natural law
theory is claiming that we
can learn and understand what some
of the obligations are
by considering with our reasons
what it is that is fruitful
and what it is that is frustrating
and that this too is a source of intelligibility
I have emphasized
and accentuated the role of reason in all this
precisely because the
theories against which natural
law sets itself over the course
of history have tended to emphasize
other factors when for instance
we are considering natural law
as a theory of jurisprudence
when we are considering it in its influence
upon the formation of society
and the adjudication that is done by law
natural law theory stands
in opposition to things like legal positivism
and to ethical relativism
invariably systems
such as these try to privilege the will
as a source of moral
value and to limit in one
way or another intellect
to a merely instrumental role
to a matter of figuring out how to obtain
what we want
how to get what it is that we desire
but natural law tradition
in its mainstream approach
has always favored the priority
of intellect to will
I mean this both for theological
as well as for purely secular theories
of natural law
namely it stresses a view of reason
as deeply receptive
it's worthwhile thinking about this for a minute
namely that our powers of reason
are such that they are
active and then active
that we must if for instance
we want to change some situation
maybe we don't like the way our society
is presently organized
or maybe we don't like something in our own character
or something in our own family
any effort at change
any effort at the practical reason
when we're devising a solution
inventing a new structure
urging someone or perhaps urging ourselves
to take a new stand
requires first that we understand
the way things are
not that we'll keep things the way they are
but that we have to understand the way things are
and why they are what they are
I consider this to be one of the chief virtues
that is needed for a natural
law approach and it's the virtue of humility
a sense not of being
the world's doormat not humiliation
but humility in the sense
say that Bernard of Clairvaux used to use it
namely as a reverent love for the truth
a truth about our nature
a truth about our common human nature
a truth about our social nature
as well as our individual nature
and a truth that doesn't mind being challenged
that doesn't mind being investigated
with all the tools that reason
and philosophy can summon
precisely because the consequences
and the stakes are so important
it is a matter of reflecting on
those principles that are so basic
that we cannot not know them
for instance that we always should
pursue the good and avoid the evil
but that we have to educate ourselves
and form ourselves about
what is it that's good and what is it
that's evil because there are things
that are merely apparently good
but are in fact not so good for us
they are inauthentic desires
rather than authentic desires
and knowing the difference between the two
is a project that requires
enormous humility and a readiness
to submit to interpersonal dialogue
and criticism so that we aren't
merely being comfortable with what we're used to
as such
basic principles of natural law
are in us as operating principles
rather than as
explicitly known, thematically stated
explicitly expressed
propositions
when we come to a course like this
we try to state them in so many words
for example that we should never
do evil that good may come
but in us it's an operating principle
in us it's something that is innate
or native to us
and that we need to learn how
in the course of time by experience ourselves
and by the consultation of the wives
we need to form our
consciences in such a way that we
regularly do this
on that subject the theme of conscience
is an extremely important subject
within the tradition of natural law
and conscience is understood
not as just a Freudian super ego
conscience is understood
not necessarily as a little voice
perhaps a voice of God
or the voice of an angel
conscience is understood typically
in natural law theory as
a power of our minds
to judge, to evaluate
actions we have done
or actions we're considering doing
in light of principles that we did not choose
in light of principles
that are things that are already
established by our nature
if we would only look carefully enough
at that nature
and mindful for instance of the ways
in which conscience needs to be better understood
when I think of a wonderful
popular movie in play
perhaps you've seen at one point
or another in your life Robert Boltz
a man for all seasons
and it's a tremendous play about a great hero of mine
Thomas Moore
but the one reservation I have
about the presentation of Thomas Moore
in that particular piece of stage craft
is the way in which conscience is portrayed
Moore is made to say
at various points in the course of the play
that he has been faithful
to his conscience
faithful to his set of chosen principles
and I think that that probably does a bit
of disservice to Thomas Moore
as well as to the notion of conscience
not that conscience shouldn't mean
fidelity to one's principles
for that is exactly what conscience means
my quibble is with the notion
that it is fidelity to one's chosen
principles for I think
that what Thomas Moore himself stood for
were principles that he did not choose
principles that instead
he found already in practice
in operation and things
which he could not in truth deny
so too I think with respect
to us what adequate
formation of conscience means
is a training in a fidelity
to principles such as principles
about what fosters and fulfills
human nature and the avoidance
of what it is that frustrates human nature
and standing
fast standing steadfast
for those principles that we did not
choose but which are already
present as operating principles
of our nature coming of course
to understand these things to articulate
them to really grasp
them and to let them be useful
does require the mediation of
various authorities in our lives
parents the wise perhaps
clergy perhaps teachers
all of these
authorities consulted and
needing to be personally accepted
needed to be personally
regulated in our life and that we do
this precisely as we mature
under the careful guidance of some
natural structures such as the family
now with this in mind
the objectivity the universality
the intelligibility natural
law theory has often been
invoked by thinkers
political and social
it has been invoked sometimes for very
conservative purposes to maintain order
sometimes for very radical
and revolutionary purposes
founding and in refounding and in
revising and reforming various structures
in the
course of natural laws history there has been
a sense though that whether it be used
for things new or for the maintenance
of things old what we must
look at our principles of right
and justice that have prevailed
by reason of their intrinsic excellence
that are true regardless
of whether those in possession of power
are willing to recognize them
it is in this sense that we can talk
about inalienable rights in our own
Declaration of Independence or that we
can criticize certain practices
in our own cultures history such as slavery
in which these
inalienable rights in which these
native principles of justice were
somehow ignored that somehow the culture
was blind to them it allows
us to make judgments which are not
demeaning but which attend attempt
to be appreciative of
what this basic human nature is
it has allowed the practice of
judicial review to flourish in our society
but even that too can
be abused rather what
natural law tries to do as a
theory is to invoke principles
of right and justice that remain
the same and abide in our
nature and to try to find
ways to institutionalize them
we do so in government we do so
in forms of voluntary association
we do so in family and we need
to do so in the formation of our own character
thank you for this opportunity
to talk with you about the natural law
it gives us the venue for the discussion
of many other interesting moral and
social topics in our own day
applause
we genuinely hope
you've enjoyed these lectures from our
great courses series our
courses are now available to order online
visit our website
at www.teach12.com
or call our customer
service representatives at
1-800-TEACH-12
that's 1-800-832-2412
thank you very much
