Professor Warren Goldfab, chairman of the philosophy department
at Harvard University, is our guest panelist in this program.
He specializes in logic, history of logic,
and philosophy of mathematics, and has translated and edited
the logical writings of Jacques Herbrand.
He has also coauthored with Bertrand Reben the decision
problem in solvable classes of quantificational formulae.
The program begins with a discussion of Professor
Quine's early philosophical career at Harvard
and consideration of his relationship
with the logical positivists of the Vienna circle,
most notably with Rudolf Carnat.
This background sets the stage for a thorough discussion
of Quine's naturalism, and in particular,
his naturalized epistemology.
Questions about the famous two dogmas are raised,
and then attention is drawn to his doctrines of extensionalism
and ontological relativity.
We now join the discussion in Cambridge, Massachusetts.
Joining Professor Quine for this discussion are Warren Goldfab,
professor of philosophy at Harvard University,
Paul Horwich, professor of philosophy at MIT,
and Martin Davies, wild reader in mental philosophy
at Oxford University.
In 1932, the Quine set sail for Europe destination was Vienna.
Herbert Feigl, who was at Harvard University from Vienna
at that time, had suggested to Quine, who had already
achieved acclaim as a logician, that the main action in logic
would be found in Vienna, and perhaps in the person of Rudolf
Carnat, who was ultimately to play a great role in Quine's
development as a philosopher.
Before going into the influence that the Vienna circle had
on your work, I'd like to ask you, what was the situation at
Harvard at that time, particularly in the field of logic?
At that time, logic was very weakened in America generally.
As far as I know, hardly any of them taught the subject.
Harvard was looked to, prided itself on being perhaps
the greatest center for logic in America.
After I'd been there for a little while,
I'd been there for a little while,
after I'd been there for a little while,
I came to feel that this was, well,
this profession reminded me of the Wizard of Oz.
I was learning virtually no logic that I hadn't already
imbibed as an undergraduate from my unsupervised honors
reading.
Pardon.
Who were the main characters at that time at Harvard?
In logic, the three names associated with logic were
Whitehead, Clarence Serving Lewis, and Harry Sheffer.
Whitehead, of course, with a very good reason,
because he and Bertrand Russell had done this monumental three
volume work on mathematical logic, the work that
was far and away the greatest thing in that subject,
and virtually the only great thing
that I'd become aware of up to then.
Lewis had done many years earlier.
In fact, as far back as 1918, the book
had appeared a survey of symbolic logic
in which he did a good job of reporting the developments
at the hands of Burs and Boulle and the others,
and some small extent, perhaps, Fraga.
His teaching, he was perhaps my most influential teacher,
from a point of view of straight classroom contact.
His course in Kant, and his course
in his own theory of knowledge.
He wasn't teaching logic.
What little logic I associated with him from reading,
I was not sympathetic with, because it was modal logic.
In fact, he was very much the pioneer, the American pioneer
in, or the pioneer, I should say, in the modal logic
of necessity.
Harry Shuffer was the one who was giving logic courses,
but they were just altogether too thin.
And there was no inkling of the current excitement
in Central Europe at the hands of Tarski and Łukasziewicz
and others in Poland, and Hilbert Ackermann Bernice
in Germany, got it again.
So you met Karnath in Europe in 1932,
and you clearly found he had a lot to offer.
In 1934, you gave a series of lectures
on his program of logical syntax.
Those lectures are very sympathetic to him,
but pretty soon you found yourself
having some differences with that program and with Karnath.
Let's know, where did you first find your differences with Karnath?
What were the initial difficulties you first
found yourself running into in thinking about executing
the program?
Yes.
The first occasion, apparently, and I
didn't learn this until just within the past few years,
was as far back as March 1933, when I was there with Karnath
and was getting so much stimulation and knowledge
of philosophy from him.
I didn't know that until it was turned up by Neil Tennant
and a log that Karnath had kept in his methodical way,
where day after day in Prague, when he wasn't going into lecture,
I would go out to where he lived and we would discuss,
because I was reading his logical syntax of language
in the German edition.
As it came out of the typewriter, it hadn't yet appeared.
It wasn't to appear for another year.
Karnath entered in this log that I had expressed questions
about the analyticity, some doubt about it.
And his reflection was that perhaps I
was right in thinking, I'm not sure how accurately I
remember this three or four line passage,
but perhaps I was right in thinking
that it was a matter of degree, until this recent archaeological
discovery.
I thought of 1935, when I was writing Truth by Convention,
that came out in 36 for a festrift for Whitehead,
as being my first manifestation, certainly, of that doubt.
And certainly by 39, 40, it had become really quite a firm doubt
and not just a tentative misgivings.
I'd like to ask you about your attitude towards the positivist
doctrine that metaphysics is meaningless in discussing
the so-called inverted spectrum hypothesis,
a hypothesis that, for all I know,
other people are seeing red things the way
I see green things in vice versa.
In reaction to that, you said you thought
this hypothesis would be unverifiable and therefore
meaningless.
And this sounds exactly the sort of thing
that the hard-line positivist would have said.
Does this show that you are, in fact,
a hard-line positivist in this respect?
No, I can agree.
This is exactly what the hard-line positivist would have said.
I wouldn't say it or I wouldn't mean that anyway.
What I perhaps said, perhaps I started
out saying that for one thing, it's unverifiable.
And then I should have gone on to say, whether I did or not,
that I can't even see how, by connecting it up
with other hypotheses, getting it into the network
of the web of belief, that it would link up indirectly
with verification, that it seemed to be simply inaccessible
to scientific developments that we can project,
that we can imagine and foresee.
And that, it seems to me, should qualify something
that purports to be a statement or a question of fact
as meaningless in the positivist way.
So you do countenance, then, a class
of meaningless, unverifiable, metaphysical sentences.
Yes, yes.
But it's way out, as I think it feels this is,
because I don't even consider it necessary for meaningfulness.
That a sentence be indirectly connectable
with observation, that it be part of a network.
I wouldn't require that the sentence be indirectly
verifiable in this sense.
That there be a set of sentences which together have
what I've called critical mass.
And that they together will imply an observationally
testable situation and would include the sentence
in question and would lose its critical mass
if, when that was removed from the class,
that would be a way of explaining what it would mean,
perhaps for a sentence to have empirical content at all
that would share empirical content in this essential way.
I wouldn't insist on that by any means.
And I don't think that the bulk of sentences in history
or perhaps in various social sciences,
nor perhaps all of them even in serious rigorous physics
meet even that test.
And I don't think that for that reason,
they should be rejected as meaningless.
Because they are sentences that we have postulated or accepted.
That is, we've conjectured them, accepted them,
because they seem to fit in so nicely
with the theory that is working.
Perhaps considerations of symmetry,
perhaps it seems to fill a nice little conceptual gap.
And I think that furthermore, they
can be vital to the progress of science,
because they are, I imagine, a very important, maybe
overwhelmingly large part of the heuristics
of the fashioning of worthwhile scientific hypotheses.
That is to say, hypotheses that are worth testing,
rather than desperately erring away one's time
on hypotheses that we ought to have thought
were very unlikely to come out right when tested.
So I think that's a vital part of science.
And in fact, it's because of, including all these,
that I can't envision any sharp demarcation.
I'm with Carl Popper in this, between science and metaphysics
in the in the primitive sense.
That does raise a question, though.
The positivists were very fond of demarcation criteria,
not just to separate science from metaphysics,
but also to separate science from pseudoscience.
So the question is, how would you handle a question in which
someone might want to bring into question something,
for example, like psychoanalytic theory,
as to whether that really had scientific status or not.
The positivists would handle such a question
by their general criteria.
How would you handle such a question?
Yes, well, I think the effect that that consideration has on me
is rather that I'm very suspicious of it and dubious of it.
I can conceive that it might be helpful in some of the suggestions,
some of the things, perhaps some of the things that are said
about dreams or some of the things that are said about inhibitions
from earlier experiences, this way,
that can inspire somebody with a more scientific temper
to some constructive ideas that will go on.
Maybe it's already happened.
But the sort of culture is developed
and the trust that's been put into it as something therapeutic
and worth spending an awful lot of time and money treating oneself
to, that makes the thing certainly a great evil.
And I'm not sympathetic with it at all.
But I think to this extent, it's more nearly continuous
with science than it should be for me to be single-mindedly
inclined to brand it as meaningless.
The critics of verificationism used to devise sentences
which were apparently meaningful but which were cooked up in such a way
as not to be susceptible of empirical confirmation
or falsification either.
I seem to recall some sentence along the lines
of there's a planet for whose existence
we shall never have any evidence.
Would you want to say the same about those sentences
as you say about sentences in the outer reaches of mathematics,
which is that overall simplicity can be our only guide?
No, I think the situation isn't as clear with those sentences
because those sentences might be related in the way
that I was sketching through these various systematic kinships
to such sentences so as to be valuable in the theory
that they're fitting into the web of belief in such a way
as to seem very likely to belong.
Well, in a way, those sentences of higher mathematics
have that too in one direction, namely they are results
of simply continuing to apply and extrapolate the grammar
and lexicon that we've been needing for scientific purposes.
And that's a very clear and unconjectural link that they have.
And it's the only reason, my only reason,
for taking them seriously as a part of science.
So I think a detailed structural connection is different.
What about the idea of taking the inverted spectrum
hypothesis or its negation as just being a sentence
in the outer reaches of phenomenology, where once again
we'd say, well, we are allowed to be meaningful
because it's just using over again vocabulary
that we use in more workaday circumstances.
And we'll once again just let the truth value fall where it may
in light of overall simplicity, I guess,
in which case you'd go for the denial
of the inverted spectrum hypothesis.
Yes, well, that's an interesting suggestion
because I was about to wonder, all right,
if we admit it, which way is our decision going to go on?
That's truth value.
People wonder about the outer reaches of mathematics as well.
Well, there we can settle for simplicity.
I can't see simplicity coming into the act, in this case,
which is a commentary also on how independent it
seems to be from anything scientific.
I wonder if you recognize a class of sentences
that are meaningless in a more definitive way
than simply not seeming to have any empirical consequences
or the possibility of any fitting into the web of belief.
I have in mind Wittgenstein's example.
It is five o'clock on the sun.
Oh, good.
Where it looks as though, although grammatically OK,
how one feels like saying, well, five o'clock
hasn't been defined for the sun.
It doesn't make any sense to us,
whether it's five o'clock on the sun.
What's your reaction to kind of set?
Well, a characteristic of this kind of example, I suppose,
is that we can prove on the basis of principles
that we all, unhesitatingly, accept anyway, I should think,
that there couldn't be any criterion or any criterion
that would fit in usefully with the rest of science
in which those same terms are used.
Maybe it's just the virtue of this.
If it is a virtue, it's a clear case.
I see.
We've been talking about some of the historical influences
on you, just about Karnap, who does seem to have been predominant.
But there was one very centrally influential book
on all of the philosophers of the inner circle, not just Karnap.
And that was Wittgenstein's Tractatus.
They all read it quite numerous times,
and it clearly impacted all of their work.
Did it have any direct effects on you and in your work?
I'm not aware of us having had any positive effect.
I didn't like it.
I read it early.
I can't think how early.
Very likely, already, when I was a graduate student there in 31,
32, although not in the course, no, I didn't like it.
I didn't like the absoluteness of his atomism.
Also, of course, I was put off somewhat
by his being so blithe about construing quantification
as just the infinite case of truth functions.
The analogy is important, but I guess I
may have felt at the time any way that he wasn't taking
the difficulties of actually acting on this
into consideration.
Wasn't appreciating.
Also, it seemed to me that his treatment of number
in terms of relations was untidy.
And I couldn't see why it wasn't clearly so inferior
to the much simpler definition of number
that Russell had already given, which followed Frege.
So it was a bit much later work that I found more sympathetic.
The two dogmas that you reject in your article,
two dogmas of empiricism, are the analytic, synthetic
distinction, the distinction between matters of statements
that are true in virtue of their meanings alone,
statements that are true in virtue of the facts,
and the other dogma is reductionism,
the idea that every meaningful sentence
has its own empirical content can
be reduced to observational facts in one way or another.
I wanted to ask you about the relationship
between your criticisms of these two doctrines.
In particular, does your critique, your rejection
of the analytic, synthetic distinction
play any role in the line of thought
that takes you from the denial of reductionism
to the web of belief, to your renunciation
of a priori knowledge?
My wholism was already present in two dogmas.
In fact, in the two dogmas where everybody reads it,
there's a footnote to duem.
Actually, that footnote is misleading in that I didn't
know anything about duem when I presented two dogmas
as a lecture or when it first appeared as an article in January
1951.
And it was Peter Hemphill, that is, Carl G. Hemphill,
and also independently, Philip Franck,
who, having read that article, said how yes, that's like duem.
And so I added that footnote when the thing was reprinted
in from a logical point of view by way of giving duem credit.
It seemed to be claiming this as something, some novel
contributions, just a matter of presenting it
as being the way things are.
Anyway, so I had come to that somehow.
And it's hard to say, it's not a very clean cut idea,
somewhere along the line from Truth by Convention
to Two Dogmas.
And then, the Web of Belief, well,
that was a very, I think, an admirable and catchy title
due to my collaborator, Joe Ullian.
But that's just more of the same.
When I was writing Two Dogmas, I brought that in.
And structurally, its position in that article
is, as one possible consideration to help account
for the rather strange fact that people take analyticity,
even analyticity across the board the way they do,
so uncritically, that there may be a failure to appreciate
that reductionism won't do.
Fail to appreciate wholism.
As for whether it was this wholistic view that
made me skeptical of analyticity in the first place,
I just can't judge, because something
like an appreciation of that can be
vague and inarticulate enough so that it
doesn't come out explicitly.
And I had thought of it as such.
It's the same, the two attitudes, the wholism,
therefore, anti-reductionism in that particular instance
of reduction.
And the skepticism about meaning and analyticity
are so much of a piece.
Incidentally, that anti-reductionism
has certainly caused misunderstandings,
because I am not against reductionism as such,
for heaven's sake.
I'm very fond of it.
More reduction, the better.
And it's just this particular case of it.
Could your line of thought, which involves rejecting
the reductionism in this epistemological form,
the reduction of any theoretical statement
to observation statements, which goes from there
to wholism and the web of belief and the rejection
of a priori knowledge, could that
proceed independently of any critique of analyticity?
They're so closely mentioned, it's hard to say.
But I think just because of the developing situation,
the circumstances when these questions arose,
it was certainly what I became clearly aware of was
misgivings specifically over analyticity.
That was because of the way Carnot was using it.
But I thought of it, then, as an objection that,
and still in two dogmas, I thought of it,
as a matter of not having given a satisfactory definition
of his terms, of his term analyticity.
But the difficulty of doing so, then,
is of a piece with the wholism.
If he had managed to, or if someone
had managed to give it a characterization of analyticity
from which it would not follow that an analytic truth could
be known a priori, then would that
conception of analyticity have been
able to play the philosophical role that it
was being asked to play prior to two dogmas?
I think it's something like the definition of analyticity
that I propose in roots of reference.
For example, yes.
No, that's certainly unscathed.
Just going back to two dogmas for a moment,
Freddie Ayer cited you as being responsible,
or partly responsible, for the dismantling
of logical positivism because of your attack,
your twin attacks on the analytic synthetic distinction
and reductionism in that paper.
And we've spoken privately a bit about Freddie Ayer
and his position at that time when you met him,
and subsequently, as you observed
his philosophical connection to logical positivism
and how it differed from your own.
And you've expressed a willingness
to say something about this.
So would you tell us about that?
Well, it seemed to me in his influential first book,
Language, Truth, and Logic, he came out, interestingly,
in between the two phases of Carnop
that it seemed to me so abruptly different.
The Carnop of the logisher Aufbau,
where he was very much the phenomenalist,
and the later Carnop, where he's a, well,
I'd say he's taken on naturalism along more specifically
with his physicalism.
In fact, it eases the transition from the earlier
Carnop to the later one and makes it more intelligible.
I can't see quite how to pin it down
in the way of specific points.
The book was impressive to me.
The way so much in philosophy came under his criticism.
The book, from beginning to end, focuses primarily
on meaninglessness of metaphysics,
and one metaphysical, one philosophical,
traditional philosophical question,
or issue after another is taken up,
and then he argues, shows how it is hopelessly
unempirical and how it goes.
And this is leading up, directs it well,
and so this makes for a close continuity, again,
between the Vienna circle of the later Carnop
and the Wittgenstein of his days in England,
where philosophy becomes, under Wittgenstein,
a straight therapeutic undertaking,
and philosophical problems are results
of misuse of language that can be cured.
And the point pointing out of just the way
that air felt that language had gone wrong in these cases,
sometimes is the way he handles the questions
and showing them, showing that they're meaningless.
And he certainly produced something
that gives the spirit of the Vienna circle
for the reader who runs.
It's not intellectually exacting.
It can be read and depreciated by wide circle and was.
Very important point of view of the history
and geography of philosophy.
You've said that naturalism is one
of the main components of your philosophy.
That's the view, roughly speaking,
that science is the only road to genuine knowledge.
I'd like to ask you about this.
Do you think that this naturalist doctrine
can be established or in any way justified,
or does it have to be a basic axiom?
Well, no.
I think perhaps the avenue has to be something like this,
that you're engaged in science and have recognized
what implicitly or explicitly that the checkpoints
of science, insofar as they exist,
are checkpoints in observation through that channel
of applying the observational setup.
And you appreciate that without considering
that what doesn't submit to that test is meaningless.
Of course, I've just been arguing against that point of view.
But insofar as there is a check, that's what it is.
And so this would make one critical of the transcendental
intrusions, as if there were other sources,
either in a priori knowledge of the human or divine revelation
as a support underpinning for science and its method.
But I feel that naturalism is and was very widespread.
Nothing new about this.
I adopted the term, introduced, I don't know which,
naturalistic epistemology or epistemology naturalized
for a specific application, namely,
getting away from the notion of a phenomenalistic reduction
of scientific concepts in order to endow them with meaning
in favor of going at those questions from within,
from within science itself.
And this is certainly quite a clear and undistakeable
contrast between my way of doing things and Carnop's
Aufbau to take extreme case.
But on the other hand, naturalistic philosophy,
generally, it seems to me, Hume was completely a naturalist.
It says that Hume didn't carry out reductions.
And if he did carry them out, well,
maybe he would have tried the same kind of thing that Carnop
would have tried if he had had the same apparatus
in the way of logic.
And it seems to me most, as far as I know them,
traditional philosophers were.
But then there are these intrusions
of in one philosopher after another, of course,
partly with his divine intervention.
But if one philosopher such as himself
say that science is the only road to genuine knowledge,
naturalism is correct, another philosopher says,
I disagree.
I don't think that naturalism is correct.
Is there any way to settle the dispute?
Well, perhaps there's not.
Because it would seem that the other philosopher in this case
was not satisfied with empirical evidence
or was prepared rather to, I suppose
I should put the other way around,
that he was prepared to welcome the kind of evidence
that I couldn't admit because it doesn't persuade me,
because the kind of thing that would persuade me
would be at least the illusion of empirical evidence
in observation.
So that he's got something which I suspect
is just wrong turning and nonsense.
But in any event, of course, that's
taking a partisan position in this particular confrontation.
But to take a symmetrical approach here,
it would just be that inability on my part
to appreciate what he's counting as evidence is wrong.
You've distinguished between your naturalism
and your empiricism.
No.
No.
I thought that your empiricism, you
have taken to be itself an empirical doctrine which
flows out of your naturalism.
It's your naturalism which leads you to empiricism,
which leads you to the view that the checkpoints should
be observable data, but you could imagine it's
turning out that other sorts of data
should be taken into account.
Well, I don't think I can.
But I'm not getting the distinction between naturalism
and empiricism.
When, as I was explaining, my reason
for introducing that phrase, epistemology naturalized,
that was specifically for contrast
with Carnop's building up and the traditional epistemologist
before Carnop.
But Carnop was the one who came closest to actually building
it up.
Building up a phenomenal language in which science
was not expressed, and then getting a language
about the natural world, the physical world from that.
And I'm taking the other specifically, the other approach
and going into it from the standpoint
of the physical world.
They already accepted ontology itself.
As far as I can see, the alternative that you're
picturing would just be the sort of thing
that I'm picturing, someone who is claiming
a kind of mystical, or to me anyway,
mysterious, source of evidence or kind of evidence
that I can't appreciate and that doesn't move me.
And it might be a mystical, in some extreme case,
a mystical insight on the part of some guru in the Himalayas.
I think it's in pursuit of truth.
You say that empiricism is itself an empirical doctrine
as part of the web of belief, and might have to be abandoned.
If it turned out, for example, that there was much more
to clairvoyance or telepathy than we presently think,
we would be led away from the view
that the only reasonable checkpoints for scientific theory
are observable data, and we have to accept
some other checkpoints.
Oh, good.
Maybe we'd even have to accept divine revelation.
Good.
Yeah.
So let's see where this leaves us.
I do think it's an empirical doctrine,
I mean a scientific doctrine coming out of science,
in that science tells us there are only
avenue of evidences through our senses
by the impact of physical objects and forces.
And furthermore, that we might get evidence to the contrary,
and it would be still evidence of the kind that does count for me,
because it would be observable evidence.
And I can well imagine evidence for clairvoyance
just in the prediction of observable events, where
I couldn't see what empirical basis, in terms of known
scientific forces, could have brought this about.
And that would entail a revision not only of empiricism.
Well, would it?
Maybe we're getting a bifurcation here.
What about that?
It makes me wonder whether perhaps there's
some difficulty in empiricism on the, yes,
I think this is the trouble.
Perhaps we should say that empiricism goes on,
because I'm still settling only for corroboration
in the observations.
Yes, good, good.
But what goes by the board is the doctrine
that the input is just through the senses, at least
through the senses that we've so thus far enumerated.
And good.
Well, I think the moral of this, this
may be to have second thoughts about the statement
that empiricism is a scientific result.
Yes, that's good.
That's interesting.
Perhaps you've already answered this question
and what you just said.
But I wanted to ask you about which prominent philosophers
in the 20th century you would say are clearly not
sympathetic to naturalism.
Don't endorse naturalism, as you see it.
Well, I wonder.
Certainly the ordinary language philosophers of England
are naturalistic, as one could wish.
It's the other extreme, whatever philosophers
there are who are religious apologists,
trying still to support notions of revelation
would be an example to the contrary.
Those are clear cases, both ends, I'd say.
And then in between, what I would think of
is just the philosophers who are still
reluctant, even though not coming through
with epistemological reductions of the kind that
current up in the off-bau is undertaking.
Something that's never been taken up so far as I know
and pursued any further or could be.
But still are dissatisfied with the naturalization
of epistemology, in that they apparently still
feel that there's a problem there.
And this would be a negative kind still of non-naturalism.
There's a question about where naturalism leaves one
with respect to the issue of what is philosophy.
One possibility that you have endorsed
is that we think of philosophy as part of natural science.
There are other possibilities.
One might think that philosophy is simply
discredited as a possible enterprise.
Or one might think that philosophy, perhaps
with Wittgenstein, the philosophy
doesn't really aim at knowledge,
but as a therapeutic endeavor.
Is there any particular reason for picking
your characterization of philosophy?
No, that's not the characterization I intend.
I may occasionally say things that
sound very much like that, or even exactly like that.
But what I mean is philosophy is continuous with science.
My philosophy is continuous with science.
I can say that because that follows
from the fact that my philosophy, at least,
is continuous with science and it's part of philosophy.
And it may still be that, and I think it is,
that my philosophy is more continuous with science
than it is with some other parts of philosophy.
And I don't think of this sort of thing,
the scientific sort of philosophy,
as being the whole of philosophy.
There are other parts of philosophy, even, that I respect.
Ethics.
And of course, my position is that
judgments of moral value, and likewise aesthetic value,
are not part of science, except the anthropology
behind them is.
So I think a philosophy is quite a
quite a scattered, quite an aggregate whole.
And I should add, I think of furthermore,
even rather sympathetically, of English ordinary
language philosophy as being philosophy.
It's just that it's not enough of it.
I wanted to ask a question about Peter Strossen's paper,
two conceptions of philosophy and the contrast
between his naturalism and your naturalism.
In that paper, Strossen says,
what's this alternative conception?
In other words, what's his conception of philosophy?
Well, he says, the common as distinct
from the scientific understanding is a complicated affair,
embracing an indefinitely large range of ideas or concepts.
He gives a long list of concepts and then says,
the philosophical aim of those who adhere
to my alternative conception of philosophy,
I take to be that of elucidating the character
of such concepts as these and their interconnections.
What do you make of this alternative conception
of philosophy and how does it differ from yours?
It's narrower.
Yes, I would count this as decidedly as philosophy.
And in fact, it seems to me it's the,
well, it's of a piece
with the English Ordinary Language Philosophy.
These concepts, you list,
aren't very ordinary language, of course,
but on the other hand, they're also not symbolic logic.
And it's of a piece with that.
And I think it's all philosophy.
And it's even a lot, I think it's useful.
I think it probably turns out to be very largely true even.
But I wouldn't limit it to that
because I think there are,
well, a lot more that goes on that interests me
in my part of philosophy that doesn't come under that head,
not analysis of concepts.
But, well, naturalized epistemology
is one thing.
And then all such ventures are fruitful or not as
trying to get a more economical ontology
such contortions as getting a better understanding
of bodies identified with portions of space-time
and then portions of space-time in turn
with the classes of quadruples of numbers.
That's, I think, inside the philosophy.
And it's not analysis of concepts.
Doesn't seem in quite the same sense, anyway.
It's the kind of thing that would be regarded
as further extension in an unaccustomed direction
of natural science.
One of the things that Strossen stresses
is the interconnections between concepts.
And sometimes he speaks of this in terms of
plotting the contours of a conceptual scheme.
Part of what this involves is not just listing
a whole lot of things that we do,
but trying to identify, in some sense,
though not, I think, a scientific sense, particularly,
what's basic about what we do.
And so, for example, Strossen says
that material bodies are basic particulars,
not in the sense that they're basic for science,
but in the sense that identification
of material bodies, he says, is basic.
Identification of other kinds of objects
depends upon identification of material bodies
and not conversely.
So he argues.
Do you think there's any good prospect
for theoretical results of this kind in philosophy?
Yes, this does sound good to me.
And it's interesting, in particular,
perhaps as an extension,
and what seems to be an increasingly serious extension
of ordinary language philosophy,
where what is really coming into consideration
is the structure of ordinary language,
and not the structure in the linguist sense,
but the conceptual structure of our whole ordinary
and even extra ordinary, even scientific,
conception of the world.
And again, very much a part of what I regard
as philosophy and useful,
and as conspicuously continuous with science.
Paul asked earlier about
whether naturalism could be justified,
perhaps within the naturalist camp.
There are these different projects.
I wonder how one or other of those
might be chosen ahead of the other.
Strossen himself says of the two conceptions,
each has its own worth, he says, and its own appeal.
The choice between them is ultimately,
perhaps, a matter of individual temperament.
Do you think that's right?
The choice of them for what?
One can very well choose music instead of,
without casting aspersions on philosophy,
you can choose music instead,
and one can do fiction instead of science.
I think of the insistence on observation
as the checkpoint, insofar as any checkpoint can be,
can exist for what deserves the name of science.
And although a great deal of what deserves
the name of science can't be checked,
directly or indirectly, I claim,
still, when it is checked, it's going to be checked that way.
And I think of this not as something to establish,
but what distinguishes that scientific endeavor.
Now, how would anybody want to do that?
There, of course, there are two frequent reasons.
One is technology, and the other is
just intellectual curiosity.
I suppose the question, partly,
is how large a role science is going to play
in one's intellectual life.
Strawson, in effect, takes up the question
that you've just asked, the question, for what?
And he says, for one content to lead his life,
at least his intellectual life,
in the rarefied atmosphere of science,
the choice on this test will go one way.
For one content to lead his intellectual life
in the muddier atmosphere of the more mundane,
it will go the other way.
Does that seem to you to be the key,
whether one has a taste for the rarefied
or a taste for the muddier?
Well, I'm wondering just what the other way is,
in this case, what he has in mind.
He just had in mind what he calls
the more liberal or Catholic conception of philosophy.
Well, I think maybe he's a shift
to a more liberal or Catholic conception of science,
and he wouldn't find the discrepancy.
Made it sound as if naturalism consisted
in your being prepared to call science
the only things that were subject
to the checkpoint of observation.
And that makes the doctrine sound somewhat terminological.
So it makes the doctrine sound as if it's just about
what you are going to call science,
and what you are not going to call science,
and who cares about terminology.
No, I don't think that is a naturalistic position.
I see.
I just think of that as the distinguishing trait
of anything that any of us would think of as science
in the broadest sense, including history,
that if there is a checkpoint, it's there.
And on the other hand, I wouldn't expect one
to call something science if the checkpoints
were supernatural, the alleged checkpoints.
Do you think, is this closer to what your naturalism
consists in, that one simply ought to believe things
that haven't been subject to these things
that aren't subject to those observational checkpoints?
No, no, on the contrary, I hold that a great deal
of what's in science, the broad sense of this broad sense
has no checkpoint, direct or indirect,
and is still valuable, and valuable for science itself
and indirectly for prediction, but very indirectly,
namely as suggesting for further filling out
some more hypotheses, which, unlike those first ones,
do link up indirectly, systematically,
with critical masses that can as whole apply observations.
And I think that science would be very severely impoverished
if the evenly, most liberal sort of positivism
were put into effect.
But all these things fit into the web of belief
in one way or another, all the things that you think
should be, could be believed.
So I don't insist on checkpoints.
All I am assisting on here is negative,
namely, no checkpoints except observation.
Where do that leave ethics?
Out of science, but in philosophy,
and in respectable philosophy.
And in what we might legitimately believe,
doctrines.
Well, in another sense of believe, yes.
It has been noted by many philosophers yourself included
that there are points of contact between your thinking
and that of American pragmatism.
explicitly mentioned, for example, in the Dewey lecture,
some agreements you have with Dewey.
To what extent was pragmatism an actual influence on you?
I think, well, it's hard to think of any.
It's hard to think of any.
And I haven't been clear of my own mind
on what constitutes pragmatism
and what separates it from epistemology, from empiricism.
I've thought about various tenets
held by various card-carrying pragmatists,
James, Dewey, Perce.
And they seem to be far enough from each other.
At least as far from one another
as any of them from some non-pragmatists,
as far as they're usually classified.
So I've never considered myself a pragmatist.
And that's where that misleading paragraph
at the end of Two Dogs was makes all the difference.
Where I'm picking up Carnop's phrase
that he applied to his frameworks
as being purely pragmatic,
unlike the rest of science, which is empirical.
And where I say, well, yes, I agree with Carnop
about the character of what he's calling the framework.
Of what he's calling the framework,
but of course I'm questioning the difference
between the framework and the rest of science.
And I'm saying that it's just that my pragmatism
is more through or going, I would apply it across the board.
But that's, as it turned out, was an unfortunate way
of putting it, I was just using his word.
I have a post of pragmatism, it's just that I've wondered
just what is distinctive about it.
And so I've never considered myself a pragmatist.
You mentioned Carnop's notion of framework.
One difference between you and Carnop
that come over and over again in various guises in the years
is your attitude toward natural language
as opposed to constructed language.
Carnop almost never wants to deal with natural language.
He always wants to define his notions
only for constructed languages,
where you always seem to want to pull him back
into consideration of what languages people actually speak.
Yes, yes, because I think of those constructions
as superstructures for one or another particular,
generally local, temporary purpose.
And I think of axiom or postulate as a,
in effect an indexical indicator word,
namely something relative to the particular project
of pedagogy that one's engaged in.
Here's the way he's organizing this law
that he wants the reader to master.
He's putting it in this order
and deducing these from those.
Somebody might find an even more efficient way
of doing it the other end too,
and that there's nothing intrinsic about those things.
The artificial language,
of course, if one thinks primarily
in terms of artificial languages,
then there's no problem about analyticity,
that what's analytic is the axioms and their consequences.
So what is the point of artificial language?
Well, it depends, of course, on what it's used for,
but at one point I presented this artificial example,
a positivist, a logical positivist named Ixman.
I thought of that now.
Ixman is making some point about the meaning
of some metaphysics in which he,
some metaphysical, these things are meaningless,
and his argument is that you could have all of science
and all of our predictions and everything
without any of these metaphysical questions even coming in.
And to show this, at least with some examples,
he says, imagine a tribe,
a tribe of Martians who speak a language
of the following sort,
and then he sets up an artificial language.
He has to tell us a good deal about the syntax
and vocabulary, but just certain parts,
just the parts that are gonna make his point
at the point of this particular metaphysical sentence
that he's taking the props out from under.
So he lays down these particular traits of the language,
whenever these things,
there are these sentences when these are true,
these are true, and that's all he needs to make his point.
All right, there's an artificial language,
and there's a perfectly clear sense
in which we can say what's analytic and what isn't,
what's in the framework,
and what is empirical outside the framework,
namely what Ixman has laid down.
But what was the significance of his laying it down?
Well, in this example,
we know exactly what the significance was,
and it doesn't throw any light
on a more general notion of analytic.
And it's this sort of consideration
that has made me
empirical in my approach
or my criticism of these semantical notions.
Besides your naturalism or empiricism,
perhaps they're the same thing,
you've singled out as central doctrines of your philosophy,
what you call your extensionalism,
and also your skepticism about meaning.
Could you tell us something about what these doctrines are
and how they relate to one another?
Well, essentialism is what's involved in saying that
classes that have the same members,
everything that's true of a class
is true of a class that has the same members as that class.
In that sense, therefore,
they are just one class, not two.
And that's extensionalism,
the core of it, that's the law of extensionality.
In an extensional language,
any two predicates are interchangeable
without, if they are true of the same objects,
interchangeable without disturbing the truth value
of the sentence in which they occur.
So that for an extensional language,
therefore, there's no difference
between a property and a class.
Properties are identical for such a theory,
such a language, if and only if they have the same,
if and only if they're true of the same things.
Therefore, you might as well call them classes, and I do.
And thus, I don't recognize properties.
Well, that's really the whole of essentialism.
But when, good Lord, I mean of extensionalism,
but an important consequence of it is
that there's no difficulty in an extensionalist language
or an extensional language,
we can say, no problem about the
substitutivity of identity.
That is to say that if two terms are names of the same thing,
two singular terms are names of the same thing
and nothing else, you can put one for the other
in any context anywhere,
and again, the truth will be undisturbed.
It's hard to make sense really of that law failing
if the things really are identical.
But when you get away from extensional context,
that does seem continuously to be threatened.
And that's one of the practical virtues
of trying to maintain a completely extensional theory.
Could you explain how this extensionalist position,
denial are any properties over and above classes?
How that relates to your skepticism about meaning?
It relates in this way.
It's not enough to warrant the skepticism,
not in itself altogether,
but it does relate in this way
that pretty good that are two of the same things,
still may or may not have the same meaning.
So it's a, so sameness of meaning
is a distinction that goes beyond
sameness of extension,
sameness of objects denoted.
I wanted to ask about properties in the fully
austere ontology where we just have classes
of four tuples of real numbers.
Well, there properties as traditionally conceived
aren't recognized, but then nor are I suppose
tables and mountains fuzzy blurred objects
as normally conceived recognized.
But still I sense that you're more sympathetic
to tables and mountains than you are to properties.
One of you would say why?
Yes, one has to settle for their fuzziness
since all empirically learned terms are vague
that way on their edges at least.
And we can't do without them.
And the way I'm inclined to accommodate them,
however, is by taking as my theoretical ontology
objects that are not fuzzy.
And it would mean that any of indefinitely many
distinct from one another,
mutually distinct bodies, real bodies could be
identified with that table.
It would make no difference in all applications
of our scientific theory.
But from the theoretical point of view,
we would consider ourselves to be talking about
one of that multitude and not all of them.
Well, as for properties, I can understand
the antipathy to properties particularly
if properties are seen as related to extensions
as sense to reference using Frager's terminology
because properties would come under the scope
of skepticism about meaning in that case.
What about the alternative conception of properties
where properties are thought of as lying
in between a fragrance sense and extension?
How do you feel about admitting those to your ontology?
No, I'm against it.
My objection is again,
I'm just over the principle of individuation,
of what I would want would be an explanation of clear one,
of just when to say of property A and property B
in that sense that they're the same property.
And you're skeptical about that.
I don't know any way to do it.
I'm supposing the scientists were more certain
that they needed properties than they were of any account
they could offer you just now
of the individuation conditions for properties.
And so they just set that as a research project.
Would that be an okay way to proceed?
Yes, it would, it would.
And it seems to be the way people do proceed.
Well, it would, yes, in order to proceed that way,
of course, they would have to be thinking
in terms of the particular, to me very mysterious,
situations where they felt they couldn't do without them.
And then that's what they'd be doing
in their continuing investigation.
That would be to try to sharpen,
define some concept that would serve
that purpose and that could be appropriately
then be called properties.
The situation could be worse still.
The familiar situation in, of course,
in theoretical physics, notably,
is to introduce a new term for a technical purpose
without giving any definition at all, any clear definition.
The names for the elementary particles
without exception are in that status.
They're not defined.
We're told a lot of things about them enough
so that one can get on.
And conceivably, if there was something
that might appropriately be called properties
that seem to be needed in science,
they might even be brought in that way.
And we would learn to put up with them
by mastering all the things
that can usefully be said about them,
even though everyone was at a loss to define them.
That I'd, I'd face it, that would be, of course,
what one always wishes for something clearer
and more elegant, but you,
but nature gets in there sometimes and prevents it.
I wonder whether there'd be another point
at which properties might need to come in.
Those who see events as the terms in causal relations
are often driven to say something a little bit more,
which is that some of the properties of an event
are causally efficacious, as it's said,
other properties of the event not.
And just to be able to say that,
on the face of it seems to be a matter
of quantifying over properties.
Yes, well, the way I handle that one
is that I take the events as extensional.
And in fact, I do, in general,
think of a physical object as the,
in the most general sense, as the content
of some portion of space-time.
It needn't be a continuous portion at all.
It could be scattered.
It could be sugar, for instance,
of, as an object for me,
is a single physical object.
It's all the sugar in the world, past, present, future.
Or, of course, one could equally just identify it
with the portion of space-time that it takes up.
That's purely a verbal difference at this point,
it seems to me.
And I think of events as physical objects,
in that sense, and as extensional.
And then the question arises that the question is you raised.
Here you have an event of,
well, let's see, I remember Davidson had an example
that brought this out.
If I could, here's some sort of a contrivance
that's
of
rotating, that's right, a heating up.
And the heating up causes a bit of ice to melt
and the immediate environment, as we say,
the heating up caused that.
There's the property in a broad sense.
But the heating up, in this case, and the rotating,
are inseparable.
And so what I would say is, yes, so far as this,
that although it's strange, strange usage,
and after all, I'm not doing philosophy of ordinary language,
but rather I prefer to be doing these things
in the spirit of mathematicians who will bring in new symbols
and new terms just in order to clarify what they're doing
or make it simpler and easier to follow.
And as far as I can see, it would fit all the purposes
of science to make the following unidiomatic departure
and say that, yes, that time, the spinning melted the ice.
The spinning of the event, the spinning of that wheel
melted the ice because the heating of the wheel
and the spinning of the wheel were both what the wheel was
doing, was the state of the wheel.
No harm because the fact remains that our general law,
that nearby heating melts ice, stands,
and there's no suggestion of a law that some nearby spinning
melts ice.
I suppose you'd be unlucky if all the spinnings were
heating and all the heatings were spinning.
Yes, well, that would pose a problem which scientists
would be eager to get into, just why is that, but quite.
So you're not inclined to go down the path of saying
that the heating which is a spinning, on this occasion,
causes the ice to melt, causes quay heating the ice to melt,
although it doesn't cause quay spinning the ice to melt.
That's the point we should appeal to some, I think.
Yes, well, that was all to some, I can imagine.
Oh, yes, so that would be a good day-to-day vernacular way
of doing it, despite of the non-vernacular status of quay.
But I wouldn't, because that brings in concepts
that I don't think we need and that I find
it clear to avoid.
I'm going to quit while I'm at it, I think.
About ontology, you share with Carnap
certain basic predilection for wanting
to rob certain questions of their force.
For example, the question, what is an ordered pair really?
Now, Carnap, one of, I think, his main motivation
is to make sure that those sorts of questions don't make sense.
And he has this elaborate notion of framework
and what's in a framework, what's outside a framework that
does that work for him.
So how do you rob that kind of question?
Well, I think I'd agree with Carnap, not framework.
No, but that's right, but I would agree with his conclusion.
I think the trouble with this is that we're using a term that
hasn't been sufficiently, it hasn't been either defined
or sufficiently described, to cover the particular circumstance
that we're questioning, so that in that sense,
it's a meaningless question.
But as you've said, there is no entity without identity,
so you have to do something.
Yes, but which entity is it?
Of course, that begs the question again,
but I don't see how there's any dodging that one.
The ordered pair can be defined serviceably
in any number of ways.
And there are several ways that have come into the literature,
and it doesn't matter which ones you use,
just so you can prove the basic law of the ordered pair.
That x, y is identical with z, w if and only if x
is identical with z and y with w.
And so for practical purposes, the meaning of ordered pair
is just that.
And then in order for the sake of it,
and commonly, we can leave it at that in practice and do.
And there's a corresponding situation,
well-known in the case of saying what numbers are,
what the positive integers are, of different ways of doing it,
all of which are perfectly good, and it doesn't matter which.
And then there are two ways of looking at that situation,
in both the case of the pair and the numbers.
Namely, one way is, yes, here we've
got this ambiguous term ordered pair,
or the many kinds of ordered pair.
But I think that philosophically, the more straightforward way
is, in this case, elimination.
And say, now we've shown, here we've defined ordered pair.
We're shown we're not going to need
to assume, as an irreducible notion,
the notion of ordered pair, because we've
got other notions here, which, if we put them together
in the right combination, we'll do the same trick.
So let's do that.
And there are no such things as pairs.
Do the same thing about numbers.
There are no such things as the positive integers.
We're just talking about these sets.
But then it's awkward to keep, we need a name, a short name,
for these little constructions that we are serving as stand-ins.
For the pair.
And so what better name, since we've already
freed the term ordered pair.
It doesn't refer to anything anymore.
Those are gone.
Let's reuse it.
It's another kind of economy.
So that's the way I suggest looking at these situations.
Is there, do you see any relationship
between the particular situation one
is in here, and thinking about what numbers are
or what an ordered pair is, and your general doctrine
of ontological relativity?
That's, yeah, interesting thought.
I hadn't.
Well, yes, yes.
Yes, there certainly is in very broad terms.
The point about ontological relativity
was that there are certain functions,
tagging functions, you might say, which
are various so-called objects we're performing.
But serving, really, as far as the logical structure
or even the empirical support and checkpoints
of our theory is concerned, mirror nodes
in the logical structure.
We can reshuffle these objects, put in any others that
are in one one correlation with them.
They deserve that purpose just as well.
And so if we had some systematic way of naming these nodes,
neutral names, we could just put those in
and just get rid of all these other names for objects.
However, we have no systematic way of naming those nodes.
The only thing we do is name them in our unsystematic way.
And so we have these various terms for these various objects.
And we talk about rabbits and this and that.
But in talking about rabbits, cats, et cetera,
we might just as well be talking about cat compliments
and rabbit compliments and the like.
So there's good parallel.
Would the following, though, be something of a difference?
In my own language, of course, using my own language,
I can't use any other one.
And I can think to myself, well, I
wonder whether the number one is such and such a set
or whether it is such and such a different set.
Which of these identity statements should I believe?
And it seems to me to be a genuine question.
But if I contrast that with the question,
I wonder whether my word or my linguistic expression,
the number one, really does refer to the number one.
That doesn't seem in the same way as if it could be
a genuine question for me.
It seems a trivial matter of what the word refers to means
that my expression, the number one, does, for me,
pick out the number one.
Well, but then that raises the question
in that refers to the number one and what sense of number one.
In the case of abstract objects like the number one,
that seems to me that ontological relativity doesn't even
it doesn't even need to seem counterintuitive.
Frege, I seem to remember, raised the question or mentioned
the question, or the possibility, what is the number one?
It could be Julius Caesar.
Doesn't matter.
He went at least that far into ontological relativity.
And oh, and then Ramsey with his,
what have come since his day to be called Ramsey sentences,
rather brings out that point, again, for abstract objects.
It seems fairly intuitive that even
that abstract objects are brought in there just
as stopping points or to bring things together.
It wouldn't matter.
Well, of course, we know it.
It doesn't matter how we go on and artificially
define these numbers as long as we get the behavior out of them,
the properties that make them useful in application.
And formerly, those properties are just
the properties of a regression, a sequence
of the kind called a progression.
But there's an example that we use of two physicists
who at a time out, did I have to do this before?
I know I mentioned it, but I'm not sure I did it,
about the neutrino and the physicists.
I know you didn't.
Good.
Well, yes, this, I think, brings out some of the spirit of it.
There's a crisis in physics, and something
has to be done in revising the theory or supplementing it.
And one physicist suggested maybe we
needed a new particle.
In fact, two physicists arrived at that idea
of introducing a new particle with certain properties
that will help clear up the paradox.
And one of them brings in a particle that has some rest mass,
and the other one brings in a particle that has no rest mass.
But they both apply the same word, neutrino.
And it seems to me it presents no problem
to say that there's clearly no meaning to the question
whether, A, they are talking about the same particle,
but disagree in its properties, or B,
they're talking about different particles.
One has a rest mass, the other hasn't,
but they happen to have given it the same name.
No difference.
And well, I think that applies, again,
to the example of the numbers, yes, the numbers,
and to the example of the ordered pairs,
that one has certain services that,
in case the ordered pair is, I think, particularly
conspicuous this way, because ordered pair isn't even
a common sense notion to the extent that 1, 2, 3 are.
And all that's wanted is something
that is going to carry the individuality of both x and y,
and not vice versa.
And some further entity, then, in addition
to the x and the y, anything will do.
And then they cast it out and find, yeah,
here's something it'll do.
There's a little class of two members
that's easy to describe.
Not just the class of the members x and y,
but a little more complicated.
Someone else comes up with an equally simple one,
but a different one, and that's a situation
where it doesn't matter.
You have this function, that function
in the sense of service, not in the mathematical sense,
to be performed, and anything will do in the pinch.
And then the sweeping theory, finally,
of ontological relativity is that that's
the way with all reference.
But what makes it, I'd say, counter-intuitive to all of us
is when it's not a question of abstract objects anymore,
like ordered pairs and numbers, but sensible objects.
So this is where one has to consider, and keep in mind,
that the sensory associations are undisturbed
in all this reshuffling of objects
in the course of ontological relativity,
one-to-one reinterpretations.
The sensory connotations remain.
And when a body ends up being identified or supplanted,
as you prefer, either way, by a class of quadruples of numbers,
the sensory qualities of that body,
the qualities by which you learned it
through ostention or whatever, carry over
to that class of quadruples of numbers.
So it's a matter of shifting one's emphasis
from the object to the sentence, ultimately
to the observation sentences, as far as their objects
that we've learned by ostention, objects whose names we've
learned by ostention.
And those go along unaffected.
And what the theory of ontological relativity
brings out is just that really the entity, the object hood,
the object hood is not really what matters here.
Two things that do matter are, one,
all this bundle of sensory qualities
to put the thing in mentalistic terms,
all the association when it comes to a neural league
with the sensory input.
That's one of the two things that matter.
And the other thing that matters is the role it plays,
the service it performs as a node in the theoretical structure,
the logical structure of the scientific theory.
And then what the thesis of ontological relativity
brings out is these are two separate purposes
and can be separated, even be separated ontologically,
in that the ontology can be reshuffled at will
to within one to one for the one.
And on the other hand, the sensory input stays put.
In your long career as a teacher and professor,
you must have encountered a great number of students
who have gone on some within philosophy
and some outside of philosophy to pursue careers.
Does anyone in particular, or do any of them in particular,
stand out in your mind as?
Oh, yes, indeed.
Of course, of the earlier ones, Donald Davidson,
then in logic, there have been a few, certainly not so much
of my students who have gone successfully
into computer theory and the like.
But philosophers, later generations,
of course, I think of Doug Finfield Estelle and Roger
Gibson, I'm mentioning ones that have gone on,
carrying on more or less my point of view.
