Thank you very much. Okay. So it's time to start. So it's my great pleasure to introduce Professor
Gerald Toof Toof. So before going, so let me introduce about Professor Gerald Toof Toof.
I'm quite briefly. So he was born in 1946. And interestingly, he has two daughters
and five grandchildren, according to his CV. And also, you can find, if you Google and Toof Toof,
you can find his Wikipedia page. So as you can see, so I will not share this screen because
already Professor Toof Toof's screen was shared. So his main contribution is three-fold. One is
gauge theories in elementary particle physics. So as all of you know, and renormalizability
and in Yang-Mil theory. And so as a result of his work, I mean, he got, he became a Nobel
laureate in 1999. So with his advisor, Professor Feltman. So he also contributed to his large
expansion and also instanton calculation. So Toof Toof Polyakov Monopole. And simply, you know,
you may be familiar with some Toof anomaly matching in various areas. His other contribution is
quantum gravity and black holes. So yeah, he's also a pioneer for the introduction of a holographic
principle with learning of the source kind. So I think today he will talk about fundamental
aspects of quantum mechanics. So according to this Wikipedia page, Toof Toof has deviating views
on physical interpretation of quantum theory, particularly in 2016, he published a book
length exposition of his ideas, which according to Toof Toof has encountered
some mixed reactions. I don't know what in this. So yeah, I think, I mean, this will
give us very, I mean, great opportunity. Basically, you can ask any questions during his talk. So yeah,
so please start Professor Toof. Thank you very much for your kind invitation and your introduction.
I will speak slowly if, for whatever reason, you don't understand or you want me to repeat
something, just interfere and ask me to do so. So yes, this talk is on a way of looking at
quantum mechanics, which for a long time was not popular. And I'm hoping to bring some change in
that and explain to you how I think about quantum mechanics, which is indeed not exactly how normally
people talk and think about it. So we are used to this classical theory, planets and stars,
billiards balls and so on. And we know exactly the effective laws of nature by which they move.
And we call these laws of nature deterministic, which really means that there's only one truth
and the truth is described by the coordinates of all the objects that you're talking about.
And the way these coordinates evolve in time is given by very precise classical equations.
However, on the atomic scale, this is no longer true, it seems. So at the atomic scale,
the only laws we can write down are quantum mechanical laws, and they seem to be not deterministic.
So even if you know, as well as you can ever think, dream of the initial states of all the
atoms in a certain process, then you will not find that the laws that tell these how these
atoms evolve will be referring only to the reality that you see. But there's something else going on
you could call it a hidden variable. And there's something not right with the deterministic
viewpoint. So it so happens that it is about for a hundred years now that physicists know
what to do. And they call it the Copenhagen Convention or Copenhagen Interpretation.
And the answer to the questions is, don't ask any question. Just follow the rules. Do the
calculation. Here is the Schrödinger equation. If you use that equation, you will find everything
that you want to know. And there is not more to be found. That is, in short, the Copenhagen viewpoint.
And it made a lot of sense. So people who work with quantum mechanics could use that rule.
They found that they could, and all circumstances compute what they want to know. And the theory
works as well as you can ever expect it to be. But when particles move, say, in beams towards
each other and they collide, the collision is precisely described by quantum mechanical rules.
But the theory never predicts you exactly in which direction the particles will scatter.
But the particles will scatter randomly in all directions. In some directions more than other.
But you can't say they'll go in any specific direction. So that is the situation today.
And to some people, including myself, this is not quite the ideal situation. It is
literally like the situation you have when you predict the weather. So when you predict the weather,
you can say with certain probabilities what the weather will be tomorrow and the day after.
Even what the weather will be weeks or months after now, you will write down a probability
distribution. But you cannot say exactly what the weather will be. However, in case of the weather,
at least what you can say, we know which laws are responsible. They are just too difficult for us
to solve. Because every single atom in the clouds and not every single cloud and every
status of the weather at every point on the planet Earth must be given. And then in principle,
you should be able to predict the weather much more precisely than you can now. And the more
precise statements you can make about the initial state, the better the prediction becomes.
But for atoms, this is not the case. And according in particular to John Stuart Bell
and many others, aspects were actually did the experiment. They say, no, it doesn't work. You
cannot predict the future from what you know now. No matter how accurately you describe,
no matter what kind of data, it will not work. They give a so-called no-go theorem.
Now, when I hear people write down a no-go theorem, I know that they're just missing something,
because it hasn't happened before again and again, that someone writes something is impossible. You
can try it if you like, but this solution will not work. Then you know only one thing,
which is that the method used wasn't right. They didn't think of something. And the same thing here,
people who say that there is no way to interpret quantum mechanics in terms of deterministic
processes, then they haven't taken into account everything. And my bottom line will be now say
that precisely, if you have a deterministic theory, it must be deterministic all the way.
So everything must be deterministic. You should not allow for any chance to occur. As soon as you
do that, the theory doesn't work anymore and everything becomes unpredictable. So that will
be the bottom line. I say it now just to give you a sketch of what I'm going to talk about.
And there are clues that you can use to understand in which way direction to search
for a better theory. And one clue is given. Oh, I should say, if you don't understand me well,
I can imagine it's a long distance, but it signals now to travel. If you don't understand me for
that reason, please shout and I'll try to talk lower or clearer. So I would hope that is clear.
So there is an interesting clue as to where to search for a better description of quantum
mechanics in terms of deterministic laws. And that is by considering an unstable particle.
In particle physics, also in nuclear physics, there are many particles or states of particles
and states of atoms which are unstable. The outer certain amount of time the atom decays
by emitting a particle or a particle can decay by splitting in several other more stable particles,
because those are unstable particles. And the unstable particles are known to obey an exponential
decay law. The exponential law says that at all moments when you look at such a particle,
the probability that it will decay right now stays the same. That probability can be very small,
it can be very big. The particle can have an average lifetime of only nanoseconds or less,
or the particle can have an average lifetime of billions of years or more, but they all share
the same property. The exponential decay law is described by an exponential curve.
How can you square that with determinism? Suppose that you have a particle, but you imagine the
particle to contain a clock. The clock is ticking and the clock ticks from 100 to 0,
100, 99, 98, 97, and so on. It goes all the way to 0. And when the clock says 0, the particle
bam and it decays. That is not an exponential law, but such laws are usually not found for
decaying particles. So particles don't carry a clock, they decay spontaneously with a probability
that remains the same. And the question you can then ask is, can you square this with determinism?
And the answer is absolutely yes. By itself, such a decay would be a normal thing to expect
in a deterministic theory. But you have to remember one thing. The state we call the vacuum state,
which is a state with no particle presence at all, that state is not empty. There's lots of
things going on. In fact, what we call vacuum looks more like white noise. Think of a television
set that is not tuned in to any broadcasting station. So the television set just gives you a
screen which is blinking in all states. We call that vacuum fluctuations. And if you assume now
that the vacuum state actually contains very, very many fluctuating data, which fluctuates
essentially randomly, then you can say, okay, a particle fills those data, only when the surrounding
data or the data surrounding a particle take a very special value, the particle suddenly decays.
And that is exactly the way you can describe a decay in particle. And that picture works
excellently, qualitatively. But now the question is, okay, if you have this insight, then what
is that law? What is the special state that the vacuum has to be in for this particular particle
to decay and for other particles to decay, all different particle types decay at their own
preferred rate. But the question is, how do we fill in the details of such a theory?
And question? Yes. Yeah, Janet. So let me check out whether I understand the statement.
So based on some pay us or some pay us mechanism, you will derive some H bar and some uncertainty
principle will have some fundamental principle of quantum mechanics or some that.
Yes. So what you say is exactly right. My aim is to derive such a law. Now I have to add immediately
to get the details right is extremely difficult. And I have not even come close to doing that.
So if you think I'm, I'm having a ready full prepared theory, and you can switch it on right
now to compute anything you like. No, I have not done that. But what I can do is explaining
how such a theory. Now it should be that. Okay, thank you. I hear some noises. I don't know what
they come from. Okay. So the prototype and the way to think about such a theory is called a cellular
automaton. The cellular automaton is you have to imagine a grid. This grid would fill up the
entire universe. The sizes of the grid are extremely small, smaller than anything we have
to be able to study in physics today. You can make a combination of the fundamental constants of
nature, the speed of light, Planck's constant and Newton's gravity constant to find a unit of
length, which is extremely small, even compared to particles that you know. And it is probably
that scale at which we have to think about which we have to think to understand this
cellular automaton. And what it basically is is on the grid, at every site of the grid,
there are certain data indicated here in this picture, in terms of triangles, spheres, or other
object in this picture gives them different colors, just to indicate that every single
lattice site can be in a certain state. I call that a state, but this time it is a completely
classical state. Some people had the same idea about the cellular automaton, but then they
fill in quantum equations for the cellular automaton. I'm saying no, those won't eventually be
quantum equations, they will be classical equations. Very important to remember, that is my statement,
but I have not yet or not at all been able to specify the details of these states. It is probably
very, very hard to do so. To do that right, you have to know a lot more about the standard model,
the standard model that describes the particles today as best as we can using Schrodinger equations,
using quantum mechanics. But eventually I'm saying no, the correct equations should be
without quantum mechanics. If you can write out such equations, you will be able to be in a state
that you don't understand much more. And I claim there will be an important outcome
of these investigations, which is a statement that yes, in principle, you should be able to
calculate the constants of nature in the standard model. Today we know that the standard model
contains more than 20 constants of nature. Those constants of nature have to be measured and put
in by hand in theory for the theory to work. We have no way of computing these constants.
My claim is, if we understand the problem I'm talking about, if we understand that right,
then we can actually calculate those constants and we can have something to check the theory
with experiments, because those constants will be computable and we can compare them with what has
been measured. There will be 20 measuring points, which will be able, which should allow us to check
the theory, but I am not even close to that kind of stage in formulating this theory.
So my claim is now that every choice on cellular automaton, every choice for its evolution law,
will give me a quantum theory. One can compute what will happen when particles collide, at least
if you know exactly what to look at. But that is an extremely difficult question to look at,
but any theory described by any cellular automaton, a local cellular automaton, so the interactions
should be interactions between neighbors only, then it will become a quantum field theory and in
principle you should be able to compute all the kinds of particles that are there and how they
interact. It works in two directions. I can also start with a theory such as the standard model
and in principle derive what cellular automaton will generate this behavior. I add the words
in principle, in practice it is very difficult to do so, but at least I know what the questions are
and all we have to do now is try to answer the questions. So with respect to this theory,
we are very close to quantum field theory before the 1970s when we started to learn
how to fill in the holes. I don't know what the rules are. So let me begin with a prototype of a
quantum model that explains to you how to think and how to work in such a theory.
This what you see here on the left of this picture is a chain of states. I label them one, two, three
all the way to some integer n. If you look carefully and are able to count, you find in
this example n is 11, but n could be any number. It could be very large, it could be very small,
but this is the prototype of models I'm looking at. In such a model, the object can be in n different
states. Different states, all these n, which in this model looks like 11, 11 different states
tell you exactly the classical states this model can be in. So I'm discussing here a classical model
and the law of evolution for this classical model is extremely simple. It just says there's a clock
on the background somewhere, the clock is ticking and at every tick of the clock,
whenever your particle were in position number zero, it goes to position number one.
If the particle is in position number one, and at the next beat of the clock, it will go to position
number two, and so on until it arrives at the position n minus one. When the clock ticks again,
it doesn't go to n, it goes to zero. So it's circular. This model is a circular model and the
evolution law is indicated by an integer k, k running from zero to 10 in this example,
and the evolution law can be written down in a notation that looks like quantum mechanics,
but it isn't quantum mechanics because I'm not using any Schrodinger equation at this point.
I just used the law of evolution, classical evolution, and the classical evolution, I can
represent that by a matrix and 11 by 11 matrix saying this matrix contains zeros and ones on every
row and every column, there are n minus one zeros and there's one entry, that's one. This
matrix acts on a vector k, which has zeros everywhere, except where the particle is sitting,
there it has a one. So you can imagine how this works mathematically. This is acting
in this matrix on the state where k has a certain integer value from zero to 10,
then it gives you the next value, which in this example is just zero, it's one to 11,
but 11th one is replaced by zero again, so that this goes round and round and round.
We also say mathematically that u acting on k is k plus one modulo n and this matrix here
is written as if it were quantum mechanics in terms of zeros and ones, but even though it's
classical, you can still look at it as a matrix and you can try to find a matrix called h such
that u is e to the minus i h times delta t, where delta t is the time it takes for the clock to
give its next beat. This is actually mathematically an easy exercise, I'll show you very briefly how
it's done, but if you have such an h, you can also write down the state psi and say d dt of psi is
minus i h of psi, where h is just the matrix that solves this equation and if you have this
equation, you can check that this is indeed obeyed by the state at every integer value,
at every value of time that is an integer multiple of the beats of the clock, you will
find exactly the state that your system will be in. This is a way to write down classical evolution
in a quantum notation, it is only notation, it's nothing more than that. So at this point this is
this how you turn a classical theory into a quantum theory by just doing this mathematics.
In practice the mathematics, for anybody with some practice of mathematics finds this very easy,
this is what we call the discrete Fourier transform or the fast Fourier transform,
where you're not integrating but you're just making a sum over 11 entries. Here are all the
11 states are integrated by k being 0 to 10, this is an exponential e to the 2 pi i times k times n
divided by capital N and you have to sum this of all values of k, then you get a new quantum
like state I call n, but this quantum state now is no longer describing any particle in any position,
it describes these things as a superposition. The reason for doing this is well eventually we
want to understand how quantum mechanics works, but right now it's also a convenient way to solve
this equation, but to write down the general solution in the closed terms, the general solution is
that these are the eigenstates of the operator u, those eigenstates I can write down as e to the minus i
2 pi times times n little n divided by big n and then it is very easy to find the corresponding
matrix h. So to find the matrix h you have to do this calculation and you'll find n states which
are the eigenstates of this u and you'll find n different eigenvalues for u, all you have to do
now is write them as e to the minus i, e every time and then you get the the way the matrix h
that tells you how these states evolve. So this what I write down here is just a mathematical
trick, it is not particularly difficult to solve them, but you find there are n values for this
this number little n, the capital n values, little n is the indicating which bar you're looking at,
these you can regard as energy levels, this state has n energy levels, they are equally spaced as it
turns out to be, so this is the solution of the Schrodinger equation for this model, you'll find
11 different states at all at the same distance from each other and by the time you reach number
11 you're at the highest possible state, you can write down more eigenstates which actually are
mathematically identical to the previous ones, so you have to stop in this model after 11 steps
and you'll find this quantum mechanical system. There's one interesting mathematical question
you can ask, you can ask what happens if it takes number n very very large, then you get what I call
the continuum limit, this is the same picture as I had before but now I take the continuum limit,
the particle can be at any state on this circle, so now it becomes a more mathematically advanced
way of writing things, the particle can be anywhere, the sum I had before changes into a loop integral
going around this loop and here you get the sum again but now the sum goes all the way to infinity,
you go through the same mathematics, you find the same answer, you find equidistant
elementary quantum states for the system but now you get an infinite sequence of states
set at zero and they're all equally spaced all the way to infinity, now you might if you have
some experience in quantum mechanics you might immediately make an important remark, say this
looks exactly like the energy level levels of the harmonic quantum oscillator, so the quantum
harmonic oscillator has exactly the same states, so what I can also say is that this thing going
around in circles now is a classical model that is mathematically identical to the harmonic oscillator
in the quantum harmonic oscillator because the quantum harmonic oscillator has these
level energy levels also, actually you can say every state the quantum oscillator can be in,
I can map them to a state for this classical theory, except that most states you usually look at in
the harmonic oscillator are superpositions of states of this thing but the superpositions don't
mean so much, if you want you can say that these two position coefficients represent probabilities,
if you want, if you don't want you can just say these are superpositions period and my model
allows me to make these superpositions, there's no further physical consequence with that,
it doesn't change the model at all, but you can say I can now also treat the model using
probabilities by taking that the squares of the coefficients of your superpolysis states
will represent probabilities, that is your choice, it doesn't matter mathematically this is all
equivalent to doing the same thing. Question? I think I didn't understand this example,
so where is stochastic some white noise, I mean why is this model different from
quantum mechanical model? It is not different from the quantum mechanical model, sorry to
not, but I have not yet reached the point of dealing with stochastic effects, there's nothing
stochastic in this model, it is completely deterministic as you can see, so I started
a completely deterministic model and I'll introduce later what I mean by stochastic,
because in the very end you're totally right, in the very end you want the theory
that reproduces stochastic properties of quantum mechanics, absolutely right, but I haven't reached
the point yet. So let me consider some coupled harmonic oscillator theme, so we know classically
in classical mechanics how to solve and, but in this case we also have some matrix
vision, but then still I don't, it is just a quantum mechanics model.
Your question, I understand your question, your question is very well posed and it's absolutely
right, I have not yet reached the stage to discuss that, so I am not discussing pathology,
but I will and what it will look a little bit like is next picture I was just talking about to show.
What you see here is many harmonic oscillators and so, but with different periods, some take a
long time to go around, some go very fast, so, but I still have a clock that beats at one,
with one beat at a time, but now I can start in any one of these yellow boxes, I can start here,
I can start here, and any of these, they're more than n now, boxes, and the rule is again clear,
the rule is you make one step in this chain, but you see you can return to the same value you were
at before without having reached any of these, so if you are here in this circle here, you'll
stay in this loop forever, if you're in this small loop, you stay in a small loop forever,
if you're in any of these loops, you stay in the same loop, so this is the next step,
the next step is you can say a more realistic model of the universe will be that you have a
choice, you can be in different states of this oscillator, which each have different
periodicities, so this is simply the next step, a little bit closer to what you are talking about,
because you were thinking of having an infinite sequence of harmonic oscillators in an infinite
chain, well that will be the next step again, to add infinity here, say I don't have
six different models, I have infinitely many different models that my system can be in,
then what? It still is not stochastic, I have not introduced probabilities at all,
I'm saying however, you can if you want, introduce probabilities if you want to,
then you can say I have a chance down here, there's another chance I'm here, another chance I'm here,
and if I know these chances today, I know what these chances are tomorrow and the day after,
all the time, the chances will always be the same distribution, because the rest of the model is
completely deterministic, so this is how I will talk about her models, but I'm not going, I'm
trying to go very slow, and so I haven't yet reached stage of making infinitely many possible,
but I will come to that, so it's a very important question, so right now you see that every single
model of this kind has a certain sequence of eigenstates, so this thing here has only six
eigenstates, this thing here has eight, the one inside is only three, and here this is a
12, and this is two, and so on, so all the different oscillators are there, now if you have
in such a world, what are the energy levels in this world? Well, I have six different oscillators,
therefore I have, or I think it's, no it's five here, sorry I'm five different oscillators here,
so every oscillator here has its own sequence of states, there is this little thing with only
two states has a very widely separated, the big oscillator which has 12 states here has a more
closely separated here, so there's this sequence, there's that sequence, there's that sequence,
and so on, so now I see that if you have a model where you, whenever you go around and you reach
the same state where you had before, without having hit all the others yet, which you can also be
in starting any of these other things, you have this situation that the energy levels form a more
complicated pattern, what I can do next is put all these patterns together, so what I'm doing next
is say, well I squeeze all these, and if you look carefully, when you squeeze all these together
into one sequence of energy levels, you find it looks a lot more complicated now, actually this
looks a little bit more realistic, maybe the energy level spectrum of our universe is as complicated
as this, so when you see an energy spectrum as complicated as this, you might have the idea,
let's try to disentangle them, maybe what I'm looking at is just a whole collection of these
equally spaced energy levels, in that case my model is actually one of these, so I hope this is
very clear because this is an important next step that I've been making, I put a model, I take a model
where, where you don't have a single row of states which have very many of them, then the energy
spectrum starts to look like this, that's the short message that comes out of this exercise,
and you can go into more mathematical steps, however in all these cases the Hamiltonian
is periodic energy, if we go back to the previous state here, you look carefully that here you
encounter the same energy level as here, if you have a discrete clock, then this state here is
the same as that state there, and what I'm saying in this part of our theory, I have a ground state
which people can call the vacuum, but if you have a finite clock that makes sticks,
you also have the highest energy state, if you try to get higher, you encounter the original
energy states again and again and again, so there's not only a vacuum state, there's a state I call
the anti-vacuum, the anti-vacuum is the highest energy state, now it so happens that I've also
been investigating black hole physics, where at some point time turns around, so you're going to
a black hole, you're going to a region where time runs backwards compared to the time that's here,
so if time runs backwards, the energy levels also backwards, and so as well as the vacuum state
originally then becomes the anti-vacuum, the completely filled state, but Dirac encountered
such a situation in his theory of electrons, that you can have the vacuum state for electrons,
but you can also have a state where the whole system is completely filled with electrons,
and he called that the full state, but here I'm saying you can have the same thing with the vacuum,
there could be a completely filled state, which I call the anti-vacuum, I'm not going to use the
anti-vacuum very much in this talk, but later you can imagine if we want to do the mathematics
and want to extend our mathematical understanding as well as possible, you have to realize that
many of your models will contain an anti-vacuum besides of the vacuum, and as I said just before,
it's important in black holes, because in black holes time can switch to minus time and so on.
So all the models actually... Excuse me, could you tell me what is the essential difference
between the ontological states and the quantum states? There is some essential difference there?
There is no essential difference, mathematically you don't see the difference between quantum
mechanics and this, so mathematically I'm saying that the models I had before, this model, is a
deterministic model, because for every point here you know exactly which other point you write at,
but now I can take this deterministic model, I can diagonalize the evolution operator of this
model, and you get an energy spectrum for its eigenvalues that looks like this, and you have
to use this energy spectrum as if you are doing quantum mechanics. So what I'm saying now is,
this is neither classical nor quantum mechanics, it's a model that you can write down classically
in this notation, you can write down quantum mechanically in this notation. For a mathematical
point of view these models are identical, this model is that model, but I just wrote the energy
eigenstates of it, that's all I've done. My claim is this is all you can do in quantum mechanics,
if you do it right you will find that our universe is a model of this sort, but I didn't tell you
yet how to get this model when you see the universe, what you know of the universe today
is called the standard model of the elementary particles, that's the best way to describe the
model. If you add to that some theory of gravity you're done, but you have a difficulty as you know
with adding gravity to everybody's satisfaction in that model, so we don't know that, but we know
the standard model pretty well, and we can give any graded student the assignment, now derive
what the standard model looks in this notation. The graded student will probably come back empty
handed saying this question is too difficult for me, I don't know how to do it. No, I'm investigating
the question, it is very very difficult to do this, but in principle it should be possible,
because there's a lot of information in this line spectrum here, and I think that the information
is just a hidden way to inform that this is the actual reality we are looking at,
but it's important and please keep asking such questions first, so I'm saying right now there
is no difference between classical theories and quantum theories, but that's because I have no
excuse me, I have a question, yes, could you go back to the previous page?
Yes, okay, so here in deterministic cellular automata, can you jump from one for example in
the inner circle revolution to outer circle, among the different closed path?
Very good question again, not without making a change in the theory, you can make a change to
say if the model if the particle ends up here, it doesn't continue to the next one here, but it jumps
and what you can do is you can make the jump dependent on where the other particles are, so
if this particle sits here, and if this particle arrives here, then it jumps, if this particle
sits somewhere else, it does not jump, now I've made it fundamentally more complicated, it still
is very simple from a quantum mechanical point of view, but also then this would be the wrong
model, I could then rewrite the model and say now I have a very long periodic chain, but I still
may have others which are shorter, the model will still look like this, so mathematically speaking,
I haven't done very much, but again your question is well posed, but please keep it because I'm
actually going to do this kind of exercise explicitly, just to explain how to come closer
to a model of physics, so yes I'm going to do that, but you say, but I haven't done it yet,
it's again something that has we done with lots of care, as you might imagine.
One more question professor, if you come back again to the previous slide, does it mean that
when the particle goes in a certain circle, it jumps from one position to another is deterministic,
but if it jumps to another circle, it is random and we have to know what is probability.
No, no I'm not saying that, this model will always be deterministic, if I do as you say,
if I say it jumps randomly, then I've deserted, then I no longer have a deterministic theory,
and I am after finding deterministic theories, my claim is every deterministic theory has
basically this structure, because all I have to do is go on until I reach the point I've reached
before, that point does not sit here and you can clearly see, you can clearly see that because this
model is very small, if I take a very very big model, it's sometimes very hard to see,
but I go back to a point where I've been before, take the entire universe, the universe is not going
back to its Poincare cycle very quickly, so there we don't see this happening,
but in smaller models, you see the other certain amount of time, you go back to the same spot.
But how particle knows that it should jump to the next position in the circle,
rather than jump into another one? When clock ticking, what should particle do from one state
to another one? What the particle should do is written down in this picture, I can write down
in the equations if I want, I can say I have an operator U which contains 1s and 0s,
it contains a 1 that tells you where the particle is going, contains a 0 if the particle is not
going to that spot, period, there's nothing more than 1 and 0 on this matrix, I can regularize
that matrix, turn it into Australian equation, then that's the quantum model, there's no
stochasticity anywhere, so in this model, in this model, every particle has a very precisely
defined rule as to where it should go, it's only allowed to go to follow its line, it's not allowed
to jump, not at this stage, I am going to consider jumps however, but they're more technical
than what you think, and at this stage there's no jump and so there's no stochasticity,
but I can always introduce quantum superpositions of these states and then say whenever I'm in a
quantum superposition, I will stay in a quantum superposition forever, so both, if I have a position
superposition of two states, both states will evolve, but one will never come close to the other
or take over or something, no, you will always keep the same superposition, so superpositions are
relatively easy here, also handling probabilities is very easy in this model, you're not learning very
much forever, not at this stage, but I have to do some more steps to explain to you why how this
can be made much more resembling real quantum mechanics. Can I ask a question, does the system
have its own clock? Yes, so I do have a clock, but as you saw in one of the previous slides,
I can take the continuum limit, then everything goes with a very smooth clock as it were,
and you don't notice the presence of the clock anymore, it doesn't change very much in the physics,
because whether I have a circle without clocks or a circle that says tick, tick, tick, tick,
tick, it doesn't make too much difference mathematically. It looks as though each system
has its own independent clock. Yes, it has a clock, but you can now start to complain about
general relativity, and that's a very well taken observation that in general relativity it seems
there's no exterior clock, there's only an intrinsic clock that evolves into itself,
but you can try to define such an intrinsic clock, it's much more difficult to do, so yes, our land
into such difficulties, particularly when we introduce gravity, we have to ask this question
again and again and again, but you're too quick in asking this question, I'm not yet
anywhere close to studying it. So this is actually the question that you rather have been asking,
can we generate, can we mimic genuine quantum mechanics, the real quantum thing, like the real
Schrodinger equation for a particle in a box or something like that, can we do that? The answer is
yes, but it is not easy, so suppose that we want to understand the particle in a box or a particle
in a harmonic oscillator, well when the particle sits in a harmonic oscillator, yes, then we can
use exactly this one single circle, when a particle sits in a box, it hits against the walls, its
periodicity can vary and my situation now becomes a lot more complicated and then the question is
legitimate, can I turn this into a quantum model and the answer yes, but it's quite a bit more
complicated and now I'm going to add an ingredient that brings me back to ordinary quantum mechanics
in a much more imaginative way, I'm going to introduce a background, well originally that
was against the rule, but let's assume that the background also follows the rule, so the background
is deterministic, but in contrast with the rest of the theory it is very fast, so the background
has its own clock and that clock is much much faster than the clocks that are eventually interested in,
so that is like looking at a television screen with black noise, but the black noise is going as
fast as the electronics of the television set can follow, so you see so much blinking
that it looks like gray instead of black or white, it doesn't look black, it doesn't look white,
it looks gray because the blinking goes so fast that you cannot follow, now that is a theory that
already is going to look like quantum mechanics a lot more than what I had before, so now let's look
at that and then I'm going to look at the energy eigenstates of this system, there's quite a big
step you have to imagine, but this is a theory with fast fluctuating variables, I have to speed up
my talk a little bit because I want to reach the final stages, I'm not going very fast, so I'm going
to skip over some of these arguments, but as I said in this in this transparency there's a white
noise, it's going to be added to it, and now this is more like a genuine cellular automaton, if you
make an arbitrary cellular automaton, you have an arbitrary inclusion law, you'll see it blink
also very fast as if it has white noise in its vacuum state, this my claim is then you
really get quantum mechanics as you know it, including stochastic behavior, so what we have now
and this is very important are fast variables and have slow variables, that is the next
real step of sophistication in the theory that I need to make, so again I have energy levels,
so in principle this looks just like the models I had before, nothing changed except there's two
sets of energy levels, there are the slow energy levels which are now going to describe the quantum
theory I'm interested in which is here, this is a logarithmic scale for the energy levels,
so when I go higher up I get energy levels hundreds of times higher than here and there are very many
of those, they all also equally separated, but the separation between these energy levels is much
much bigger than these, now imagine this theory and now say this is real quantum mechanics,
suppose our world looks like this, what happens if I apply thermal dynamics, thermal dynamics
hasn't been mentioned yet, but in thermal dynamics you can say that if the thing is in somewhat near
a thermal equilibrium then I'll get equipartition, the states with high energy are suppressed by
small Boltzmann factors, the Boltzmann factors for all these states are so small that at first
approximation I can neglect them all, then I only get the slow energy spectra and the slow energy
spectra will obey my rules of being possible to combine them to make this thing deterministic,
my claim is on the following, the world as you know it has an energy spectra more or less arranged
like this, there are very fast fluctuating variables which for that reason have very wide
separated energy levels which are all not occupied because of thermal dynamics, the Boltzmann factors
are too small, we can also compare the situation with a with the standard model which contains
particles that are too heavy for us to see, in the standard model there are perhaps Higgs particles
or other particles that we have not yet understood because the LHC has not been able to reach those
particles, those particles are always sitting in the ground state not moving at all only making
slight changes in the model, so now I'm going to say yes this is going to be my theory but there
will be interactions between these states and this one and now the interactions are of the kinds
you already had discussed using the questions, in the question the one question was can you hop over
from these levels to these levels, now I'm saying in this picture yes I will introduce the possibility
that every now and then a particle hops from here to here or hops from here to here, I'll just add that
as a possible law in the in the game, however those events where a particle interactions
particles from the background are rare, I'm postulating now that yes every now and then
the particle in this world interacts with the particle in this world but the interactions occur
rarely only every now and then and this happens if for instance compare now the treatment of the
standard model but the standard model contains the particles we know but also contains the
particles we don't know yet that's why it works so badly today because there are many
particles that we have not yet been able to open up to see what they are like because they haven't
been produced, their fields have not yet been excited so now I have many very short circles
in my theory, the short circles are going around so fast that the energy levels are very far away
from each other due to thermodynamics due to the fact that these high energy levels could not be
reached by hand and any possible way, I don't see those fast fluctuating variables so real
quantum mechanics comes about when you you have all the levels but you missed them all because
you couldn't see them but now I can imagine those energy levels to be there then I get a model
that looks much much better like quantum mechanics that you know of than before you get that these
very many very high energy states form a background of highly fluctuating states so highly fluctuating
than a look like white noise now I'm in a situation that I can add particles that may be unstable
that can decay with an exponential decay law and so on so this is the main rule is now that
yes you have fast variables but we cannot follow them we cannot measure them therefore we encounter
the real quantum mechanical nature of our world because you're missing out on looking at those
fast fluctuating particles and then by doing that you get a new and interesting situation
now the theory looks much more like quantum mechanics I'm going a bit faster because I wanted
to go into the consequences of such a theory and my claim is that
well that what happens it now happens it looks very much like the things that happen in cellular
automaton in right this cellular automaton contains particles that move very slowly around
and they're very far from linking things that make you slowly move an object behave like
behaving at random so now you see I have a classical model with random behavior put in but
the behavior is random because the universe is so large so these classical states in the high energy
mode can vibrate but in a very short time they go through all possible states they can go through
so they look actually like multiverse and all these things people talk about but now I introduce them
in a way that looks much more like deterministic so the universe is deterministic but only if
you are able to follow exactly everything that happens in these particles let me see well how
you go about question yeah so is this line of thought I mean so the resulting equation is
different from pop-up-flunk type equation so you know so in classical mechanics if we introduce some
stockasting noise whatever and eventually we will have some pop-up-flunk some equation
so this kind of thing so starting from Newtonian equation introducing some
stochasticity can you derive a straight equation instead of a pop-up-flunk equation or so I'm yeah
absolutely a good question yes my claim is yes because basically this model is likely first
models are introduced they are very simple they are deterministic but only deterministic if I take
this fluctuating background into account I take all the states the fluctuating background can be
in then it becomes deterministic but imagine that's so much work to think of every single
fluctuating object at every point in space and time it's hopeless to follow all the behavior
so the pop-up-flunk equation will work very very well but now I have set it up in such a way that
I can see how to turn this into a deterministic theory in principle all the states are deterministic
so every single fast fluctuating variable can be in L states Ls are not the Ls are the Ns
that I had before they are very very many of them and now I can ask how do I set up a theory
and how can I reproduce this the Schrodinger equation that I want how can I reproduce the
Hamiltonian that I want and what I'll do now is I'll show a method to produce the Hamiltonian
out of a deterministic theory the big question will then be is that the right deterministic theory
I chose that is a very difficult question and I cannot answer but I can I can answer the question
how can I make a model that looks like the model I want to produce for that I introduce the Pauli
matrices sigma one sigma two and sigma three they are two by two matrices and they will be acting
whenever a particle makes a decision do I go this direction do I go that direction and now I have to
say well this time there'll be a new ingredient in the theory saying the particle can go in this
direction or it can go in that direction but that depends on where the fast fluctuating variables are
well they're going so fast I can't follow them I can't tell you where they are
so because of that I can only give you a quantum amplitude but if I could follow these fast moving
variables very fast then I could write down exactly the quantum amplitude for the particle
to go our this direction or that direction because it's now deterministic so it's a
Pochett Planck equation but a deterministic Pochett Planck equation which only generates
random numbers because our universe is so big if the universe were as tiny as a few plant lengths
it wouldn't be random anymore it would be completely deterministic but no our universe is
very very large all these random oscillators interact with each other not very very intensive
but sufficiently to make it hopelessly non-periodic and and stochastic looking so I introduce the
the Pauli matrices which can be in two states one states that the particle went this way the other
states the particle goes that way and to introduce a flip operation so the the unitary operator that
tells you where the particle goes this or that way is an operator which gives you a flip and that flip
is that one of these Pauli matrices will serve as a flip operator this actually is only is not in
the Pauli matrix it tells you which which of the two states are you in are you in the flipping
state or in the non-flipping state these two say I make the flip because I make it in two ways so
that is I still can control the phase that I put in the phase has no physical effects so
such speaking single one and single two are not distinguishable from each other but in practice
they are having and do the mathematics they are different and they have the same mathematical
properties that the Pauli matrices normally have but now I want to write the Hamiltonian
the general set flip and Hamiltonian is relatively easy to get you have to take these Pauli matrices
but multiply them with a constant alpha which is always one half pi it's not one quarter pi
not the third pi it must be one half pi y well e to the power one half pi times i times these
matrices gives you this matrix again if it were not one half pi but something else then this
would become a superposition there are four entities of the matrix will be different from zero
that would be a quantum superposition so now postulating that I have a deterministic theory
that is mimicking for quantum mechanics is the same as postulating that these coefficients are
exactly one half pi and nothing else it's nice it's not nice what they get out of this it's one
half pi it's deterministic but it isn't really quantum mechanics and now you can say that this
theory will be quantum mechanics only if it makes these alphas water half pi but not in the other
case but I want to mimic real quantum mechanics in real quantum mechanics I often have the power
matrix with very different coefficients so I want these alphas to be different from zero actually
I want them to be very very tiny if they're very tiny you have another mathematical machine at your
disposal that's better than the Schrodinger equation because it gives you faster the probabilities
now tell you that in the moment I have a machine as follows I can make take my flip operator but
now I say the flip only takes place if one if all the pass moving particles are in certain positions
that's what I said before about the unstable particle so the unstable particle reacts only
if the if the pass variables in the immediate surroundings take certain values then I have
to multiply them totally with the correct and delta function that doesn't change anything it
doesn't make these alphas smaller or bigger they're still one half pi all of them but now they're
multiplied with delta functions those delta functions are zero most of the time every now and
then a delta pops up and then the particle makes a flip so classically this is completely
deterministic but now I have an operator which I can say is very small but in what way is it small
well it's expectation value is very small because if these fluctuating background is
socastically moving then at every single moment the probability of these x's being realized is
very very small so the vacuum expectation value of this interaction at the moment is very small
it has the same one as before with the coefficient alpha being one half pi this is the paramedics
but now there's a run over L1 times I2 also in expression this is the expectation
that the fluctuating variables have the right value so you see I'm combining quantum mechanics
with stochastic physics this you could call stochastic physics but I'm using quantum notation
to describe it but what I describe gives me something that looks very much like the standard
model because I have an interaction Hamiltonian just like the standard model and I it is very
small because these L's just like the standard model and I have a way to solve it mathematically
just like the standard model what I can do is I can do a perturbation expansion but making
sequence of terms writing down final diagrams for all these terms that tells you this very small
coefficient comes in once comes in twice comes in three times I'm doing the perturbation expansion
I'm terminating the perturbation expansion whatever the next term is so small that it
doesn't make any difference anymore that is exactly what you do in quantum field theory
so the claim is now we have to do the same thing as a quantum field theory but now I know what the
interaction Hamiltonian is the interaction Hamiltonian is a paramedics times the coefficient on our
pi which I should not forget times a number which is very small if the hidden parts when moving
variables can move in very very different many different positions only one position this term
pops up so this term on the average is very small and the method is accurate because I may make this
assumption that this background is fluctuating more or less randomly so now the notion of random
fluctuations does come in and now the theory I get I get out looks much more like quantum
yes I've been skipping skipping some slides because I'm moving towards the final slide I hope I have
some I think if you have suction time it doesn't matter yeah basically you have one hour and 30
minutes originally so yeah so yeah everything is up to you yeah I'll take my time in that case
so okay I'm flexible so now this is my Hamiltonian but this is not different not fundamentally
different from what you have in the standard model in the standard model we have oscillating fields
most of those fields are in harmonic oscillators which means that I know exactly how I already go
in circles but then every now and then there is an interaction Hamiltonian acting but it is very
small because the coefficients L are very big the harmonic oscillators go the fast way was going
to loops with the loops containing many elements sufficient number of elements they make it very
long lasting before this interaction Hamiltonian acts so assuming that only it only acts to find a
number of times when you it interacts very many very few times because it's so slow and
that means that you can forget the terms where interaction Hamiltonian acts more than five times
or something like that because that happens so rarely that it doesn't make any difference to ignore
that that's because also what you do when you solve the Fokker-Plumple equation so but now you see
that this has the same quantum notation it's a quantum operator on one hand but it generates
stochastic ratio on the other end because the underlying theory is deterministic but it
it has the it is defined originally in a deterministic way so you see that the two different languages
now come together where everybody like John Bell like Zyling and all these people doing
quantum mechanics say it's impossible to combine quantum mechanics with stochastic
ratio with Fokker-Plumple equations no this it agrees very well with these equations you can use
once this description or the other description in one description it looks like quantum mechanics
the other description looks like classical it actually acclaimed it is quantum mechanics so
we're using quantum terminology to describe a classical model but the classical model is
far too difficult for us to solve the universe is far too big to figure out what happens when
every now and then a stochastic variable takes the right value it's possible but it's hopelessly
difficult it becomes easy if you use the language of quantum mechanics so quantum mechanics is making
things easier not more difficult as people would like to think they think that the easy theory is
a deterministic one the complicated theory is quantum mechanics no it is the other way around
quantum mechanics is a magnificent mathematical tool to deal with this extremely complicated
situation we talked about where we don't see 99 percent of the degrees of freedom of nature
because they are oscillating too fast so however there is a catch and this now so I'm now going to
step three in my argument I arrived at a model which I'm very pleased about because it looks
like quantum mechanics at the moment and basically on the other but I have one problem and that is
nasty people who have grown up for this 100 years of quantum mechanics will ask me nasty questions
and yes please ask nasty questions so one thing is what about all those paradoxes that we have
derived bell has derived the bell inequality is being violated by quantum mechanics there are many
other paradoxes the ghc paradox there are many other paradoxes that you can find in the literature
which all say that if you have a measuring device and at the last moment you rotate your measuring
device to to change the thing that you want to observe then you end up in a paradox the paradox
tells you there is no classical theory that describes the situation how come that I'm nevertheless
getting classical theory and I'm claiming that the generous quantum mechanics the answer to that
question is actually very easy deceptively easy it is that in this there's one thing I cannot do in
my models which is change to ontological basis the ontological basis is the basis in quantum
field theory where I'm not looking at the energy ion states I'm looking at where all these balls
are exactly where they are that's the ontological basis but if I use that basis I cannot go to a
different ontological basis because you have to do I go to a basis where these balls are in the
superposition now there's one extra ingredient in the theory I haven't yet told you that is this
the big bang ages and ages ago started in a deterministic mode the balls I'm talking about
were in some initial position what the position was I don't care much about but it was in an
ontological deterministic position it was not in a superposition so when John Bell does his
experiment he takes his photons in this case they are in a certain ontological phase that
you can do measurements and now we see Bob and Alice in his setup make a little change in the
device now now they're looking at superpositions of photons I'm saying no Bob and Alice cannot do that
because the universe when it started started in a deterministic mode it'll stay in a deterministic
mode forever and that I call the ontological conservation law so the universe started in a
way that all these balls were in one position they were not in a superposition so superpositions
are not allowed in this theory and that is a new step which I haven't yet mentioned before
that not all choices of bases are equally physical so what John Bell does of Zylinger and all the
other people do when they do quantum mechanics is they assume that you can freely move from one
basis to another basis and describe all these different choices of bases in ontological theory
no if I take the universe I take the initial state of the universe I put that in a superposition
of states that's not a state that is allowed in my description that superposition would allow
Bob and Alice in in their setting to go through a superposition of states otherwise they will not
be allowed to do so so this is the limitation the restriction that people have forgotten to impose
on your theory that the universe itself cannot make a superposition a transition towards a super
position of states it looks like it can and now this is the final chapter of my procedure
that it looks as if you can make superpositions because that's what John but what Bob and Alice
are doing in John Bell's experiment as if they can go through different superposition of states
nor they cannot which is the same statement that's saying Bob and Alice have no free will
the free will was dictated as soon as the universe started running with the balls in
certain positions at that moment Bob and Alice already had made the decision there's no way for
them to change it to any other basis and that takes away the the paradoxical the counter
intuitive component of quantum mechanics there's a so-called possibility of making counterfactual
experiments experiments you cannot do because you cannot superimpose two states but
let's say let's say in a different formulation what I what I what you can do is that Bob and Alice
in John Bell's experiment has a free will to when they throw the dice they have the possibility
throwing the dice and get the three you have the possibility when they throw the dice and
they get a six they can get a five they can get a two and they throw the dice they can get the
die can come at any value when you throw dice the dice cannot go into a value where it's a
superposition of a six and three that's impossible and that means that Bob and Alice cannot really
go into a superposition of states and that according to many people in quantum mechanics
would be saying that Bob and Alice have no free will well you can use those words you can also
ignore them my classical underlying theory doesn't know about what free will is but it does know
that every single ball is in a particular position and not in a superposition the superposition can
be chosen if you want to describe probabilities if you want to but then you cannot at the same time
say that Bob and Alice can go from one state into a superposition of other states that is not allowed
so that is why there is no real contradiction between quantum mechanics and the stellar theory
so the question then and is then can you explain as inequality I mean usually we learned I mean
without that kind of concept internal mountains superposition I've I've been trying to say that but
if you say it right it's very difficult I'm saying that Bob and Alice in Bell's experiment
can choose how to put their detector but they cannot put the detector in a superposition of states
and that was assumed by Bell if they put the detector in a superposition of two states
then they'll measure the focus of being in superposition focus yes but the universe doesn't
allow them to it cannot cut the detector can be rotated but that rotation has history
in the minds of Bob and Alice the universe was still deterministic at all stages but Bob and
Alice cannot make a cannot choose a setting where the setting is itself a superposition
that is impossible and that means that this way I take away the contradiction many people have
said things like this so I'm probably not the first at all to say these things but it's hard to
you understand what you're saying when you make such a statement what I'm saying is now that I can
write down classical theories that behave exactly right but those classical theories do not allow
me to consider quantum super positions just like that the quantum super positions are not
probabilities but we can treat them as if they were probabilities because that helps when you
want to do a calculation but if you do say only if you want to take all the degrees of freedom
into account of all these fast fluctuating objects you say no if you take them all into account
they are only in ontological states not the super positions of states so this is just saying that
I'm I'm saying no to the question no you're not allowed to ask this question so that's a different
answer than the Copenhagen answer the Copenhagen answer is you can ask the questions the answer
will bring you nowhere I'm saying you're not allowed to ask the question because the question is
silly is nonsensical the question is not the correct question because in the classical theory you
cannot ask for a super position of states but you can make it look like you are in a super position
of states but that's your own responsibility you can use it in your calculations as you want but
in reality the world will not be in that kind of super position at all so that is the bottom line
which makes things work but I'm still not ready with my talk there still is a problem
so yes I said I must have determinism all the way saying that from day one onwards this universe
was in a deterministic state it was staying in that state forever but as soon as Bob and Alice
are choosing a superposition they are deviating from this picture they're making a mistake that is
the bottom line yeah any question yeah I have a question does this cellular automata have
Hilbert space structure built in not by itself it is a cellular automaton made by you can make it
by computer you can take a computer you can inside the computer what to do you can program the
computer is there a Hilbert space in the computer no there's no Hilbert space computer there's only
a computer program in the computer similarly in a cellular automaton the only thing it is there is
the computer that does the computation not the Hilbert space but I'm free to introduce Hilbert
space because it helps a lot it helps me to do a perturbation expansion which brings me the answer
much much faster than trying to compute for every probability what happens because I'll never get the
answer it's too complicated so yes but then there's one there's still a question oh yes the statement
now is I can make I can perform now the one of L expansion and that is a genuine expansion but it
only makes sense if L is an integer because I was working with integers all the time I kind of work
with fractional numbers not unless they're rational then I can replace the rational numbers or integer
numbers according to some prescription which I cannot work with arbitrary real numbers in this
theory so the value of one of L are rational and this means that the coefficients that come with
these interaction automatonians are rational coefficients those rational coefficients tell me
that in the standard model these coefficients are the constants of nature like the fine structure
constant 1 of 137 so in a standard model I don't know what the number is I can replace it by any
real number I like and do the perturbation expansion same thing here I can replace one of L
by any number I like and do the perturbation expansion but physically you should expect the one
of L to be a rational number L is an integer and I can put some integer on top as well so
I can make this this a rational number but the rational number should be believed the non-rational
number should not be believed as if someone has done not done his job right yet because if this
number is not rational with a real number like pi then I still have an integer number that's my
place is to solve before I can calculate anything that's not a deterministic theory so if L is not
integer or rational I don't have the deterministic theory if I assume to have deterministic theory
I can eventually expect that this theory will give me a prediction for the fine structure constant
I say this very carefully because no I cannot compute the fine structure constant I'm not even
close to that so but I can just state right now that all the cons all these 20 more than 20
constants of the standard model they're all rational numbers which in principle should be computer
good but unfortunately I haven't computed them because there is a very big problem
what's happening here um oh yes
there oh here comes this is the final transparency particularly this is transparent saying that
that there's one thing that the standard model has and the model I written down does not and
that is symmetries there are many many symmetries in the standard model that um that occur such as
translation symmetry now translation symmetry on the left is relatively easy you can look at the
eigenvalues and then you can make continuous translations on the left that's relatively easy
but make continuous rotations on the left is actually very hard like this learn transformations
are even more difficult because a learnings group is a non-compact group so to make a theory
learnings invariance we have to make infinitely many tests to see whether the theory really is
learnings invariant so that's very very hard to comply with so learnings invariance is very difficult
local gauge theories the standard model is characterized by having a local gauge invariance
in the definition of your fields so I should introduce local gauge invariance in the procedure
I've done so now I have not been able to do that so this is where I fail to get the final theory
I don't know how to make the theory locally invariant but I can replace the local gauge group
by a discrete gauge group uh a permutation group which has a discrete finite number of elements
then you can do such a thing on the lettuce but the continuous gauge theories are then very difficult
to make the barter and the Higgs mechanism on the lettuce well that's also a symmetry procedure
and the holy grail really is a general coordinate transformations I want to see eventually also
to comply with general relativity it doesn't at this stage that is where I failed I haven't
named the military that powerful but I think this is a good start that I've made but this will be
a a good way to formulate this theory now the hard work still has to be done and that is answer
these questions about these symmetries that I had here before and uh and and uh by a systematic way
to translate all the properties of the standard model including all these mathematical difficulties
properties of these symmetry groups how they interact mutually to get the states of the standard
model very interesting question the standard model gives you all the answers in terms of the
standard model language to turn that into a constant language I told you how to do that in
principle in practice that will be extremely hard but I'm sure that there will be some smart young
people coming up untold now to do the calculation in all detail but maybe young people will be able
to do this and figure out how to translate these words into practical calculations and here I want
to thank you and my hope is that we can continue the discussion I answered some questions while
talking you are now allowed to ask more questions until until my final time is really over
thank you very much yeah professor thank you I have a question please yeah yes uh first of all
thank you very much for the kind talk it was very very nice I have two questions actually
yes one is related to the fact you have connected everything to a classical theory and I was
wondering about the sensitivity of this classical theory with respect to initial conditions
because at some point you claim that you may not care very much about the actual initial
condition at the origin of the universe but typically we know that some classical
models do have very high sensitivity with respect to initial conditions I was wondering what is the
role of that in this setup a very important question well we are used to thinking if you
have a stochastic theory such as the weather as a typical example yes you see that the weather
depends very very much on initial conditions there are so-called butterfly effect you probably
know about the butterfly effect is that if a butterfly somewhere in China flaps its wings
a little differently from what it was supposed to do it disobeys laws of nature you there are no
such butterflies but suppose there was a butterfly that could violate the laws of nature by flapping
its wings a little bit differently that that change in its flapping of its wings will propagate
and there will be more and more air molecules that will react differently after a while the
clouds would have a different shape after a while more and more things start to become different
in various storms and weather patterns in fact in the end also political decisions made by
politicians always become different because these butterflies being flapped between wings
give a different what was supposed to do that's called the butterfly effect and I take your question
as being about that that is there a butterfly effect in the real world very probably yes
and that will be the reason why the outcome of all our experiments are controlled by quantum
mechanics so for instance the LHC could really be out of luck and not have produced a Higgs mechanism
by some pure quantum fluctuation maybe political consequences will be different people no longer
build big machines and then they have we don't understand some things they'll do different
things so there will be a butterfly effect from not detecting the Higgs into different
turning turnings of the world history we don't know but very likely I think very likely the
answer is yes there will be a butterfly effect in the real world as well right thank you I have
another question related to the fact that you said that going into the Hilbert space description
provides you with a like a much faster way of computing things yes but my question is related to
how is this connected to the computability of the universe let's say you start with a
grid with and the answer your ability to compute things by actually keeping track of
all the degrees of freedom is very limited and my question is if by doing to the quantum
mechanic at the description have you found a way of improving drastically the computability time of
whatever we mean by solving problems in in the universe I'm thinking of polynomial versus non-
polynomial time kind of things of computability questions well you know in I think the stand
of model as you have it today gives you a very good answer to this that in practice we use Hilbert
space to compute how electrons evolve for instance we use Hilbert space to compute the magnetic moment
of the electron so you probably know that the qc qed quantum electrodemics is a component of the
stand of model that generates a very precise values for the electromagnetic moment of the
electron so but when people do use those computations they stop after a certain number of terms
so doing potential expansion up to n terms is practically easy that's a polynomial amount of
time you need for that except the polynomial will rapidly increase if you want to go to the next step
so after five or more steps or something it becomes impossible to compute the magnetic moment of the
electron because it's too difficult so it's not it's not non polynomial as long as you say I'm going
to stop somewhere now it's a little bit worse I have to say about it situations a little bit worse
for the electron we also know the perturbation expansion for the electron actually diverges
but things being as they are it may well take 137 terms in the perturbation expansion before
you really find the things diverge and the same thing here if l is 100 then after 100 steps
you have 100 to the power 100 as the chance that you still have something after that changes the
world so stop long before you went through 200 steps but so in practice we can say well we can
calculate certainly accurately enough to be happy with the answers so the magnetic moment of the
electron is no more precisely than anybody can measure practically so um so we're happy with
that we don't need to go further I think that will be the answer in general give the answer to your
question yes it's it's not infinitely precisely calculated but we don't need to go further because
the errors we're making are smaller than can be detected in practice so
yeah so the question is probably a little bit too mathematical to be of direct importance for physics
all right questions about post-question though taking off thank you
I have a question yes if this cellular automata they eventually derives as the
quantum mechanical of the Schrodinger equation where do we get the um the Copenhagen interpretation
in this from this deterministic process okay um me what I did today in the talk I tried to explain
but it's very hard within now to do so that um the classical theory I hide down are formally
for a mathematical point of view they're equivalent to a quantum theory that includes the standard model
but it also includes the fact that is that the perturbation expansion for the standard model
diverges so I I will not be able to produce the reproduce the standard model with interleaved
accuracy because before I reached interleaved accuracy I reached the point that that the
perturbation expansion does no longer converge so the inaccuracy is in the standard model itself
not in the theory here the theory I did I presented to you in principle has infinite accuracy
in practice not because in practice to compute certain things will become harder than
then the counting number of atoms in the universe I think like this so in practice
there are much more important limitations tell you no I cannot reproduce the world as you know
it with infinite precision I cannot and I never will be but I can produce this the world that's
north in more precision than everybody can was able to compute these days in principle in practice
again no because I don't have the right equations but if I but I think I can write down roughly
what the right equations will look like and in principle this should reproduce the real
world more accurately than any perturbative expansion except that I will need more computer time
than number of atoms in the universe to do that actual calculation so in practice no I'm sorry I
cannot do it because I cannot handle all the atoms in the universe now that kind of practicality is
what you you run into and of course nobody can do a computation that complicated so yes I there
will be practical limitations but no there won't be any observable deviations from real
I have a question maybe my question looks very naive because I'm not an expert in this field
just a curious person but as we know there is no a pure vacuum
there are virtual particles which appear and disappear every second
from this point of view how can we talk about determinicity even for a single electron
if it is bombarded every second by virtual particles
well I think you know what a van der Waals gas is a van der Waals gas is a description of a gas
in classical terms it has the equations are the atoms I assume three billiard balls
well they aren't just billiard balls but suppose two billiard balls come together
they hit each other and the way they bounce depends on the way they touch each other
and they can touch each other in many different ways so if you follow a van der Waals gas closely
you can write down the equations for how the balls will hit each other and you can assume
a stochastic behavior that's the same when two balls approach each other you never know exactly
how they will approach each other maybe you know with some very limited precision because you know
where the balls came from but you can you can do that that calculation in principle there's no
quantum mechanics there but there's also no complete determinism in the sense that you have to
introduce stochasticity because you don't know where these balls are exactly it's too complicated
for a random distribution in this world but but there's no quantum mechanics in the van der Waals
gas so that theory for that reason doesn't work so well but but it could have worked much better
if people wrote down a much more powerful random noise model for the van der Waals gas maybe you
can get an approximation reality very much more precisely but there's no reason to say I exclude
the van der Waals gas because it doesn't predict the noise it predicts things fine it just isn't
theory so so maybe on this way we can construct alternative theory which will be
to a certain extent equivalent to current quantum mechanics theory absolutely that was that's right
now that's a conjecture I cannot prove this but I don't even know how to do it so I cannot prove
that that one can make a classical theory that produces the standard exactly the standard model
standard model has features that are very difficult to reproduce that's only because
I have my own mathematical limitations but I think in principle the very smart person
could figure out all these things part by part so you have first of all to understand
how can a model be translation event then you have to understand how can a model be
rotation event and yet have finite amount of information like in a cell on a tunnel I think
that it's possible but it's very hard to reproduce rotation events then loss of variance and other
symmetries are even harder to reproduce so that's all the work you still have to do
but in principle I think these questions have nothing to do with the fundamental question is
which is whether stochastic behavior can come out I think that question can be answered
theoretically by saying no matter what models you put in your cell in your cell or automaton
you'll get behavior that will generate effectively random walks so that random behavior so that
we are in a good position to start from here but we still have to do all the hard work to get it done
precisely. Okay thank you. More questions? Yes please. Yes I still get how your theory
can overcome Belgian inequality. Do you mean Alice and Bob cannot choose the
essence of experimental device by preview? They can't choose the essence of device
randomly? Well I explained that you have to ask this question at the level of the classical
underlying theory so how can the classical underlying theory violate Belgian inequalities?
Well the classical underlying theory does reproduce exactly the events that Bob and Alice are
measuring but there's one thing that the classical theory cannot do which is it cannot force Bob and
Alice to do what we call counterfactual measurements so to do a measurement they have their devices in
certain angles and they see a focus going through this filter not going through that filter so then
they make a note of the measurements but the outcome of the measurements is yes the focus went
through or no the focus did not go through. So I can't let you talk to them. They cannot
put their devices such but the focus will be superposition when it goes through those states.
That is impossible and that is incorrectly assumed in these arguments about Belgian equality
that you can put the device into a state where the focus will come up out with certain probabilities.
No, focus will only come out or not come out and all sort of such which means that the real universe
is always in the ontological state the so-called ontological ontology conservation law.
Universe starts off in a state that yes the balls are here and not there it will always
be in a state where all these balls billions of them are all in indefinite positions and they are
not in other positions. I cannot put them in any other position so the decision made by
Bob and Alice to make a certain configuration of their settings was a decision made in their minds
eventually and in their minds they could make a choice but they could not make a superposition
of choices. How can I ask you can you make a choice that your actions or your questions are
a superposition of two different questions? No, you cannot. You can only ask this question
at that time. You cannot make a superposition. So that was made by Bill and from his point of
view it was difficult to see why you could should not make that assumption but my claim is yes you
can you can say that that is forbidden. Bill was not allowed to ask Bob or Alice to make a superposition
of settings of their measurement device impossible. They cannot and the reason why they can't is because
in their past it couldn't the switch could remain. And Bill said well who cares also
in the past and that it Bob made decisions independent of the past. No they did not.
Their decision has is linked to what happened in the past where we like it or not. So that is
the lack of fundamental we will Bob and Alice have.
Thank you very much for your nice talk.
More questions?
Hi. Yes, please.
Yes, thank you. So I'm trying to wrap my head around this because this picture with the orbits
and everything it looks suspiciously like an you take an action angle formulation of classical
mechanics and you go through with the old quantum theory quantizing the angle variable
of your action angle described canonical variables.
No. Why not?
First of all the cellular automaton does not have to obey Newton's laws. It is just
arbitrary, completely arbitrary, aboriginal. Even this matrix U can be animated between
ones and zeros. As long as it is time reversible it doesn't have to be any other restriction.
So even if it is a Newtonian energy you cannot
it's not the energy that I use for but the calculations that's the quantum energy. The
quantum energy is not the same thing as Newtonian energy. In the real world of course you use both
concepts of energy in the same way but the energy of the planet is much, much bigger in the energy
of a certain particle. But the Newtonian principles of action and Newtonian principles of action and
the reaction do not necessarily apply in this theory. So that's not the stage I'm going to
quantize the classical theory. No, the classical theory is completely classical.
It's I'm not doing a mathematical any mathematical procedure with the classical theory.
So when you say quantum if you replace an angle mental by an angle mental and so on that is
modifying the model. They're not modifying it. I'm just describing the model in terms of a matrix
which contains one since it was all. Well it looks to me when I look at the eighth
I don't know eighth whatever the picture was that you have the Hamilton Jacobi equations
in which only a single variable evolves. And now you just for some reason quantize this
variable phi or position on the ring. Oh no, I mean you're introducing some division of this ring.
Necessarily.
Okay so we start with the Hamilton Jacobi equation and you have one Hamilton Jacobi equation that
is non-trivial and this is the constant of motion. This is the omega frequency that you get for this
ring and there is multiple rings you introduce for different variables and they again collapse
into some classical KIM tori. I'm not using Hamilton Jacobi principle to quantize something.
That's that's not the quantization I'm doing. I'm just using quantum notation only. So the
mathematics of the collisions or whatever happens is not changed. So a cell automaton
doesn't have to be described as things moving in some way but you just say that there's an evolution
law. One single state evolves to another single state and the prescription is for all possible
states the system can be in. There is an evolution law and that evolution law tells you
without any uncertainty what happens next. Then I describe the evolution law as if it was a matrix
of things but that's not doing so much quantization. I'm just introducing a matrix containing
ones and zeros only. The one is the thing it evolves to and the zeros are things it does not
evolve to. That's not the same thing as quantizing in the classical in the standard sense that people
decide how many years ago if your planet's moving in or in order to orbit you can quantize the theory
and then you get the hydrogen atom. But the hydrogen atom has very different evolution laws.
So I'm not doing that particular stuff.
Okay any further questions?
Okay then okay then I mean yeah finally and let's I mean thanks again Professor Gerald
for his I mean very enthusiastic, colloquium and I mean very kind and question and answer time.
Now if you do not have further questions let's close this colloquium. Thank you very much.
Mira, thank you for your kind hospitality and for organizing this get together to allow me
opportunity to give my talk. Thank you very much. It's my great pleasure I mean
thank you. Yeah thank you very much. Yeah see you later. Yeah everyone. Yeah bye.
