In today's lecture, we're going to introduce a new thermodynamic potential, one that combines
chemistry with electricity. It's a potential of enormous importance since it describes
the operation of something we all use every single day. I'm using one right now in this
microphone. It's likely you're using one too, whether in your phones, computers, watches,
TV remote power tools, e-reader, Nintendo DS, nightlight calculator or car. I'm talking
of course about the battery. A battery converts chemical energy into electrical energy. And
if it's rechargeable, it can go the other way, converting electrical energy back into
stored chemical energy. So we're combining electrical energy and chemical energy. Well,
as you know by now, as exciting and amazing as thermodynamics is, it's not exactly super
creative when it comes to terminology. This critical new thermodynamic potential is called
the electrochemical potential. It not only allows us to explain how a battery operates,
but it describes the underlying thermodynamics of any system where chemical reactions are
occurring together with charged particles. For example, a technology of enormous importance
is called electroplating, which is widely used in industry for coating metal objects
with a thin layer of a different metal. Just think about all those chrome-plated faucets.
And another example of a process that involves the chemical reaction of charged particles
is corrosion, which, well, you probably already know what that is. Just take a look at those
rusty spokes on your bike, especially if you've left it out in the rain a few too many times.
Okay. Now, for today's lecture, I'll be focusing on the battery as an example of the electrochemical
potential. And just so we get ourselves into the battery mood, let's be sure we have a
feeling for the energy scales we're talking about. Did you know that your cell phone runs
on just a few watts of power? And as a reminder, a watt is a joule per second. So let's say
if a cell phone runs at five watts, then if it has a battery life of five hours, it means
the battery stores an amount of energy of 90,000 joules. A typical incandescent lightbulb
might run at around 100 watts. So to keep a kitchen with one of those lit for two hours,
well, that would take 720,000 joules of energy. Now, for batteries, we often don't use joules
as our units of energy, but rather watt hours. That way, we can think more closely about
the connection to the power being used. A watt hour is just what it sounds like. It's
the amount of energy needed to provide one watt of power for one hour. So that's 3,600
joules of energy. For reference, a typical AAA battery can store roughly one and a half
watt hours. And the energy needed to drive a car 200 miles is about 100 kilowatt hours.
The typical maximum power in your house is around 40 kilowatts. In the world, well, it's
increasing by the minute, but in 2013, it uses about 13 terawatts of power. Give or take
a few watts. So that means that with a mere 10,000 billion AAA batteries, you could power
the world for about an hour. But my main point here is that I'd like you to be sure that
you're familiar with these different energy scales and comfortable with the difference
between power and energy, and that you can go back and forth between the two. Okay, now
all this talk of power and energy makes me want to go power something. Did you know that
you can charge your phone with a potato or power a light with a tomato? Let's go take
a look. So here we have a battery, which is a way of storing electrochemical energy that
a lot of us are very familiar with. If I take this battery and I hook it up to two wires,
then as you can see, I can power something. In this case, I'm turning on a clock. But
did you know that from just two metal wires and a couple of potatoes, I can also get electricity?
Here I have a piece of zinc, and here I have a piece of copper. And what I'm going to do
is I'm going to wire these up through the potato and hook them back up to the clock. Now, for
this demo, just to up the current a little bit, I'm actually going to use two potatoes. I'm going
to put a bridge in between them. So I've got copper wire going into this one and a zinc wire
going to that one. And then I'm going to have my zinc electrode coming out of this potato. And my
copper electrode is going to come out of this one. And now, when I put these wires into contact,
with my electrodes, you can see that, again, the clock turns on. Now, notice that it doesn't
matter where I put the electrode. I could take this out and put it in a different place,
maybe over here. And you can see that you're still going to get the clock turning on. So
what's going on here? Well, charged particles are leaving one of the metals, and charged particles
are sticking on to the other metal. This is the basis for the Daniel cell, which is one of the
very first and simplest batteries that was ever made. And notice, you don't actually need the
potato. You could use anything. You could use an onion, you could use salty water, or just about
any other vegetable or fruit you pick. All that's doing is it's acting as the electrolyte in the
battery, which is something you'll learn about in the lecture. It's really the action of the
charged particles leaving and coming on to these metal electrodes that causes the current to flow.
Okay, so that's pretty cool. But there's a really crucial point here, and it's kind of a punchline
that I'm going to give you upfront. And then we'll do some thermo to help us understand it. You see,
the real deal is that the power does not at all come from the potato. The potato serves an important
role in allowing the electricity to flow, but it does not provide the power itself. In order to see
just what does, let's now turn to thermodynamics to shed light on this. As I already mentioned in
the beginning, the analysis of a battery introduces another new form of energy. It's a form of internal
energy for the system called the electrochemical potential. We've already discussed the chemical
potential extensively back in lecture 9. The electrochemical potential is similar in the
sense that it's another thermodynamic energy potential, and once you know how to write it down,
it can help you find the equilibrium conditions for a given system. In a battery, reactions are
occurring that both create and consume electrons, which in turn provides the electrical current
when the battery is connected to a circuit. Now, electrons are, by definition, charged species
that carry a charge of minus 1. That's a fundamental unit of charge itself. But atoms and molecules
can also be charged. As an example, let's look at a zinc atom as shown here. As you can see in this
image, in the zinc atom, we have a core of protons and nuclei and a bunch of electrons here forming
the outer shell of the atom. Now, for zinc, we have an atomic number of 30. So in its neutral state,
this atom would have 30 such electrons zipping around out here in their various energy levels.
However, zinc also is happy to lose a few of those electrons. For example, two of those 30
electrons, such that the atom only has 28 total electrons. In that case, and I should say that
the core hasn't changed here, we have an atom with a net charge of plus 2. That's because overall,
it has two more protons than it does electrons. This state of charge that an atom or molecule can
take on is known as the oxidation state. Atoms tend to have natural oxidation states. In fact,
some atoms will readily lose an electron or two or even three, while others will readily take on
additional electrons. And then there are still others that simply don't ever want to deviate
from their neutral state. Noble gases, I'm thinking of you. So you can imagine that if a battery is
going to involve having chemistry occur that also moves charges around, then the materials involved
in the operation of the battery should be able to either take on or give away charges. This is why
in batteries, we often see elements like zinc, magnesium, lithium, sodium, nickel, lead, and
manganese. All of these are elements that have a nonzero oxidation state and are happy to give away
and then take back some charge. When they're in a state of net positive charge, so they've given
some electrons away, we refer to them as ions. And that allows me to describe the true essence of a
battery. The operation of a battery involves the trafficking of charged components, including both
electrons and ions. Because the reactions that occur in a battery generate charged components,
as we'll see, these will be ions in a solution and electrons in the electrodes, we have to introduce
a new source of internal energy for the system, the electrostatic potential energy. This is energy
that arises from the electrostatic pole of opposite charges. Imagine that I have a positive charge over
here and a negative charge over there. These charges will be attracted to one another by a force equal
to a constant times each of the two charges divided by the distance between them squared.
This relationship was rigorously determined by the French physicist Charles Coulomb in 1785,
and therefore it's known as Coulomb's law, and the constant in the equation is known as Coulomb's
constant. Now, you might be thinking, aha, we have a force, and where the force can come work,
and as we've learned in thermodynamics, we can include any and all relevant work terms into
the first law. So what is it that makes force into work? Well, it's displacement. It's the basic
and very fundamental nature of thermodynamic work, a force times a displacement. And we've seen this
already in many forms, pressure times change in volume, surface tension times change in area,
chemical potential times change in number of moles, applied magnetic field times change in
magnetic induction, and so on and so on. And since I'm mentioning this all, let's not forget
that we can even consider heat as a thermodynamic force times a thermodynamic displacement. In
that case, the force is temperature and the displacement is entropy. So here, we have introduced
a new force, the Coulomb force, and from it, we can compute work done. The displacement in this
case is the change in the distance between the two charged species. Let's consider how much work it
would take a positive and negative charge that are originally sitting at some distance apart,
call it r0, and bring them infinitely far away. In order to compute that work, it's the integral
over the force times distance. So the integral over Coulomb's constant times the two charges
divided by their separation squared from r0 to infinity. We'll assume for now that the charges
don't vary, so we can pull them out of the integral and we're left with the total work done to rip
these charges apart from one another is equal to Coulomb's constant times the two charges times
negative 1 over r evaluated at infinity, which is simply 0, minus the same thing evaluated at r0.
The two minus signs cancel and we're left with the electrostatic work to tear the charges apart
equals Coulomb's constant times the charges divided by r0.
By the way, if the two charges were the same, say either both positive or both negative,
then this value would simply be the work needed in order to bring them to a distance of r0 apart.
Or another way to think about it would be that if you let them go, and again now we're assuming
that their charges are the same sign, then they'll fly apart. And when far enough away,
they'll have a combined kinetic energy equal to that value. Now I gave you this last example of
them flying away apart from each other because I want you to see the next concept in an intuitive way.
You see, once the charges have been brought to some distance r0 apart, the fact is that they
are very much feeling that Coulomb force of repulsion between them. You can think of this
as the two particles having energy stored in the electrostatic field. And you can think of this
energy as being potentially available whenever it's needed. Notice the word potentially.
That was purposeful, since it helps us think of the potential energy for an electrostatic force.
We can think of the potential here as being defined as the capacity for doing work,
which arises from the position or configuration of the charges. Any collection of charges
will have a potential energy associated with it. So the general expression for the potential
energy of a given charge, say little q, that comes near another fixed charge, say big q,
is equal to that work expression we derived. V electrostatic equals the Coulomb constant
times little q times big q divided by r. Okay, so that's good. Now, where do we go from here?
Well, we're usually interested in the electrostatic potential energy per unit of charge,
and that would be units of joules per Coulomb. So we often divide the above expression
by at least by that test charge, little q, to arrive at the following. The electrostatic
potential per unit charge is equal to Coulomb's constant times the charge of the fixed particle,
big q, divided by the distance it is from that particle. Since the charge of the test particle
has been divided out, the electrostatic potential is a property that's related only to the electric
field itself and not the test particle. And for this reason, for this version, we usually use the
symbol capital phi. And you can see that in this case, the work done to bring the particle with
charged q to any point in space will equal the electrostatic potential phi at that point
times the charge q. Now, I want you to feel your oneness with the concept of the electrostatic
potential, that capital phi thing, since that is the key variable we need for our thermal.
And the thermodynamic work expression for a charged particle, as we saw, is equal
to the charge of the particle times capital phi, where phi depends on the position of the particle.
And now we've reached a beautiful moment, since we're ready to introduce the electrochemical
potential. This will become a new term in the fundamental equation for the internal energy,
a term that accounts for this new form of energy that arises due to the separation of charges
in a system. Remember that for a closed system where only mechanical work is possible,
the fundamental equation is written as follows. du equals tds minus pdv, assuming a reversible
process. But as we just discussed, there can be many other forms of work, and they simply get added
to the right-hand side of this equality if they're present in the system. So for the case of chemical
work, we had an additional term, the sum over all chemical components in the system of the chemical
potential of each component times the change in the total number of moles of that component.
For electrostatic work, we now add another term to the right-hand side, namely a sum over each
component of the electrostatic potential for that component times the change in the total charge of
that component. This is the electrostatic work term, and as you can see, it can be incorporated into
the same sum over the different components. By the way, if you're a little unsure about the
fundamental equation or for that matter even what I mean by the term components, please do go ahead
and take a quick refresher look at some of the earlier lectures, like on the basic concepts or
the first law. Okay, so as you can imagine, the electrochemical potential is the combination of
those two terms in the summation over number of components, the chemical work and the electrostatic
work. However, we're still not quite where we want to be. Wouldn't it be nice if we could rewrite this
as a single potential? In fact, we can. To do so, all we need to do is be able to rewrite that change
in the total charge of a given component in the system as a change in the number of moles of that
same component. This will bring us to our final definition of the electrochemical potential.
So how do we do that transformation? Well, as is typical in such cases, we introduce new terms.
The total charge of a given component in the system can be written as what is called the
valency of that component times the charge of an electron times Avogadro's number times the number
of moles of that component. Now, the valency is simply the number of electrons that the component
typically gives up. Remember that for zinc, this number is plus two, since it likes to lose two
electrons. For, say, the element sodium, this number would be plus one, since it, on the other hand,
likes to lose only a single electron. So you can see why this all works. The number of electrons a
given component likes to give up times the charge of an electron is equal to the charge each component.
Remember, this could be an atom or a molecule, likes to give up. Avogadro's number times the
number of moles of that component, well, that's the total number of them. A mole of zinc atoms
would be six times ten to the 23rd atoms. So when we multiply this all together,
it's exactly equal to the total charge that the given component has in the system.
And notice that I've achieved my goal. Namely, I have an expression for the electrostatic potential
that depends on the change in the number of moles of a component. And this allows me to group it
together with the chemical potential term as shown here. And so we don't have to tire our hands out
by writing E times Avogadro's number over and over. We can use Faraday's constant instead,
written as the letter F. That's exactly equal to the charge of an electron times Avogadro's number,
which, in case you're interested, happens to be 96,485 coulombs per mole.
All right, so finally, after all of that, we have the fundamental equation expression,
which is now has du equals Tds minus pdv plus the sum over all components over the
electrochemical potential for that component times the change in its number of moles.
The electrochemical potential, we write with the same symbol as the chemical potential,
so a lowercase Greek mu. But now, to signify that it's been, let's say, electrified,
we add a little tilde on top of it. And mu tilde is equal to mu plus the valency z times Faraday's
constant F times the electrostatic potential phi. All right, and now we're ready to rock and roll
with our thermodynamic analysis of a battery. I'll use one of the simplest kinds of batteries
in our example. It's called a Daniel cell, and it was invented in 1836 by the British chemist
John Daniel. In this type of battery, we have two different liquids as shown in this image.
There are a number of different liquids that will work, but let's get specific for this example.
On the left, we have a solution of copper sulfate. And on the right, we have a solution of zinc sulfate.
A sulfate group is SO4. And in between the two containers, there is a connecting tube,
and it's a bit special since it only allows certain species to pass. I'll come back to this in a
moment, but for now, you can think of at least one crucial aspect of this connecting tube being
the fact that it allows there to be a complete circuit. And speaking of a circuit, if we now
connect the zinc and copper electrodes with a wire, current will flow from the zinc electrode
to the copper electrode. Of course, that's not very interesting by itself, but when electrons
are moving through a wire, we have an opportunity to make them do work for us. So for example,
if I were to put a light bulb here in the middle of this wire, it would turn on,
making at least some of those electrons create photons and give off light. The key point here
is that reactions are happening in each of these containers. And they're reactions that cause stuff
to get charged or uncharged, which in turn creates a difference between the charge on the left and
the charge on the right, which is what sets up a driving force for electrons to move from the right
zinc to the left, the copper. Think about it this way. The chemistry that's happening in these two
containers makes it so that there's an effective hill for any type of charge. This hill makes charges
want to roll down it, going from a state of higher energy to lower energy. And while those
precious electrons are rolling down a hill, well, we can catch them along the way and make the fact
that they have some drive to them, also known as a current, do something useful for us.
Well, let's take a look at just what's happening in detail. And we'll just take one of those electrodes,
the zinc side. When an electron leaves this piece of metal to go down that hill,
the only way for the metal to stay charged neutral, and that's what it wants to do,
is for a zinc ion to leave the metal. Remember how zinc likes to lose two electrons? Well,
that's in fact exactly what happens. So a zinc atom inside this metal electrode gives up two
electrons to the hill. As soon as those electrons leave the vicinity, the zinc atom, which now has
a charge of plus two, very strongly wants to leave the metal. So zinc plus two leaves down here,
while two electrons go up here. And then another zinc atom can give up two electrons to the hill
and leave the metal as a charged ion, and again and again. However, this whole fun process,
think of it like a big mountain that the electrons get to take a ski lift up and then ski down.
This whole process would have completely stopped after the very first zinc atom left the metal
and went down the slopes. The reason is that negative charge cannot build up on the right hand side.
Basically, in general, charge cannot build up anywhere around here. Instead, it has to be
neutralized. So when the electrons carrying a charge of minus two from that zinc atom go through
the wire and over to the copper side, well, something there has to be something over there
with a charge of plus two that can cancel the negative charge or rather grab the charge of
the electrons and be neutral overall. And that's exactly what happens. On the copper side, in the
copper sulfate solution, a copper atom separates from a sulfate group. So in the solution, we get
a CuSO4 group that becomes Cu and SO4. But the kicker here is that they don't come away from
each other neutral. Instead, the SO4 group grabs two electrons from the copper atom. And so we have
Cu2 plus floating around that can attach itself to the copper electrode. Now, no other Cu2 plus
atoms would come along until that one Cu2 plus atom that attached can get neutralized. But it just
so happens that it can because it can grab those electrons from the zinc atom. And this is the process
of the battery. Zinc atoms come off of the zinc electrode while copper atoms add on to the copper
electrode. That is, in fact, a mass transfer. It's a chemical reaction that changes the number of
moles of each of these metals. So for that, there's a chemical potential associated with each side.
But notice that in each case, the transfer also involves a charge. That's why instead of just
the usual chemical potential, we must use the electrochemical potential to describe the thermodynamics
at play. Now, what I'll do is show you how we would set up such a problem. So the electrochemical
potential contains the intrinsic chemical potential of each component plus the electrostatic
potential acting on the charged species. And just as the chemical potential of a species must be the
same in all phases at equilibrium, well, the electrochemical potential of charged components
must be the same in all phases in order to reach electrochemical equilibrium. And as I've described,
a battery operates by extracting electrical work from a chemical reaction. And just as with chemical
reactions, electrochemical reactions can be analyzed using the Gibbs free energy and the chemical
potential in order to determine the equilibrium state at constant pressure and temperature.
And by the way, that fact that the Gibbs free energy must be a minimum for any possible process,
just as a reminder, that comes from the second law. And we use Gibbs because it's relevant for the
experimental conditions, a system at constant temperature and pressure, which to a good approximation
we can assume that we have here. Now, what we really want to know at the end of our thermodynamic
analysis is the potential difference between the two electrodes. That's because that potential
difference, call it delta phi, is what determines the current that will flow when the battery is
placed in service and the amount of work that's obtained as the system equilibrates. So for each
part of the cell, we break down the reactions at play. And there are four of them. First,
the zinc electrode with the zinc sulfate solution. Second, the copper electrode with the copper
sulfate solution. Third, the two solutions with each other connected by that special bridge.
And four, the two metal electrodes with each other connected by the wire. As you can see,
this leads to a lot of fun reaction equations. And for each reaction, we write down the condition
of equilibrium, which is the change in the free energy must be zero. This allows us to write
balanced equations between the different electrochemical potentials. As you can see here,
by taking these expressions and doing a series of substitutions, we arrive at a very important
equation called the Nernst equation, which relates the electrostatic potential energy change
to the change in free energy of the overall reaction for the system divided by two times
Faraday's constant. The two, by the way, comes from the fact that we have two electrons traveling
through the wire for each reaction cycle that occurs. And now, after all of this fun, I hope that
you can see why saying potato power makes little sense. You see, the real power that came from
our demo did not come from the potato. That simply served as our bridge. Instead, the power came
from the two pieces of metal that I stuck into the potato. As soon as I did, and you saw the light
come on, the zinc electrode was losing atoms, while the copper electrode was gaining atoms.
And it was that gain and loss of charged species in the electrodes that gave us the power.
Okay, so I know that was a lot of discussion about a battery, but it is, after all, the
prototypical system to think about electrochemical potentials. And it also happens to be an immense
part of our daily lives. I hope that the next time you turn on your cell phone or open up your
laptop when it's not plugged in, you think about all those electrons going downhill skiing,
and how the chemical reactions in the battery are leading to charged metal atoms, and the
electrons they leave or take going up and down those potential lifts. And while you're thinking
about that, be reassured by the fact that you're now armed with the proper thermodynamic potential
to understand and handle such cases, where the number of moles of something is a changing quantity,
and as it changes, so does the charge.
