Hi there, and welcome to our lecture on phase diagrams.
In the last lecture, we talked about the phases of matter, and we worked our way through what
happens to the phase of a material as we add heat to it.
In the end, we looked at a few maps of phases where both temperature and pressure can vary.
In this lecture, we're going to travel more deeply into the thermodynamics that is under
the hood of such phase diagrams.
We're going to stick with a single component, as we did last time, but the work we do today
will prepare us to go even further later on, as we consider the properties of mixtures
of materials in multi-component phase diagrams.
So today, we're going to ask the question, why?
Why does ice become water above zero degrees Celsius?
And if we continue heating, why does water become vapor above 100 degrees Celsius?
What quantity governs their equilibrium at different temperatures?
First, let's go with an intuitive explanation.
We talked about the pressure versus temperature phase diagram for water at the end of the
last lecture, and we saw how the phase can change with either temperature or pressure
changes.
Remember how water boils at a much lower temperature at the top of Mount Everest?
We chatted about that last time, and I said it was because it's at a lower pressure up
there.
And as you can see from the phase diagram, at lower pressures, the transition between
liquid and gas for water moves to lower temperatures.
But why does it do that?
Well, let's get some intuition using this particular phase transition as an example.
Let's imagine the water molecules in their liquid phase, say, sitting in a pot on a stove.
Now, above the surface of the liquid sits air, which really just means mostly a bunch
of nitrogen and oxygen dimers in their gas phase.
Yes, there's also a touch of argon atoms and some CO2 and trace amounts of other gases
too, but nitrogen and oxygen certainly are the 800-pound gorillas of our atmosphere.
So these gas molecules hanging out above the water are moving around very fast, bouncing
around in all sorts of ways.
And when they bounce against the water molecules in the liquid, well, that exerts a force onto
the water.
A force we know and love, which we call pressure.
So that's what we're talking about when we say there's a pressure of 1 atmosphere, or
.01 atmospheres, or 10 or 100 atmospheres.
We're talking about how much of this atmospheric gas there is bumping into the top of that
liquid, how fast it's bumping, and overall, what sort of force that exerts per area onto
the liquid surface.
Now, think about that for a moment.
I suppose we're almost at the point where the liquid is going to turn into a gas.
For water at a pressure of 1 atmosphere, that would mean a temperature just shy of 100 degrees
Celsius.
In order to become a gas, the water molecules in the liquid need to gain enough kinetic energy
so that they can break free of their liquid bonds and go off and become a happy gas phase
molecule.
But that act of jumping away from the liquid will be hindered if there are a lot of atmospheric
gas molecules bumping them back down, pushing on them into the liquid, applying a pressure.
That's the reason why water boils at lower temperatures when the pressure is lower.
There are fewer gas molecules to counter the desire of the liquid water molecule to hop
out.
In the most extreme case, say, in outer space, where the pressure is essentially zero, nothing
is there to hold the water back at all.
And liquid water would immediately vaporize as a result, at any temperature, even in the
cold darkness of deep space.
At higher pressures, on the other hand, say, higher than our 1 atmosphere at sea level
back here on Earth, there is more to push down on the liquid, hindering the boiling
and making it so the liquid molecules need more kinetic energy and therefore a higher
temperature to escape.
Now, there's a pretty important point here, and that would be that the real story is a
little bit more complicated than what I just described.
I need to introduce the concept of vapor pressure in order to get our intuitive picture completely
correct.
So let's zoom in to that phase boundary between liquid and gas.
In our temperature lecture, we discussed how for any given temperature, there's a range
of velocities that the atoms and molecules have.
So for water at, say, room temperature, which is around 25 degrees Celsius, the average
velocity is about 600 meters per second.
That's roughly 1,300 miles per hour.
Indeed, just because the molecules are in a liquid, it doesn't mean they don't move
around really fast.
But the point I want to make is that it's not like every water molecule moves at exactly
this speed.
In fact, there is a very broad distribution of speeds.
Some molecules are moving much, much faster, even two or three times as fast, while others
are barely moving at all.
Notice that even at room temperature, there will always be some molecules with enough kinetic
energy to escape the bonding in the liquid and fly out into the air.
Whenever a water molecule leaves the liquid, it becomes a water molecule in the gas phase,
which we also call water vapor.
Now you may have noticed that I've used gas and vapor interchangeably.
The thing is that at any given point, there will be a bunch of these vapor molecules hanging
out above the liquid surface.
In fact, just like some of the liquid molecules can gain enough kinetic energy to break free
of the liquid, likewise, some of those vapor molecules may have just the right collision
to make them lose enough kinetic energy so that they really want to fall back into the
liquid.
This is the real picture at the phase boundary, molecules constantly going back and forth
between the liquid and vapor phases.
And this is where the concept of vapor pressure comes in.
The vapor pressure is the pressure at which the vapor and the liquid are exactly in equilibrium
with one another.
So the gas molecules are going back into the liquid at exactly the same rate as the liquid
molecules are going into the gas.
And you can imagine that the vapor pressure of a material will be highly dependent on
the temperature, on the types of bondings that take place in the liquid, and on how
heavy the atoms or molecules are.
For example, at room temperature, the vapor pressure of water is around 0.03 atmospheres.
This means that the atmospheric pressure at sea level of one atmosphere will be more than
30 times greater than the vapor pressure at room temperature.
So the atmosphere is really able to hold that vapor down close to the liquid surface.
And that's a critical point.
If that water vapor cannot go anywhere because it's being held close to the surface, then
it kind of sits around in equilibrium with the liquid, not allowing more liquid to come
out, except in this constant exchange with the vapor.
Now take a look at the vapor pressure versus temperature for water.
You can see that the pressure increases, in fact, exponentially with temperature.
At the boiling point of water, the vapor pressure has increased to exactly one atmosphere.
And this is indeed the definition of boiling.
When the vapor pressure is larger than the atmospheric pressure, then the atmosphere
no longer has enough strength to hold that vapor near the surface.
In that case, the vapor is able to win against the tug of war with the atmosphere, and it
can freely break out and go off and see the world.
At that point, the vapor near the surface can leave the vicinity, which leaves room
now for the liquid to send more molecules out into the vapor phase.
That's boiling.
So you can see that all of what I said before is true regarding the effects of atmospheric
pressure and how it impacts the liquid.
It's just that the way in which pressure from the atmosphere influences the liquid is not
direct.
Rather, it pushes on the vapor phase of the liquid, which is sitting right above the surface.
The atmospheric pressure is holding those vapor molecules near the surface of the liquid.
So for large atmospheric pressures, there's a lot of force to hold the vapor down.
And with low pressures, there isn't much force to push on the vapor.
So that's our intuitive picture of how pressure and temperature are tied to one another at
a phase transition.
But since I've been talking about boiling and vapor pressure, I cannot leave the subject
without mentioning that boiling is not the same as evaporation.
Water will leave the surface at any temperature, even far below the phase transition temperature.
That's something we're all pretty familiar with.
If you leave a jar of water out in the open air, it'll slowly evaporate until there's
nothing left.
So what's going on?
I just mentioned that at lower temperatures, the pressure from the atmosphere holds the
vapor molecules around, so the liquid guys don't boil out until those vapor molecules
can go where they want by overcoming the atmospheric pressure.
And that is true in general, but the atmosphere does not stay still.
Evaporation happens when the vapor molecules near the surface are brushed aside, maybe
by a nice fresh breeze, or simply because over time they find ways to escape.
Either way, if some vapor molecules are taken away from the vicinity of the surface, then
the liquid molecules once again will send some more up into the gas state, until the
vapor pressure is reached.
That is, once again, until the pressure of the gas phase is just right to balance the
rate of molecules able to leave the liquid, something that again depends heavily on the
temperature.
Now, we can see the dependence of evaporation on the ability of the vapor molecules to find
a way out quite clearly by putting a lid on that jar of water.
In that case, water will initially evaporate, but eventually when enough water or vapor forms,
it cannot float off freely away, and no breeze will carry it off.
So the vapor pressure remains the same, and the molecules condense back into the liquid
at the same rate as the liquid evaporates them off into the vapor.
In a sense, you could say that evaporation is still constantly happening, it's just that
it's perfectly countered by condensation.
So no liquid actually disappears in this case.
One difference between evaporation and boiling is that evaporation is a process that only
occurs on the very surface of the liquid.
Even if a molecule deep down in the liquid did have enough kinetic energy to escape,
if it's not near the surface, it will never make its way out, since along the way it'll
bump into other liquid molecules, dissipating and trading its kinetic energy as it goes.
But unlike evaporation, boiling is a phase transformation that involves the entire liquid,
from the top to the bottom of the container.
In this case, water molecules anywhere in the system are ready to try to jump into the
gas phase.
That's why gas bubbles, the formation of which is actually quite complicated and I won't
go into the details here, those gas bubbles can and do form at the bottom of the pot,
where the heat energy is flowing into the system.
These bubbles, however, must still be able to beat the pressure exerted by the atmosphere
above the liquid in order for the gas to be able to leave the system.
And one last point on boiling water.
Once the water is boiling, if we turn up the heat, does it get any hotter while it's boiling?
The answer is no, not at all.
What does happen is that the water boils more rapidly, but I hope you know by this point
that since the material is undergoing a phase transition, its temperature will remain constant.
More bubbles, more quickly, same temperature.
Okay, so that's our intuitive picture of why both pressure and temperature push and
pull on different phases of matter in different ways.
The PT phase diagram helps us find our way around the interplay between these thermodynamic
forces on the equilibrium phase.
Take a look again at the phase diagram for water.
We just talked about walking around one of these lines, the one that separates the liquid
and gas phases shown here.
Last time, we also talked about how at low enough pressures, you wouldn't even have
a liquid phase.
The transition across this line here is called sublimation, as the solid phase transforms
directly into the gas phase.
I hope with our intuitive picture, you can now understand how this is possible.
At one atmosphere of pressure, as solid ice absorbs heat, its temperature increases and
at the phase transition, while the temperature is fixed, the internal energy increases.
This is because the heat energy is flowing into breaking apart all those hydrogen bonds
as we discussed last time.
But at low enough pressures, it becomes so easy for water molecules in the solid to leave
the surface that extra heat energy simply prefers to go into that process, as opposed
to the process of breaking apart hydrogen bonds internal to the material.
It's quite amazing to think about.
Just by changing the pressure, we've completely eliminated even the possibility for one of
the phases to exist.
Actually, there's a very important technology that many of you probably know about and have
experienced that relies on just this process.
It's called freeze drying.
We know that what makes up most of the stuff we eat is composed of water, mostly at least
of water.
By taking the water out of foods, they can be made to last much longer, since bacteria
and mold don't like to grow without water.
Now, ideally, we want to dry out the food with minimal loss in nutritional content as
well as taste.
But let's say I want to dry out an apple, starting at room temperature.
One way to do this would be to heat it up.
But unfortunately, this leads to the destruction of the rest of the materials in the apple.
We're simply cooking it.
Eventually, all the water will leave as gas, but the apple will also not be anywhere close
to its original form.
So that was going from our starting point here over to the right on the phase diagram.
But what if instead we head to the left first in the phase diagram and then down on the
phase diagram?
Now we've frozen the water inside the apple first, which changes its volume a little bit,
but not usually enough to cause much damage.
Then when I go down in pressure and perhaps increase the temperature a little bit, the
ice will sublimate and turn directly into gas.
Because the sublimation occurs only from the surface of the ice, it's a much gentler process,
and the original apple structure, as well as its flavor, is preserved much better.
I mean, apart from the fact that it's now all dried out, but that was the whole point
in the first place.
Now, I wanted to bring back this phase diagram not just to mention sublimation and freeze
drying, but also to talk about a very special point on the plot.
It's something you've probably noticed already, and you may have noticed that I've been kind
of ignoring it so far.
If you're not, we're not only going to discuss it now, but I'm going to bring it to life
in our demo.
It's called the triple point, and it's where all three phases meet at a single point in
the phase diagram.
Let's take a look.
In this demo, we're going to get right up close to a really cool part of the phase diagram.
It's called the triple point.
And at that point, all three phases of a material, the gas, the liquid and the solid, coexist
at the same time.
So how are we going to do this?
Well, what I have here in this bowl is tert-butyl alcohol.
And that's an alcohol that actually has a phase transition from liquid to solid that's
a little higher than water.
So that means that it's easier to reach that transition temperature under normal standard
conditions.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to lower the pressure.
I'm going to put it in the vacuum chamber and lower the pressure.
And what that does is it removes force from the surface of the liquid, removes air molecules
that are causing a force downward on the liquid.
And that allows the liquid to start to boil.
Let's see what happens when that happens.
I'm going to put it in here and put this back on and turn on the pump.
Let's take a look.
So the liquid is now boiling.
But the thing is, remember when we talked about boiling that what we said was that it's
the highest kinetic energy molecules in the liquid that are leaving it.
And because of that, the temperature of the liquid when it starts to boil goes down.
Let's see what happens when it keeps on boiling and the temperature also starts going down
at the same time.
So there what you saw is that
the liquid for a little bit there was both boiling and freezing at exactly the same time.
That is the triple point.
So that was totally cool.
With the liquid both boiling and freezing simultaneously, we know we were near that triple point in
the phase diagram.
Actually, it's interesting to examine how the system got to the triple point.
First of all, why did I use something called tert-butyl alcohol instead of water?
Well, take a look at the phase diagrams of these two materials.
Both of them have a triple point.
But notice that the triple point for water occurs at an exact temperature and pressure
of .01 degrees Celsius and .006 atmospheres.
Now it's not hard to get to that temperature, but a pressure of .006 atmospheres is pretty
low.
In fact, the pump I'm using is only rated down to just above that, or around .01 atmospheres.
Because this is a single point in the phase diagram, there's absolutely no room for negotiation.
The triple point happens here and nowhere else.
That's different than, say, a phase change where we saw that the boundary can be moved
around by changing pressure or temperature.
There's no moving around of the triple point.
And you can see from the phase diagram that for tert-butyl alcohol that triple point is
at a different place.
In that case, the triple point pressure is much higher at around .05 atmospheres, so
well within the range of our pump.
The triple point temperature is a bit higher than that of water at about 25 degrees C,
so very accessible in our experiment.
And speaking of temperature, you may have noticed in the experiment that I did not have
any way to control temperature.
In fact, I started the liquid at a slightly heated temperature just to make sure it was
well within its happy liquid state.
So it started around here in its phase diagram.
I then lowered the pressure.
And as we saw, what happened is that first the liquid began to boil.
That's because we went like this in the phase diagram, traveling down across the liquid
gas phase boundary.
But the process of boiling in itself is one that releases heat from the material.
Remember, it's those higher kinetic energy molecules that leave.
So the average temperature gets just a tad lower each time a molecule from the higher
end of the kinetic energy spectrum leaves.
With no heat source feeding thermal energy into the system, this means that boiling lowers
the temperature of the liquid.
That means we travel this way to the left on our phase diagram.
And so the process continued, slowly but surely heading over to the triple point from
where I started.
A little pressure drop from the vacuum pump sucking out the gas molecules that just got
boiled off, leading to more boiling, in turn leading to a temperature drop, until we hit
that fantastic singular point where all three phases coexist in one happy place.
OK.
I hope that by now you're starting to really feel your oneness with a phase diagram such
as this.
A good sense of what these phase boundary lines imply and what it means for them to meet
in a single place.
As I've flashed up various phase diagrams for different materials, you'll have noticed
that they're different, in fact quite different from one another, depending on the material.
In order to come back to more of our why questioning, to dig deeper into what makes a material tick
and give it a curve here or a slope there on its phase diagram, let's now turn to our
wonderful thermodynamic variables and the framework of thermal we've built up in this
course.
As I hope you might be thinking, especially if you watched our lecture on equilibrium,
whenever there's a why question and we're talking about equilibrium, we can probably
find the answer in the Gibbs free energy.
The closed system, that is one with fixed mass and composition, is considered and there's
no mass transport across the boundaries.
The system is in stable equilibrium when it has the lowest possible value of the Gibbs
free energy.
And also remember that the whole reason we brought the Gibbs free energy into our thermodynamic
framework was because it's connected to the equilibrium of processes occurring under laboratory
conditions like constant temperature and constant pressure.
A change in G, DG, is equal to volume times DP minus entropy times DT.
So what does this imply?
Since both T and P can control the equilibrium by changing G, it implies that changing T
and P can control equilibrium.
As an example, consider what is happening with the Gibbs free energy at a phase transition.
Let's bring back our plot from the last lecture of the enthalpy or the heat added at constant
pressure as a function of the temperature of the system.
As more heat is added, the temperature rises until it reaches a phase transition, say melting
from solid to liquid or vaporizing from liquid to gas.
At these phase transitions, remember that we have a jump in the enthalpy since a lot
of heat is needed to make the transition occur, even though the temperature does not increase.
So what's happening to the free energy?
Well, take a look at this at the melting transition as an example.
The change in enthalpy, delta H, at that point is equal to the amount that the curve jumps
up from the solid to the liquid side.
That's called the enthalpy of melting, or delta H sub M.
And as we saw before, the change in entropy for the phase transition is equal to delta
H sub M at the melting temperature divided by the melting temperature T sub M.
Remember that since G equals H minus Ts, we can write a change in the free energy as delta
G equals delta H minus T times delta S for a constant temperature, which is the case
during a phase transition.
So putting all this together for the change in free energy during the melting transition,
we have delta G for solid to liquid equals delta H sub M minus T sub M times delta H
sub M over T sub M.
And voila, everything cancels, and we get that delta G for the solid to liquid transition
is zero.
In fact, we knew that this had to be the case.
If we plot the free energy curve as a function of temperature, we'll have a separate curve
for each phase.
And in each case, the slope is negative, which makes sense since the minus Ts part of G
makes it lower and lower as temperature goes up.
But the really key part of this G versus T plot is that the curves for each phase intersect
at certain points.
They intersect at exactly the points that correspond to phase transitions.
Since it's always the lowest free energy that dictates the equilibrium phase, once one of
the curves goes below the other, like when the liquid free energy curve crosses the solid
free energy curve at the melting point, then it's that lower one that tells us which phase
is stable.
We just worked out with our thermodynamic relationships that delta G at the crossing
point is zero, but now you can see this quite clearly and visually from the graph.
If two curves cross, then at the point that they cross, the difference in their values
is of course equal to zero since they have the same value.
So to summarize, the Gibbs free energy of a closed system with independent thermodynamic
variables pressure and temperature determines what phase is in equilibrium.
Each phase has a free energy value at a given pressure and temperature, and the one that
is the minimum energy at a particular temperature and pressure will be the equilibrium phase.
This is how we construct our pressure versus temperature phase diagrams.
Now we know from day to day experience that many materials exist in multiple forms as
a function of the environmental conditions.
Solids melt, liquids boil, and solids can sublimate directly to vapor.
But I'd also like to remind you that materials also exhibit different crystalline forms in
the solid state, depending on the conditions of temperature and pressure.
Remember from the last lecture that solid water, or ice as we'd like to call it, has
15 distinct crystal structures.
These crystal structures, these structural variants are known as polymorphs or allotropes,
where the word allotropes is typically reserved for different structural forms of pure elements
and polymorph more generally covers different structures of any substance.
Okay, back to Gibbs.
One of the most important aspects of a phase diagram is to know how many degrees of freedom
there are at any point in the plot.
It turns out that we have a rule for this, and it's called the Gibbs phase rule.
This states that the number of degrees of freedom, call it F, is related to the number
of components, call that C, and the number of phases we have in equilibrium, call that
P.
By the following relation, F equals C minus P plus 2.
Now the 2 here comes from the fact that I'm looking at a phase diagram with two independent
variables, pressure and temperature.
The reason it's useful to know what F is anywhere in this plot is that the number of
degrees of freedom tell me how many different control knobs I have available to me for changing
the material into a different phase.
The Gibbs phase rule determines how many phases can be in equilibrium simultaneously,
and whether those phases are stable along a field, a line, or a point in space on the
phase diagram.
Well rules are good and all, but let's go back to the Gibbs free energy because it's
this quantity that determines the equilibrium phase.
It's extremely useful to be able to go back and forth between a phase diagram and the
free energy curves for the various phases.
So here's the phase diagram for carbon dioxide.
I just showed you some free energy plots as we examined what happens at the transition
point.
But more generally, how do we go from this phase diagram to a set of free energy curves?
In order to do that, the first thing we need to do is to make a decision.
Do we want to walk along a line of constant pressure or constant temperature?
As an example, here's a walk along a constant pressure line shown on the phase diagram.
I can then, staying at this pressure, plot the free energy as a function of temperature.
And as you can see, at low temperatures, the free energy of the solid phase is lowest.
Then crossing with the liquid free energy curve at the phase boundary, and the liquid
curve is crossed by the vapor phase free energy curve at the subsequent phase boundary.
Now I know I've shown you these types of free energy plots before, but I really want
you to feel comfortable with the idea of being able to go back and forth between this
plot and the phase diagram.
Take a look at what happens if I take a different walk along a different pressure.
Down at this lower pressure, the free energy curves are completely different.
Here the liquid free energy curve is higher than both the solid and gas free energy curves
at all temperatures.
The liquid free energy curve still exists, it's just always higher in energy.
We'll be doing a whole lot more of this back and forth, especially as we move on to another
type of phase diagram, one that gives us a materials map for what happens when two components
are combined.
I hope that by looking at it this way, you can see just how much information is contained
in phase diagrams.
These materials maps capture all of the Gibbs free energy behavior for the different phases,
as a function of any line at constant pressure or temperature, and that is what I call packing
a serious thermodynamic punch.
