In this lecture, I want to dig a bit deeper into the equivalence of work and heat.
This is something we touched on in the last lecture when I introduced the first law of
thermodynamics.
But the idea that work and heat can lead to the same change in internal energy is so powerful
that I want to devote an entire lecture to it here in order to do the concept justice.
And speaking of concepts, the ones I'd like you to be sure you know from this lecture
are a solid grounding of the first law of thermodynamics and the three terms that go
into it, namely work, heat, and internal energy.
These are not new concepts since I've introduced them all in previous lectures, but today I
want you to really feel your oneness with them.
We'll also learn some important new concepts and to complement the feeling side of things.
In this lecture, we're also going to bring in some important mathematical relationships
that we use in thermodynamics to describe the interdependence of these quantities.
But before we get into all that, I'm going to begin with a smashing spark, literally.
In the demo for this lecture, I show a couple of examples of how work can get converted
into heat.
I'll start by lighting a piece of cotton on fire with a hammer.
Let's take a look.
The first law of thermodynamics shows the equivalence of using heat or work to raise the internal
energy of a system.
What that means is that, for example, if I have boiling water, I can't tell you whether
I put mechanical work into making it boil or thermal energy.
That's what the first law says, is that those two are equivalent in terms of raising the
internal energy of that water.
So I want to put this into action today, and the way I want to do that to start with is
by lighting something on fire, which is always a fun thing to do in a thermal course.
So let's take this piece of cotton.
My question is, how could I light this cotton on fire with thermodynamics and a hammer?
Well, one way you might think is that if I just put the cotton down on the table and
I hit it really hard, maybe the kinetic energy from this hammer will spark and will lead
to the cotton lighting on fire.
Let's give that a shot.
So there's the piece of cotton, and I'm going to hit it with a hammer.
Now what you can see is that, well, I've certainly smushed the cotton a little bit, but it hasn't
lit on fire.
So using that transformation of energy doesn't work.
But we in this course are armed with more.
We know about the ideal gas law.
And the question now is, can I use the ideal gas law to light this cotton on fire using
a hammer?
And in fact, the answer is yes.
Let's take a look.
In here, what we have is a chamber.
And what I've done is I've put another little piece of cotton inside, as you can see.
And what I'm going to do is I have here a little piston that fits perfectly into the
chamber like that.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to screw the top on tight so that we have a closed
system.
And then what I'm going to do is take a hammer and I'm going to hit the top of this piston.
And what that's going to do is it's going to compress the gas inside and raise the temperature.
OK?
Let's see if we can get it hot enough.
What I'm going to do, though, is lower the lights here for you so we can see really clearly
if this piece of cotton catches on fire.
So there you saw that I was able to light the cotton on fire with the same initial amount
of work from my arm and the hammer.
The way that worked is because we got the pressure up so high that it increased the
temperature to above the auto-ignition temperature of the cotton, which is a toasty 407 degrees
Celsius, by the way.
So let's now look at another example of the equivalence of work and heat.
In this case, I'm going to use soup.
And what I've done here is I've poured the same soup into two different containers.
In the first, it's in a bowl sitting on what is perhaps the kind of stove that many of
us have seen.
It's just a normal stove.
But in the other case, I'm going to heat the soup up using a blender.
So if we were to look at the stove, and here's a thermometer, this is an IR thermometer,
which some of you may remember from our lecture on temperature, lecture three, I can look
at the soup and I can see that it's getting warmer.
It's about 30 degrees Celsius right now and getting slowly warmer because the burner is
on.
OK?
But a different way to heat that soup up would be with a blender, and that's not usually
how we use the blender, but that's how I want to use it today.
So let's take an initial read of the temperature of the soup before we turn the blender on.
So you can see it's about 21 degrees Celsius.
But now if I turn the blender on, what's going to happen?
So I'm going to turn it on.
And now you can see we have nice blended soup.
But what about the temperature?
Let's take a look.
OK so you can see it's gone up by a couple of degrees Celsius.
Well that's good, but it's not quite hot enough to serve since I like to serve my soup piping
hot.
Let's turn the blender back on and see how hot we can get it.
OK, let's take another look and see how hot we got it.
So you can see that now with just a little bit more mechanical work I've got myself some
nice, tasty piping hot soup.
And the point is that the first law tells us that the internal energy has changed.
But it didn't tell me how it changed.
And heat are equivalent in this sense.
Now what we just witnessed were examples of energy flowing from one type to another.
From mechanical to heat, just like in the original experiments of James Joule.
What if we were to track all of the places the energy comes from or goes to, even beyond
our system as the blender and its contents?
If we really track it down, the initial energy to power the blender started from sunlight
that struck the earth 50 million years ago.
Give or take.
That sunlight energy created biomass in the form of plants and animals.
And then under intense amounts of pressure and a whole lot of time, the biomass was converted
underground into coal, natural gas or oil.
This fossil fuel was then dug out of the ground and lit on fire.
The heat from burning that ancient sunlight was then used to boil water, which generated
steam, which at high enough pressure can be used to turn a massive turbine.
And the motion of the turbine was then used to generate electricity, which was brought
through wires to this building and ultimately into the blender.
At all points along this total energy pathway, different forms of work and heat are involved.
And at all points, the first law of thermodynamics holds true.
After the blender has mixed and heated its contents, we turn it off.
Where has the energy gone at that point?
Well, someone into mixing the contents and as we showed in the demo, someone into raising
its temperature.
If we wait a while longer, the blender contents will equilibrate with the room temperature
by giving off heat to its surroundings.
So ultimately, in that experiment, what we did is the following.
We took million year old sunlight energy and brought it to the air in this room, in the
form of an imperceptibly tiny bit of heat.
Along the way, we hopefully did something useful with that energy.
In most cases involving a blender, that doesn't mean heat, but rather work.
In particular, our usefulness in this case is the work of mixing.
As I mentioned in the last lecture, one of the crucial questions thermodynamics can
answer involves the usefulness of energy in general.
After we introduce the second law in the next lecture, we'll be able to actually quantify
this usefulness.
Meanwhile, let's go back to thinking about all those different work terms.
Remember that a property is a quantity we can measure and observe for a given system.
It's something that differs depending on the thermodynamic state of the system.
Remember that in lecture four, we defined intensive and extensive variables.
Put concisely, an intensive variable does not get bigger or smaller with the size of
the system, while an extensive variable does.
Now, I defined these two types of variables before, but what I didn't tell you is how
they're related.
It turns out that a given intensive property has what is called a conjugate pair, that
is an extensive property.
We use the term conjugate pair to mean that the variables are connected or coupled.
And here's the key point.
The product of the intensive property and the differential change in the conjugate pair
extensive property gives us a work term.
More precisely, it's called differential configurational work, which is just a fancy
way of saying that there is a change in the configuration or structure of the system.
All work involves such a change.
Now, when we write a change in work, we don't use just a plain old D to write DW as we
would have for a change in, say, volume or pressure.
Instead, we write it as a squiggly D. We do this squiggly thing to signify that we're
talking about a change in a variable that is path dependent.
I'll come back to this point in detail in a few moments.
I want to highlight that there are many of these so-called conjugate pairs of
thermodynamic variables.
Each pair, when multiplied, gives a thermodynamic force times a thermodynamic
displacement to produce a certain type of configurational work.
For example, pressure is an intensive property, so it doesn't scale with the system size,
which when multiplied by the change in the extensive property volume, which does scale
with the system size, gives us a configurational work term.
This is a term representing mechanical work.
Surface tension is an intensive property, so it doesn't scale with size.
Which when multiplied by the change in the extensive property area, which will get bigger
as the system gets bigger, gives the surface energy configurational work term.
The chemical potential, and oh, this is a really important one, is an intensive property.
Which when multiplied by the extensive property, the change in the number of particles,
gives us the configurational term known as chemical work, and so on and so on.
Notice that in all cases, the units of the work term are energy.
In all cases, we have a thermo force times a thermo displacement equals energy.
Now, remember our sign convention.
We are assuming a convention where positive work is work done on a system,
and negative work is work done by a system.
This means that in the case of the PDV work term, we'll need to put a minus sign in front,
so that squiggly delta W equals minus P times DV.
This ensures that if mechanical work from a volume change is done on the system, it will be positive.
Just think about squeezing a piston with a gas inside.
In that case, I'm applying a pressure to do work on the system.
The volume change is negative since the piston compresses,
so that means that the total work done will be positive, which follows our sign convention correctly.
Now, you may have noticed that I slipped in a couple of new terms here.
First of all, I'm calling these pairs of variables conjugate pairs.
That one is easy.
It simply means that the variables are connected or coupled, which I hope is now pretty clear.
In other words, not just any two variables will give a thermodynamic work term,
but rather only these special conjugate pairs.
The other word I used was configurational to define the work terms.
This means that it is a type of work that changes the configuration or structure of the system.
We could have just used plain old work instead,
but it is common in thermodynamics to use the term configurational work,
so I wanted to introduce that terminology to you here.
And now we need to turn to another important concept that is crucial in thermodynamics,
namely the concept of reversibility, or irreversibility, as the case may be.
And the way we use these terms is to describe the type of process occurring,
which depends on the type of work being done during that process.
Irreversible work arises from the fact that some types of work are always done on the system regardless.
In this case, reversing the force or displacement direction does not affect the sign of the work.
This is also known as dissipative work, and I'll come back to this in a moment.
First, let's talk about reversible processes.
A reversible process is not real.
It's an idealized process for which the following conditions all hold throughout the entire process.
First, the system is always in equilibrium.
Second, there are no dissipative processes occurring.
In other words, no energy is lost to the surroundings.
There's no friction, viscosity, electrical resistance, and so on.
And third, a reversible process can occur both forward and backward,
with absolutely no change in the surroundings of the system.
Now, irreversible processes, they represent, well, they basically represent nothing short of all natural processes.
We're quite familiar with the concept of irreversibility.
For example, if I put a drop of food coloring into a glass of water,
we can observe the food color diffuse slowly out into the liquid.
The irreversible process going on here is diffusion.
And of course, once it's spread out throughout the liquid,
we never see the food coloring spontaneously diffuse back into a single droplet.
That's what I mean by irreversibility.
Other examples include the expansion of gas into a vacuum.
If you allow gas to see a vacuum chamber, it will flow quickly into it.
But you would never see gas doing the opposite, namely spontaneously leaving a chamber to form a vacuum.
For that, we need to put energy into the system using a pump.
And here's one last example.
Suppose I place a cup of hot coffee on my desk.
The coffee will start to cool off because it will give off heat to the surroundings.
But if I place a cup of room temperature coffee on my desk,
it would never spontaneously heat up and become a nice warm cup of coffee again.
For that, I'd need again to input energy by, say, nuking it for a few minutes.
Now, nuking coffee, there's a particular work term that I'm guessing a lot of us are quite familiar with.
I know that I am.
It's quite intuitive in the examples I just gave that the process described will never reverse.
Later, we'll see that the second law of thermodynamics serves as a rule to account for the one-way nature of these processes.
And notice that I used, quite purposefully, the word spontaneous in each example.
That's a very important word in thermodynamics.
Because remember, thermo tells us about equilibrium states of a system.
In order to find those places of equilibrium, we need to be able to predict which processes are spontaneous and which ones are not.
It's the second law that provides a theoretical criterion to let us determine which direction processes will occur,
even when the answer is not intuitively obvious as it was in those examples.
Now, that's irreversibility, and as I mentioned, it describes all processes in nature.
But back to reversibility for a moment.
I mentioned before that real processes are never reversible.
They may approach the conditions of reversibility that I outlined a few moments ago, but they will never adhere to them fully.
So why do we even discuss or define such a type of process?
As we'll see, these unreal, highly theoretical reversible processes can be used to perform calculations for very real irreversible processes.
The power of using the concept of reversible processes in thermodynamic analysis is that the variables used to analyze thermodynamic systems are state variables.
Remember, this means that if the final and initial states of a system are known, then calculations on those systems can be done with any arbitrary path,
since the final state is independent of the way the system came to that state.
This means I could choose to take a theoretical reversible path in my calculation of a final state property,
and the property I calculate will hold true for the real irreversible path.
Don't worry if that sounds confusing right now. It'll become clearer as we work through some specific examples.
Now, with all this talk of work, I don't want you to forget that another way just as important to transfer energy into a system is through heat.
Remember that it is the addition of these two transfers that give us the energy conservation principle in the first law.
And here's something very exciting I want to show you.
Similar to the case for work, a differential form for heat that would be squiggly delta Q can be found in terms of an intensive property multiplied by the differential of an extensive property.
In this case, the intensive property is going to be temperature T, and the extensive property is none other than entropy itself, or S.
We'll be going all entropy crazy in the next lecture where I introduced the second law, but I couldn't help but bring up this other crucial conjugate pair.
For one thing, because of the fact that it completes our first law equation, so that you have an expression for squiggly delta Q.
But for another, it's the sheer coolness factor of being able to view entropy in this way.
Remember that I've already defined entropy as a counting of the number of possible microstates a system can possess.
Remember that salt dissolution example from lecture four and how counting the allowed microstates explains why salt dissolves in your soup.
But remember also how I promised you that we'd be revisiting entropy in a number of different ways throughout the class to really try to feel it intuitively.
Well, here's another way to see what entropy means.
Just like volume change is the conjugate pair for pressure to give us a work term for mechanical energy, entropy is the conjugate pair for temperature to give us heat energy.
This means that heat itself can be defined as the energy transferred into a system in terms of thermal interactions with a transfer of entropy.
Entropy provides the link between heat and temperature.
And that there is my repeat for the day.
Entropy provides the link between heat and temperature.
The last topic I want to discuss in this lecture, as promised, involves digging in a bit into the math that's important in thermodynamics.
Specifically, we need to go into more detail on the nature of that squiggly delta I've introduced earlier.
Another name for a delta in general is a differential.
So the differential volume would be dv.
And as we learn in introductory calculus, I can integrate over a differential variable to get the total value of that variable.
If I integrate over the differential dv from, say, v1 to v2, I would get the change in volume, or v2 minus v1.
Now, that type of differential, when I write it as a d like that, is called an exact differential.
It means that the integral over it does not depend on the path taken.
We know this intuitively from the calculus.
We integrate over the dv to get a v and then plug in the values of the integrand, v1 and v2, to get the actual value of the integral.
We didn't worry about how the volume of some system went from v1 to v2.
And you may be thinking, hey, I know another more thermodynamic way to call that.
It's a state variable when it doesn't depend on the path taken.
And that's absolutely right.
We describe changes in state variables by exact differentials.
And that brings us to the two energy transfer terms of the first law, work and heat, or w and q.
Here, as I've mentioned a number of times, we have variables that are not state variables, but rather they are path dependent.
That's why we use a different differential to describe a change in such a variable.
The squiggly d is also called an inexact differential.
Since if I integrate over it, I must specify a path for the integral.
That makes some sense if you think about it.
We cannot integrate over a path dependent variable without knowing its path.
The squiggly is just our mathematical notation to make sure we know what type of variable we're describing.
Let's return now to the first law itself.
Remember that for a given process, any change in u, the internal energy of the system, is equal to the sum of the energy transfer terms q and w.
But now let's write the first law in its differential form.
The differential du equals the differential change in the internal energy of the system, which equals squiggly dq plus squiggly dw.
Notice that for u, I used the exact differential, so no squiggly, and that's because internal energy is a state function and does not depend on the path taken,
only on the endpoints of the integral itself, or in our thermodynamic terminology, the initial and final states of the system.
One of the nice things about a differential being exact is that it means there are a number of mathematical consequences that we can take advantage of in thermodynamics.
For example, when a differential is exact, we can use certain relationships and rules that hold rigorously for the variable being differentiated.
One class of relationships known as Maxwell's relations are extremely important since they allow us to transform one thermodynamic equation into another one,
sometimes making it much more useful for the problem at hand.
The mathematical rules associated with exact differentials also allow us to equate one thermodynamic variable such as temperature, entropy, volume, pressure, or internal energy with derivatives of other variables.
So that covers all of the topics I wanted to go over in this lecture, but I'd like to finish the lecture with a calculation.
We don't do this all the time, but with all this talk of variables and math, I'm kind of in the moon to get quantitative.
In the demo, you saw that with a hammer, I could create enough pressure to ignite a piece of cotton.
Let's use thermodynamics to answer the following question.
What is the minimum velocity of that hammer that is required to ignite the cotton?
Apart from our thermal, one piece of information we'll need to know is the temperature at which the cotton auto ignites.
It turns out to be a nice and toasty 407 degrees Celsius.
So first, we need to think about what it means to know the velocity of the hammer.
What type of energy is that?
Well, the velocity is directly related to the kinetic energy of the hammer since that energy is one-half times the mass of the hammer times its velocity squared.
So our goal in this problem is to find the kinetic energy of the hammer necessary to make the cotton reach 407 degrees Celsius.
Let's assume the gas inside of the cylinder is ideal.
And I hope that you remember from Lecture 5 what that means.
Since now, we'll treat the behavior of the gas using the ideal gas law.
That is PV equals nRT, where pressure times volume equals the number of moles of the gas times the gas constant R times the temperature.
Also, for an ideal gas, remember that the internal energy is equal to three-halves times n times R times T.
Since for an ideal gas, the internal energy only depends on the temperature, at least when the number of moles of the gas is constant,
then we can just use changes in the internal energy to get the changes in temperature of the gas.
If all of the kinetic energy of the hammer goes into the gas, then it goes directly into changing the internal energy of the gas.
So delta U of the gas, which equals three-halves times n times R times delta T of the gas, must equal the kinetic energy of the hammer,
or one-half mass of the hammer times velocity of the hammer squared.
The change in temperature of the gas is equal to the auto-ignition temperature of the cotton minus room temperature,
which is 407 degrees Celsius minus 25 degrees Celsius.
The cylinder in the experiment I performed, while open to air, has a volume of eight-and-a-half centimeters cubed at atmospheric pressure and room temperature.
From the ideal gas law, the total number of moles of gas in the cylinder is given as follows, n equals pV divided by RT.
So plugging in the values for p, v, r, and T, we get that the number of gas molecules is roughly three-and-a-half times ten to the minus fourth moles.
And we can assume that this value does not change.
So when the rod is placed in the cylinder, the number of gas molecules remains a constant since the cylinder is now closed.
So now we have n, and we have the change in temperature, which means we can compute the change in internal energy of the gas during the process.
Plugging everything in, we get a value of around 1.7 joules.
And from that, we get our velocity of the hammer, since we can now set the kinetic energy of the hammer equal to this value.
It turns out that for a hammer that weighs about a kilogram, this minimum velocity needed to ignite the cotton is around two meters per second.
Also, since we have the ideal gas law relationship, if we wanted, we could use that to compute the final pressure at the point of auto ignition.
So there you have it, a nice example of how to calculate the transformation of work, in this case from the motion of the hammer into heat.
By the way, if there had been heat dissipation, our first law covers that too.
We'd just have had to know what it was and include that in the calculation.
One way to know if heat dissipated in that process would be to measure the temperature during the process.
Another way would be to know something about the entropy change during the process, and that will be the topic of our next lecture.
