In the last lecture we talked about chemical reactions, but as you may remember at the
end, I kind of teased you a bit. I talked about how temperature plays a role in reactions
through the entropy term in the free energy. But then I also told you that reactions can
deviate from the case of standard conditions in ways that don't just involve temperature.
I briefly mentioned that in such cases what we do is to add an additional term to the
molar free energy change expression, the logarithm of something called a reaction quotient.
Today I'm here to tell you that we will indeed learn much more about the reaction quotient.
Some scientists, especially chemists and chemical engineers, will tell you that the expression
for the free energy change during a reaction that includes this reaction quotient thing,
they tell you that that equation is the single most important equation in all of thermodynamics.
And while I'm not sure I would say such a sweeping dramatic thing, I can certainly
understand why some would say this. In this lecture I want to be sure we understand what
the reaction quotient is, and how it's applied, and why it's so important. So I want to contrast
two different types of reactions to help understand the key reason for why we need the reaction
quotient. In the first reaction we will have pure compounds reacting together. In the second
reaction we will have dissolved compounds reacting together. As an example of the first
type of reaction, pure compounds reacting together, let's consider a really cool metal
called titanium. Now titanium is really strong. It has a very high melting point and it's
highly corrosion resistant, which means it doesn't damage much at all over time. It's
used a lot in the aerospace industry as well as other areas like medical technologies or
for pipes in the oil and gas industry. Now even though it's the 10th most abundant element
in the Earth's crust, pure titanium is actually pretty hard to extract. See, titanium comes
naturally as an oxide, TiO2, but we just want the Ti part by itself. And it turns out that
getting rid of the oxygen for this particular metal is not easy. So what is done is first,
TiO2 is converted into TiCl4, using the reaction TiO2 plus 2Cl2 plus 2C goes to TiCl4 plus
2Cl. This takes quite a bit of energy and needs to be done very carefully. But then once
we have the TiCl4, we can use sodium to make pure titanium. The reaction for that is TiCl4
plus 4Na goes to Ti plus 4NaCl. Okay, so there are two reasons I'm using this particular
example. First, this is a really important aspect of material science and a fantastic
example of how knowing and controlling a chemical reaction is crucial. We use pure
metals all the time in our lives, but they almost never come to us in their pure form
in the Earth, so we need to understand how to extract them. But the other reason I'm
using this example is because it's a nice simple reaction that involves pure substances.
As a reminder of what we discussed in the last lecture, what we most badly want to know
and what thermodynamics can tell us is which way the reactions will go. Remember also that
thermodynamics does not tell us whether it will go or not. It tells us only if the energy
gradient favors it. There are often kinetic barriers to the reaction occurring. We can
figure out if this reaction will occur by adding up the values of the standard state
molar free energies for each compound, and from those calculate delta G of the reaction.
In this case, that delta G is equal to minus 600 kilojoules per mole at 900 degrees Celsius.
Remember that from the second law, if the change in G for a reaction is negative, then
the reaction will proceed. This means that the reaction as written is spontaneous, which
means that it wants to occur. So what happens is that at that temperature, titanium chloride
and sodium get used up during the reaction. But here's the key point. While being used
up, they do not change their Gibbs free energies. The reaction will proceed as long as any reactants
are left. When either the sodium or the titanium chloride is completely used up, the reaction
must stop. It just runs out of stuff to react. We can think about this reaction in a very
simple graphical manner as shown here. The y-axis is the total molar free energy, and
the x-axis is just used to place my reactants and products. I plot bars to represent the
magnitude of the combined molar Gibbs free energies of the products and the reactants.
The difference in the height of the bars is minus 600 kilojoules per mole. And just to
be complete, I put a bar in between them that I call energy barrier. This may or may not
be higher than the reactants and products. In this case, I've drawn it higher, which
indicates that the reaction would need some sort of boost to get it going. The middle
bar in that represents an activation energy barrier that prevents the reaction from occurring.
The point here is that the size of these bars does not change during the reaction because
none of the products or reactants changes in any way, only the amounts of those change.
The value delta G never goes to zero. This is the key point, so let me just emphasize
once more. For this reaction of pure compounds, all of the molar free energy differences are
based on the values of the molar free energy of the products and reactants in their reference
states. And these values do not change during the reaction.
Okay, now I want to contrast this case with another reaction example. In the second case,
I'll use a reaction in which all products and reactants are dissolved in water. Let's
consider carbonic acid or H2CO3 in solution. This is a pretty important chemical since
when CO2 mixes with water, part of it reacts with water to form H2CO3. And since H2CO3
is a bit on the acidic side, that means that when CO2 mixes with water, the water becomes
just a bit more acidic. You could in fact take a straw and blow bubbles into a glass
of water, and after just a little bit, the water would go from a pH of 7 to a pH of about
5. The term pH is a measure of the acidity of a solution, and going from 7 to 5 means
the solution becomes 100 times more acidic. So the reaction that occurs is H2CO3 goes
to HCO3 minus plus H plus. And note that as it's written, I've put the letters AQ
in parentheses to help remind us that these are all dissolved in solution. That just means
there's water all around. Those H plus atoms are what make things acidic. So here's the
crucial point. This reaction is very different than the first one I showed you because now
the products and reactants are capable of changing their concentration during the reaction.
At the very start of this dissolved compounds reaction, we begin in the same way by looking
up the values of the molar free energy at standard conditions for each species. We find
a value of delta G equals plus 36.3 kJ per mole. So this is a positive value, which means
that the reaction goes spontaneously to the left as it's written. But that's fine. But
as soon as the reaction starts, the concentrations of H plus and HCO3 minus start to decrease.
The concentration of H2CO3 starts to increase. And in this case, the Gibbs free energies
of all three change. Let's plot this in the same way that we did for the titanium extraction
reaction between pure compounds by looking at the molar free energy for the reaction.
On the left, I'm showing the starting conditions represented by the numbers I just gave you,
which come from looking up molar free energies in tables. But note that we include here a
superscript so that it reads mu naught, which indicates that standard temperature and pressure
conditions were used for all products and reactants. The reactants, which in this case
are H plus and HCO3 minus, have a greater net molar free energy than the product, which
is H2CO3. In the middle, I'm plotting the free energies after the reaction has proceeded
for some time. The point is that as shown by the arrows on the plot, the molar Gibbs
free energy of the reactants decreases, and that of the products increases during the
reaction. This is in very stark contrast to the titanium chloride plus sodium reaction
between pure compounds, where the free energies remained constant throughout. Sooner or later,
for the case of carbonic acid, as the reaction between dissolved compounds continues, a state
of equilibrium is reached, and the molar Gibbs free energies of the reactants and products
are equal, as shown on the right here. The reason why this reaction is so different is
that the solutes can change their concentrations during the reaction, which in turn changes
their molar Gibbs free energies. Quite different from the all pure substances situation.
So what do we do for such a case? Well, there's no need to worry. This situation can easily
be described using what is known as the equilibrium constant. But before we get to that, most
important equation in thermodynamics, as some people call it, let's summarize the key point
of where we are so far. So chemical reactions of any kind can proceed initially in one direction
or the other, dictated by the difference in free energies between the reactants and products.
And here's the thing, either way it goes, the reaction can then stop for two reasons.
First, one of the reactants is simply used up, which would be what stops the titanium
extraction reaction. Or second, the reaction reaches an equilibrium state, with all products
and reactants still present, but now in some sort of new balanced condition. The way we
describe the second case, where reactant and product concentrations in solution are changing,
is by considering the change in the chemical potential as a function of concentration for
each component involved in the reaction. Remember in our lecture on mixing in osmosis,
how we derived an expression for the change in entropy upon mixing? We found that there's
always additional entropy caused by mixing, and it only depends on the concentrations
of the mixtures. Here's a plot of the molar entropy of mixing. As the mole fraction of
one of the components varies, the molar entropy of mixing increases as the two components
are mixed, and it reaches a maximum for a 50-50 mixture. The function you're seeing here
is the one we derived from a simple statistical model. Now, it turns out that from this expression
for the entropy of mixing, we can also write down expressions for the free energy change
upon mixing. That's something we talked about back in lectures 17 and 18 on binary phase
diagrams. We can write the chemical potential of either one of the species in the mixture
as having changed due to the concentration of that component changing. In the example
of two components A and B mixing, the chemical potential of A is equal to the standard state
chemical potential of A, which we write as mu naught sub A, plus the gas constant R times
the temperature T times the natural log of the mole fraction of component A. This is
a powerful equation that tells us how the Gibbs free energy varies with changes in concentration
of something in solution. That's exactly the case for our carbonic acid reaction. However,
the form I'm showing you only applies to ideal solutions. Remember that ideal here means
that we have ignored interactions, just like in the ideal gas law. So the equation only
considers changes in the free energy or chemical potential if we take the molar free energy
due to the entropy of mixing. But as you may have guessed, most reactions are not ideal
since interactions between components can be very different from the interactions of
one component with itself. For the components A and B, this would mean that A and B have
a very different bonding character than either A with A or B with B. And this kind of effect
is not taken into account in the ideal solution model. So we need to expand the range of applications
and the applicability of this relationship. But this form of the equation, where we take
the standard state chemical potential and add a single term that goes as the logarithm
of something, that's a very convenient mathematical form. So we'd really like to retain it. We
do this by defining something called the activity. The chemical potential of a component at any
concentration is equal to the chemical potential at standard state conditions plus RT times
the natural logarithm of the activity of that component. So what have we done? Well,
quite simply we've replaced the mole fraction with this other variable. And that's it.
But it is a very powerful switch because now we can essentially include any changes that
happen to the chemical potential of the reacting species during the reaction. At the same time
we retain the same mathematical form, namely a natural logarithm. So we write the chemical
potential for a given component, say component i, as the standard state chemical potential
for that component. In other words, when it's in its pure form and not reacting, plus RT
times the natural log of the activity of that component, A sub i. It's nice to write the
activity in terms of a coefficient for which we use the symbol gamma and it's called the
activity coefficient times the mole fraction of that component. And by writing that, by
writing the activity this way, we can really clearly see how far away from the ideal solution
model the system is. For example, you can see that if gamma for a component is equal
to one, then the activity of that component becomes the mole fraction of the component.
We get back the same equation for the chemical potential that we had when we ignored interactions
and just had the ideal solution model. The deviation of the activity coefficient from
one is a measure of how far away from ideal the system is. And as we were discussing in
so many cases for reactions, the activity coefficient can vary quite a bit as a function
of the mole fraction of each species in solution. Take a look at these plots of both the activity
and the activity coefficient for a mixture of carbon disulfide and acetone. On the left
is a plot of the activity versus concentration for this solution. So here, if the graph showed
a straight line from 0, 0 to 1, 1, then we would simply have ideal behavior since the
activity would just be equal to the mole fraction at any concentration. But as you can see,
when we compare the true experimentally measured activity of the system, it deviates considerably
from ideality. Now take a look at the graph on the right. This is the plot of the activity
coefficient for the same solution. And here, in the behavior of the activity coefficient,
we can clearly see a few things. First of all, there's a very strong dependence on concentration.
Remember that if the activity coefficient is 1, then the activity is just equal to
the mole fraction, so we have the ideal solution model. And just to be sure we're on the right
page, as a reminder, the ideal solution model means that the chemical potential will change
upon mixing things together, but only because the entropy of the mixture increases. In the
ideal solution model, we've ignored the effects of interactions. So again, the activity which
does include those effects can tell us how important they were in the first place. Okay,
back to the activity coefficient plot. So you can see that at low concentrations, the
coefficient deviates a lot from 1 by a factor of more than 3. This factor has an enormous
impact on the chemical behavior of the system, which again, remember, is driven by the chemical
potential. Just think about it. At a mole fraction of, say, 0.2, then in the ideal solution model,
we would have a change in the chemical potential due to mixing of r times t times the natural
log of 0.2. But if I now have that factor of 3 coming from the activity coefficient, then
we would have a natural log of 0.6 instead of 0.2, and that gives a result that's about
3 times smaller. So it's not just, say, a small change, like 10 or 20%, but rather interactions
that can lead to huge differences in the effects of mixing. At higher concentrations, a factor
of 2 or 3 in the activity coefficient could even lead to a complete change in the sign
of that logarithm term, which would fully reverse the qualitative effects of mixing.
So a key point here is that as concentration changes, the activity coefficient also changes.
In the case of carbon disulfide mixed with acetone, it gets smaller with increased concentration
of CS2. This means that the system behaves more and more like an ideal solution as more
and more CS2 is mixed in. If we think about what this means at a molecular scale, it means
the following. As we add more CS2 to acetone, the difference in how the CS2 and acetone
interact with each other compared to how CS2 interacts with itself and how acetone interacts
with itself becomes less and less. And once the concentration of CS2 reaches about 90%
mole fraction, the activity coefficient has effectively converged to around 1. So the solution
behaves pretty much like an ideal solution. Actually, this limit where the solution starts
to behave like an ideal one because the concentration is approaching 1, that limit has a special
name. It's called Raoultian behavior. Mathematically, this behavior is written as follows. As the
concentration X sub CS2 goes to 1, then the activity A sub CS2 goes to X sub CS2. Raoultian
behavior simply means ideal behavior. It's the same thing. So we're back to the chemical
potential of mixing depending on the natural log of just the molar concentration. Francois
Marie Raoult was a French physicist who was experimenting with vapor pressures back in
the day. That would be around 1882. He saw that if he had a solution of two liquids,
say A and B, then as long as no other gases were present, the total vapor pressure above
the solution was equal to the weighted sum of the pure vapor pressures of the two components.
So he found that the total vapor pressure P is equal to the mole fraction X sub A times
the partial vapor pressure P sub A plus X sub B times P sub B. Now, though here we're talking
about pressures, this is equivalent to the same ideal solution model behavior we found
for the free energy and chemical potential. In our example, as the concentration of CS2
becomes high enough, each CS2 effectively will see, for the most part, other CS2s as
opposed to acetone molecules. This is why the behavior of a given component is guaranteed
to become more and more ideal as the concentration of that component increases. It simply starts
to feel less and less like it's in a mixture in the first place. Now, let's take a look
at the other extreme. Over in the other limit where we have very low concentrations of
CS2, you can see from the plot of the activity that the behavior is in fact quite non-ideal.
This is where we saw the largest deviation from one in the activity coefficient plot.
Over at low concentrations where the CS2 is highly dilute in the solution with acetone,
each CS2 molecule effectively sees, for the most part, only acetone molecules. So in this
limit, we can approximate that there is a strong change from ideality, especially if
the molecules interact strongly with each other differently than they do with themselves.
For low concentrations, just as with the high concentration regime, we also have a special
name. We call the behavior of the mixture Henryan for this case. William Henry formulated
Henry's law back in 1803, and like Raoult, he was also playing around with liquids and
gases and measuring pressures. Henry's law says that at a constant temperature, the amount
of gas that dissolves in a liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of that gas in equilibrium
with the liquid. For a dilute solution, Henry's law tells us that the pressure goes as a constant.
It's called Henry's constant, times the molar concentration of the solute. It's interesting
to compare this to Raoult's law, which states that the pressure goes as the partial pressure
of that component in its pure state times its mole fraction, valid for the other extreme
at high concentrations. Both these laws appear to give something similar, a dependence of
a constant times a mole fraction. This is actually true if the two components being mixed have
a similar bonding behavior with each other as they do with themselves. But that's just
for the ideal solution case. If interactions are strong and different between the two components,
then in the case of Henryan behavior, we're looking at a regime where these differences
are in a sense maximized. Since again, each solute is surrounded primarily by only solvent,
as opposed to other solute molecules. That's why in the activity coefficient plot, we saw
the largest deviation from one occurring right near zero. This is where the mixture
is said to have Henryan behavior. For a narrow concentration range near zero, the deviation
from ideality is roughly a constant, and that's Henry's law.
Just to ground Henry's law in an example, consider a can of some carbonated beverage.
Before you open it, there's CO2 gas inside, sitting above the liquid drink, and that CO2
is pressurized. It's not too high of a pressure, but usually about twice the atmospheric pressure.
Now, the liquid also has CO2 inside of it, dissolved in the liquid. We can think of this
as none other than our two-component solution. Here, component A would be the liquid, and
component B would be the CO2. In the unopened can, the CO2 that's mixed in a solution with
the liquid is at fairly low concentrations. So, the behavior of the chemical potential
of CO2 in the solution will be Henryan. That means that the amount of CO2 that's actually
dissolved in the liquid is proportional to the partial pressure of the CO2 above the
liquid in the can. If the gas inside the can is essentially all made up of pure CO2, which
is usually the case, then this partial pressure above the liquid is just the total pressure
of the gas. In a typical can of, say, soda, the amount of CO2 dissolved in the liquid
is around 0.2% mole fraction. This is pretty low, so we know we're in the Henryan limit.
This means that we might expect that if I double the partial pressure of CO2 inside the can,
then I could get up to 0.4% CO2 dissolved in the beverage. And in fact, within a certain
range of concentrations, this is the case. The amount of carbonation is driven simply
by the pressure of CO2 above the liquid. But, as the concentration of CO2 continues
to increase, then the behavior begins to deviate from Henryan, and this type of dependence
will no longer be observed. Note that when the can is opened, all of that CO2 that was
under pressure goes away. That's the pop sound we hear when we open it. Now the concentration
of CO2 dissolved is much higher than it wants to be, given that the partial pressure of
CO2 above the liquid has just been dramatically reduced. That's why the drink bubbles. The
concentration of the CO2 in the liquid must decrease until it's suitably proportional
to the partial pressure, which, when the can is opened, is extremely low.
And this is a perfect opportunity to return to our original example of a reaction where
the reactants are dissolved in water, the one involving carbonic acid. That's because,
as I mentioned a bit earlier in this lecture, CO2 dissolved in water at low concentrations
leads to the formation of carbonic acid, or H2CO3. And then, remember that we talked
about how carbonic acid decomposes into HCO3- and H+, with the reaction that I showed before.
H2CO3 goes to HCO3- plus H+. This reaction is what causes carbonated water to have a
slightly more sour taste, since it becomes a little bit acidic. That's also why sometimes
alkaline salts like sodium bicarbonate are added to soda water. They reduce the acidity,
which reduces the sourness. And now that we have all this activity stuff under our belt,
we arrive at an exciting place. That would be the point where we're ready to learn the
thermodynamic equation that governs the carbonic acid reaction. And it goes as follows. The
change in the chemical potential in a reaction is equal to the difference in the standard
state chemical potentials plus R times T times the natural log of what is called the
reaction quotient, or Q. This reaction quotient is the ratio of the activities of the products
multiplied together, divided by the activities of the reactants multiplied together. So,
for the carbonic acid reaction, this Q would equal the activity of HCO3- times the activity
of H+, divided by the activity of H2CO3. And the chemical potential change occurring
during the reaction is written as the standard state chemical potential of HCO3- plus the
standard state chemical potential of H+, minus the standard state chemical potential of H2CO3.
And add to that RT times the natural log of Q, which is the natural log of those activities
as shown. The activities in the Q change during the reaction, as the system strives to reach
equilibrium. From our discussion a moment ago about the activity of CS2 or CO2 in the
solution and the different limits of Raoultian and Henryan, one thing we saw for sure is
that these activities are highly dependent on concentration. And see, that's just the
thing. The concentrations of these components are changing as they react, so the activities
will change as well. This reaction quotient allows us to keep being able to calculate
the chemical driving force for the reaction at any point, as long as I also happen to
know what the activities are for the reactants and products. And then there's that very
special point, where in fact this driving force, this change in chemical potential due
to a reaction occurring, when that is zero. At that point, there's no longer a way for
the system to lower its free energy, and so it's in equilibrium. We can find this point
simply by plugging in zero for the change in chemical potential. We find that the equilibrium
point for the reaction is determined when the RT natural log term is equal to those differences
in standard state chemical potentials. This point, where we have equilibrium, is so important
that we call the reaction quotient at that point, the equilibrium constant. It's still
just the same reaction quotient, but it only refers to the equilibrium point in the reaction.
So many textbooks will give that its own variable. Often K is used for the equilibrium constant.
So certainly among those who do a lot of chemistry, this equation for the equilibrium of reaction
has been called the most useful in thermodynamics. But most important is the fact that the activity
product ratio that makes up the equilibrium constant on the right hand side is independent
of the variations in the system composition. As you can see, the equilibrium constant K
is controlled completely by the difference in standard state chemical potentials. This
means that it's only a function of the temperature and pressure, and for any given temperature
and pressure, it's a constant. As soon as the substances reacting are chosen, then the
value for the equilibrium constant is fixed. It's the activity product ratio that would
be observed if the system were able to reach equilibrium. Now, the equilibrium constant
is a very useful piece of information to have about a reaction. If K is very large, it shows
the reaction will tend to go to completion. That is, mostly products will be present at
equilibrium. And if K is small, it shows that the reaction hardly goes at all before enough
products are formed to stop it. If you're trying to design a process to produce some
kind of new chemical, then you can imagine how important it would be to know to what
extent the reactions involved in this process should theoretically proceed. The equilibrium
constant will not tell you whether reactants will actually react or at what rate. Remember,
in thermodynamics, we take an eventually it will happen approach. Just as a candle does
not light itself, even though the burning of a candle is a highly favorable reaction.
There can be any number of reasons for reaction kinetics to be very slow or even completely
hindered. The equilibrium constant indicates the activity product ratio at equilibrium,
not whether equilibrium is easily achievable. So finally, let's apply this equation to our
carbonic acid reaction. So what we really want to figure out is how much of this reaction
will actually occur before it reaches equilibrium. We can now do that by equating plus 36.3 kilojoules
per mole to minus RT times the natural log of the ratio of activities. Plugging in the
value of R, which is 8.3 joules per mole kelvin and room temperature, which is 298 kelvin,
we can solve for K. We find that the natural log of K must be equal to minus 14.66. And
then solving for K, we get the value K equals 10 to the minus 6.37. This means that the
ratio of activities for this reaction equals 10 to the minus 6.37 when the reaction has
reached equilibrium. And this is the answer to our question of what happens to the reaction
after it starts. The reaction continues until the ratios of the activities of the products
and reactants equals this equilibrium constant, which in this case is very small. That means
that very little of the reactants have formed products at equilibrium. Basically, not all
that much happens. The physical result of this is that carbonic acid is a weak acid.
So there you have it. In this lecture, we talked about a crucial concept in the application
of thermodynamics to reactions, namely the activity coefficient and how it relates to
concentration and the chemical driving force during a reaction. This in turn led us to
a way to compute this driving force at any concentration and to an equation to find the
equilibrium of a reaction. This is of fundamental importance when the ability of a reaction
to occur depends on the concentrations of the reactants and products, which are changing
during the reaction.
