We've already mentioned the word phase a number of times in this course.
Phasor can exist in a variety of phases.
To be precise, a phase is a uniquely identifiable form of a material separated by other forms
by an interface.
The phases we encounter most often are gases, liquids, or solids of differing crystal structures.
Now I've talked about how thermodynamic properties can vary dramatically from one phase to another
of the same material, and how at those transition points between phases, some properties are
not even well defined.
But so far, the phases of materials have been discussed in terms of some other important
thermodynamic concept, like say heat capacity or thermal expansion.
Today, I'll make the phase itself the topic of discussion.
Folks, this is big time, because ultimately, as I talked about way back in the introduction
to the course, it is the phase maps of materials that represent one of the most important outcomes
of thermodynamics.
These maps, also called phase diagrams, they provide enormous amounts of information about
a given material or a given composition of different materials.
Let's begin with a question.
What is one of the very few materials that we are all intimately familiar with in all
three of its phases?
Most materials only exhibit a single phase in our normal living conditions.
However, there is one material familiar to everyone that exhibits multiple phases at
standard living conditions.
Quite bluntly, if you weren't familiar with it, you'd be dead.
The material is dihydrogen monoxide, or more commonly, water.
We can't live without knowing and drinking it in its liquid phase, and most of us have
also held ice cubes in felt steam.
And we also know how to change water from one phase to another, lower its temperature
to zero degrees Celsius and it becomes ice, or raise it above 100 degrees Celsius to make
steam.
But how rigid are these temperature boundaries around the phases?
Come take a look at how I've cheated to the freezing point boundary and made something
called supercooled water.
This is a really fun demo and something you can all try at home.
OK, so in this demo, we're going to talk about what happens when you supercool water.
First of all, here I have just some regular water.
When I pour it, well, what happens?
What happens is you get regular water in the bowl.
But here is water that's been cooled below its freezing point.
When I pour this water into the bowl, what happens is something very different.
As you can see, as I pour it and it hits the bottom of the bowl, it actually turns into
ice.
How is that possible?
How did that happen?
Well, it's because I was able to bring the temperature of the water down below the actual
freezing temperature, the phase transition point of that liquid.
It needed a trigger to get out of that metal stable state.
That's why it didn't just convert into ice while it was inside the bottle.
The trigger in this case was just pouring it into the bowl and having it strike the bottom
of the bowl.
And you can see that as it did so, it froze instantly.
And another thing I could do instead of pouring the water and watching it turn into ice as
it pours, is I could just trigger it by shaking it or hitting the bottle and then all the
water inside of the bottle will turn into ice instantly.
Let's take a look at that.
So I'm just going to hit it, hit the bottom of the bottle to trigger it.
And then you can see that the whole bottle of water just essentially froze instantly
and it went back to the phase that it wants to be in, which is solid ice.
So there you saw an example of how we can push materials into being metastable.
That means it's not exactly in its happy place.
And any small nudge could send it out of its current phase and into another happier or
in more technical terms, lower energy state.
By the way, did you know that there isn't just one form of ice?
Remember that for solids, we can have different phases since the atoms or molecules can arrange
in different crystal structures.
Diamond and graphite are a well-known example of this.
Two different materials made up of exactly the same atom, carbon, but just arranged differently
in its repeating lattice structure.
And what a difference that makes.
We don't usually spend thousands of dollars on a graphite ring for someone we love.
That would be kind of strange since graphite is the core ingredient to most pencils.
But in the case of water, we have not just one, but rather a whopping 15 different phases
of solid ice.
Each one with a different crystal structure and density.
Now I'm going to spend most of today talking about one of the simplest ways to change a
material from one phase to another using a single control knob, namely by changing its
temperature.
This leads us to our very first phase map, where we examine the dependence of the phase
of a material on its temperature.
In our lecture about heat capacity, we looked at where energy from heat actually goes in
a material, how it gets distributed among the various degrees of freedom.
And we talked about how heat capacity is defined as the change in heat added divided by the
change in the resulting temperature of the material.
That's just the slope of a plot of heat added versus temperature.
And while we did talk about how the heat capacity varies considerably from one phase to another,
we did not examine closely what happens for this plot across a range of phases.
Let's do that now for the case of water.
Here's a plot of heat versus temperature for a fixed pressure of one atmosphere.
I'll start at a low temperature, say minus 50 degrees Celsius, where we know water is
a solid.
As we add heat to the solid ice, its temperature increases, and it goes fairly linearly with
a slope equal to the heat capacity.
In this part of the diagram, note that it will be the heat capacity of the solid phase.
Now, as we approach the melting point of water, at zero degrees Celsius, we find something
very interesting occurs.
Namely, I keep adding heat to the system, but the temperature does not change.
In fact, I need to add a whole lot of heat before the temperature starts changing again.
In the plot, this results in a vertical line at the temperature corresponding to the phase
boundary.
Once we add enough heat, the temperature again starts to increase linearly with heat added,
just as before, although now with a different slope corresponding to the heat capacity of
the liquid phase.
The same type of transition then occurs at 100 degrees Celsius, where water undergoes
another phase transition.
So what's going on here?
We can see from the plot that in order to make the material go from one phase to another,
a lot of heat needs to be added.
This heat is not raising the temperature of the material, but rather it's doing something
else to make it change its phase.
What is it doing?
Well, to answer this, let's do something we like to do when it's time to get all
fundamental and gain some understanding.
Let's cruise on down to the scale of the atom.
At this scale, we can see those water molecules up nice and close.
We can see the one oxygen and two hydrogen atoms for each molecule.
And if we look closely, we might be able to see that the oxygen atom grabs some of the
charge away from the hydrogen atoms.
This makes oxygen have a slight negative charge, while the hydrogen atoms have a slight positive
charge.
Now, as we know, opposite charges attract.
So this charge redistribution in the molecule is what drives the bonding behavior in the
solid.
The negatively charged oxygen from one molecule wants to find and get close to the positively
charged hydrogen atoms from another molecule.
Those types of bonds, by the way, are called hydrogen bonds, and they're the key type of
bonding in water.
So here we are in the solid phase of water, and we start to add heat.
Similar from our discussions of heat capacity and thermal expansion, that as I add heat
to a solid, what happens is that the energy goes into the vibrational degrees of freedom.
So for this case, those molecules start grooving and shaking more and more vigorously.
That is, until the material reaches the temperature of its phase change.
Up until that point, the hydrogen bonding between molecules keeps them all together,
even though they're vibrating with more and more energy.
But at the phase change temperature, while this grooving and shaking doesn't stop, something
else happens.
That temperature is enough so that the hydrogen bonding itself starts to break apart.
And since that is the bonding that holds the positions of those molecules fixed on average,
it means that the molecules can start to slip and slide out of their fixed crystalline positions.
And so we have a liquid.
Notice that the heat energy we added to break up the hydrogen bonds did not go into anything
related to the kinetic energy of the system.
It did not go into motion.
Remember, the three types of degrees of freedom, translation, rotation, and vibration.
At the phase transition, the heat goes into none of those degrees of freedom.
Rather, the heat energy went entirely into raising the potential energy of the system.
That's what happens when we break apart those hydrogen bonds.
That's why the temperature during the phase transition doesn't change, even though we're
adding heat.
And what a lot of heat we needed to add.
I mean, to go from solid to liquid at zero degrees Celsius, so without changing the temperature
by a single degree, but just changing the phase, we need to add an amount of heat equivalent
to that needed to raise the temperature of water as a liquid by 80 degrees Celsius.
It's literally enough energy to get water from the tap all the way to its boiling point.
And for the next transition, from liquid to vapor, even more thermal energy is needed
to change the phase.
With the temperature fixed at 100 degrees Celsius, we need to add an amount of heat equivalent
to raising the temperature by 540 degrees, just to change from liquid to vapor.
This type of heat that gets a material to change phase is referred to as latent heat.
For water, it's 80 calories for the solid to liquid transition and 540 calories for
the liquid to vapor transition.
Now, sometimes you might hear other terms used for these phase transition energies,
like the heat of fusion for going from solid to liquid, or the heat of vaporization for
going from liquid to vapor.
The discovery of latent heat is actually quite interesting, as with so many scientific
discoveries, it was discovered in the context of trying to make sense out of nature and
of the world in general.
It goes back to the 1700s, when it was thought that once a material was uniformly heated
to its melting point, the addition of only a tiny additional amount of heat would melt
the entire sample.
In other words, as soon as heat was added to raise the temperature of the material above
the melting point, the phase transformations spontaneously occurred, with no extra input.
In that case, a graph of heat added versus temperature for the melting ice would have
looked something like this, with the solid and liquid lines each having a slope still
equal to their corresponding heat capacities, but now connected at zero degrees continuously,
with no latent heat.
This was the view of how materials changed their phase back in the 1700s.
But for Joseph Black, who was a professor of medicine at the University of Glasgow,
this did not make any sense.
And he wrote the following observation, quote, if we attend to the manner in which ice and
snow melt, when exposed to the air of a warm room, or when thaw succeeds to frost, we can
easily perceive that they soon warm up to their melting point and begin to melt at their
surfaces.
If the complete change of them into water required only the further addition of a very
small quantity of heat, the mass, though of considerable size, ought all to be melted
within a very few minutes or seconds by the heat from the surrounding air.
For this really the case, the consequences of it would be dreadful in many cases.
For the melting of large amounts of snow and ice, occasions, violent torrents and great
inundations in the cold countries or in the rivers that come from them, they would tear
up this and sweep away everything.
And this so suddenly that mankind would have great difficulty in escaping their ravages.
This sudden liquefaction does not actually happen.
And so latent heat was discovered.
In the context of what we know to be the correct heat versus temperature plots, ones that include
latent heat, let us now return to our demo of supercooled water.
I'll start over here and start to cool the water down so that that means that I'm taking
heat out of the material.
Now what happens in the case of supercooling is that when I reach the phase boundary temperature
instead of stopping the temperature drop and changing the phase, we simply continue
along the same line going below the solidification temperature.
How is this possible?
Well, it turns out that these boundaries separate the equilibrium phases of the material.
Remember way back when we talked about how thermodynamics is concerned with equilibrium
properties of materials?
That means we take a kind of eventually it will happen approach to materials.
Thermo tells us all about what a material would like to be if it could have its way.
That's what I call equilibrium.
But what thermodynamics does not go into is the kinetics of different processes.
As we talked about in our lecture on equilibrium, coffee would like to spill out of a cup,
but the boundaries of the cup prevent it from doing so.
And those expensive diamond rings would like to turn into graphite rings, since graphite
is thermodynamically favored at atmospheric pressure.
But it doesn't because there are barriers that prevent such a transformation, well at
least on short time scales.
Eventually that is after perhaps hundreds of thousands or millions of years though those
diamond rings will in fact become good, very expensive pencils.
Since again, eventually it will happen.
And is therefore a metastable phase of carbon.
So for the transition of water into ice, we can also have metastable phases.
And that's exactly what we have with water that remains as a liquid below zero degrees
Celsius.
It wants to be a solid, but turning it into a solid from a liquid takes time.
And it gets helped by having what are called nucleation sites.
These are tiny little places in the system where the liquid can get stuck forming a tiny
little piece of solid, which then coaxes more liquid to form more solid and so on.
That's why in order to make supercooled water, we needed to use distilled water with no impurities
like trace amounts of other elements that are usually in water and help solidification
along by serving as nucleation sites.
We also used ultra smooth plastic containers so that there was less chance of nucleation
at the container walls.
By doing this, and by very, very carefully not shaking the water while it cools, we
were able to keep it from transitioning to a solid, even though we measured a temperature
of minus 10 degrees Celsius.
I had to use a cooler with salted ice water in order to cool it instead of a freezer.
Because the vibrations that come from the compressor turning on and off are enough to
provide the nucleation of water to ice and the phase transition to go.
Now again, I want to emphasize that eventually this supercooled water would have turned into
a solid, since that is its thermodynamic equilibrium.
But we were able to kind of trick it for a bit by taking away some of the things that
help the phase change occur.
And the reason I wanted to spend time on this point is that I want you to keep in mind that
as we make phase maps of materials, the boundaries we draw between phases come from thermodynamics.
And therefore, they are always referring to the equilibrium properties of the system.
It does not mean that a material cannot exist in a different phase than is indicated in
our phase map, since it can be kinetically trapped.
But it does tell us what the preferred equilibrium phase will be.
And that's the starting point for any study of any material.
Now let's go back to where the water wound up on this heat versus temperature plot in
our demo, since I'd like to make one last point about it.
When it's up here, as I just said, the material is only metastable.
It wants to get down to here, where it's in its happy equilibrium place.
So how does it get back?
Well, you can see that it can basically do one of two things.
It could drop straight down, keeping its temperature constant, and releasing a whole bunch of heat.
That would be called an isothermal transition, since the temperature is constant.
Or the supercooled water could increase its temperature in another way until it reaches
the freezing point, and then be back on this equilibrium curve and drop down to ice in
the usual path.
In that second case, it would be called an adiabatic transformation back to equilibrium,
since it occurs without any heat transfer.
Another way, the water winds up freezing into a solid, but the two paths are different
in nature, and which path is actually taken will depend on the conditions under which
the transformation takes place.
And some of you may be wondering at this point, if I can supercool a material, couldn't I
also superheat it?
Absolutely.
It just goes the other way on the same plot, as you can see here.
In fact, water can be superheated and often is when it's put in a microwave.
The temperature goes above the boiling point, but we grab it before vapor has time to form,
and there's little around to help the transition along, so it stays a liquid.
Place a tea bag into superheated water, and a massive rush of water will boil instantly.
But watch out, since that can actually be quite dangerous.
Superheating and supercooling are possible for all materials.
For the case of water, it can be cooled down to nearly minus 50 degrees Celsius before
it's simply no longer possible for it to stay a liquid at atmospheric pressure.
That's the temperature at which the material no longer needs any external help from nucleation
sites, but will simply nucleate on its own.
So you can never supercool below that temperature.
But apart from water, take a look at just how far below the solidification temperature
we can push these different materials.
In the case of the element niobium, we can cool the liquid down to 525 degrees Celsius
below its solidification temperature.
OK, I've been talking about these simplest forms of phase maps, plotting heat against
temperature.
In the backs of your minds, you might have been thinking, but I know that heat is also
the same as enthalpy for a constant pressure process.
And you'd definitely be on to something here.
The latent heat transfer for a process at constant pressure gives us directly the enthalpy
of the process, and this includes the phase transitions.
In fact, at constant pressure, the latent heat of a phase transition is exactly equal
to the enthalpy change during that phase transition, which is often called the enthalpy of melting,
or the enthalpy of vaporization.
But what about the changes in other thermodynamic variables occurring in a system at these
phase transitions?
Well, in fact, I can use the relations I've been drawing on to work my way over to other
important thermodynamic variables like entropy.
More precisely, we know from the reversible process definition of the entropy that squiggly
dq is equal to temperature T times the change in entropy ds.
Suppose we perform a constant pressure experiment, heating a sample through its melting point.
The heat released upon melting is the enthalpy of melting, so dh is equal to Tds.
And I can integrate both sides of this equation over the heat required to make the phase transition
occur.
Since the temperature does not change during a phase transition, this gives me the following
expression.
The change in enthalpy at a phase transition equals the temperature of that phase transition
times the change in entropy for the phase transition.
And isn't that a glorious moment?
Just by measuring the heat added at constant pressure in a simple open-to-air experiment,
we can get the entropy change as a material is heated through its different phases.
Take a look at the entropy for water as a function of temperature.
Notice first that it's always increasing with temperature, which we know must be true.
You can also notice that just as with the heat or enthalpy change, we have jumps in
the entropy as well at the phase transitions.
These are often called the entropy of fusion or the entropy of vaporization.
So here's our next question.
What properties of a material can we use to control what phase the material exhibits?
I've been focused on just one single property, and that would be the temperature.
Both water in the freezer to get ice or on the stove to get steam.
But other than temperature, how can we change the phase of a material?
Well, remember that there are a lot of ways to push on materials with different thermodynamic
driving forces, chemically, electrically, magnetically, optically, and so on.
But apart from temperature, one of the most important variables we can control to change
phases is pressure.
In the temperature versus pressure phase map, we examine a plot of the different phases
of water with temperature on one axis, and in this case instead of heat, we have pressure
on the other.
Backing up for just a moment, remember that the phase of a material depends upon the state
of the material.
And as I'm sure by now you're happily aware, a state is a unique set of values for the
variables that describe a material on the macroscopic level.
These are the state variables for the system.
Now, since we're talking about just water here by itself, we have only one component
in our system.
We're not mixing water with anything else, at least not yet.
So that means that knowing three thermodynamic variables uniquely defines the state of a
given closed system.
Usually these variables are pressure, temperature, and volume.
Knowing there are a fixed number of water molecules, then one of the most helpful and
useful plots is that of the equilibrium phases of water versus the temperature and pressure.
Now, let's think back to our lecture on equilibrium, since remember, these phase maps only tell
us about the equilibrium properties of matter.
And of course, as soon as I say the word equilibrium, I'm sure your hearts and minds
immediately turn to one thing, the Gibbs free energy.
As we've learned, in a closed system with independent thermodynamic variables, pressure
and temperature, it is the Gibbs free energy that determines what phase is in equilibrium.
Each phase has a free energy value at a given pressure and temperature, and the one that
is the minimum energy at a particular temperature and pressure will be the equilibrium phase.
A plot of the different phases a given material can exhibit at different thermodynamic variables,
is known as a phase diagram.
So here's the pressure versus temperature phase diagram for water.
Now, what we're all pretty used to is the single line at a pressure of one atmosphere
that goes across like this, from solid to liquid to gas.
That gives us the freezing and boiling temperatures of zero and 100 degrees Celsius that we all
know and love.
And it's the line we've been talking about for this whole lecture, in all of our pressure
versus temperature graphs.
Remember, we have assumed a constant pressure in all of our analysis thus far.
But that line is just for a single pressure.
Notice how much the properties and phase boundaries change as I change the pressure.
For example, as I lower the pressure, the freezing point of water remains about the same,
but the boiling point gets significantly lower.
If you live in Denver, Colorado, you're up about one mile above sea level, and the pressure
in the air is about 0.83 atmospheres.
According to our phase diagram, this means that in Denver, water boils at around 95 degrees
Celsius.
So plan to boil those potatoes a little while longer, because they'll need the extra time.
But if you go even higher, like, say, to the top of Mount Everest, you'll be at about
one-third the atmospheric pressure of sea level.
And again, from this phase diagram, we can see that water will boil, in that case, at
around 70 degrees Celsius.
I wouldn't even try to boil the potatoes up there, just eat them raw.
Now, check this out.
If I go to even lower pressures, like, say, 0.001 atmospheres, then there's not even the
possibility for a liquid phase of water at any temperature.
That whole phase just disappears.
And as temperature is increased, we go straight from solid to gas.
That kind of phase transformation from solid to gas is called sublimation, as opposed to,
say, freezing, melting, or boiling.
By the way, have any of you seen dry ice?
That's actually got nothing to do with water.
So sometimes people get confused because they associate the word ice with water.
Actually, dry ice is the solid phase of carbon dioxide, or CO2.
How does it work?
Well, let's take a look at the phase diagram of CO2 to find out.
See, in this case, at a pressure of one atmosphere that's back to our standard sea level pressure,
as we increase the temperature, we see that we have the same behavior as for water at very
low pressures.
Namely, there's no liquid phase, and the material goes from solid straight to gas.
That's why dry ice is so useful, for example, in shipping something that has to be kept
cold.
It can keep things cold, quite cold, in fact, since its sublimation temperature is negative
78 degrees Celsius at one atmosphere, without becoming a liquid as water would, which would
in turn ruin the packaging or the container.
And notice from this phase diagram that for CO2, if I were to increase the pressure to
say 10 atmospheres, well now the liquid phase becomes possible for certain temperature ranges.
For the case of water, increasing the pressure will lead to much higher boiling points.
At 100 atmospheres, the boiling point is now 300 degrees Celsius, and you can see that even
more strange things happen at higher pressures, like the fact that this entire phase boundary
line disappears all together.
What is that all about?
Well, to find out, you'll need to wait a few lectures.
But for now, taking the fact of just how important this type of diagram is, and how much information
it contains.
We can go even higher in pressure and temperature too, and the information keeps coming.
There are many materials, with lots of phases and various boundaries between phases, and
we'll be learning a lot more about them in the coming lectures.
But to end this lecture, let's think about how water is at the heart of all of life.
And just look at how lucky we are.
Check out where Earth's standard operating conditions are in this phase diagram.
Unlike almost any other material, we sit right in the perfect spot, where the solid, liquid,
and gas are all nearby.
And that, my friends, is a beautiful thing.
