Well, the title of the talk is social media platforms trading with prediction error minimization
for your attention.
And for starting this talk, it's important to know that the nature of human culture is
to guarantee that specific well-bounded and highly viable states are frequented.
So culture defines where individuals will deploy their attention, which is attentional
practices, the affordances that are relevant and salient in a given moment.
So cultural affordances, acquisition by regiments of attention, can be understood as shared patterns
of attention and shared expectations, which reduce metabolic costs to minimize prediction
error.
So individuals' concerns have been shaped by learning in their social-cultural practices
determining what shows up as relevant in the field of affordances.
So we have the landscape of affordances, which are all the available possibilities of action
in a given environment.
And we also have our field of affordances, which are the emergent possibilities of action
that stand out as relevant or salient in a situated moment, which includes social-cultural
practices.
And in this field of affordances, we spend approximately 16 hours of one full walking
day.
And this field of affordances can be also understood as cultural affordances, which are possibilities
of actions that human encounter in their niches.
And these cultural affordances include natural and conventional affordances, which are in
some way socially constructed.
So natural affordances are reliable possibilities of action in a given moment.
Conventional affordances are possibilities of action, which depend on explicit or implicit
expectations, norms, conventions, social practices in individuals' ability to infer
the culturally specific sets of expectations.
Importantly, here is the social aspect, the social affordances, which are possibilities
of social interactions offered by the environment.
Importantly, we respond strongly to emotional content related to social interactions.
Our field of affordances is heavily populated by social cues that grab our attention.
So nowadays, individuals are immersed in both an offline geographical situated culture and
also in an online digital culture.
So together, they determine the patterns of attention that will be learned.
As all we know, COVID-19 pandemic brought deep global changes, pushing societies to an
online digital way of life.
And given the importance that digital world has taken in our lives, digital affordances,
which are online possibilities of actions, have become an enormous part of our cultural
landscape.
So it seems relevant to ask how much daily time we spend online connected, how much daily
time we spend on digital social platforms.
So we can start by telling the world's population right now, it's 7.8 billion people around
the world.
So in terms of internet use, it consists of 4.8 billion people around the world, which
is 61% of the world's total population.
And the daily time spent using internet is approximately 6 hours, 55 minutes.
So returning to our field of affordances, we can see that now it's divided.
Our time is divided in cultural affordances, which are offline and situated in the physical
world and digital affordances online and situated on a digital world.
So in my point of view, this division, the way we divide our field of affordances in
the digital and in the physical world is becoming more and more relevant.
So now in terms of social media use, there are 4.4 billion social media users around
the world, which is the 57% of the world's total population.
And importantly, in the past 12 months, there are 520 million of new users, which is a 13%
increase.
So one out of nine total users started within the past 12 months.
So more than 1.4 million new users join social media every day.
That is 15 new users per second.
Importantly, the question is how much daily time does a user spend using social media?
And in this graph, we can see the daily time spent using social media by country and in
white we can see the worldwide mean time spent using social media, which is 2 hours 25 minutes.
So now returning to our field of affordances, we can also divide this time spent in digital
affordances but now using digital social platforms or digital social affordances, which are online
possibilities of social interaction, specific to the attributes of a digital social platform.
And as you can see, if we spend 2.3 hours a day, it is 16 hours per week.
So we spend a full working day in social media platforms.
So the main aim of this work is to analyze under the active inference framework how the
field of relevant affordances is changing as a product of the use of social media platforms,
specifically how digital social affordances mediated by third parties are manipulating
our patterns of attention, affecting the meaningful content that is acquired, the way self-identity
is built, how beliefs are updated, as well as how social norms are learned.
Social emphasis is made on the users' monitoring of prediction aerodynamics, which is the rate
at which prediction error is minimized over time during the engagement with digital social
affordances in digital social platforms.
So two questions are relevant here.
Is the field of relevant affordances moving towards a biases anticipatory digital affordance
responsiveness?
Are digital social platforms changing our patterns of attention?
So what are digital social platforms?
Importantly, we have to understand that we live in data-fied times, which are determining
the design behind digital social affordances.
So the main aim is to increase the daily time users spend on digital social platforms in
order to keep them producing more and more data, because data is what generates value.
The strategy behind is amplifying what attracts their attention, the attention of the users.
So for doing so, this strategy uses learning algorithms, needing active participation of
humans to generate relevant data for training.
They learn to predict users' behavior and preferences to determine the information that
is assigned to each user.
They are tools that will find those patterns that will change the behavior of the users.
So in the free online culture model, users do not pay for using data services and neither
are paid for the data they input to digital services.
The goal behind is to produce data to generate more and more value.
Digital social platforms are mediated by third parties with economical interests, and here
we can see that 58% of digital share of total worldwide spend on advertising media is digital.
And this corresponds to $378 billion annually.
And importantly, in a year, the annual change worldwide in digital ad spend is a 13% increase.
So this is really valuable, economical proposals.
And well, important to highlight that the problem is not the digital social platforms per se.
The problem is the manipulation engine behind them.
So digital affordances can be studied under active inference framework and also focusing
on the role of prediction aerodynamics.
So how are affordances, or digital social affordances, selected in a given moment?
And here embodied feelings are the key.
They allow a sensitivity to how well or bad an agent is doing at improving its grip on
what is relevant in the landscape of affordances.
The sensitivity to changes in the rate of prediction error reduction is known as prediction
aerodynamics.
So the steeper the slope, the faster the rate of reduction.
And prediction aerodynamics are manifested as changes on affect.
So if the rate of error reduction is faster than expected, a positive balance or a positive
feeling is experienced, and the action policy is more precise as a result.
And if the rate of error reduction is slower than expected, or increasing unexpectedly,
positive balance or negative feelings are experienced, and the related action policy
becomes less precise.
So users encode in their cortical hierarchy the sets of expectations that correspond to
prefer digital social platforms in order to selectly engage with those relevant social
digital affordances.
So responsiveness to relevant digital social affordances, which are solicitations, need
possibilities for action, plus affective attractiveness, plus individuals' concern shaped by their
social cultural practices.
And policy selection is determined in terms of how likely it will lead to expected outcomes
plus the expected rate of error reduction.
And digital social platforms afford two categories of actions.
Digital social instrumental actions, which are intrinsically motivated behaviors directed
towards preferred social outcomes, and digital social epistemic actions intrinsically motivated
explorative behaviors directed to maximize information gain and rewarding social experiences.
So digital social platforms provide many, many different types of digital social affordances.
And we analyze some common ones, placing them into two categories.
Self-identity formation and some relevant affordances are problem-making, editability,
audience-grating, information-insuring, and meta-voicing.
Also belief-updating, category of belief-updating, which is some affordances are infinite scrolling,
information search, cost-rebalance, and notification checking.
This division is based on the effect that error reduction and its expected rate has on
users' beliefs about themselves and user beliefs about others and the world.
So we are working on it.
We are making this table dividing digital affordances in terms of self-identity formation
and belief-updating and the digital action with they are related to, so they can be epistemic
or instrumental, and also the desired outcomes that the user is searching for.
And also they design strategy behind each one of these affordances.
So because of time's concerns, I cannot explain each one of them, but all these digital social
affordances become as highly silent in the field of digital affordances because they
share a fast-expected rate of prediction error reduction.
So I want to explain two of them.
The first one is appearance-changing.
Appearance-changing affords to users to edit versions of oneself that seem positive.
And digital epistemic actions are done to explore identity and self-appearance.
This situation, of course, in a high-speed, there are high-speed comparisons.
So we share expectations about how we should look.
And when editing appearance for social approval, first, prediction error rapidly increases,
but a fast rate of prediction error reduction is expected due to internalized social standards.
This policy becomes highly relevant.
Information gain about self-appearance and social approval is very important.
And self-appearance prediction error can be minimized online and extremely fast.
And so the offline self-image becomes uncomfortable.
We cannot minimize our image in the mirror, but we can minimize prediction error by using
AI filters with social-cultural appearance standards.
And this is the strategy behind these digital affordances, which is motivating information sharing.
We can immediately change our own image by applying filters of desired social-cultural appearance standards.
So this has been called snapshot dysmorphia because unrealistic social-cultural standards
are provoking a maladapted internalization of social norms.
And we share these pictures of ourselves with these filters that are under these desired
social-cultural appearance standards.
And the second affordance I want to explain is infinite scrolling.
Infinite scrolling affords to users scrolling and scrolling their digital social platforms
endless feeds.
And digital social epistemic actions are not directly related to a specific anticipatory
utility, but its aliens pertain to please curiosity-related behaviors.
So users select salient information of their feeds, but this information is optimal for
error reduction.
And why is it optimal?
It's optimal because of the design strategy behind the engineer preferences of the algorithm
has learned about the user, what the user is going to select, what is salient and relevant,
and the error is optimal for its reduction.
So infinite scrolling, importantly, also allows a digital social-instrumental action which
has as an outcome finding out relevant digital solicitation.
So monitoring of prediction error dynamics and the associated feelings will increase
the attunement with those digital affordances that stand out as relevant.
So it is an instrumental action because we know that when we engage with infinite scrolling,
we are going to find out relevant affordances to engage with.
So optimal grip and digital social platforms.
Optimal grip is experienced as equilibrium.
So this equilibrium is experienced as an effective tension.
Liquid performance is enacted in the particular situation to reduce effective tension.
So a nice example is to step back in an elevator to fill this equilibrium again and reduce
the effective tension.
So affectivity can be understood as action readiness, playing a central role in structuring
the field of affordances.
Effectivity emerged in part as a reflection of error dynamics.
So the field of affordances will also be structured in a way where we are able to stay in touch
with our various cares and concerns.
So there are three dimensions in the field of relevant affordances, the width, the depth,
and the height.
The width is the broadness of the scope of affordances, choices, or different actions
options.
Depth, the temporal domain, the future possibilities for actions, anticipatory affordances, responsiveness,
and the height is the relevance and the salience of the affordances.
So here we can see a representation of the field of affordances.
And these affordances have different width, depth, and height, and also they have a corresponding
expected rate of prediction error.
So affectivity as action readiness and the sensitivity of error dynamics is key.
So if the environment changes and the individuals' concerns change, the salience relevant affordances
changes.
So the height of digital social affordances can lead us to the question, are individuals
becoming highly responsive to them?
So in this representation of digital social affordances, we aim to highlight that the
height is important because they are very salient and they are salient, correspond to
the affectivity as action readiness because the prediction error can be reduced in a very
fast rate.
So the richest opportunities for improving our grip come from affordances that are near
their too complex or not too simple.
Affective dynamics keep agents in contact with those spaces that have optimal complexity.
So in this same affective dynamics that are hijacked by addictive behaviors and substances
also includes the hyper-stimulating effects of many digital social platforms.
So digital patterns of attention, learning digital social platforms, may be placing into
risk a context-sensitive grip on a rich dynamic and varied field of relevant affordances.
Digital addiction is a similar story where pathological high precision on particular policies
can create an imbalance and indeed a collapse in the field of affordances.
Digital social platforms functions as a hyper-affordance, exploding how attention is manipulated by culture
as a tool to reduce metabolic costs but for marketing purposes.
So being sensible to prediction error dynamics makes digital social platforms a technological
tool highly attractive for users and they are built taking advantage of our natural tendency
to minimize prediction error in social contexts.
The task of minimizing prediction error is easy in the digital existence and it is felt
as pleasant as it tends to be reduced in a very fast rate.
So the takeaway message is that digital social platforms are trading with prediction error
minimization for our attention.
Having digital social affordances which allow an easy and fast rate or prediction error reduction
will keep our attention to generate more data and more and more value.
The field of digital social affordances is becoming more and more salient as attentional
manipulation increases.
Finally, we believe that in the digital way of life we are immersing it is worth to debate
and study further if and how the narrowing of the context sensitive field of relevant
affordances is occurring towards a biases anticipatory digital social affordances responsiveness
mediated by third parties' interests.
So special thanks to my co-authors Mahoud Elbaracin, Mark Miller and Bruno Lara and
to cognition organizers and well these are my information if you want to contact me it
will be a pleasure.
Alright thanks so much Alessandra it was really really cool.
Question with questions please come to the Q&A I think I see already Marco there we go
go for it.
Yeah actually I think I have a question still but I just wanted to say that was great and
I really believe that this is one of the most valuable applications for active inference
for the real world especially short and long term.
So one thing that I'm noticing is I think we need to accept that the institution is
that the industry is behind these maladaptive manipulations of how our attention is being
attention and values are being acted upon these there's a weird problem of they're arriving
at systematic methods without the systematic understanding which is kind of interesting
so you get the whole AP testing and focus groups and everything and they just do whatever
works and that's the scary part right they just do whatever works and that will continue
until the way of systematic understanding of why whatever works is also bad for us in
the long term right there is literally no incentive for them to make it in a long term
way healthy or sustainable and one thing I often like to say is that this is the modern day
analogy not actually a homology equivalent of the industrial revolution right so the
long term consequences are just really really complicated to understand and the moment
where we would see the impact negative impact of these kinds of practices if we wait until we
see them then it's going to be too late so again I'm just you know just saying this is really
great and important but so one thing that I find potentially of interest I'm not sure if you or
colleagues are already doing this is so the way that they can systematically and effectively
manipulates intention and valence for this you know the whole nasty loop of acting upon people
are there like tropes right so patterns like schemes right so I think game theory might be a
very very interesting lens for that so yeah I'm not sure if everything makes sense but this are the
like you know a way to create a framework of how these loopy ways of manipulating their users or
consumers will yeah it is done because I don't even think that if you're going to do the whole
the shady business in this company I don't think they will have a model that's a scary part you
can't just go in and wait for a whistleblower or something well you actually have to deconstruct
whatever they have found to be working so is that going to be possible for you yeah thank you for
all your comments Marco and it's very interesting what you were saying about gamification actually
there's a hypothesis for me it's very interesting hypothesis that
um make a voicing for example the importance of meta voicing can be seen as a meta voicing is
likes or yeah likes retweets all the hearts and like very tiny and a few types of communicating
with others giving feedback so quickly that's meta voicing okay and but what is important there
are metrics we can see the metrics how many likes how many hearts how many retweets or shares
and this is the game is this the theory behind this gamification of communication so users are
internalizing metrics as an evaluation of of how we communicate so it's not what is not
per se relevant is the content of what we are trying to communicate but the numbers the metrics
behind so prediction error it's um and the and the type of of information we want to share
like behind or underneath it it also with we are expecting metrics in the way we are communicating
so yeah um for me it's a very relevant point there Marco
there's a there's another way that we could parametrize what their strategies are by simply
looking at what kind of information pattern maximally reduces um you know free energy and
basically just gives you a very very strong reduction in uncertainty right so or or signals
that you're going to have a reduction in uncertainty on any given kind of field so for instance a very
known pattern is um these two people are the ugliest in the world uh check out who right and so
they're hinting at the fact that there is a very salient social information here and that
there's a very simple way for you to disambiguate this information which is socially salient and
this kind of pattern is is easy to parametrize right you could you can easily find um it create
an agent which um has an intentional process that is driven by the the prediction of reducing
some uncertainty and thus having a model that knows it's going to reduce its prediction error
over time um the problem with that model would be that if they used it it becomes an arms race
right we can identify what processes are most likely to lead to this which means they could also
identify them and potentially you know use it yeah i'm not sure if that's what moha was moha was uh
uh what that was about but but but if i should correct you so i think that's what i also mean
why i think game theory is important i'm not just saying gamification but like the the game that is
played between the user and these technologies so when when because because the game the implicit
language game or the game that is played is in itself a kind of belief right so when you reinforce
that these are the modes of interacting that these are the games that um with which you interface
with cyberspace or the world at large through cyberspace and that in itself is the issue because
when that becomes precise then there is very little means of escaping that because you're
very interfaced with with the world how you relate to the what your notion of what signifies
significance if that is already claimed by this that's a culture um then you had to escape it so
i think that's what i what what i mean to say and like moha was saying that becomes an arms race
and and it's an arm race between not the user and these companies but between the companies and
that's the scary parts so what should be the way that people and users can in a weird way also
engage in the arms race but not like you know doing it upon each other but what is the way to
these da symmetries or read even the playing fields right i'm not sure if that's because i
feel like this work is is really good at for now at a problem diagnosis and you know the ideal scenario
would be to leverage that to get to solutions problem solving um and how to design tools or
new practices and then you know i to be honest for now and i'm slightly pessimistic that i think the
most valuable part is actually re re-appreciate and re-emphasize the importance of lift practices
and i think that also and i think the people's intuition that that is the case also
is indicated by certain movements i think someone mentioned john raveki the meaning crisis
the the i think the pandemic has facilitated this whole community building movement as well
i think that is all in the meat space because i think that we have an historical foundation to
ask this question um i'm ramming a bit but i'm just also curious about your thoughts about
whether in the cyberspace itself there's also a way to counter these movements
yeah i i totally understand your your your point mark marco and and i'm i'm not sure
what could be like the outcome of what is happening right now and there is no regulation
that's that's a big issue there is no regulation and and if regulation starts um then um new ways
of communications can emerge and we are going to need new and new regulations um and i actually
don't think regulation yeah so so in my point of view um it's um it's it's in it's in the individual
level so each one of us has to like uh be aware of of our field of relevant affordances how many
time do we spend there so what what i have done and and this is in the personal domain i turned off
all the notifications i'm i'm i'm almost out of facebook really i'm i'm i'm really doing it um
it's difficult you know uh that's a problem um because these these things are i think it's my
point of view but um if i want to share something personal here i'm i'm feeling better you know
being out of of social media and um i'm just using whatsapp because of uh covid pandemic and this
is my social interactions but that's that's almost all so yeah it's a personal decision
and to be aware of this this strategy is behind of the manipulation of attention it's important
so you're not aware so the responsibility is in the user what i i think this is where um there
Ali and i kind of disagree um the problem statement in itself like i don't think per se the problem
is that our attention is being focused because the reason it's being focused is that we're
tuned to a hypostimulus the problem is that this tool is mostly only being used by one or two actors
which have a very specific intent in mind and so while we could repurpose their tool for
community building for an extension of knowledge which we have to some extent
unfortunately they have been mine to screw with our epistemic field to polarize us so
completely that eventually we're unable to continue sharing and we're we're becoming limited to a very
brittle um understanding of reality which is a problem in itself and then we don't have the
tools to keep moving forward um i think that's the issue we could effectively um turn ourselves
into hive minds and maybe that's not a bad thing maybe the the relevance of the field is only
a function of what we intend to do with it um so you know my answer is a bit different from
Alejandra at this point i guess i agree i disagree with everyone that um because and i fully encourage
people to take first responsibility in protecting themselves from the maladaptive influences but
at the same time i think we can't escape the fact that cyberspace is here to stay um and and i think
like like mo z there there's going to be you know opportunity for a lot of beneficial use cases um
but i think it's impossible almost impossible nowadays for most mortal souls to find a healthy
balance and how to integrate it in your life and i think that's that's where we need to go where
it i don't think it ever will be perfect but that it will be uh designed in such a way that it's
feasible to develop your own particular relation to cyberspace and just a very brief point because
because finally there's a another person wanted to ask the question so i also want to say that
regulation is not it's not the answer and the reason why is because um it's not the skill at
which regulation tends to occur won't suffice for a this fast-paced um industry and b for the level
at which the maladaptive mechanisms occur is is highly variable and it's highly specific to a
particular cyber particular context the user um equal platform interaction and so i think what's
crucial is is that the the the platforms that exist need to have the available mechanisms and
signals to know when something is maladaptive then maybe hopefully Kevin is also going to talk
about this i hope so give what he said before but but that's again why i earlier also mentioned
this whole thing about epistemic signals right this whole whole goddamn fucking industry is just
pragmatic it's just all reward driven and even when something is ostensibly uh epistemic that it's
still not you know it's not actually for the sake of understanding it just has to learn about being
epistemic so amount of shares and stuff right that is not actually because you want the user to
know how popular or how good it is or how worthy of reading no it's a measure of how many people
will view it so that you know how valuable ad space will be for that particular thing and so that's
the thing i think you know given that this is an active inference group that's a crucial thing
what is epistemic should be epistemic what's pragmatic should be pragmatic and it should be
in the healthy relation with each other and anyways i've been rhyming too much but again
great work and i hope to see this continue on further and go Kevin thank you so much
excellent um Kevin is next and this is unfortunately this is our very last question
right and maybe just like kind of a more proactive right kind of uh foray into the space
sorry words thanks to Marco and of course Alejandro and now but the uh you know because
the thing that i've been wondering about right this kind of is a personal side obsession is
well the agents who are using right these kind of attention attracting technologies right to kind
of advantage themselves or actually like you know maybe this couple will have like the maximum
influence in the space but also it's like it's too component right so it's both the agents also
the needs they're embedded in and what the niche is selecting for in terms of strategies
and that is like i guess maybe analog trying to draw the analogy of like
but yeah given a certain environment in a terrain it's like incredibly hot it's really
helpful for species to evolve and adapt to ready heat as much as possible it's very cold right
they adapt to uh to retain heat as much as possible and there is no like you know one size fits all
kind of depends on the uh the situation they're in and our own message uh directed at mal regarding
the idea of relevance at least comment on previous in the chat um whereas like well
you know i wonder if like even makes sense i'm still in this idea from John Ricky but
of like can you give it a national definition of what's relevant because you know it's it's like
well can you say what's fit well no it just depends on the nation the context ran and so
then maybe the question is is what do you guys uh suspect would be a better niche construction to
facilitate uh you know whether it's facebook or whether it's you know uh different corporations
using advertising techniques to kind of fracture or capture certain attention uh or really just
the attention economy right it's driven by a certain kind of uh and i don't really know right
what what the like i also i'm very always skeptical like is it just one problem or is like involved
two things kind of feeding back to each other and kind of feedback loops and reinforcing and
kind of creating these immersion effects that no one agent is actually responsible for and maybe
they don't even want which goes back to marco's point about like they're optimizing the short
term without the long term goal in mind but like there's no incentive right to want any for that
goal uh and maybe that's analogous to like how what incentive was there for like buys to uh
figure out that you know there should be like an answer anti like cancerous element if you
don't see that fact until like you know 60 70 years the ones lifespan and you've already effectively
you know reproduce offspring like is there a reason for for the the needs to select for a strategy
that's actually been visual long term um you know i guess what would that look like sorry that was a
long question i wonder do you want to start but i expect you and i will have different answers
so i just you go ahead go go go ahead runo no one can hear you do you want to take my spot
um no it's no one yeah no one in the okay just go to another screen i guess
that's uh that just very quick um the i think that one way to answer this is like um
the problems are the platforms here so like the intents of the platforms that you are looking for
no so it's it's very difficult to i mean because the things behind the algorithms behind they have
another purpose so they are not they they facilitate use something but it's it's for me it's some
sort of illusion so because somebody was saying yeah it depends on the niche but maybe that's
exactly what they want you to think i mean that that's what we call audience curating no in in one
of the affordances so it's it's it that's the illusion that you have but because it's reinforcing
something no but i don't know i mean maybe there will be some different platform that will allow
different strategies and that doesn't have um economical purposes behind that's the whole
point here i think i don't know rolls away yeah exactly go ahead now okay so there are metrics
that we can easily i mean we've measured them i'm working on a project with Daphne
Demakis and Connor Heinz right now that's doing exactly that that's measuring the kind of metrics
which tell us what promotes an echo chamber and as i was discussing earlier echo chambers
produce brittle epistemic fields so what you want is an epistemic community which doesn't
produce this brittle field and my sense is that while we don't know what the goal would be we don't
we cannot tell right now what the best goal the best goal state would be there is a heuristic
that seems to lead in goal states which are generally seen right now looking back as more
positive and i believe those are those are uh more epistemically um accurate and a better
model basically just something that produces a better model and you can measure that on on on
social media platforms by simply seeing the interconnectivity of the network i.e. does it
produce clusters which are two separate from one another and then produce their own spheres of
knowledge which then are irreconcilable but also which socially um seem to be irreconcilable like
you literally do not assign any precision to someone from a group which seems to produce
something which is different from yours so it's not just semantically irreconcilable it's socially
irreconcilable so i believe that the answer to that is you as an individual have the power
to reflect on the kinds of things you're being shown and understand that while it may trigger
emotional responses which you do not want to be exposed to or that shows kinds of information
which you think are so ridiculous they're not worth being seen you should probably make yourself
see them just continue to keep that networking alive so that you um you can promote a better epistemic
field all right in that wonderful thought now um i think uh well we run out of time so we need to
wrap it up uh right here uh
