In a recent video, I said that the live stream dream could not have been playing an unaltered
version of Minecraft because the probability of them getting the luck that they did was
1 in 2.0 x 10 to the 22.
I just said there's no way that's ever going to happen.
And I tried to put a limit on how often humans could do something.
And I said if you had 10 billion humans doing the same thing once a second over and over
and over again for a century, the 10 billion human second century is 3.1 x 10 to the 19.
A smaller number.
So anything that actually occurs to a human has to have odds below 1 in that.
And as an example, Patricia, the current world record holder in craps, the chance of her game
occurring because it's just pure random luck, is 1.6 x 10 to the 12.
Okay, all good.
But then people have pointed out that in 2011, four senior citizens playing a card game in Warwickshire
in England got a perfect bridge deal.
They all had a full suit each.
And the probability of that happening is 2.2 x 10 to the 27.
We're talking nearly 100,000 times less likely than what happened to Dream.
And that actually happened.
So the question now is, do I owe Dream an apology?
This video is sponsored by the Great Courses Plus, a subscription service with thousands of
factual videos available on demand.
More about them and an extra mass question at the end of the video.
First up, what's the deal with a perfect bridge deal?
This is where an entire deck of cards is dealt out to four players.
And then when each player turns over their hand, they see all their cards are from the same suit.
And this is what Wender, Ron, Alan and Norman claim happened to them in Warwickshire in November 2011.
Although technically they were playing West, which was a precursor game to Bridge.
But the deal and all of this is exactly the same.
So I'm just going to refer to it as a perfect bridge deal.
And they're pretty adamant it happened, said Ron.
I would swear on my grandchildren's lives it was not fixed.
Oh bold statement, Ron.
But several newspapers picked it up at the time.
And most, if not all of them featured this number, the 2.2 times 10 to the 27 probability.
So now we have to work out, first of all, is that number correct?
And secondly, what actually happened?
In their description of what happened, they said it was the first hand of the night.
So I'm going to use a brand new deck of cards to recreate what happened.
Okay. Don't need the advertising cards.
Don't need the two jokers.
Right. Well, I say recreate what happened.
Of course, we're not going to get the perfect deal,
but we can still follow along with the steps and keep track of the mathematics
of how likely it is to get that perfect deal.
Now they said that they shuffled the cards a few times.
So I'll do that.
They then dealt the cards out where they cut them.
And then they dealt them out between the four players.
So importantly, if you're playing a wist or bridge, you deal out the entire deck.
So I actually think it's easiest to just keep track of how many possible starting arrangements
of the deck would lead to having a perfect deal.
And then our probability is that many arrangements out of the total number
of arrangements possible of a deck of cards.
And that we know it's just 52 factorial because there's 52 cards that could start on top,
51 underneath that, 50 all the way down.
Okay. So I've now shuffled the cards twice.
They then cut the cards somewhere like that and they started dealing.
So the first card I'm dealing to the first imaginary player,
that could be any card in the deck.
All it's doing is specifying what suit we want this first player to end up with.
So that could be any of the 52 I'm holding.
The next one can be any card that's not the same suit as this one.
And there are 13 in that suit.
So this is any of the remaining 39 possible cards.
Okay. This one's any of the remaining 26, the other two suits that aren't here.
There's now one suit left for the fourth player.
So that's any of the 13 that could be there.
Now the next card going to the first player again,
that can be any card that matches whatever suit this one is.
And so that's any of the 12 outstanding cards from that suit.
Likewise, any of the 12 from that suit, 12 from that one, 12 from that one.
And then this one's any of the 11 from this one,
11 from this one, 11 from this one, 11 from this one.
So apart from the first cards, which were 52, 39, 26 and 13,
these next cards, each hand is just 12 factorial.
So our total number of hands which give you a perfect deal is
52 times 39 times 26 times 13 times 12 factorial to the power of four.
And then it's all of that out of the 52 factorial possible combinations.
You could turn the handle on that to crunch out a number,
or you could cancel out a bunch of factors top and bottom,
whatever you want to do.
It ends up being one in two octillion, 235 septillion.
So on all the way down 301,560,000.
So there you are.
That's where the number comes from.
Obviously what I've dealt out now isn't going to be a perfect hand.
So what did the first person get?
They got, oh my goodness, they got all spades.
How did that happen?
What about the next person?
They've got all hearts.
But you saw me get a new deck of cards.
You saw me shuffle it twice.
We cut the deck, but yet a perfect bridge deal.
The probability of this happening is only 2.2 in 10 to the 27.
This cannot have just happened.
For the record, I did actually execute a perfect bridge deal.
However, as you may have noticed from the concentration on my face,
when I was shuffling, something suspicious was going on.
Suspicious, but legitimate, right?
I legitimately think this is what they did.
The steps that I just went through.
And I'm going to do it again because, of course,
I've got more brand new decks of cards.
I have a lot of these.
And the first key bit of information is the order in which the cards start.
So once you get rid of the advertising cards and the jokers,
the rest of the cards in a deck are already clumped by suit.
This is just how the deck starts.
So you can see you got all the hearts, all the clubs,
all the diamonds, all the spades.
We actually don't care about the ordering within them.
I mean, they do happen to go ace through king,
ace through king, and then it flips in the middle,
king through ace, king through ace.
But we don't care what order the cards are
when the people get them in their hand.
We just care that they're all the same suit.
So what we really care is where the suits are and they're clumped.
They're all together.
There's one suit, next suit, next suit, next suit.
And if you deal with cards in bridge,
by just giving the first person the first 13 cards,
next person the next 13, this would work.
But you don't.
You give this to the first person,
second person, third person, fourth person,
then back to the first person.
So we've got to spread the suits out.
So every fourth card is the same suit.
And we do that with what are called pharaoh shuffles.
So I did two pharaoh shuffles,
which is just a fancy name for a perfect interleaf shuffle.
So the way this works,
first of all, you put the deck into two exact halves.
That's the 26 cards.
That's 26 cards.
And then when you push them together,
they need to perfectly alternate.
So you have one from one side,
then one from the other,
then one from one side,
and then one from the other.
There we go.
And then you just push that all the way along.
And there it is, a perfect pharaoh shuffle.
So you can see it goes one on this side,
then one, then one, then one, then one, then one.
And normally a riffle shuffle,
they'd be clumped a bit.
They would not be singles,
but this is singles the whole way through.
This is just a pointless little flourish
to get all the cards back into a little pack.
And now you can see they've been reordered
but in a very systematic way.
You've now got all the black suits together.
You've got all the red suits together.
That was a terrible spread.
And then they alternate within those.
So we're halfway there.
They go spades, clubs, spades, clubs,
spades, clubs all the way along.
And then you've got diamonds hearts,
diamonds hearts all the way along.
So we're going to do a second pharaoh shuffle.
I am specifically doing out pharaoh shuffles.
And that means that the outermost cards don't change.
And you achieve that by when I take off the bottom deck,
the bottom most card,
which has always been the ace of spades,
when I start pushing them together,
I make sure that goes on the bottom.
There it is.
And then we push all the way along.
And now we've got,
you can see all the black ones or the red ones.
And the bottom card is still the bottom card.
And actually the top card is still the top card.
So this is an out pharaoh shuffle.
Now I put all those together.
And we've got the exact condition required
to get a perfect bridge deal.
Look at that.
Then now the suit perfectly alternate.
So you get all four suits in each group of four.
And it goes spades, diamonds, clubs, hearts.
Spades, diamonds, clubs, hearts.
The actual order is not important.
What is important is every fourth card is the same suit.
Also they did cut the deck,
but that actually doesn't make a difference
to the kind of the cycle they're in.
Because cutting the deck,
you're just taking some off one end,
you're putting them on the other end.
Every fourth card is still the same suit.
So I could cut this as many times as I want.
It's like that.
And the deal will still work.
So the first card out happens to be spades.
I didn't know what suit that was going to be because of the cut.
But I do now know that the next three cards
will all be different suits.
And then we go back to spades.
And then we've got hearts.
And then we've got clubs.
Then we've got diamonds.
And then this carries all the way down.
So that's my theory.
Because it was the first hand of the night,
they started with a new deck of cards.
They shuffled them twice.
They accidentally did.
Perfect interleaved shuffles.
And then when they doubt them out into their forehands,
everyone got a complete suit.
Except that is not the only way it could have happened.
When I started playing around with this,
I realized there were other options.
But before we get to those,
we're going to take a closer look
at what actually happens when you do a perfect
Faro shuffle.
And for that purpose,
I have, of course, got another brand new deck of cards.
I'm going to perfectly out Faro shuffle this eight times in a row.
We'll speed the footage up
and watch what happens to the order of the cards.
And that's eight.
All right, I should make it very clear.
I'm now video good enough at doing a perfect Faro shuffle.
I'm not good enough to do it live on stage.
But if I'm filming it and I have the luxury of editing afterwards,
good enough.
So now after eight of these,
you can see they've returned to exactly the same original starting order.
But we could have done in shuffles.
Now I have the cards back in their original order.
I can conveniently show you a different type of Faro shuffle.
So instead of doing the out shuffles like I was doing before,
I could do in shuffles,
which means that the outermost cards move in.
So the bottom card, the ace of spades,
doesn't stay on the bottom.
I move it over slightly.
So now it starts one in.
And the knock on effect is the top card doesn't stay the top card.
It's now one over.
It's slightly in as well.
So you can see now what was the bottom card is now the second card in.
Same thing goes all the way along.
And to what was the top card is now the first card in.
So that is an in Faro shuffle.
And if we do two of those,
give me a second if I re-split the deck.
That looks like it there.
No, off by one.
You know, you just got to judge it by eye.
If they've been properly shuffled,
it's a bit harder to do.
I'm kind of cheating because I know what the card should be.
Okay, there we are.
There's my next in shuffle done.
And lo and behold, I give these a cut and then start dealing.
And once again, we have exactly the same situation.
So I had a bit of a think about it.
I went, you know what?
Hang on a second.
It doesn't have to be out shuffles.
You could instead do two in shuffles.
Or you could do any combination of out and in shuffles.
So if you do an in and an out or then an out and an in,
you still end up with the cards
with each suit perfectly spaced out for a perfect deal.
So that actually makes it even more likely again.
They could have started with a brand new deck of cards,
done any two types of perfect riffle shuffle.
It doesn't matter where they started lining up,
as long as it's an in or an out.
Two of those, any number of cuts anywhere in the deck,
deal it and you get the perfect deal.
Although question now is, if actually this was two in shuffles,
that works, how many in shuffles would it take
before a deck gets right back to where it started?
And so I ran the calculation on it and it turns out 52.
So out shuffles, if you do eight out shuffles in a row,
you get back to where you started.
If you want to use in shuffles to get back to where you started, 52.
I am not going to do 52 in shuffles to show that that works,
because I don't think you'd want to see, oh wait, hang on,
what am I getting?
I'm just, this is coming in live now,
it turns out you would like to see that.
So I'll tell you what, I'll do it live on Patreon as a Q&A.
And so if you're one of my Patreon supporters,
thank you so much, all of you who are,
then you can watch me do it live and ask me questions as I do it.
It's going to take a while and I'll then release the footage on my second channel
so everyone can check it out.
So there you are, I will do 52 in shuffles,
but even that is not the worst case scenario.
We can take a closer look at what actually happens
if we do out shuffles on a brand new deck of cards.
The aces at both ends, as we know, don't go anywhere.
My favorite two cards though are the Fiverr Clubs and the Fiverr Diamonds,
they swap, each time you do an out shuffle,
they just switch places and they go backwards and forwards
in their own little two cycle.
Okay, now the two of hearts, it goes to where the three of hearts was,
three of hearts moves to where the five of hearts was,
the five of hearts goes over to where the nine of hearts was,
that moves to the four of clubs, that moves to the seven of diamonds,
which goes backwards to where the ace of clubs was,
that goes to where the king of diamonds is,
and that goes back to the start.
So these eight cards form a cycle,
and each time you do an out shuffle, they all move one around.
In fact, the rest of the cards form eight cycles,
there are six of them, and for all the cycles
to simultaneously be back where they started,
you need to do the lowest common multiple of shuffles,
and thankfully two and one both divide into eight,
that's why eight shuffles get you back where you started.
For in shuffles, it's a bit more complicated,
because all of the cards form this single cycle of 52 cards.
So that's why you have to do it 52 times,
you've just got to go all the way around this giant cycle.
If you want to see more about shuffles and cycles,
the mathematician and magician Tori Nogas
has some fantastic videos going into the maths
and the theory behind it,
and she does that in far better detail than I could.
I just got obsessed with how long
I could get the repeating point to be
with different combinations of shuffles.
So we already know if you do out, out, out over and over again,
that's eight in, in, in gives you 52.
I then checked in, out, in, out,
and if you keep repeating and alternating between the two,
504, 504 alternating shuffles
before you get back to where you started.
And if you start on the out,
and then alternate in, out, in, out,
it's exactly the same.
From here in, it's a bit annoying
to have to type them all out.
So I'm just going to swap them O's for outs,
I's for ins, and I'm going to give you
the fewest number you need to then repeat to get the pattern.
I started looking at combinations of three,
and all of these gave me 60.
And I realized these are actually all the same.
They're all two outs followed by an in,
followed by two outs, then an in.
You're just starting at different points in the cycle,
same as these ones.
And that doesn't make a difference.
So I'm only going to give one example,
and it doesn't matter where you start in that range.
Now I wanted to see if I could find extremely long
and unexpectedly short repeating cycles.
So if you do out, in, in, out, in, in, in,
8,820 before it repeats.
Ridiculous.
Those seven shuffles, you have to do 8,820 shuffles
to get back where you started.
These eight, only 16.
Seven outs, and then a single in.
You just do all of that twice,
and you get right back to where you started.
And I like the fact that this shows us,
if you do a little bit of working out,
that an in followed by seven outs followed by an in
is the equivalent to doing a single out.
And we can actually start to get some interesting equations
showing which combinations of shuffles
are equivalent to other ones.
And when we had that 52 cycle from doing all ins,
that tells us that 51 ins is equivalent to an inverse in.
And we could carry on with this.
I decided just to find one more ridiculous long one
and call it a day.
I found this run of 13 outs and ins,
which doesn't repeat until after 20,000 and 20 shuffles.
Just ridiculous.
But the point of all of this, where we started,
is to find out which shuffles set up a perfect deal.
And we already know that two out shuffles, that works.
It turns out two in shuffles also works.
Get a new deck, two in shuffles, you're ready to go.
You can actually do an out and then an in.
That works.
And you can do an in and an out.
That works.
And there are loads more.
In fact, there are infinitely many.
If you do 28 ins, that sets you up.
If you do an in, seven outs, two in, seven out, and an in.
And I could keep generating these without ever running out.
But the important ones are these,
which have a realistic chance of actually happening.
Given any pair of in and out Faro shuffles will order the deck
to give you a perfect deal, of course it's way more likely
than assuming the deck is always perfectly randomized.
And this starting condition of having all the suits together
doesn't only happen in a new deck.
When you're playing bridge,
a lot of the time when you're putting a card down,
it's because the suit of the card you're playing
matches the other cards already down.
Now, it's not going to happen every game,
but a lot of the time,
particularly if there's a human picking up the cards
who likes organizing things,
you will end up accidentally putting the suits together.
And so it's going to happen way more often
than the naive calculation indicated.
And when this happened in 2011,
Peter Rowlett of the AP article went through old newspaper archives
and found stories of perfect bridge deals one per decade,
including my favorite story from 1929,
when it happened again at a game in London.
And that story says it had happened five times before that on the record,
going right back to a game in 1888.
So there you are.
That's why our senior citizens playing cards
with dream on the wrong side of the 10 billion human second century,
assuming that everything was perfectly fair
and correctly shuffled was incorrect.
In the case of our senior citizens,
the deck was already stacked.
And I maintain the same thing still applies to dream.
Speaking of good luck,
this video is sponsored by the Great Courses Plus,
and I had decided that they could sponsor this video
about the bridge deal before I remembered
that my friend Art Benjamin has done a whole series for them
about magic and math.
I can probably be excused
because I've got over 11,000 videos
and I tend to watch the ones about history.
I like them because they fall somewhere between
a documentary series and an actual proper course.
Only there's no like tests or checks
that you're paying attention.
You can just enjoy watching the videos.
And if you want to sign up for a free trial,
you can do that and support this channel
by going to thegreatcoursesplus.com
slash standupmaths.
I do recommend starting with Art Benjamin's series.
Episode five is all about perfect shuffles,
pretty much what I covered here.
But in magic, you can use in and out shuffles
to move the top card to any position in the deck,
using binary.
Super interesting.
And actually, a bit of an open question.
You can actually use in and out shuffles
to move any card to any position,
and I can say that because it occurred to me
that 52 cycle of in shuffles does that, just badly.
So I have no idea what the most efficient way
of moving any card to any position is,
but it can definitely be done.
There you are.
Didn't expect an open question in the sponsorship message,
did you?
There you are.
I haven't looked into it.
If anyone can find out, let me know.
If you just want to learn more magic and math,
I highly recommend Art Benjamin's series.
Look at so many episodes, including Magic Squares.
There you are.
Learn to do a magic square.
How hard can it be?
So do head on over to thegreatcoursesplus.com
stand up fast, support me, support the channel,
and learn some super interesting stuff with your free trial.
Get on to it.
