Supersymmetry is a cornerstone of string theory. It's what allows string theory to explain all
the things, not just the forces of nature, but also the building blocks. And it was originally
developed in the context of string theory in the 1970s, but it quickly became popular throughout
all of theoretical physics, because the concept of supersymmetry enabled the solution to some
really thorny problems in our standard model of particle physics, like why is gravity so weak?
How do the forces of nature unify at high energy, and why does the Higgs boson have the mass that
it does? Sorry, supersymmetry is a proposed symmetry in nature between the fermions, which are the
building blocks, and the bosons, which are the forces in nature. And it says that they're really
connected, that they're really related to each other in a very cool and complicated mathematical
way. Supersymmetry says that for every fermion, there is a partner over in the boson family. And
for every boson, there is a partner over in the fermion family. Now, you might expect that this,
that the partner particles, which are called super partners, because supersymmetry, it's going to get
a little rough here with the jargon. The simplest form of supersymmetry possible says that for every
fermion, say you pick a fermion like the electron, that it has a super partner particle, which is called
a sparticle, sparticle has the exact same mass as the electron, the exact same charge, but a different
spin. So the simplest version of supersymmetry says, okay, you've got an electron with this mass,
this charge, and spin one half, you should see a boson with the exact same mass with the exact
same charge, excuse me, but spin one. Well, we don't, there is no such thing as a boson that has the
mass of the electron that has the charge of the electron, but spin one, that particle just doesn't
exist. There's no, and that's true for every particle, every fermion, every boson, when you
make the simplest possible match, it just doesn't exist. This makes us think that this supersymmetry
is broken in our universe, that the supersymmetry only appears at very high energies, like the
energies inside of a particle collider, and that when things cool down and we have the normal
everyday energies, the super partners, the sparticles, gain an incredibly high mass,
which makes them just not appear in the normal everyday universe. They're too high mass, if
you made it, it would instantly decay into something else, and so you just never see it around.
So the way to test supersymmetry, which is more of a family of ideas rather than one idea, it's like,
there's a bunch of supersymmetric models, each one outlining different predictions for what these
sparticles, the super partner particles ought to be, and there's different models with different
predictions for the sparticles of what their masses and properties might be like. But even though
we don't know exactly which supersymmetry theory is right, if any of them, that doesn't,
hasn't stopped theorists from making names for all the sparticles. So you might encounter some of
these names, so I want to tell you what it means. If you have a fermion and you want to know what
its super partner particle is, its sparticle is, you just add an S to it. So the electron becomes
the electron, the neutrino becomes the neutrino, the top quark becomes the stop quark. And if you
have a boson over here and you want to find out what its sparticle is, you add an eno to the end.
So if you have a photon, its super partner particle, super partner particle is the photeno. If you
have a gluon, its partner is the glueno. My two favorite ones, by the way, and by favorite, I mean,
I hate them. The super partner particle of the up quark is the sub quark. Sub quark, how's it going?
And the super partner particle of the W boson
is the weno boson. I just said that out loud.
So the game of experiments of experimental physics is to try to find some evidence of
supersymmetry to find a weno boson somewhere in our particle colliders.
The simplest methods, or the simplest models of supersymmetry, the ones that were the most
natural, that had just the right combination of masses and energies to, say, give the Higgs boson
the mass that it does, these were expected to be found in the Large Hadron Collider.
And they weren't. We've been running the Large Hadron Collider for a few years. We've found zero
evidence for supersymmetry. Over the course of a few years, entire classes of models of
supersymmetry have just been wiped off the map. Is supersymmetry totally dead? No,
because there's more complicated models that put those particles that super partner particles
outside the range of current detection capabilities. But people are starting to get a little bit worried
because the simplest ones, the most natural ones, the most elegant ones have just been wiped out.
What does this mean for string theory? It's not a direct test of string theory. This is
instead testing supersymmetry, but string theory needs supersymmetry to get the job done.
And so if we don't find any positive evidence for supersymmetry,
it makes string theory that much harder to buy. And that's where we are today.
Okay. Thank you so much for watching. I'm still on this series of exploring the nature of string
theory. Next week, I'm going to talk about something very interesting called the land escape.
Tune in next week. But in the meantime, why don't you go to patreon.com slash P M Sutter.
That's P is and Paul M is and Matthew Sutter keeps these shows going really appreciate it.
And you can like, share, subscribe, do all the YouTubey stuff and go out there
and find your Spartacle.
