Welcome to lecture 4 in our series on Einstein.
We find ourselves now in the middle of trying to understand the work in physics that made
1905 Einstein's miracle year.
In the previous lecture, we talked mainly about Einstein's remarkable 1905 paper on
the quantum hypothesis, the paper in which he introduced the concept of light quanta
or photons, the paper that Einstein himself judged to be revolutionary.
But it was Einstein's other major paper of 1905, his paper on special relativity that
turned out to be the most famous product of that extraordinary year, and it is to special
relativity that we now turn.
In this lecture, we will survey the background, the classical physics that Einstein was overturning
when he proposed the special theory of relativity.
We will look at why Isaac Newton believed that space, time, and motion were absolute.
We will think about how the idea of absolute space was also embodied in 19th century theories
of electricity and magnetism, the work of James Clerk Maxwell, which assumed the existence
of an electromagnetic ether, a quasi-material medium in which electromagnetic waves were
thought to travel.
We will study the famous Michelson-Morley experiment, which failed to detect the Earth's
expected motion with respect to the absolute ether frame and gave rise to doubt about
the whole notion of absolute space.
And we will ask why some philosophical critics, such as the physicist and philosopher Ernst
Mock, had doubts about Newtonian absolute space even before Einstein did.
But in the next lecture, we will actually start learning about special relativity itself.
One might ask why so much attention to the historical background is needed.
An important part of the answer is that we are trying to approach special relativity in
much the same way that Einstein did.
Recall again Einstein's own emphasis on the crucial role that the history and philosophy
of science played in his way of doing physics.
And was, he said, history and philosophy that endowed him with a crucial independence
of judgment that made possible his being such an original thinker.
This is especially evident in the case of special relativity.
The history that we will survey is the same history that Einstein studied when, while
a student at the Etae Ha, he read Ernst Mock's book on the history of mechanics.
It is the history that Einstein learned when he read Ferdinand Rosenberger's masterful
intellectual biography of Newton, titled Isaac Newton and His Physical Principles.
What Einstein learned from his study of this history was not just the historical details
about Galileo, Newton, and Maxwell.
What Einstein also learned, as he told us himself, was that the concepts and theories
introduced by his predecessors were not set in stone.
He learned that Galileo was correcting the errors of Aristotle, that Newton was correcting
the errors of Galileo, and so forth.
He learned that even the great Newtons, saying that something was true, didn't necessarily
make it true.
Learning that the history of science is a history of new ideas overturning old ideas
helped to give Einstein the courage to be a rebel.
So let's turn our attention to the history that Einstein learned.
In one sense, relativity is a very old idea.
In his 1638 book on mechanics, Discourses on the Two New Sciences, Galileo had pointed
out that mechanical phenomena always appear the same with respect to any frame of reference
that we would today call an inertial frame, that is to say, a frame of reference at rest
or moving with a constant speed in a straight line.
Galileo's example of such a frame was a ship sailing smoothly at a constant speed on a
smoothly flowing river.
Drop a heavy object like an iron ball from the top of the mast, and it falls at the foot
of the mast exactly as it would if the ship were at anchor.
A passenger on the ship cannot tell that the ship is moving based solely on mechanical
experiments performed on the ship.
The ship's motion is detected only relative to observers on the riverbank.
By the way, I like to picture this with Galileo standing on the pump of Echio and Florence
looking down upon a boat gliding along the river Arno.
Does the falling iron ball move horizontally as it falls?
No, says the passenger on the boat.
Yes, says the observer on the riverbank.
Who is right?
From one point of view, both are right, since it all depends on one's frame of reference.
Acceleration is another matter.
If the ship turns or the wind picks up and gives the ship a push, the passengers themselves
feel the difference.
As we would now say, an accelerated frame of reference is not an inertial frame.
The same principle of Galilean relativity, that's the name we now use for it, is a basic
part of Newtonian mechanics, as one might infer from the fact that it is acceleration
A, not velocity, that figures in Newton's second law of motion, his so-called force
law, F equals MA, which we all learned in high school physics and which says that force
is equal to mass times acceleration.
Nowhere does an absolute measure of velocity, position, or distance play an explicit role
in the equations of Newtonian mechanics, nor does an absolute velocity, position, or distance
play any role in any of Newton's explanations of physical phenomena, from planetary motions
to free fall.
You might object.
You might say that Newton's derivation of Galileo's law of free fall, for example, is
a counter example to what I just said, because that law asserts that the distance a body
falls is proportional to the square of the time during which it has been falling.
But distance, in this case, is measured only relative to the point of release, and we
simply ignore the fact that the Earth is turning on its axis and revolving around the sun.
So again, Galileo's principle of relativity is a fundamental part of Newton's physics.
And yet, Newton famously asserted the existence of absolute space, time, and motion.
He did so partly for theological reasons, absolute space being what Newton called God's
sensorium.
Our human, sensible measures of space, time, and motion were all relative according to
Newton, but in themselves, space, time, and motion were absolute.
Moreover, Newton thought that he had a compelling physical argument for why we had to assume
absolute space.
This was supposed to be proved by Newton's so-called rotating bucket thought experiment,
which appeared in Newton's major treatise on mechanics, the mathematical principles
of natural philosophy, of 1687.
Newton asks us to consider a bucket partially filled with water and suspended by a rope
in otherwise empty space.
We're not supposed to ask what the rope's attached to.
Twist the rope tightly, and then let the bucket rotate as the rope unwinds.
At first, the water remains still and at surface flat, since there is slippage between the
water and the side of the bucket.
And eventually, the water starts to spin, and its surface takes on a characteristic
concave shape.
Weight longer, and the bucket comes to a stop.
For a short time, the water still rotates, and its surface is still concave.
Weight longer still, and the water too stops, its surface once again being flat.
Newton asks how we can explain the appearance of the concave surface.
He says that it cannot be because of relative motion, since the only thing relative to which
the water can move is the bucket itself.
But one sees the concave surface both when the bucket and water are rotating together,
thus when there is no motion of the water relative to the bucket, and during that short
time when the bucket has stopped and the water is still rotating, thus when there is motion
of the water relative to the bucket.
Newton argues that the only possible answer is that the concavity in the surface of the
water results from the water's absolute motion with respect to absolute space itself.
Einstein read about Newton's bucket experiment in Mach's book on mechanics.
He also read there Mach's ingenious critique of Newton.
Mach argued that Newton's thought experiment was flawed because in the real world the universe
is not empty, but filled with the masses of all the stars.
Mach granted that it's not motion relative to the walls of the bucket that causes the
concavity in the water's surface.
But he argued that there is no physical or observational way to tell whether it's rotation
relative to absolute space, or rotation relative to the masses of the stars that explains the
concavity.
He suggests his own thought experiment.
He asks us to assume, for the sake of argument, that the bucket and water are stationary,
but that all of the stars are set spinning around the bucket.
How do we know, asks Mach, that we wouldn't see a concavity in the surface of the water
under such circumstances?
In other words, Mach suggests, it might well be that the only relevant factor is the relative
motion of the water and the stars.
Mach's critique certainly does not prove that there is no absolute space.
It merely undermines Newton's best attempt to give a physical argument for absolute space.
But it sowed the seeds of doubt.
It is also important, because it nicely illustrates one of the philosophical principles for which
Mach was most famous, a principle that, by his own testimony, was a major influence on
Einstein at the time of his discovery of special relativity.
Mach's philosophy, called positivism, is a radical form of empiricism, the view that
all knowledge, or at least all important scientific knowledge, comes from experience, which is
to say observation and experiment.
A positivist and empiricist like Mach always asks about any scientific claim, where is
the evidence, or what are the observations that support the claim?
His point against Newton is that there is no observable difference between motion relative
to the masses of the stars, and motion with respect to absolute space, and so there's
no compelling observational evidence for the reality of absolute space.
As we shall see in the next lecture, there was a crucial point in the development of
Einstein's thinking about special relativity, where he asked exactly the same kind of question
about time, or more specifically about the concept of simultaneity, and concluded that
the concepts of absolute time and absolute simultaneity were as empty as the concepts
of absolute space and absolute motion.
As we have seen, absolute space and motion thus played no significant role in Newton's
physics, but it was widely believed in the latter half of the 1800s that absolute space
played a crucial role in Maxwell's physics of electricity and magnetism.
Most physicists of the late 1800s believed that electromagnetic energy in waves, including
light waves, lived in a quasi-material medium called the electromagnetic or luminiferous
ether, which continuously filled space even in the interior of massive bodies.
And they reasoned that the frame of reference defined by the presence of this electromagnetic
ether, which they called the ether frame, coincided with absolute space.
Thus, when one said that light traveled with a velocity c equal to 3 times 10 to the 8th
meters per second, one meant that that velocity was with respect to the ether frame or absolute
space, not with respect to some ordinary material body like the earth moving through the ether.
There were good reasons for assuming that light and other forms of electromagnetic energy
had to be contained in some kind of ethereal stuff.
Water waves are transverse variations in the surface of a body of water.
Sound waves are variations in pressure in a solid fluid or gas like the air.
Don't light waves and radio waves have to be waves in something?
Electromagnetic energy surely cannot exist in nothing, can it?
Just what this ethereal something might be, however, was proving to be a hard question
to answer.
The electromagnetic ether would have to be something very unusual.
On the one hand, it would have to be so rarefied, so low in density, as to offer no discernible
resistance to the movement through it of massive bodies like the earth.
We don't feel an ether drag.
On the other hand, if it behaved like ordinary matter, it would have to be fantastically
rigid, stiff enough to make possible the propagation of electromagnetic pulses with the speed of
light.
These puzzles were very worrisome, but for a long time they were not enough to overcome
the basic intuition that electromagnetic waves had to be waves in some kind of medium.
But now, if the velocity of light C was defined with respect to the ether frame, it seemed
obvious that observers on bodies moving through the ether, such as humans on the earth, as
it rotates on its axis and revolves around the sun, that such observers should measure
a velocity of a ray of light less than C when moving through the ether in the same direction
as the ray, and greater than C when moving through the ether in a direction opposite
to the ray of light.
The speed of light is so great, it is again 300 million meters per second, or a bit less
than 200,000 miles per second, that adding or subtracting the earth's rotational and
orbital speeds would have only a small effect.
But in principle, there should be such an effect, and it should be observable.
In 1887, the American experimental physicist, Albert Michelson, and his collaborator, Edward
Morley, conducted a famous experiment designed to detect just this effect, the effect of
the earth's motion through the ether.
The Michelson-Morley experiment, which was performed at the Case Institute of Technology
in Cleveland, turned out to be an important, not only as part of the history of the ether
in relativity, but also as the first truly great American contribution to modern experimental
physics, with Michelson becoming the first American to win a Nobel Prize in physics.
The Michelson-Morley experiment employed a device invented by Michelson called an interferometer.
The Michelson interferometer used a half-silvered mirror to split a beam of light into two rays
moving at right angles to one another.
The two rays are then reflected back and recombined.
With the interferometer fixed on the earth's surface, the two perpendicular rays will move
in different directions with respect to the ether.
One ray perhaps moving in the same direction as the earth's motion through the ether,
the other ray moving perpendicularly to the earth's motion through the ether.
Therefore, relative to the interferometer and the earth's surface, the two perpendicular
light rays should travel with different speeds.
If that's so, then, when the rays recombine, the peaks and troughs of their wave motions
will in general no longer be perfectly aligned.
The waves will be, as one says, out of phase.
But when two light rays that are out of phase are combined and illuminate a screen, they
should produce a striking image of concentric, circular, light and dark bands called an interference
pattern.
The width of the bands should give a very precise measure of the degree to which the
rays are out of phase, and so also a very precise measure of the velocity of the earth's
motion through the ether.
The Michelson-Morley experiment was a beautifully designed high precision experiment.
They went to great lengths to control for experimental error.
In order to dampen vibrations, they built the interferometer on a giant stone slab
that floated in a pool of mercury in the basement of the physics building.
And they did the experiment at night in order to minimize vibrations from horse-drawn wagons
and carriages clattering along the cobblestone street outside.
It was such a precise experiment that if there had been an effect to be observed, it would
have detected that effect.
All the more reason why Michelson and the rest of the physics community were shocked
when Michelson saw no interference pattern.
This highly accurate experiment thus detected no difference in the velocities of the two
perpendicular rays, and so no evidence that the earth was moving through the ether.
Of course, the negative result of the Michelson-Morley experiment does not prove that there is no
ether, nor that there is no absolute space.
One can try to save the concept of the ether by such ad hoc stratagems as assuming that
the ether is partially dragged along by massive bodies like the earth, and in a moment will
examine an even more ingenious way of trying to insulate the ether concept and the notion
of absolute space from the negative result of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
This other ingenious idea is what's known as the Lorentz contraction hypothesis.
Still, in the end, after Einstein proposed the special theory of relativity, physicists
came to understand that the Michelson-Morley experiment produced a null result for the
straightforward reason that there is no ether wind, no ether, and no absolute space.
But before moving on to consider the Lorentz contraction hypothesis, two additional comments
about the Michelson-Morley experiment.
The first is that, for a long time, historians of science argued about whether or not Einstein
knew about the Michelson-Morley experiment.
It was pointed out that Einstein didn't cite the experiment in his 1905 special relativity
paper.
Of course, there are almost no footnotes at all in the 1905 paper, and Einstein doesn't
mention it explicitly in most of his own comments about the genesis of the theory.
But it has now been established clearly that Einstein did know about the Michelson-Morley
experiment as one among several experiments that failed to detect an ether wind.
By itself, the Michelson-Morley experiment did not play a major role in Einstein's thinking.
He already had lots of reasons for being skeptical of the ether and absolute space.
But as we will see, taken together with those other experiments, the Michelson-Morley experiment
was important as part of the evidence for Einstein's extension of the old Galilean principle
of relativity to include not just mechanical, but also electrodynamical phenomena, and that
was a crucial step on the road to relativity.
A final comment about the Michelson-Morley experiment is that its significance for the
history of relativity is not confined to its suggesting that there is no ether frame and
hence no absolute space.
It's a delightful irony that as we speak, the basic principle of the Michelson interferometer
is once again being used in a crucial experiment connected to relativity, only this time its
general relativity.
One of the many surprising predictions of general relativity is that events like a supernova
should produce gravity waves.
If they exist, they would be extremely hard to detect.
But an experiment is now being conducted that aims to detect gravity waves with a gigantic
Michelson interferometer whose arms are miles long, not meters, and it uses lasers instead
of ordinary light.
The idea is simple.
A passing gravity wave will distort the interferometer in different ways along the two perpendicular
light paths, and so one should detect interference where the laser beams are recombined.
Called LIGO, which is short for Laser Interferometer Gravitational Wave Observatory, this is the
most expensive single experiment ever funded by the National Science Foundation.
Two sites are in operation in the United States, one in Louisiana and one in Washington.
Similar experiments are being run also by a German-British collaboration and a French-Italian
collaboration.
If we get positive results, if we detect gravity waves, this will be one of the great achievements
of early 21st century experimental physics.
Just as the Michelson-Morley experiment was one of the great experimental achievements
of the late 19th century.
As was noted a moment ago, only after Einstein proposed the special theory of relativity in
1905 did physicists begin slowly to realize that the right way to interpret the result
of the Michelson-Morley experiment was as showing that there is no electromagnetic ether, no
ether frame, and no absolute space.
But the idea of the ether and absolute space was so fundamental to classical physics that
physicists struggled to provide other explanations of Michelson's null result.
The most ingenious and important of these attempts to save the ether and absolute space
was proposed independently by the British physicist George Francis Fitzgerald and the
Dutch physicist Andriy Antoon-Lorens.
Fitzgerald and Lorenz were both sympathetic to the idea that all matter was fundamentally
electrical in nature, perhaps in the sense that the forces holding atoms and molecules
together in stable structures were electromagnetic.
If that were true, and if electricity and magnetism resided in the ether, then it was conceivable
that material bodies moving through the ether could feel the effect of that motion in the
forces holding them together.
More specifically, Fitzgerald and Lorenz suggested that bodies moving through the ether could
experience a contraction in the direction of their motion, a contraction proportional
to their velocity through the ether.
Literally, Fitzgerald and Lorenz proposed that bodies moving through the ether got shorter
in the direction of their motion.
If the contraction hypothesis were true, then the entire Michelson interferometer might
contract in the direction of its motion through the ether by an amount that precisely cancels
the effect of the different velocities of light.
The arm of the interferometer parallel to its motion through the ether would be shortened
just enough so that when the two light rays are recombined, they are in phase, with their
peaks and troughs perfectly aligned.
That would explain the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment while not giving
up either the ether or absolute space.
In hindsight, the Lorenz contraction hypothesis looks like a desperate ad hoc attempt to
save a threatened theory.
Such a judgment is a bit unfair because the idea was not at all implausible at the time.
Moreover, as we shall see in the next lecture, Lorenz's contraction survives, although in
an importantly transformed way, in Einstein's special theory of relativity.
But Lorenz's success in accounting for the Michelson-Morley experiment without sacrificing
the ether and absolute space raises a deep and important philosophical question, one
that Einstein was forced to think about very carefully and one that we will ourselves have
to discuss again in a couple of later lectures.
In its most general form, the problem brought into focus by the success of the Lorenz contraction
hypothesis is known to philosophers of science as the problem of underdetermination or the
problem of empirically equivalent theories.
The contraction hypothesis was just one of several devices by means of which Lorenz modified
Maxwell's electrodynamics in a way that produces a theory that, for all intents and purposes,
makes exactly the same predictions as special relativity.
The differences are so insignificant from one point of view that for some years after
1905, many physicists spoke of the Lorenz-Einstein theory as if they were one and the same.
We call two theories that agree in this way about all predictions empirically equivalent,
meaning that there is no experiment or observation whose result could decide between the two
theories.
Really interesting examples of empirical equivalents are hard to come by, and even in the Lorenz-Einstein
case, the equivalence is, strictly speaking, not exact.
But let's assume that it is an exact equivalence.
We also say about two such theories that our choice between them is underdetermined, that's
a philosopher's word, by the facts or the empirical evidence precisely because they
are empirically equivalent.
Now comes the tough philosophical question.
Einstein thought that his way was the right way.
He had enormous respect for Lorenz, but he thought that Lorenz was just plain wrong about
such things as contraction.
But how can Einstein or any physicist make such a claim if he or she cannot adduce any
empirical evidence to back it up?
Since the theories are empirically equivalent, it's impossible, in principle, to base one's
preference for one theory over the other on an empirical fact.
How then does one make a rational choice?
One could just throw up one's hands and say, it doesn't matter, believe what you will as
long as the predictions come out right.
But such a laid-back attitude won't satisfy someone like Einstein, who thinks that in
some sense, science reveals to us the deep truth about nature.
If there is a truth about nature, and if science is our best way of finding that truth, then
there must be a reasonable way of choosing among empirically equivalent theories.
One very reasonable attitude is to counsel patients.
Very often, new experiments and observations reveal new phenomena, like x-rays and electrons
in the mid 1890s, that we hadn't previously tried to fit into our theories.
And it might turn out that one of two competing theories that are equivalent with respect
to all past observations does a better job than its rival in accommodating those new
discoveries.
But Einstein thought that he was right and that Lorenz was wrong even in advance of any
possible new discoveries.
Why?
The answer is precisely because of the ad hoc way in which Lorenz cobbled together his theory.
By contrast with Lorenz's theory, the special theory of relativity, to which we turn in
the next lecture, is a model of elegance, simplicity, and unity.
Not a pastiche or a collage, but a harmonious theoretical structure.
Simplicity is the term most commonly used by philosophers of science to characterize
such theoretical beauty.
Einstein struggled to find just the right term, and late in life settled on the German
expression fulcomanheit, which translates poorly as inner perfection.
Whatever name we use, the philosophical challenge is the same.
Why should a basically aesthetic property of a theory, like simplicity, elegance, or
inner perfection, be a mark of the theory's truth?
It won't do to say that simple theories are true because nature is simple.
The reason being that our only way of knowing about nature is by means of our theories.
So how do we know that nature is simple, except by our discovering simple theories?
The viciousness of that logical circle should be obvious.
Now is not the time to attempt an answer to the question about simplicity and truth.
As mentioned, we will talk about this problem again in later lectures, it being one of the
deepest philosophical questions with which Einstein grappled, and a problem with profound
implications for Einstein's way of doing physics, from the birth of special relativity in 1905,
to Einstein's lonely old man's quest for a unified field theory.
Now is the time to try to understand the first of Einstein's truly beautiful theoretical
creations, the special theory of relativity.
To that we turn in our next lecture.
