Welcome to lecture five in our series on Einstein.
We're now deep into the physics of Einstein's Miracle Year of 1905.
We've studied Einstein's first great paper of 1905, the one in which he introduced the
photon hypothesis.
In the previous lecture, we reviewed the important parts of the background to Einstein's other
great achievement of 1905, the special theory of relativity.
Trying to understand especially why the concept of absolute space was so deeply embedded in
classical physics.
We looked at early warning signs about the notion of absolute space, such as the shocking
negative result of the Michelson-Morley experiment, which failed to detect the Earth's movement
with respect to an electromagnetic ether that was supposed to coincide with absolute space.
And we looked at the attempt of the physicists Fitzgerald and Lorentz to salvage the concept of absolute space
by the assumption of Lorentz contraction.
Now we are, at last, ready to turn to special relativity itself.
Given the importance of special relativity, not just in the physics of the 20th century,
but also in the broader culture that celebrated Einstein's achievement like no other single
contribution to physics before or since, it is important that we develop a sound basic
understanding of how the theory works.
One can get a somewhat intuitive feel for special relativity without a lot of technical apparatus,
but patient, careful thinking is still required.
In other places, here too, we'll try to think about things in more or less the same way that Einstein did.
At the heart of Einstein's special theory of relativity is a new way of thinking about place, time, and motion.
In relativity theory, a system's location and speed are well-defined only with respect to a specific
frame of reference, or state of motion of an observer.
The consequence, the lengths of objects, the intervals of time between two events, and whether or not
two events are simultaneous, all depend upon the frame of reference within which one asks the question.
On the other hand, ironically, the speed of light is unique in being the same in all frames of reference.
Stranger still, space and time become entwined with one another in a new structure, a four-dimensional
space-time, as it's called. Perhaps most surprising is the fact that this simple change of perspective about motion
is what leads to Einstein's signature equation, E equals mc squared, energy equals mass times the square of the speed of light,
which implies that mass can be converted into energy, and vice versa, and thus holds the secret to the atomic bomb.
We will take a guided tour of all these basic principles of special relativity.
We start with two principles, the relativity principle and what is called the light principle, and a puzzle that arises when we combine them.
First, the relativity principle. Recall or discussing in the previous lecture how Galileo's principle of relativity had been a fundamental
part of mechanics for over 200 years. It says that the physical description of any mechanical phenomenon looks the same in all
inertial frames of reference. Now remember that an inertial frame is one moving with a constant speed in a straight line.
Einstein now asserted that the principle of relativity should be universal in its scope, including electrical and magnetic phenomena,
not just mechanical phenomena. Repeated failures to detect physical effects of the Earth's presumed motion through the electromagnetic
ether, such as the Michelson-Morley experiment, provide an experimental basis for this generalization of the relativity principle,
which became one of the two fundamental physical principles upon which special relativity would rest.
But it's characteristic of Einstein's way of thinking, that it was a thought experiment that really motivated this bold generalization or extension
of the principle of relativity. Experiment strongly reinforced Einstein's intuition and provided the ultimate justification for extending relativity
to electrodynamic phenomena, but a thought experiment provided the path to the crucial insight.
It is also characteristic of Einstein's way of thinking that this thought experiment concerned a nuts and bolts engineering problem of the kind encountered
every day in his family's electrotechnical business. Remember that the Einstein firm built electrical generation equipment.
Einstein's thought experiment concerns a dynamo, an electrical generator. An old-fashioned direct current generator works by having a conducting coil rotate around a fixed magnet.
Classical Maxwellian electrodynamics predicts that in such a situation, something called an electromotive force is produced in the coil,
and that the electromotive force in turn induces an electrical current in the coil. This is why the phenomenon is also known as electromagnetic induction.
But Einstein begins his 1905 paper on special relativity, literally with the opening words of paragraph one, by pointing out that exactly the same observable phenomenon,
the current in the coil, is produced if instead of rotating the coil around the magnet, one spins the magnet within the coil.
What puzzles Einstein is that in this latter configuration with the moving magnet and stationary coil, Maxwellian electrodynamics tells an entirely different story.
According to the ordinary electrodynamics that Einstein knew, the moving magnet engenders an electrical field in the vicinity of the stationary coil,
and it's that electrical field that causes the current to flow in the coil.
So with a moving coil, an electromotive force is supposed to induce the current, whereas with a moving magnet, it's an electrical field that engenders the current.
Einstein asks why there should be such an asymmetry, that's his word, in the explanation, if the observable result is the same, the current in the coil,
and if all that's required to produce such a current is the relative motion of the magnet and the coil.
From the point of view of absolute space or an ether frame, there might be a difference between moving the magnet and moving the coil,
but the real physical observable result is the same.
Doesn't that suggest that only the relative motion of magnet and coil is physically significant?
And doesn't that suggest that the principle of relativity should be extended to include electromagnetic phenomena as well as mechanical ones?
Note one additional characteristic feature of this argument that opens the 1905 relativity paper.
It is Einstein's emphasis on what is and is not observable.
The current in the coil is observable, but neither the electrical field said to be produced by the moving magnet,
nor the electromotive force said to be engendered by the moving coil are directly observable.
This is a philosophical point of exactly the same kind that Mach, whom Einstein read with care, had made against Newton in his critique of the rotating bucket thought experiment.
That the world's most famous paper in all of physics begins thus with a humble electrical engineering problem and a distinctively philosophical argument is surely worthy of note.
It was in this way that Einstein introduced the first of the two principles upon which the relativity theory is based,
this being the principle of relativity itself in a version that comprises both mechanics and electrodynamics.
Maxwell's electrodynamics suggested another principle, namely that the speed of light is a constant independent of the state of motion of the source of the light.
In other words, this second principle says that, for example, whether a laser is stationary or moving, the laser beam that it emits propagates with exactly the same speed.
This would surely be true if light and other forms of electromagnetic radiation lived in the ether, but it is interestingly an implication of Maxwell's electrodynamics that survives even if one jettisons the ether.
We call this second principle the light principle.
In effect, every experiment that confirmed the basic truth of Maxwell's electrodynamics provided evidence, at least indirect evidence, for the truth of this second principle.
So Einstein finds himself now with two intuitively motivated and empirically well supported principles, the relativity principle and the light principle.
Unfortunately, these two principles seem to give rise to a paradox.
This is because, taken together, they seem to imply the following, namely that all observers should see light travel with exactly the same speed.
Think about it now.
The light principle says that the speed of light is a constant independent of the source.
And the relativity principle says that all physical phenomena, including the propagation of light, should appear the same to all observers in inertial frames of reference.
Therefore, all such observers should see light propagated with exactly the same speed.
But if all observers see light travel with exactly the same speed, that violates both our intuitions and a fundamental principle of classical Newtonian mechanics, the so-called velocity addition law,
which says that the velocity of an object measured by a moving observer is the object's absolute velocity plus or minus the observer's own velocity.
For example, if I am traveling on a train at 65 miles per hour and pass a car traveling at 60 miles per hour, then I see the car moving backwards at 5 miles per hour.
We've all had that experience.
Intuitively, don't we all think that light should behave in exactly the same way?
If, by moving fast enough on a train, one can overtake a fast-moving car so as to make the car appear to be moving backwards, shouldn't I be able to do the same sort of thing with light, at least in principle?
That something might be wrong with this intuition, and thus also with the classical velocity addition law, was a thought that had occurred to Einstein nine years earlier when he was a student at the Argao-Cantanel School.
Remember the thought experiment we discussed in lecture one, where Einstein imagined chasing after a beam of light and realized that if he were traveling alongside it at the speed of light, he would see a standing wave and not a train of peaks and troughs passing him by.
In effect, one wouldn't any longer see the light.
Remember Einstein's thinking that a situation like that could not be allowed to happen?
So again, we have a puzzle.
The relativity principle and the light principle, when conjoined, imply violations of the classical velocity addition law, which seems as if it should be true.
Something has to give.
How can this paradox be resolved?
How to resolve the paradox was not immediately obvious even to Einstein.
Two well-established principles contradict a deep principle of classical mechanics.
How can classical mechanics be wrong about something so simple as the addition of two velocities?
Solving this puzzle required of Einstein an insight from another direction, an insight that Einstein himself remembered later on as the key that unlocked the whole riddle of relativity.
It required an insight about the nature of time.
Einstein's most important new idea on the road to the special theory of relativity was his realizing that the appearance of a paradox rested on the heretofore unquestioned assumption that absolute time defined an absolute criterion of simultaneity for all events.
He was right, for if there is absolute time, then there is, as it were, a master clock for the whole universe whose readings determine absolutely and for all observers whether any two events anywhere in the universe occur at the same time.
But Einstein realized that this was wrong.
Whether or not two observers judge two distant events to be simultaneous depends on the observer's states of motion.
Let's do another thought experiment.
Imagine that you were riding in the middle of a railroad flat car at each end of which is a flashlight.
When you pass an observer standing at trackside, the two lights flash.
Since the speed of light is a constant independent of the motion of the source, in this case the flashlights on the moving train car, and since the stationary observer is an equal distance from each light, he or she sees the flashes at the same moment and judges that they occurred simultaneously.
But you, riding on the flat car, see things otherwise.
Before either flash reaches you, riding on the car, you have moved a small distance down the track.
So light from the front of the car has a shorter distance to travel as it were before reaching you, whereas the light from the back of the car must travel a longer distance.
As a result, you see the flash in front before you see the flash in the rear, and so you should judge that the two flashes did not occur simultaneously.
If light traveled with an infinite speed, you and the stationary observer would agree that the two flashes occurred simultaneously.
But since light travels with a finite speed, you disagree.
Here is yet another place in Einstein's reasoning about relativity where he was thinking like a philosopher.
He was once again asking himself, as in the thought experiment about the dynamo, what is observable?
He was again asking Ernst Mach's question.
In fact, in this instance, he explicitly credited Mach's empiricist predecessor, the British philosopher David Hume, with having triggered the insight.
Remember that Hume's treatise of human nature was one of the books Einstein was reading and discussing with his friends Conrad Habicht and Maurice Sullivan and Michele Besso in the Olympia Academy in Barron.
Einstein realized, thanks to Hume and Mach, that one does not directly observe the simultaneity of two distant events.
Light or some other signal or physical influence must bring me information about what's happening at a distance.
I can directly observe whether two events in my immediate vicinity are simultaneous, but judgments of distant simultaneity require an inference based on signals traveling with finite speeds,
and that opens the door to my inferences being affected by the way I, myself, move in the intervening time.
That there is, therefore, no absolute distant simultaneity, as we call it, becomes another fundamental principle of special relativity.
Now finally, Einstein was in a position to begin putting all of the pieces together to create the special theory of relativity.
If there is no absolute distant simultaneity, there is no absolute time, and so the time that enters the equations of physics symbolized by the variable T has no absolute significance.
That means that, among other things, we have to be more careful in writing down rules for translating the description of a physical process in one frame of reference into another frame of reference
in a manner that reflects the fact that there is no absolute distant simultaneity.
We need new transformation rules that reflect how simultaneity depends on the state of motion of the reference frame.
The old transformation rules of classical Newtonian mechanics called the Galilean transformations leave the variable T untouched.
The Galilean transformations show us how to re-describe the positions of objects when we go from one frame of reference to another,
but they tacitly assume that Newton's God-given absolute time stands there unaffected.
The new transformation rules set down by Einstein are called the Lorentz transformations.
They differ from the classical Galilean transformations, mainly in the way in which they mix the variables representing space and time and make essential reference to the speed of light.
One notices that if the speed of light were infinite, the Lorentz transformations would become identical to the old classical Galilean transformations,
which means again that the finite speed of light, now also a constant for all observers, is one of the deep keys to special relativity.
What difference does it make if we employ the new Lorentz transformations rather than the old Galilean transformations?
One important difference is that it resolves the paradox about the classical velocity addition rule.
Just a little bit of junior high school algebra is all that it takes to derive the new relativistic velocity addition law.
As with the old classical velocity addition law, observers in different inertial frames will attribute different speeds to any signal, projectile, or process moving with a speed less than the speed of light.
But owing to the privileged and now characteristic role that the speed of light C plays in both the Lorentz transformations and in the relativistic velocity addition law,
if the process in question is light propagating with the speed C, then all observers in inertial frames of reference agree on that speed, regardless of their own states of motion.
We're at another one of those points where it's a good idea to slow down and review.
We started with a thought experiment about dynamos that motivated the extension of the relativity principle to electrodynamics.
We added to that the light principle, which says that the speed of light is a constant independent of the motion of its source.
We found that these two principles implied that all observers agree that light travels with the same speed C.
Like Einstein, we noted that this contradicted the classical velocity addition law.
We then followed Einstein's reasoning about simultaneity as it led him to propose a new set of transformations, the Lorentz transformations,
and then we closed the circle by seeing how the Lorentz transformations implied a new relativistic velocity addition law,
which in turn implied that all observers do agree on the speed of light, thus resolving the paradox about the implications of the light and relativity principles.
While you're catching your breath, let's think about an interesting little historical point.
Did you notice that the new transformations are called the Lorentz transformations?
Did you wonder about that?
Did you recall from our last lecture that Lorentz was one of the physicists who tried to save the classical notion of absolute space from the threat of the Michelson-Morley experiment by the ad hoc expedient of Lorentz contraction?
Did you ask what his name is doing on the correct relativistic transformation equations?
The answer is that Lorentz was the first person to discover these transformations.
In fact, he was the first person to notice that Maxwell's equations for electrodynamics have the curious property that they retain exactly the same mathematical form
if you use these Lorentz transformations to shift from one frame to another.
We now realize that there is a deep and important reason for this.
The relativity principle demands that physics work the same in all inertial frames.
So Maxwell's equations had better keep their form when we translate from one frame to another.
This is as it should be.
But Lorentz was still wedded to the notions of absolute space and time.
So to him, the fact that Maxwell's equations transformed in this way could be seen as little more than a mathematical curiosity.
It took the radical new vision of Einstein to see that what was involved was a whole lot more than just an odd mathematical trick.
Have you caught your breath?
Are you ready to start doing some more physics?
There are many interesting consequences that follow from the theory of relativity whose basic principles we have now established.
Among the most surprising consequences of applying the Lorentz transformations are what are known as length contraction and time dilation.
Relativistic length contraction takes exactly the same mathematical form as the Lorentz contraction that was introduced to explain away the null result of the Michelson-Morley experiment.
But whereas Lorentz contraction was assumed to be a real physical contraction, relativistic length contraction is all a matter of perspective, all a matter of the frame of reference of the observer.
A stationary observer watching a yardstick zoom by in a rocket ship will see the yardstick as being shorter than a yard.
But conversely, an observer on the rocket ship looking at the supposedly stationary yardstick will see it contracted by an equal amount.
Lorentz thought that absolute space defined the absolute length of a yardstick.
In Einstein's universe, there is no absolute space and there is a perfect democracy of inertial reference frames.
Any frame is as good as another one. No one frame defines the ultimate truth.
The frame of the zooming rocket ship is as good as the frame of the seemingly stationary observer on the earth.
Is the yardstick on the rocket ship really shorter than the stationary yardstick?
The question is not a well posed one because in relativity theory, length is well defined only relative to a specified frame of reference.
And again, all inertial frames are created equal.
Time dilation is the corresponding perspectival feature of the behavior of clocks.
The stationary observer sees the clock on the rocket ticking more slowly than a stationary clock.
Whereas the observer on the rocket sees the stationary clock ticking more slowly.
As with length contraction, neither clock is privileged.
Time dilation is the basis of the famous twin paradox about which you might have heard.
One twin stays on earth while another spends a significant amount of time in a fast moving rocket.
From the point of view of the twin on the earth, everything on the rocket slows down, not just clocks, but also biological processes.
Of course, exactly the opposite is observed by the twin on the rocket.
To the rocket twin, the earth twin appears to be aging more slowly.
It's all a matter of perspective or frame of reference.
A note of caution is in order here, however.
Many popular discussions of the twin paradox make a serious mistake when they imagine bringing the rocket twin back to earth so that a face-to-face comparison can be made.
Surely we think that one or the other twin must be objectively older when they meet one another again.
Each cannot be older than the other.
But didn't we just learn that it's all a matter of perspective?
Didn't we just learn that the earth twin sees the rocket twin aging more slowly while the rocket twin sees the earth twin aging more slowly?
The error in so many popular discussions of the twin paradox is they're overlooking the fact that bringing the rocket twin back to earth requires our decelerating the rocket ship, slowing it down.
Just as getting it launched in the first place required our accelerating the rocket ship.
But accelerating and decelerating rocket ships don't correspond to inertial frames of reference.
Inertial motion is motion with a constant speed in a straight line.
That means that simple timed dilation is not the full story.
The correct calculation is a somewhat complicated one.
In fact, the correct calculation shows that the rocket twin is objectively younger than the earth twin when they meet again.
That is a real difference, not just a matter of perspective.
Because the acceleration and deceleration experienced by the rocket twin, but not the earth twin, is a real physical effect.
Again, not just a matter of perspective.
Without doubt, the most famous consequence of adopting the new relativistic view of space and time is the equivalence or inter-convertibility of mass and energy expressed in the well-known formula E equals MC squared.
You won't find this formula in Einstein's first paper on special relativity in 1905.
It took Einstein a few months to notice this further implication of his theory, and a short note about mass energy equivalence appeared in November 1905, two months after the famous first 1905 relativity paper.
There is no really intuitive way to show why mass and energy are related as E equals MC squared.
Classical physics had asserted separate conservation laws for energy and mass.
Einstein now reveals mass and energy to be two different faces of one still more fundamental aspect of nature, whose full human significance would only be appreciated some 40 years later when the first atomic bomb was detonated and the first atomic reactors began producing electricity and powering ships at sea.
That energy and mass are so related to one another in special relativity is ultimately a consequence of the way in which position and time are entangled with one another in the Lorentz transformations.
But again, showing how and why that is so would require more time and more mathematics than we can now afford.
Another way in which mass behaves differently in relativity theory is that the mass of a moving object is a function partly of the object's velocity.
The faster an object moves, which means the more its so-called kinetic energy grows, the more the object's mass increases.
As the object's velocity approaches the speed of light, the mass becomes infinitely large, which is one reason why, according to special relativity, the speed of light represents an upper bound on all physical processes.
Everything that we have just reviewed was the product of Einstein's burst of brilliant activity in the spring and summer of 1905.
But it took another three years until 1908 for the special theory of relativity to be given its most elegant mathematical formulation.
It was then that the mathematician Hermann Minkowski, one of Einstein's old teachers, showed that the Lorentz transformations could be viewed geometrically as just a curious kind of rotation in an abstract four-dimensional space time.
Minkowski had expressed surprise that his former student Einstein, whom he remembered with good reason as not very hard working and not very promising, he was surprised that this Einstein had produced a contribution to physics of such profound importance.
But Minkowski was perhaps not surprised that Einstein's mathematics, while in no way mistaken, could be given a much more elegant formal expression.
For Minkowski and Einstein, this space-time way of viewing special relativity was more than just a mathematical convenience.
They both realized that the relativity theory was showing us that what is real are not space and time by themselves, but only this amalgam called space-time.
And they both understood that the mathematics of special relativity should clearly reflect that physical or even metaphysical fact.
Moreover, the fundamental elements of this new space-time were seen by Minkowski and Einstein to be not things, as we ordinarily think, but space-time events, as they were called,
which are just locations or points in four-dimensional space-time.
Even more striking is that physical objects in the traditional sense were now to be represented as what we call world lines in space-time.
It's as if you and I and everything in the world come to be regarded as nothing more than continuous sequences of stages or series of point-like space-time events, in effect, just paths through space-time.
This metaphysical picture of space-time as a set of space-time events, the technical term is manifold, this picture will come to play a big role in Einstein's thinking
as he moves from special relativity, first to general relativity, and then on to his ultimately failed quest for a unified field theory.
But all of that, general relativity and unified field theory is the subject matter for later lectures.
Right now, we need a bit of a break from physics.
In our next lecture, we'll turn our attention back to history and biography, following Einstein's life and career from the Patent Office in the miracle year of 1905 to his arrival just nine years later in Berlin in 1914 as a distinguished full professor,
a member of the most important scientific academy in the world, and at the age of just 35, the most highly regarded physicist in a Germany from which he had fled 20 years before.
Thank you.
