Welcome to lecture 7 in our series on Albert Einstein.
After following Einstein from Bern to Berlin in the previous lecture, it's time to turn
our attention back to physics again. In this and the next lecture, we will be examining
Einstein's general theory of relativity, arguably the most radical and most important of all
of his many contributions to the physics of the 20th century.
What Einstein achieved in his miracle year of 1905 was remarkable, but Einstein more or
less immediately set about trying to extend his theory of relativity. Ten years of hard
work was required, however, before Einstein published the general theory of relativity
in 1915. As we saw in the previous lecture, those were ten tumultuous years in Einstein's
life. In 1905, he was just a patent clerk in Bern. By 1915, he was a world-famous physicist
working in Berlin, the scientific capital of Germany. He had a second son. His marriage
to Malava had collapsed. He was now involved in a no longer secret relationship with his
cousin Elsa, and a once peaceful world had been transformed into a world at war with
Germany at the center of the conflict. But throughout it all, Einstein maintained a
clear focus on his work in physics, the search for a general theory of relativity being his
main scientific challenge. In this lecture, we will examine Einstein's first steps toward
general relativity, and we will see that, as was so often the case, Einstein achieved
important fundamental insights by means of simple, visualizable thought experiments.
By basing our own first approach to general relativity on those thought experiments, it's
as if we're teaching ourselves some of the basic ideas in exactly the same way that Einstein
first discovered them. It's as if we're thinking with Einstein, and like Einstein.
We ask to begin with what is so special about what later came to be called the special theory
of relativity of 1905, and in what sense it needed to be generalized. Shortly after introducing
the theory of relativity, Einstein began to worry about the fact that its scope was limited
to transformations among inertial frames, frames moving relative to one another with
constant speed in a straight line. Einstein saw no principled justification for such a
restriction, and so he asked himself whether a more general theory could be formulated,
and valid for transformations among frames moving arbitrarily with respect to one another,
including accelerated frames. Remember that acceleration is change of velocity, which
means either a change in speed or a change in the direction of motion.
Einstein took a first important step toward a general theory of relativity in 1907 with
what we now call the elevator thought experiment, by means of which Einstein uncovered a deep
connection between accelerated frames of reference and gravitation. One legend has it that the
idea first occurred to Einstein when he looked out a window at the patent office and saw
some construction workers in a nearby building, realizing that if one were to fall through
a great distance, one would not feel the force of gravity while one was falling. Einstein
realized that the acceleration one experienced while falling would, as it were, cancel out
or negate the feeling of gravity's pull upon oneself. By the way, skydiving doesn't quite
work as an example, because one feels resistance from the comparatively dense atmosphere through
which one is falling, that's the wind one feels while falling.
But the elevator thought experiment comes to us in a slightly different form. Einstein
imagined an observer inside a closed space, like an elevator, that is equipped with a
complete physics lab. Inside the closed lab, one can perform any physics experiment, but
one cannot communicate directly with observers or the world outside the closed laboratory.
Think about doing experiments, like throwing a ball from one side of the laboratory to
the other when the laboratory is in empty space and is stationary or otherwise moving
inertially, which is to say again with constant speed and direction, and let's assume that
it's moving in an upward direction. The ball will appear to travel straight across the lab.
This is just the old Galilean principle of relativity. But imagine now that the lab is
stationary on the surface of the earth, and repeat the experiment. Thanks to the earth's
gravitation, the ball will be observed to follow a downward parabolic trajectory.
Imagine next that the lab is again in empty space, but now is accelerated upward with
a constant acceleration, not moving upward with a constant velocity or speed, but accelerated
upward with a constant acceleration, as when an elevator ascends or a rocket carries the
space shuttle aloft. One will see exactly the same thing that one saw in the lab at
rest in the earth's gravitational field. Einstein realized that no experiment performed
inside the closed lab could distinguish between the lab's being in a strong gravitational
field and its being accelerated rapidly upward. And he concluded that a general theory of
relativity, one valid for transformations among mutually accelerated frames of reference,
would therefore also have to be a theory of gravity. He formulated this insight in what
is known as the equivalence principle, which asserts that uniform acceleration is equivalent
to the presence of a homogenous or uniform gravitational field. Now of course, since
the earth is spherical, its gravitational field is not strictly speaking homogenous or
uniform because its lines of gravitational force diverge. But the equivalence principle
still holds for reasonably small regions of space where the divergence is negligible.
The equivalence principle cleared up an old and vexing puzzle about Newtonian physics,
which is why the term for mass in Newton's second law of motion, the force law, always takes the
same value as the term for mass in the law of universal gravitation. Recall from high school
physics what these two laws assert. Newton's second law of force, F equals mA, says that
force is equal to mass times acceleration. The mass might be that of our ball thrown
across the lab. Newton's law of universal gravitation asserts that the gravitational
force that two bodies exert on one another, say the earth and a ball falling downward
toward the earth, is proportional to the product of the two masses divided by the square of
the distance between them. There's also a constant of proportionality, g, called the
gravitational constant. Mass in the second law of motion, which is called inertial mass,
is a measure of a body's inertia, its resistance to changes in its state of motion. Mass in
the law of universal gravitation, which is called gravitational mass, is a measure of
a body's ability to feel and exert gravitational attraction. The old question that arose already
in Newton's day was this, why should one and the same property of a body be responsible
for both its resistance to changes in motion and its ability to feel and exert gravitational
force? That's clearly not the case with electrical forces, for example, where inertial mass again
measures resistance to a change in motion, but electrical charge measures the body's
ability to feel and exert electrical attractions or repulsions. Einstein's radical new answer
to this old question is that inertial and gravitational mass are equal because they
are literally one and the same property of a body, and that this is a consequence of
the equivalence principle's assertion of the indistinguishability of gravitation and
uniform acceleration. There's a sense in which all of us are perfectly familiar with the
equivalence principle, even though we might not be aware of it. Think about the fact that
when we talk about astronauts experiencing the strong acceleration of a rocket at launch,
we say that they are experiencing perhaps 2.5 G's. The symbol G in such an expression
stands for the acceleration due to the force of gravity at the Earth's surface, which
is 9.8 meters per second squared. In fact, the astronaut is being accelerated upward
on a powerful rocket, but it feels to the astronaut exactly the same as it would if
the Earth's gravitational field had suddenly been intensified by a factor of 2.5. We all
have a similar experience to a lesser degree when we step on the accelerator in a car
and feel ourselves being pushed back into the seat. Another important consequence of
the elevator thought experiment is that since electromagnetic phenomena are no more capable
of distinguishing acceleration and gravitation than are mechanical phenomena, therefore the
paths of light rays should be curved in the presence of a gravitational field. If an observer
in an upwardly accelerated elevator shines a light beam perpendicularly across the elevator,
then because of the upward acceleration of the elevator, during the time it takes the
light to travel from one side to the other, the beam will strike the opposite wall a little
below where it was emitted. The observer inside the elevator will see the light beam curved
downward in a parabolic trajectory similar to but less pronounced than the parabolic
trajectory of a ball thrown across the elevator. But acceleration and gravitation are equivalent,
though a gravitational field should produce the same effect. The bending of light produced
by the Earth's gravitational field, or even by the kinds of accelerations actually achievable
with powerful rockets, is so slight as to be unnoticeable because the speed of light,
300 million meters per second, is so much greater than the speed of a baseball thrown
across the elevator. But the Sun's gravitational field is strong enough to produce a measurable
effect, and the predicted bending of light from distant stars as it passes near the
Sun became the basis for the most famous confirmation of the general theory of relativity in 1919,
about which we will learn more in the next lecture.
Einstein's next step on the road to general relativity came with another thought experiment,
a rotating disk, which first occurred to him around 1912. Why a rotating disk? Because
rotation is one form of acceleration, and so must be part of a generalization of relativity
to include mutually accelerated frames of reference. In order to understand Einstein's
rotating disk thought experiment, we have to remind ourselves of one of the most important
implications of special relativity, what was called length contraction. Remember how
this works. Two observers, one stationary on the Earth and one flying by on a rocket ship
at a high speed, possess two otherwise identical yard sticks. If the observer on the ground
attempts to measure the length of the moving yard stick, he or she gets the surprising
result that the moving yard stick appears to be shorter than the stationary one. But
it's not as though the moving yard stick has really been shrunk, because if the experiment
were repeated from the point of view of the moving observer, the opposite result would
be obtained. That is to say, the observer on the rocket ship sees the stationary yard
stick as being shorter. Again, this is not a real physical effect, since it would be
impossible, indeed contradictory, for each yard stick really to be shorter than the other
one. No, the effect is merely an artifact of the motion of the two frames of reference
with respect to one another. Let's proceed then with the rotating disk thought experiment.
Picture to yourselves something like an old-fashioned phonograph record, one of those stiff, heavy
plastic ones sitting on a turntable. Einstein imagined an observer at the center of such
a flat disk, who first measures the ratio of the disk's circumference to its diameter
when the disk is stationary. The result will, of course, be pi, which is roughly 3.14.
Now let the disk rotate with a constant radial velocity, like a phonograph record turning
at a constant 33 and a third RPM, and repeat the measurement from the point of view of
an observer who remains stationary at the center of the rotating disk. A yard stick
or ruler applied to and moving with the circumference of the disk will appear to that observer
to be contracted in the direction of its motion, owing to special relativistic length contraction.
But this means that, from the point of view of the stationary observer, the seemingly
contracted yard stick or ruler will have to be applied more times to get around the
whole disk than was the case with the non-rotating disk. And so the circumference of the rotating
disk will appear to the observer at the center of the disk to be greater than the circumference
of the non-rotating disk. But yard sticks or rulers applied to measure the diameter
will not appear contracted because the rotational motion of the disk is perpendicular to the
diameter. The measured length of the diameter is the same for both the rotating and the
non-rotating disk. Put these various measures together and we get a curious result. When
the stationary observer at the center of the disk computes the ratio of circumference
to diameter for the rotating disk, the ratio is greater than pi. In a moment we will ask
what this could possibly mean. But first let's clear up a confusion that affects all of us
when we first try to think about the rotating disk thought experiment. It was just said
that since the yard stick moving at the edge of the disk is contracted in the direction
of its motion, it must be laid off more times than in the case of the stationary disk to
get all the way around the disk and that therefore the circumference of the rotating disk appears
to be greater than was the circumference of the non-rotating disk. But wait a minute.
Hasn't the outer edge of the rotating disk itself contracted by an equal amount so that
we lay off the contracted yard stick the same number of times to measure the contracted
edge of the rotating disk? Don't we get the same result for the circumference in both
cases? The answer is no, we don't. Our mistake here is imagining that we're dealing with
a real material disk. A real disk undergoing this kind of rotation would be a complicated
physical system. The consequences of the rotation, especially if it were rapid enough to reveal
relativistic effects, would include stresses within the structure of the disk that would
almost surely lead to the disk's breaking apart. So just forget about a material disk,
which means I suppose forgetting about our phonograph record analogy. What we are talking
about in the case of the rotating disk thought experiment is really just a rotating frame
of reference, not a rotating material object. All that is relevant, therefore, is the contraction
of the yard stick that's applied to measure the circumference of the disk. So what does
it mean that the measured ratio of circumference to diameter for the rotating disk is greater
than pi? What it means, as Einstein immediately realized, is that the geometry of general
relativistic space time is radically different from the flat Euclidean geometry of classical
space time. The space time of general relativity is curved. Why this is so may best be understood
by imagining first how one does geometry on a surface curved like the surface of a sphere,
which we call a surface of constant positive curvature. That's a technical term. Let's
exercise our visual imagination and let us first ask what might seem to be a silly question.
Let's ask what one means on such a surface by a straight line. In fact, our ordinary notion
of straight line confuses two different ideas. One is the idea of a straight line as a set
of co-linear points in the sense that where we look at the line from one end, it would
appear to be just a point. The other is the idea of a straight line as a line of shortest
distance between two points. This latter is termed the metrical notion of straightness
because it has to do with measures of distance, hence metrics. And it is this latter notion
of straightness that we generalize to come up with a relevant concept of straightness
for arbitrary non-flat and hence non-uclidean surfaces. So what kinds of lines are lines
of shortest distance on the surface of a sphere? For a clue to the right answer, ask yourself
why when one flies from New York to Paris, one flies as far north as Iceland. Airlines
have to maximize profit, which means that they have to economize on fuel by flying the
shortest possible routes around a sphere like the Earth. The routes they fly are called
great circle routes. A great circle on a sphere is a circle of maximum circumference around
the sphere like the equator or a line of longitude, which is one of the lines connecting the north
and south poles. Lines of latitude accepting the equator are not great circles. It turns
out that on a sphere, the lines of shortest distance are always arcs of great circles.
If you're not sure about this, try the experiment yourself with a basketball and some string.
It's easy to prove. So now let's think about a circle on a sphere. As on a flat surface,
a circle will be a line, all of the points of which are equidistant from a center. A
helpful example would be a circle of latitude with a north pole as its center. A diameter
of such a circle will be a straight line connecting two sides through the center. That means that
a diameter of such a circle will be an arc of a great circle like a line of longitude
through the north pole. If you've got this picture in your mind, then it should take
only a moment's reflection to convince yourself that for a circle on a sphere, the ratio of
circumference to diameter will be less than pi because the diameter is comparatively longer
than in the case of the flat circle. But the rotating disc thought experiment gave us the
opposite result, with the ratio of circumference to diameter being greater than pi. As it happens,
the case of Einstein's rotating disc corresponds to another kind of curved surface, a surface
of constant negative curvature, as we say, which can be pictured not perfectly as a sort
of saddle shape. It's much harder to picture a circle on a surface of negative curvature,
one of these saddle surfaces, and just see intuitively how the ratio of circumference
to diameter differs from the Euclidean value of pi. Perhaps it's best to imagine a circle
draped over the surface, much the same way a saddle actually sits on a horse's back.
Then ask oneself this question. Would such a circle, if it were made of rubber, would
such a circle, if laid flat on a flat surface, would it lie flat without bending or folding?
The answer is no. To flatten a circle drawn on a saddle surface, a surface of constant
negative curvature, one has to introduce pi-shaped folds around the edge, because there is more
circle as it were than in the case of the flat circle. In a similar way, to flatten a circle
on a sphere, one has to cut out pi-shaped wedges because there is less circle as it
were than in the case of a flat circle. Such challenges to our visual imagination
notwithstanding, the essential point about the rotating disc thought experiment is that
it is what first suggested to Einstein that generalizing relativity by including relations
among mutually accelerated frames of reference would have profound implications for the geometry
of space and spacetime. It is what first suggested to Einstein that space and spacetime and general
relativity would be curved. But this is not merely a quirk of general relativity, as we
shall see in the next lecture. The curvature of space and spacetime turns out to be the
crucial fact about general relativistic spacetime from the point of view of how it explains
physical phenomena like gravitational attraction.
There are many other equally surprising features of non-Euclidean geometries of curved surfaces.
Let's conclude by talking about just two. But first, let's pause to generalize still
further the notion of a straight line as a line of shortest distance. Such lines on a
sphere turned out to be arcs of great circles. What about surfaces like the saddle that represents
the surface of constant negative curvature? The geometers use the technical term geodesic
to designate straight lines or lines of shortest distance on arbitrary surfaces. What do they
look like on the saddle-shaped surfaces? I like to think of them as lines of least resistance
on a surface or lines that somehow effortlessly follow the curvature of a surface.
Let's give our intuitions a workout by thinking now about triangles on spheres and saddles.
The triangle is a closed geometrical figure consisting of three intersecting straight lines.
We all know what flat triangles look like and we all know some facts about flat Euclidean
triangles such as the fact that the sum of the angles of a triangle equals 180 degrees.
In Euclidean geometry, this is called the angle sum theorem. What then about triangles on curved
surfaces? On a sphere, the sides of a triangle will be arcs of great circles. An easy example
to picture is a triangle with an arc of the equator as its base. One's visual imagination
should suffice to convince oneself that with such a triangle, the sum of the angles will
be greater than 180 degrees because of the way the sides of the triangles seem to be
bowed out, sort of opening up the internal angles of the triangle.
What about triangles on surfaces of negative curvature like our saddle surface? As with
circles, so too with triangles, things are harder to picture on a surface of negative
curvature. But picture to yourself three intersecting geodesics on such a surface, each a line
that naturally or effortlessly follows the curvature of the surface. From without, the
sides of a triangle on such a surface will appear to dip in toward the center of the
triangle as if the triangle were slightly pinched or compressed from each side. If one
can fix that picture in mind, then it should be an easy task to convince oneself that for
triangles on surfaces of negative curvature, the sum of the angles will be less than 180
degrees.
The last interesting question we'll pose for now about the geometry of curved surfaces
concerns the fate of parallel lines. This is historically an important question because
it was through thinking about parallel lines that geometers first learned about the possibility
of non-Euclidean geometries. A helpful starting point is a theorem of Euclidean geometry called
playfairs postulate. Actually, playfairs postulate is equivalent to one of Euclid's axioms, his
fifth postulate or so-called parallel postulate. Playfairs postulate asserts this. Given a straight
line, straight line, and a point not lying on that line, there exists through that point
one and only one straight line parallel to the given line.
The question now is whether this postulate is true on surfaces of positive and negative
curvature. The answer, it turns out, is no. Playfairs postulate fails and it fails in
different ways on the different kinds of surfaces. On a sphere like the Earth, take the equator
as the given line and pick the location of say New York as the given point. Can one draw
a straight line, which is to say a great circle, through New York that does not pass through
the equator? No, you can't. On a sphere, any two great circles are bound to intersect somewhere.
A basketball and a pair of rubber bands suffice to prove this claim. That means that on a
sphere, there are no parallel lines. You might object that two different lines of latitude
don't intersect, but your mistake would be forgetting that the equator is the only line
of latitude that is a great circle.
On a saddle, as always, things are harder to picture. But it turns out that for any geodesic
on a surface of constant negative curvature, any straight line, and any point not lying
on that geodesic, there will be, through that point, an infinity of geodesics not intersecting
the given geodesic. It's a deep fact about such geometries that while two such parallel
lines, parallel in the sense of not intersecting, that while two such parallel lines seem to
be approaching one another ever closer, they never intersect. It's as if their approach
were asymptotic.
We could have still more fun thinking about geometry on a curved surface, but you've already
done a lot of hard work. This is another one of those points where you should take a deep
breath. You've just spent 20 minutes or so inside Einstein's mind, thinking about acceleration
and gravitation, and about acceleration and spacetime curvature in exactly the same way
that Einstein first thought about those topics. Does it make your brain hurt a little bit?
Isn't it sort of like the feeling you get at the end of a good workout in the gym? Yeah,
you're tired and maybe a bit sore, but deep down inside, you feel really, really good.
When Einstein developed the rotating disk thought experiment in 1912, he was still three years
away from publishing the general theory of relativity in its final form. But the power
of Einstein's thought experiments is demonstrated by the fact that two of the essential ingredients
of general relativity, the equivalence of acceleration and gravitation, and the curvature
of general relativistic spacetime first occurred to Einstein thanks to thought experiments,
the elevator and the rotating disk. In the next lecture, we'll look at the finished
theory to try to understand how it works.
Thank you.
