In the previous lecture, we focused on the way in which the new physics of the 20th century
posed a challenge to old philosophical views about the nature of science.
We surveyed responses to those challenges from philosophers representing several of
the contending viewpoints that were important in the early 20th century as part of the philosophical
landscape that Einstein knew, the landscape within which he thought and worked.
We talked about Neocontians like Ernst Kassirer, conventionalists like Henri Poincaré and
logical empiricists like Moritz Schlick and Hans Reichenbach.
In this lecture, we turn our attention back to Einstein.
His own distinctive philosophy of science is worthy of study in its own right as a thoughtful
and provocative alternative to Neocontianism, conventionalism and logical empiricism.
Einstein's philosophy of science is worthy of study also because of the way in which
it made him a different kind of physicist.
Einstein read Kant and Poincaré.
He was deeply influenced by both.
Einstein's physics triggered the development of logical empiricism and Einstein was himself
on friendly terms with many of the movement's major figures.
But he strongly dissented from central pieces of logical empiricist doctrine.
We will examine Einstein's own rather different way of understanding how scientific theories
are related to physical reality and to the experiments and observations upon which theory
is based.
We will try to understand how for Einstein, observation and experiment can be the final
arbiters of scientific truth, even though, as Einstein said, scientific theories are
quote, the free creations of the human mind.
Crucial to Einstein's philosophy of science, as we will see, is a so-called holistic view
of theories and human knowledge more generally.
The idea being that one never tests individual scientific claims in isolation, but only whole
theories, among other interesting consequences of Einstein's theory holism, is his being
able to reconcile deep respect for the ultimate authority of experimental evidence with his
equally famous appreciation of aesthetic properties like simplicity and beauty as guides in the
search for scientific truth.
Many people are surprised to learn how much time and effort Einstein devoted to the philosophy
of science.
The popular image of physics with its strong emphasis on observation and experiment leaves
little room for the reflective and speculative habits of mind of the philosopher.
But as we have seen, from early on, Einstein stressed the crucial role of philosophy in
physics, arguing that philosophy gives the physicist the independence of judgment that
made possible the revolutionary innovations for which Einstein is so famous.
Still in the popular mind, physics and philosophy represent two very different ways of knowing.
That might be why, in public lectures and published articles, Einstein went out of his
way to emphasize the importance of philosophy in physics, arguing that the physicist, him
or herself, must be a philosopher.
One especially nice expression of this attitude bears quoting at length.
It is from a 1936 article, Physics and Reality, that Einstein published in the Journal of
the Franklin Institute, whose Franklin Medal Einstein had just won.
Einstein wrote the following.
It has often been said, and certainly not without justification, that the man of science
is a poor philosopher.
Why then should it not be the right thing for the physicist to let the philosopher do
the philosophizing?
Such might indeed be the right thing at a time when the physicist believes he has at
his disposal a rigid system of fundamental concepts and fundamental laws, which are so
well established that waves of doubt cannot reach them.
But it cannot be right at a time when the very foundations of physics itself have become
problematic as they are now.
At a time like the present, when experience forces us to seek a newer and more solid foundation,
the physicist cannot simply surrender to the philosopher the critical contemplation
of the theoretical foundations, for he himself knows best and feels more surely where the
shoe pinches.
The physicist is the one who knows where the shoe pinches, a typically vivid Einstein
metaphor, all the more interesting, by the way, when one remembers Einstein's famous
aversion to wearing socks.
Where did Einstein think the shoe pinches?
A good place to start our investigations is with Einstein's complicated relationship with
the logical empiricist movement.
We've already talked several times about Einstein's early debt to the grandfather of logical
empiricism, Ernst Mach.
Remember that in the 1905 special relativity paper, Einstein was led to doubt the existence
of absolute distance simultaneity by his asking the kind of question Mach would ask,
where is the observational evidence?
Finding no such evidence, Einstein dismissed absolute distance simultaneity, just as Mach
had earlier dismissed Newton's absolute space.
Logical empiricists who later elevated the verifiability criterion of meaningfulness
to the status of dogma, looked back to this very episode as proof of the rightness of
their views, when they said that a scientific concept is meaningful only if its direct connections
with experience could be clearly exhibited, they thought that they were doing exactly
as Einstein had done.
But even in 1905, Einstein's reasoning was a bit more subtle than that.
If Einstein had really demanded direct observational evidence to validate every scientific concept
and every scientific claim, then how could he also have argued in 1905 that Brownian
motion proved the reality of atoms and molecules?
In 1905, we still had no direct observational evidence for atoms and molecules, we couldn't
see them under the microscope, instead physicists like Einstein inferred their existence from
evidence that they could see, like the random dance of the pollen grain suspended in water.
Einstein still demanded evidence, but it didn't have to be in every instance direct evidence,
the evidence could be indirect.
Right here we see an early hint of what is later to become a major disagreement between
Einstein and logical empiricists like Schlick.
But now the question is how we understand the difference between direct evidence and indirect
evidence.
Einstein took up this very question himself in his lectures on electrodynamics for students
at the University of Zurich in the winter semester of 1910-1911.
Einstein asked his students to think about what we mean when we talk about the electrical
charge at a specific point in the interior of a solid charged body.
One might be trying to model the electron for example.
As Einstein notes, there can be no direct evidence since you cannot insert a test body
inside the solid charged body to measure the charge in the interior.
Does it follow, asks Einstein, that the concept of charge inside a solid body is meaningless?
No, says Einstein, because when we do science, we do not test every individual assertion
all by itself, as with the value of the charge that we ascribe to each individual point inside
that solid charged sphere.
Instead, we test theories in their entirety, and if a whole theory passes the test, then
it's reasonable to assume, at least provisionally, that each of the theory's individual claims
inherits some of that empirical confirmation.
Water the whole plant, and each leaf takes a drink.
The picture that Einstein was painting for his students might well have represented his
way of thinking for some time, but it had been strongly reinforced just one year earlier
when Einstein first read the very influential book, La Terrie Physique, Sonobjet et sa Structure,
The Aim and Structure of Physical Theory, published in 1906 by the French physical chemist,
historian of science, and philosopher of science, Pierre Duembe.
Einstein almost surely read the book first in its German translation, which had been
published by Einstein's old friend, Friedrich Adler, in 1908, just one year before Einstein
became Adler's upstairs neighbor upon his return to Zurich to begin his new job as a
professor at the University of Zurich.
The two labels commonly applied to Duembe's philosophy of science are epistemological
holism and the even more unwieldy term underdeterminationism.
We already spoke about the underdetermination of theory by evidence in connection with Lorenz's
version of electrodynamics, which was for all intents and purposes empirically equivalent
with Einstein's special theory of relativity, so that empirical evidence underdetermines
one's choice between Lorenz and Einstein.
Let's now think more carefully about both holism and underdetermination.
A good example to focus our thoughts is this.
By the late 18th century, Newtonian planetary dynamics had been developed to the point where
one could make extremely precise predictions about the motions of the planets.
What to do then about the fact that observation had revealed systematic deviations between
the predicted orbit of Uranus and its observed orbit?
A simple-minded philosophy of science might lead one to think that if a theory makes a
prediction and that prediction is wrong, then the theory is falsified.
We're fortunate that scientists in the late 1700s and early 1800s weren't that simple-minded.
They asked the right question, which is, have we overlooked some crucial assumption?
The answer was yes.
We had overlooked one very crucial assumption, which was that there are no planets beyond
Uranus.
In 1846, the French mathematician, Urbain Leverrier, calculated the orbit of a hypothetical
transuranic planet whose gravitational effect would precisely account for the anomalies
in the orbit of Uranus.
He asked the Berlin Observatory to take a look and on the evening of September 23, 1846,
the planet Neptune was discovered.
Let's think about what happened here from a methodological point of view.
The lesson to be learned is that, like all scientific theories, Newtonian planetary
dynamics lived amid a network of auxiliary assumptions, such as the assumption that there
were no transuranic planets.
Some of those auxiliary assumptions are of little significance, but sometimes they make
all the difference.
Since in principle, such auxiliary assumptions are always lurking in the background, one
can never say that a single observation refutes a single scientific claim.
Prior to the discovery of Neptune, the observational evidence could have been interpreted as proof
of the falsity of Newtonian planetary dynamics, or it could have been interpreted as it was
by Leverrier as proof of the falsity of one of those lurking auxiliary assumptions.
The evidence in the spring of 1846 did not suffice to choose which was the right point
of view.
The evidence in the spring of 1846 under-determined our choice of a theory.
Reflection on examples like this moved Duem to argue that it was always like this in science.
History always lives amid lots of auxiliary assumptions and lots of other theories.
This is especially so according to Duem in sciences like physics that require sophisticated
experimental apparatus, because other theories are needed to explain the functioning of that
apparatus and to interpret experimental results.
For example, if I look through a telescope and see rainbow-like rings around planets
and stars, are the planets and stars really surrounded by such rings?
Is that what observation reveals?
No.
Optical theory shows that the rings are produced by the lenses in my telescope as a consequence
of the way refractive index varies with color.
The problem is well known as the problem of chromatic aberration.
Duem draws two conclusions, both of which Einstein endorsed.
First, it is always only whole bodies of theory that we test in science, never a single proposition
standing alone.
And second, theory choice in science is always, as we say again, under-determined by empirical
evidence.
Of course, it's often the case that new evidence breaks a tie between two competing theories,
as happened when the Berlin Observatory turned its telescope to the night sky and found Neptune.
But under-determination never goes away, it just pops up in a different place.
If evidence alone does not determine theory choice, what does?
An important part of Duem's answer was trust one's scientific common sense, or balsance,
as Duem said in French.
But we don't have time to pursue the interesting question of what Duem meant by common sense.
Another part of Duem's answer, and the most important part of Einstein's answer, as we've
already seen, is choose the simpler theory.
Simplicity, the sort of aesthetic property of our theories, proves to be hard to pin
down, even for an Einstein.
We'll talk about simplicity a little bit more in a moment.
For now, let's follow the logic of Einstein's thinking about theory and evidence in a different
direction.
One well-known consequence of dogged application of the logical empiricists' stringent verifiability
criterion of meaningfulness is skepticism about the role of so-called unobservables
in science.
Think about Boltzmann's atoms, Maxwell's electromagnetic ether, Gregor Mendel's genes, or Sigmund Freud's
id ego and superego.
None of them are directly observable, or at least they weren't in the early 20th century.
Overzealous logical empiricists often counseled our not using such concepts at all since they
lacked direct observable empirical credentials.
If such unobservables were allowed in, then one was supposed to treat them as if they
were little more than figures of speech, part of a conceptual shorthand that one introduces
for reasons of mental economy.
On this view, later often called instrumentalism, scientific theories are regarded as nothing
more than convenient descriptions of observable phenomena.
Nothing more than tools or instruments, hence that name instrumentalism, tools or instruments
for organizing experience and making predictions.
Instrumentalism is the view most commonly associated with logical empiricism.
An alternative view, usually called today scientific realism, offers a more commodious
home for unobservables.
The scientific realist regards theories as aiming at a true description of even those
parts of nature not directly accessible to observation.
Realists tend to be more accepting of indirect evidence as evidence enough for postulating
unobservable structure in nature, such as atoms, genes and the id.
In the second half of the 20th century, philosophers of science were obsessed with the realism
and instrumentalism debate, and many of them, hero worshippers all, asked, was Einstein
a realist or an instrumentalist?
The answer is that, here as elsewhere, Einstein's philosophy of science is more subtle than either
one of these simple alternatives.
Einstein was sort of a realist and sort of not a realist.
That Einstein was sort of a realist should be obvious.
How again could he be otherwise if he was theorizing the properties of unobservable atoms,
molecules, photons and the space-time manifold?
On the other hand, Einstein wasn't a simple minded realist.
Most scientific realists argue that since there is one reality that science aims to
describe, our theories must give us at any stage in the development of science one best
picture of that reality.
But Einstein, like DuM, was impressed by the fact of underdetermination and empirical equivalence.
He trusted simplicity to help us in sorting through the alternatives, but he knew and stressed
that in principle there would always be more than one equally well confirmed theory in
any given scientific domain.
So Einstein, who believed in atoms, molecules and photons, also had the humility to admit
that in principle one could always paint a different picture, one such picture being
better than the alternatives, mainly only with respect again to those aesthetic properties
like simplicity.
Does simplicity suffice to settle the question of which theory gives the true picture of
reality?
Einstein was strongly tempted to go that route, but as we have seen and will discuss again
shortly, he held back because he knew that aesthetic properties are as much matters of
taste as they are objective judgments of aesthetic fact.
Still, to the extent that Einstein was a realist, his was a picture of science as a mode of inquiry
capable of plumbing the deepest depths of nature.
He was always diving deep in his own science.
His picture of science was therefore also one in which no clear boundary could be drawn
between physics and metaphysics.
Logical empiricists famously followed their forebears, David Hume, in condemning metaphysics,
the very epitome of the quest into the deepest, most abstruse realms of the unobservable as
meaningless sophistry and illusion.
By the later 1920s, this ever more strident logical empiricist hostility to metaphysics
became one of the main points of disagreement separating them from Einstein.
Einstein had yet another reason for opposing overzealous logical empiricism.
Having worried that if we tie theory too closely to experience, we don't leave any
meaningful work for the theorist.
There's a social and institutional context here that bears mention.
Our contemporary picture of science is one filled with grand theories, relativity theory,
the quantum theory, the theory of evolution, the theory of the covalent bond, solid state
theory, the list goes on.
One is surprised therefore to learn that in Einstein's day, theoretical physics was
a brand new field.
When Einstein was a student, chairs in theoretical physics were rare.
Experimentalists were everywhere, like Einstein's teacher H. F. Weber.
Theorists like the young mox plonk were hard to find.
In the early 20th century, theoretical physics was engaged in a deliberate struggle to establish
its legitimacy in universities.
One way to devalue theory is to argue that theory is nothing more than a shorthand description
of experience.
One might argue that theory can soar no higher than mere generalizations from individual
observations.
Einstein's own early work and the work that he so admired in the physics of Plonka Lorenz
taught him a different lesson.
What made the new theoretical physics so interesting, what gave it its power, its potential for
revealing nature's deepest secrets, was that it was a way of doing science that had the
courage to soar to the highest heights, to a place where one had the broadest overview
from where, is this ironic, from where one can see down to the deepest depths.
This is a way of doing science that does not content itself with living on the surface
of mere observation.
The theoretical physics that Einstein prized was distinguished also by its having the courage
to let the theorist's imagination have free reign.
Many times, Einstein said this in a famous capsule form by proclaiming that theories
are, and I quote, the free creations of the scientific intellect.
Isn't it interesting that yet again, we find Einstein here thinking about science in a
language that one might have thought more appropriate to thinking about art and literature
and music, poetry, symphonies, paintings, those are the free creations of the artistic
mind, but science for Einstein, yes, science too.
But the free creations of the scientific intellect are not entirely free.
Einstein was still an empiricist, insisting always that in the end, science was answerable
to empirical fact.
But Einstein's preferred way of making science answerable to fact also reveals subtlety and
nuance not found in every philosophy of science.
This subtlety is nowhere more in evidence than in a famous distinction that Einstein
introduced into our thinking about science, the distinction between what he called principle
theories and constructive theories.
A principle theory for Einstein consists of a set of principles, his term, each of which
is distinguished by having rock solid empirical credentials.
His favorite example was his own special theory of relativity in which, as you will recall
from lecture five, the principles are the relativity principle and the light principle.
Such a theory might well be regarded as little more than a shorthand summary of the experimental
facts.
A constructive theory is very different from a principle theory.
A constructive theory for Einstein is a deep theory, one that pretends to construct for
us a model or picture of deep physical reality.
The Bohr model of the atom, which we discussed in lecture three, would be a good example.
Einstein said naturally that ultimate understanding is provided by constructive theories, but
he had seen theory go off the rails too often because the search for constructive models
rushed ahead of the facts.
Better, Einstein said, to get the empirical principles settled first and only then to
go in search of the deep models, helped now by the guidance offered by those principles.
This is precisely how Einstein thought he got the better of Lorenz back in 1905.
Lorenz wanted a constructive model of how interatomic forces contracted moving yardsticks,
but Einstein thought that Lorenz put the cart before the horse.
Einstein was content to start by just getting the facts arrayed in the cleanest, clearest
possible form.
I keep promising to talk about simplicity and truth.
Let's do that now.
We've already covered a lot of this ground.
Einstein like to M thought that there would always be empirically equivalent theories
like special relativity and Lorenz's electrodynamics.
Therefore, theory choice would always be under determined by evidence.
Our main guide in such situations would be simplicity.
But now let's ask why.
Some philosophers of science argued that one chooses the simpler of two theories because
nature is itself simple.
Einstein knew better.
His friend, Moritz Schlick, took up this question in his first essay on the philosophical
implications of relativity in 1915, an essay that enormously impressed Einstein.
Schlick made the obvious point that such a justification of the simplicity criterion
is silly because the only way we know about nature is through our theories.
If we have reason to think that nature is simple, it could only be because we had succeeded
in describing this or that aspect of nature with a simple theory.
But then we can't appeal to that simple theory's simple description of nature to justify our
choosing the theory in the first place by reason of its simplicity.
Schlick's own justification of simplicity as a criterion of theory choice was interesting.
He said that the simpler theory is the theory with fewer arbitrary elements, and that it
was only the non-arbitrary elements in theory that could be held to correspond to reality.
Hence, if you want to describe reality, choose a simple theory, which is to say a theory
with a minimum of arbitrary elements.
This is not a silly idea.
Schlick's intuition was that the arbitrary elements in theory were, in some sense, subjective,
not objective.
The example that he gave was relativity theory.
A claim about the length of a yardstick could not correspond to anything real because such
claims are frame-dependent and thus arbitrary.
Pick a different frame, get a different length.
Einstein's reasons for trusting simplicity were different still.
For Einstein, it had less to do with whether simplicity was a mark of truth or reality
in science, and more to do with simplicity as a pointer, a sign, a guide.
For Einstein, it was a question of heuristics.
Especially after the successful outcome of his long search for a general theory of relativity
in 1915, Einstein was convinced of the power of mathematical simplicity as a guide to truth
and physics.
Where he saw that many of the errors he made along the way were the result of his not trusting
his instincts in accepting the simplest set of gravitational field equations, which he
had discovered as early as 1912, only to reject them and then return to them in the end.
That a theory was simpler than its rivals was not by itself proof of the theory's truth,
but it was taken by Einstein as a reason for putting one's money on that theory.
To use a term invented by philosophers of science in other settings, simpler theories
were pursuit worthy, worthy of the time and effort to refine them, extend them, and test
them.
Later, we will discuss two more experiences that further confirmed Einstein's faith in
simplicity.
In lecture 18, we will discuss Einstein's unfortunate addition of the cosmological constant to his
field equations, this in 1917, something he did to block expanding universe solutions
of the field equation.
Einstein regarded this addition as a blemish on the beauty of the theory, and he was glad
to remove it in the early 1930s after Edwin Hubble's observations of distant galaxies
had proved that our universe is expanding.
In lecture 16, we will consider Einstein's more than 30 year long quest for a unified
field theory.
One problem making that quest so difficult was that it concerned physics so deep and
so far removed from direct contact with experiment and observation that it might never be possible
to put theory to an empirical test.
Einstein used that in such a situation, on the frontiers of physics, simplicity might
turn out to be the theorist's only guide.
But for all of his faith in simplicity, Einstein also admitted that, in spite of long effort,
he could not define exactly what simplicity meant.
Late in life, in 1949, he wrote that the best he could say was that judgments of simplicity
were, quote, a reciprocal weighing of incommensurable qualities.
It is almost as if, in the end, Einstein's poetic imagination triumphed over his more
narrowly scientific empirical scruples.
The logical empiricists, you'll recall, had been driven to a very stingy verifiability
criterion of meaningfulness in the effort to show that there was compelling empirical
evidence for general relativity's challenge to Kant's claim that the geometry of space
had to be flat Euclidean geometry.
Einstein favored a more generous view of theory's relation to fact.
Could Einstein himself answer Kant?
It was precisely Duem's holism that also gave Einstein his own distinctive answer to
Kantian a priorism.
Strict Kantians argue that the assertion of the Euclidean character of space is a necessary
a priori truth, part of the way the mind structures its knowledge of nature.
Seeming experimental evidence to the contrary has to be explained away, as with Ponca Reyes
revising our assumption about the path of light rays.
Einstein conceded that one could, and perhaps must, for the moment hold some statements fixed
when interpreting experimental results.
But in the spirit of Duem, he noted that there is no reason in principle why just some specific
elements of theory, like the claim about Euclidean geometry, had to be what was held fixed.
We could just as well choose to hang on to our stipulative definition of straight line
as a path of array of light.
For Einstein, as for Duem, it is only whole theories that we test.
Where we make our revisions within that body of theory is ours to choose.
Everything is up for grabs.
No claim is immune from revision.
We seek the simplest theory of nature, but if that simplest theory posits curved spacetime,
then so be it.
Let the chips fall where they may.
Even as a young person, Einstein was interested in philosophy.
Its study made him a better physicist by reinforcing his independent ways.
As Einstein strode upon a larger stage in the 1920s and beyond, that same independent
philosophical mind began more and more to concern itself with topics beyond physics.
Einstein the physicist and philosopher came to be seen also as Einstein the political
figure and Einstein the humanitarian.
That Einstein will be the focus of our next lecture.
