Welcome to lecture 21 in our Einstein series.
At the end of the last lecture, the second of two surveying the story of Einstein and
the bomb in the context of the larger story of the politicization of physics in the 20th
century, we found Einstein dismayed by the attack on J. Robert Oppenheimer because of
unwarranted suggestions of disloyalty. We had also found Einstein warning the public about
the growing threat to civil liberties in the United States as the atomic arms race combined
with escalating international tensions to foster a climate of fear and suspicion that reminded
him too much of the Germany he had left in 1933. But by the time of the Oppenheimer Security
hearing in 1954, Einstein was a seasoned veteran of public political battles for civil rights
and social justice in the United States. The Einstein, who had earlier championed pacifism,
Zionism and internationalism, arrived in the United States with an already well-developed
moral and political sensibility and long experience of public advocacy. He was to confront new
challenges in the United States, but a change of address brought with it no decline in the
seriousness of his commitment or the energy he was willing to devote to the causes in which he
believed. When Einstein settled into his new home of Princeton, New Jersey in October 1933,
among the first challenges he tackled of necessity was that of helping other refugees from Nazism,
mainly Jewish scholars, artists and scientists, find homes and jobs in the United States.
It was not an easy task. The United States was in the middle of the Great Depression.
Millions of unemployed Americans were themselves contending for the few available jobs. Moreover,
the American government was not alone in being slow to appreciate the scale of the Holocaust
that was brewing in Germany. And a country that liked to think of itself as a nation of immigrants
had for some time been dramatically restricting immigration. No open door greeted those seeking
to flee Hitler's persecutions. As hard as it was to get an exit visa from Germany, it could be
harder still to get a visa to enter the United States, which is why many Jewish refugees wound
up instead in places like Mexico, Cuba, Singapore or Australia. One friend of mine, a prominent
Einstein scholar, was born to a Jewish refugee father in the Philippines during World War II,
his parents having fled Germany in the late 1930s only to find themselves living soon under Japanese
occupation. But even after the lucky few got to the U.S., further obstacles remained. While Einstein
never doubted that the United States afforded unprecedented freedom and opportunities, he
was sobered by the realization that even here, anti-Semitism was a problem. It was not the naked
Nazi racial hatred, but the polite anti-Semitism of quotas and quiet social prejudice. Even at an
elite university like Princeton, there were unspoken limits on the number of Jews who could be added
to the faculty. But racism of another kind was a still worse problem in the United States of the
1930s. Einstein already knew more than did many Europeans about the politics of race in the U.S.
In 1931, from Germany, Einstein had joined Thomas Mann and others in supporting efforts to save
the Scotsboro boys, nine African American teenagers wrongly accused and convicted in Alabama
of raping two white women. Later in 1931, Einstein was recruited by the African American historian,
educator and activist, W.E.B. Du Bois, who had studied at the University of Berlin in the 1890s
to pen a letter about the dangers of racial prejudice on the occasion of the upcoming 21st
anniversary of the magazine that Du Bois edited, The Crisis. After his move to the United States,
Einstein devoted surprising energy and effort to the cause of combating racial prejudice
and promoting civil rights. His efforts took many forms, some public, some private. He joined
many organizations, such as the American Crusade to End Lynching, and he subscribed to many public
appeals. In an article entitled The Negro Question that Einstein published in 1946 in Pageant
Magazine, he explained why he was taking such steps. As a Jew, Einstein said, he was well aware of
the problems of racial prejudice. But as a new American citizen, he could avoid a feeling of
complicity in racism directed toward African Americans, only by speaking out, as he said.
He dismissed stereotypes of Negro inferiority as a fatal misconception,
and he urged his readers to join him in combating what he called the deeply entrenched evil of racism.
Einstein matched deeds to words. One good example came also in 1946, when he accepted the offer of an
honorary degree from Lincoln University in Pennsylvania, which was founded in 1854 as the
first institution of higher learning anywhere in the world intended to serve mainly African American
students. Einstein was 67 years old, and his health was such that he routinely declined such
invitations from other colleges and universities, especially if it required any long travel.
But he was happy to make the 60-mile trip to Lincoln for the ceremonies on May 3rd.
Einstein gave a physics lecture for Lincoln students before also giving a speech at the
commencement ceremony, in which, by the way, he warned his audience about the danger of atomic
weapons. Later, he was entertained at the home of Professor Lawrence Foster, among those whom
Einstein met was a six-year-old boy named Julian, the son of Lincoln's president, Horace Mann Bond.
The young Julian Bond afterwards went on to become a leader of the Civil Rights Movement
of the 1960s and beyond as a founder of the Student Nonviolent Coordinating Committee,
a member of the Georgia House of Representatives and Senate and Chairman of the NAACP.
Einstein's involvement in the cause of civil rights included friendships with prominent
leaders like the actor and singer Paul Robeson, whom Einstein first met in 1935 after a concert
that Robeson gave in Princeton, which happens to have been his hometown. Einstein and Robeson
shared more than a love of music. By the mid-1930s, Robeson was well known as a social activist
and an unabashed socialist. They met again when Robeson performed in Princeton in Eugene O'Neill's
The Emperor Jones in 1940 and in Shakespeare's Othello in 1942. Robeson had become famous for his
portrayal of Othello, the Moor of Venice, whose marriage to Desdemona, the daughter of a Venetian
senator, is tragically destroyed by the scheming Iago. In the racially charged atmosphere of the
times, a stage representation of a mixed race marriage was controversial enough,
all the more so when an African-American played the leading role. In the lead-up to the 1948
presidential election, Robeson campaigned actively for the Progressive Party candidate Henry Wallace.
A photograph from that time shows Einstein in Princeton with Wallace, Robeson, and Frank
Kingdon, radio commentator and chair of the Progressive Citizens of America,
which also supported the Wallace candidacy. Robeson's reputation as a radical led to his
U.S. passports being revoked in 1950, a not uncommon form of intimidation at the time.
In March of 1950, NBC refused to allow Robeson to appear on Eleanor Roosevelt's Sunday Evening
Television program, the same program that had broadcast Einstein's interview the month before.
In October 1952, in a gesture of solidarity and friendship,
Einstein invited Robeson to a well-publicized visit at his home in Princeton. They're meeting
this time lasting a good six hours, with a conversation ranging over everything,
from music to the current political situation in Israel and the nascent freedom movement
in South Africa. Equally telling is the story of Einstein's friendship with the African-American
soprano, Marianne Anderson. Scheduled to give a recital in Princeton in 1937,
she was denied a room at the Nassau Inn. When Einstein heard of this, he invited her to be a
guest at his home. No fuss, no bother, just simple hospitality. Anderson accepted the invitation,
and they became good friends, with Anderson staying at Einstein's home whenever her travels
took her to the Princeton area. Like Robeson, Anderson was then a frequent target of what
strikes us today as insanely irrational prejudice. The most famous incident occurred in 1939,
when the Daughters of the American Revolution refused permission for Anderson to give a concert
in the D.A.R.'s Constitution Hall in Washington, D.C. Eleanor Roosevelt resigned from the D.A.R. in
protest and led the effort to arrange for Anderson to give the concert instead on Easter Sunday
on the steps of the Lincoln Memorial. A crowd estimated at more than 75,000 would forever
remember Anderson's heartlifting performance of My Country, Tis of Thee. Einstein was also known as
a friend in Princeton's own African-American community. We do well to balance the image of
Einstein, the genius in residence at the Institute for Advanced Study, with the image of
Einstein, the person who's walks to the Princeton Hospital would take him through the heart of
the African-American neighborhood northwest of Nassau Street, where he was known to stop and
visit on a friendly porch, like that of Kerry Dan's Panel on Jackson Street, now Paul Robeson
Place. Kerry's grandson, Henry Panel, remembers seeing Einstein a lot when he was a kid,
walking along in his sweater and sneakers with no socks, and giving nickels to the neighborhood
kids. About Einstein, Panel said he'd talk with anyone. The extreme prejudice directed
toward Paul Robeson and Marion Anderson seems hardly credible in the United States of the
early 21st century. Equally incredible, but true, is the extent of the FBI's surveillance of anyone
deemed by its director, J. Edgar Hoover, to be a subversive or a security risk. Still more
incredible, but true, is the fact that one's simply advocating civil rights in the 1940s and 1950s
could be enough to earn the subversive label. Should one be surprised to learn, therefore,
that it was Einstein's involvement with civil rights, as much as his other political activities,
that drew the attention of Hoover's FBI. Even before his permanent move to the United States,
Einstein had been the target of attacks from conservative groups who deemed him a dangerous
radical, as when a group called the Woman Patriot Corporation sought to block the issuance of a U.S.
visa to Einstein in 1932 for one of his planned trips to Caltech as a visiting lecturer.
Their 16-page memo to the State Department charged that, I quote now,
not even Stalin himself is affiliated with so many anarcho-communist international groups
and that Einstein advocated acts of rebellion against the basic principle of all organized
governance. This silly screed was taken seriously enough to require Einstein's appearing at the
embassy in Berlin for an interview about his political affiliations, a meeting that
Einstein branded an inquisition. The delay in the issuance of Einstein's visa found its way
into the newspapers and nearly became a major public embarrassment for the U.S. government.
But the FBI's interest in Einstein intensified in the early 1940s when the Army sought the
agency's opinion on Einstein's loyalty and connection with his possibly being recruited
for war-related research. Bizarrely, the main documentation of Einstein's possible disloyalty
that the FBI provided in return was the Woman Patriot Corporation's Looney Memo,
which had somehow made its way from the State Department into the FBI's files.
In the early 1940s, the nation was at war with the Axis Powers and the Soviet Union
was supposedly an ally. Still, Hoover's FBI was as much or more concerned with the threat of
communism than the threat of fascism. A biographical sketch of Einstein also provided by the FBI to
the Army, a sketch the sources for which are obscure, but might well have been German police
files, played up unsubstantiated and of course, false rumors of Einstein's working secretly on
behalf of the Soviet Union while in Berlin, with such charges as that his kaput summer house was
the hiding place of Moscow envoys. The FBI was remarkably obtuse about the actual political
geography of the left and seemed not to understand that Einstein's deep commitment to democratic
socialism made him a staunch opponent of Stalin's brand of totalitarian communism.
Among the many ironic consequences of the FBI's unfounded suspicions of Einstein is the fact that
the same Einstein who counseled President Roosevelt to take seriously the threat of a Nazi atomic bomb
was denied a security clearance to work on the development of the bomb. The Navy, which did not
seek advice from the FBI, the Navy cleared Einstein to do consulting work on problems like the placement
of undersea mines in Japanese harbors, but the physicist who first discovered that E equals MC
squared was not allowed to work for a Manhattan project that we now know was deeply penetrated
by Soviet spies like Klaus Fuchs, who went completely undetected by the FBI and other security
services. In later years, Einstein said that having not been asked to work on the bomb, he was spared
a difficult moral choice. What would he have done if he had been asked? My guess is that he would
have helped at least as long as there was reason to take seriously the threat of a German atomic
bomb. Choosing to work on the bomb might have been a difficult choice, but Einstein had already
proven with his letters to Roosevelt that he was capable of acting with resolve even if the
decision to act were a tough one. FBI interest in Einstein intensified still further in the early
1950s when, in the opinion of some researchers, a program of passive information collection
was transformed into a concerted effort to gather evidence sufficient to destroy Einstein's effectiveness
as a public advocate for progressive causes. The ultimate goal might well have been to have
Einstein deported, as suggested by a memo from the Immigration and Naturalization Service to the
FBI in March of 1950, which raises the question of revoking Einstein's naturalization. This
intensified effort directed against Einstein began on the day after Einstein's very prominent February
12, 1950 appearance on Eleanor Roosevelt's new television program, whereas we learned in the
last lecture, Einstein had warned viewers of the danger of the hydrogen bomb and reiterated his
call for world government. On the morning of February 13, the next day, Hoover asked every
FBI field office to supply any, quote, derogatory information it might possess on Einstein. The
timing hardly seems coincidental. It was a sign of Hoover's desperate desire to smear Einstein,
that he devoted significant agency resources to investigating such absurd stories as that during
his Caltech visits in the early 1930s, Einstein had been the head of a Soviet spy ring in Hollywood.
Another informant, whose allegations were taken seriously, revived yet again the rumors of
Einstein's communist involvements in Berlin during the 1920s, asserting, among other charges,
that Einstein had once admitted in print in a Berlin newspaper that he was a communist. Hoover
went so far as to enlist the help of army intelligence in occupied Germany to try to confirm the report.
The informant's name is of course blacked out in the version of the Einstein FBI file released to
the public, which by the way you can read online at the FBI website. But ingenious detective work
a few years ago by historians of science Klaus Henschel and Andreas Kleinert managed to identify
this informant conclusively as none other than Paul Weiland, the man who had led the anti-Einstein
and anti-relativity campaign in Germany in the early 1920s, including organizing the August 1920
public meeting in the Berlin Philharmonic Hall that we discussed in lecture nine.
Einstein was by no means the only target of FBI scrutiny. The FBI had files on millions of people
the agency regarded as potential security risks. In April of 1951, Hoover reported to Congress
that he had 14,000 people on the debt comm or detention of communists list, people whom the
FBI was prepared to put into detention camps should war break out with Russia. What kind of
circumstances made possible Hoover's use of the FBI for such purposes? In 1945, World War II ended
and the Cold War with the Soviet Union began. Especially after the Soviet Union surprised
the world by developing its own atomic bomb in 1949, fear of communist subversion and
persecutions in the name of protecting American security became epidemic in America well into
the 1960s. But the worst of that period is epitomized by Wisconsin Senator Joseph McCarthy's
wild allegations in the early 1950s that Soviet spies had penetrated every major institution
of government and American public life. And by the Senate hearings that McCarthy led, hearings
aimed at rooting out the supposed espionage. Many lives and careers were ruined by what were often
false charges of communist sympathies. McCarthy himself fell from grace late in 1954 after
overreaching himself and publicized hearings that were supposed to root out communists working inside
the U.S. Army. But the culture of suspicion and intimidation that McCarthy represented continued
for many years to take its toll. To Einstein, it was all too eerily reminiscent of the slow but
steady descent into fascism that he had witnessed in Germany in the early 1930s.
When people's fears were manipulated to pave the way for tyranny and reasonable people stood by
minimizing the growing reality of Nazi intimidation, believing or wanting to believe that democratic
institutions in a civilized nation would protect people's civil liberties. As we saw in the previous
lecture with Einstein's advice to Oppenheimer, Einstein counseled others to stand firm, and he
stood firm himself. In one case that garnered national attention, a Brooklyn schoolteacher,
William Frauglass, was subpoenaed to testify before the Senate Internal Security Subcommittee
in 1953. Having sought Einstein's advice, Frauglass received a letter from Einstein,
later published in the New York Times with Einstein's consent. In this letter, Einstein invokes the
example of Gandhi, urging Frauglass to refuse cooperation, not as did so many by invoking
Fifth Amendment rights against self-incrimination, but on the grounds that submitting to such an
inquisition is, quote, shameful and, quote, contrary to the spirit of the Constitution.
Einstein concludes by arguing that if enough people do this, they will succeed. If not,
then says Einstein, and again I quote, the intellectuals of this country deserve nothing
better than the slavery which is intended for them. Einstein demonstrated his own resolve
in the face of hostile criticism when in 1949 he published in the inaugural issue of the journal
The Monthly Review, a then hotly debated and subsequently much reprinted article entitled
Why Socialism? Though not always as vocal about the cause of socialism as about other issues,
such as Zionism and pacifism, Einstein had in fact long been a socialist in his politics.
More specifically, Einstein had long sided with those who advocated what is most helpfully termed
democratic socialism. This is definitely not the communism of Lenin. Already in the latter 19th
century, tension had begun to grow within the larger socialist movement between those who favored
gradual social transformation through electoral politics and those who favored revolutionary
social change. But World War I and the Russian Revolution that came in its wake transformed
that tension into an outright split. More radical socialists were dismayed to watch patriotism
and partisan national interest overwhelm socialism's internationalist commitments
at the war's outbreak. More conservative socialists were saddened by the Russian Revolution's
steady drift toward violence, not just for its own defense, but as a tool of social control.
In 1919, the split was formalized with the founding of the Communist International or
Common Turn as the umbrella under which radical communists around the world organized themselves
and what was for all intents and purposes under Soviet leadership. Democratic socialist parties
formed their own international organization at the same time. In the United States, events parallel
developments in Europe, when in 1919 what became the Communist Party of the United States of America
separated from the Socialist Party of America, the latter being under the leadership of Eugene
Debbs and later Norman Thomas. As mentioned, Einstein's socialism was that of the Democratic
Left, which distinguished itself from the Communist Left by its deep commitment to constitutional
electoral procedures and gradual social reform. This was the socialism of, for example, the
Austrian Social Democratic Party co-founded by Victor Adler, the father of Einstein's Zurich
friend Friedrich Adler, and it was the socialism of the founding president of Germany's new Weimar
Republic, Friedrich Ebert, after World War I. This democratic socialist tradition continues today
in parties such as the German Social Democratic Party that led Germany under Chancellor Gerhard
Schroeder from 1998 to 2005, or the British Labor Party that regained power in Britain
under Prime Minister Tony Blair in 1997. In the United States, in the 1920s through the 1950s,
the distinction between communists and democratic socialists was clear, even if J. Edgar Hoover
chose not to see it. Communists and socialists competed against one another even at the level
of presidential elections. Socialists saw the Stalinist purges of the 1930s in the Soviet Union
as just further confirmation of their fears about what can happen when democratic constitutional
procedures and protections are trampled in the name of revolution. Communists, for their part,
criticized socialists for being too friendly to capitalism and too timid to oppose Hitler and
Mussolini, but one could hardly fault Einstein for going easy on capitalism. In his thoughtful and
densely argued 1949 essay in the monthly review, Einstein identified the economic
anarchy of capitalism as the cause of the evil that consists in human social instincts being
represented not as a good, but only as a threat to private egotistical interests. Einstein argued
for a planned economy as the antidote, but he warned that a planned economy carries with it the
risk that an all-powerful bureaucracy could become as much a threat to the rights of the individual
as is the unchecked competitiveness of capitalism. Clearly, the danger of Soviet-style communism
was on his mind. Among the many provocative observations in this essay is Einstein's noting
that democratic government under capitalism cannot be trusted to protect ordinary working people
because political parties are financed or quote otherwise influenced by private capitalists who
constitute and again quoting oligarchy of private capital. Equally provocative is Einstein's arguing
that one should not defer to the wisdom of experts on the economy because contemporary economic
science can only describe current economic arrangements the end quoting Einstein the
predatory phase of human development as he called it and so such economic science can say
nothing about the socialist society of the future. The worst evil of capitalism, Rod Einstein,
is the quote crippling of individuals. He held the whole educational system to be complicit in this
since it inculcates an exaggerated competitive attitude as Einstein termed it and trains students
to worship acquisitive success. Writing such things in the political climate of 1949
took a lot of courage but as with his involvement in the civil rights movement,
Einstein matched deeds towards believing firmly that working people had to organize themselves
for their own protection and to promote their interests. Einstein had already become in 1938
a charter member of local 552 of the American Federation of Teachers in Princeton, New Jersey.
Einstein was always clear and firm in condemning what was going on in Stalin's Soviet Union.
The defense of human rights and civil rights in every nation was important to him. Still,
he was something of an uncomfortable ally to American socialist friends too many of whom were
too willing to seek temporary political gain by joining in the red baiting of the McCarthy period.
In one especially blunt letter to the American socialist leader Norman Thomas in March of 1954,
Einstein described conditions in the Soviet Union as abominable to the taste of modern
civilized man. But then he added that, I quote again, America is incomparably less endangered
by its own communists than by the hysterical hunt for the few communists there are here.
He concluded the letter to Thomas by yet again drawing the parallel to Germany
in the early 1930s where an Einstein's assessment slogans like the communist conspiracy were mainly
used to make entirely defenseless those who lack judgment and courage.
World government, control of atomic weapons, racism, opposition to McCarthyite persecutions,
socialism, a long list of social causes drew Einstein's support during his last 22 years
in the United States. Where are we to look for the moral roots of this social activism?
That Einstein was well versed in political theory is obvious from his 1949 monthly review article,
but that's theory. Where does the passion come from? An important part of the answer to that
question brings us back to the issue of Einstein's complicated relationship to Judaism
and to the Jewish people. That will be one of the topics of our next lecture.
