Welcome to lecture 23 in our Einstein series.
In this lecture, we're going to shift the focus away from Einstein himself, at least
partly, and toward the larger cultural world that responded so strongly to Einstein and
his physics.
The century whose onset coincided with Einstein's graduation from the Étéha is one that thought
of itself as distinctively modern, and the heralds of modernity quickly seized upon the
work, the person, and even the name of Einstein as emblematic of the new.
Historians and critics of literature and culture use the term trope to designate a common theme
or motif.
Einstein and modernity is one such trope.
Our aim in this lecture will be to understand how the trope of Einstein and the modern
works.
We'll find modernity difficult to define, and we'll find that cultural appropriations,
invocations, and evocations of Einstein and his work get the physics wrong more often
than not.
But fussing about whether it is literally correct to see Einstein's view of space and
time at work in the analytic cubism of Picasso, for example, will prove to be a misplaced
worry.
Culture is not a rigid network of tight logical interconnections.
A writer doesn't deduce a novel from first principles.
Culture is a loose and dynamic arena of ideas, images, metaphors, and resonances.
Another mistake is to think that one must be looking for developments in Einstein's
physics to be the causes of changes elsewhere in culture.
That might well happen, but culture is no more a causal network than a logical one.
What really does a metaphor cause a mood?
Images don't collide and recoil, they resemble.
To use another term of art from the cultural critics lexicon, the connections we seek might
be not causal, but, as they say, hermeneutic, a matter of similar meanings or interpretive
moves.
And if it's such semantic or hermeneutic lengths that we seek, then temporal order means less.
Einsteinian innovation in physics can come 20 years after some novelty in verse, and
the two still be, from the point of view of meaning, part of one Einsteinian modern moment.
There's also what some call material culture, the buildings, manufacturers, artifacts, and
technologies that shape our lives as much as do our sonnets and our songs.
Some might say that there is Einstein in your television as much as there is Einstein in
your theater.
One might mean by that simply that the television camera and the television screen work only
with the physics that Einstein discovered.
But if meaning is what we seek, not cause, then one can read a machine like one reads
a text.
Radios breaking through the barriers of space and time could have been read in the 1920s
as being just as disruptive of old forms of thought and action as was Einstein's preaching
that distant simultaneity was all a matter of convention.
And last we'll find that Einstein himself might not have been, at least in some respects,
as modern as the cultural world that claimed the sanction of his authority.
Not really pre-modern or anti-modern and surely not post-modern, Einstein might most
helpfully be described as a somewhat reluctant modern.
How's that for a trope?
The concept of modernity itself is where we must start.
It's such a slippery notion that we might do better trying to exemplify it rather than
defining it.
It means different things in different contexts, no one common meaning being easily identifiable
beyond the trivial meaning of different from what meant before, what went before.
Even the meaning of before is hard to fix.
Philosophers date the period of modern philosophy as starting around 1600 with thinkers like
Descartes.
Modernism and art, on the other hand, and in poetry, theater, and music begins almost
three centuries later toward the end of the 19th century.
Then again the modernism that evoked a neo-Thomas reaction from the Catholic Church in the latter
19th century was not the paintings of Edward Manet whom the critic Clement Greenberg called
the first modernist when in 1960 he invented that period in art history.
Know the modernism against which Pope Leo XIII invaded was the philosophy of late 18th
century Enlightenment thinkers like Jean-Jacques Rousseau, Voltaire, and Emmanuel Kant.
Chronology clearly won't yield a single definition of the modern.
Greenberg's analysis of modernism in painting does however suggest one possible principle
of modernism in the form of reflexive self-criticism.
Greenberg sees it work in the art of Paul César, for example, a tendency for the painting
to criticize the craft of painting itself by acknowledging in the painting that it's
painted on a flat rectangular canvas.
He contrasts such openness about technique and materials with the old masters trying
to disguise the means whereby they made a realistic image.
Self-criticism of means is, in fact, as Greenberg notes, a hallmark of Kant's so-called critical
philosophy, where it's the very process of knowing that turns inward to assess its own
nature and limits.
If that's what modernity involves, then Einstein is definitely a modern because for all of
his other differences with Kant over space and time, he wholeheartedly agreed that philosophy
and science must events such as self-critical self-awareness and self-reflection.
But something as rarefied and abstract as a philosophical meta-principle of critical
self-reflection is not what most of us have in mind when we think about Einstein and modernity,
is it?
We're thinking instead about revolutions in physics, about space and time, about relativity
and frames of reference, about quantization and an exploding universe.
So let's dig a little deeper and look elsewhere for threads connecting Einstein to what was
happening in other parts of culture.
One place to look for ideas is to the list of principles of classical physics that we
discussed way back in lecture three when we were trying to understand what was essential
to the classical physics against which the quantum and relativity revolutions were reacting.
It makes sense that if the relativity and quantum theories are quintessentially modern,
then their precursors, what went before, would be part of a premodern cultural formation.
The first of the three fundamental principles of classical physics that we identified in
lecture three was continuity.
The idea was that all processes in nature were continuous in the sense that one could
analyze them into ever smaller steps without ever reaching some last atomic bits, just
as the numerical continuum between say zero and one can be divided ad infinitum.
Between any two real numbers, there's always an infinity of other real numbers, and between
any two of those, another infinity, and so on and so forth without end.
In classical physics, a falling body passes through a continuum of locations symbolized
by a continuous variable, X. Maxwell's electromagnetic field is a continuum of points over which
light waves flutter.
Of course, the atomic theory of matter had an old pedigree even in the 19th century,
but here too continuity reigned in the way in which the structure of the individual atoms
was portrayed, with atomic stuff continuously filling the space inhabited by an atom of
finite size.
And many classical physicists, like Einstein's friend Lorenz, thought that a properly electromagnetic
theory of matter would reveal even the atom, or its constituent electrons, to be really
just a kink or warp in a more fundamental, continuous electromagnetic ether.
But the quantum revolution changed all of that, as first Planck and then Einstein taught
us that in all processes, change proceeded necessarily in a stepwise fashion through
the exchange of discrete, fundamental quanta of energy measured always as whole number
multiples of h nu, where nu stands for frequency and Planck's constant h measures the essential
granularity of nature.
And then along came Bohr, who showed that the electrons revolving around an atomic nucleus
were likewise constrained to a discrete set of orbits separated by energies that were
also integer multiples of h nu.
As we now know, thanks to Einstein and Bohr, the seemingly continuous glow of a candle
flame or laser pointer is really a stream of discrete photons more like grain from a
combine than water from a spigot.
We now look to the art world of the latter 19th century.
One of Clement Greenberg's quintessential moderns is George Sera, whose signal contribution
is pointillism.
Stand far enough back from his masterpiece, Grand Jot, and you have an inviting view of
Sunday afternoon strollers on an island in the Seine.
Come closer and continuous fields of color show themselves to consist of individually
applied dots of pigment.
Our practiced early 21st century eyes accustomed to the halftone printing process, which actually
predates Sera's pointillism, and now to digital photo reproduction, pixelation and counting
dots per inch when we use our desktop scanners, those 21st century eyes cannot appreciate
the impact of Grand Jot when it was first exhibited in 1886.
The continuous unity of scene and vision was fractured into thousands of discrete quanta
of color.
Back out again and continuity reappears, just as the continuous electrodynamics of Maxwell
is valid in the macroscopic limit, but Einstein and Sera have revealed the true microstructure
to be quantized, discretized, and pointillized.
Sera discretizes a static scene in space.
Discretization in time was the result of high speed photography and movies.
The idea of mimicking the perception of continuous motion in time by the rapid viewing of still
images is older than the halftone printing process, but new in the later 19th century
is the use of multiple coordinated cameras and later high speed cameras to break up motion
into stills for separate study or later reassembly into motion pictures.
It was in 1877 that the English photographer Edward Meabridge used such techniques to answer
Leland Stanford's question about whether the feet of a galloping horse are ever all off
of the ground at the same time.
It was in 1891 that Thomas Edison produced the canada scope for individual viewing of
motion pictures, and five years later came his vitoscope for projecting images before
an entire room of viewers.
Did Planck and Einstein pick up the quantum idea from Sera and Edison?
That might not be the right question to ask for understanding a whole culture in which
the fragmentation of unity was a motif.
One might just as well ask whether their model was bourgeois individualism and the fragmentation
of organic social communities under the pressure of industrialization, which seems unlikely.
The point is again to be on the lookout not so much for causes and influences, though such
there surely were in individual biographies, but for the cultural resonances that define
the period.
Unity of a different kind was fragmented in ways evocative of relativity.
As part of his assault on the Newtonian concepts of absolute space and time, Einstein argued
that measures of location, time, speed, distance, and duration are all frame dependent, having
meaning only with respect to a given frame of reference.
In Einstein's universe, there's no one truth about distance simultaneity but an infinity
of truths corresponding to the infinity of possible perspectives associated with the
infinity of possible inertial states of motion of the observer judging simultaneity.
Compare this to what another of Greenberg's moderns, the French impressionist painter Claude
Monet, was doing in the early 1890s.
Monet produced many different series of paintings, each having a single subject, but one depicted
in many different lights at many different times of year, at different times of day,
and in different kinds of weather.
Everyone knows the famous Haystack series.
Another favorite of mine features the façade of the Rouen Cathedral.
Most are from the same angle, looking up sharply from the left front corner, but we see the
scene at sunset, at dawn, in mist, in midday sun.
Monet himself explained his aim in his journal.
He faulted the realist painters who then dominated the French Academy, he faulted them for thinking
wrongly that reality is one and could be captured in a single realistic image.
For Monet, reality is not exhausted by any one perspective, however detailed the image.
One portrays reality only by portraying its manifold aspects.
Perspective here does not mean a state of motion of the observer, but otherwise the
analogy with relativity runs deep.
There is a single subject, one cathedral in the case of the Rouen series, one physical
process in say the case of the relativistic description of cosmic ray muons, but that
one's subject or process presents a different face when differently regarded.
A glow with brilliant reds and browns at sunset, the Rouen Cathedral exhales a soft and misty
blue at dawn.
The half-life of a high-speed cosmic ray muon measured in its rest frame is 1.56 microseconds,
but measured by an observer on the Earth's surface is 7.8 microseconds, this thanks to
time dilation.
No one perspective is privileged, it's a perfect democracy, and all perspectives are
needed for completeness.
There is at least this one important difference between Monet's perspectivalism and Einstein's
relativity, namely that Einstein gives us a formula for translation from one perspective
to another, the Rouen transformations, whereas Monet gives us none.
But here we're being fussy philosophers again, obsessing about details not relevant to the
larger point about the cultural motifs.
Perspective is handled in yet another fashion by Georges Brock and Pablo Picasso in a style
of painting later dubbed analytical cubism.
In this case, Einstein is invoked by name, even if the physics doesn't exactly fit.
In paintings like Brock's Man with a Guitar, done in 1911 and 1912, multi-dimensionality
is the key.
Please having three dimensions, there's a multiplicity of directions from which one
can regard the subject.
One could do as Monet might have done, different canvases portraying the guitarist from left,
right, front, and rear, but Brock and Picasso chose instead to interleave all of these perspectives
in one painting.
The Cubist's simultaneous presentation of multiple perspectives is more of an affront
to classical realist presumptions about representation than is the serial perspectivalism of Monet.
Partly this is because the co-presence of different perspectives subverts any possible
illusion that one might have about the completeness of any one perspective.
But it's also partly due to the fact that interleaving the various representations requires
a fragmenting of each, which means that even the unity of a single perspective is disrupted.
Even more so than Monet therefore, Cubists like Picasso and Brock forced the viewer to
reflect on method and technique, which Greenberg identified as the hallmark of the modern in
painting.
One simply cannot look at Brock's Man with a Guitar without asking oneself what Brock
is trying to do and how he's doing it.
That a Cubist masterpiece is thus a self-reflexive study of representation itself could well
explain why so many viewers find such an image so profoundly engaging.
The painting pulls one in, the eye seeks the separate bits from each interleaved plane
and tries a reassembly only to have another bit from another plane intrude, which horses
want to try again, only to have the next attempt thwarted too.
A unity clearly inhabits the canvas, but seeing it in its unity proves an elusive goal.
A famous literary experiment in multiple representation also makes an explicit invocation of Einstein
and relativity.
This is Lawrence Durell's Superb Alexandria Quartet, published from 1957 through 1960.
The first three novels, Justine, Balthazar and Mount Olive, provide three different spatial
perspectives.
And the fourth, Clea, a temporal perspective on a story of passion and intrigue set amid
the interwoven ethnicities of the Egyptian city of Alexandria just as World War II approaches.
A masterpiece in its own right, the Alexandria Quartet succeeds both because of the simple
beauty of the writing and because of the complexity of the perspectival structure.
The essential temporality of reading contrasts with the atemporality of the painter's canvas
and makes impossible the trick of simultaneous presentation, even if unlike Durell, the author
breaks up and interweaves the multiple narratives in a single text, as Faulkner did in The Sound
and the Fury in 1929.
And yet Durell's narrative canvas works on the reader somewhat as does Brock on the viewer.
And the reader tries, as the reader tries, in vain to assemble the different narratives
into a single story or seeks at least to find within the four different narratives a core
of truth.
As the first novel's title character, Justine says seeing herself in multiple mirrors at
the dressmaker's shop, look, five different pictures of the same subject.
Now if I wrote, I would try for a multi-dimensional effect in character, a sort of prism sightedness.
Why should not people show more than one profile at a time?
It's that seeking for a core of truth that is in the work of Monet, Picasso, Brock, Durell
and Einstein, the really crucial point.
Whether perspective reveals or destroys a deeper inner truth was a question much discussed
in many cultural settings throughout the 20th century.
Let's think about the question as it was discussed by Einstein and the philosophers he read.
You'll remember that Henri Poincare's collection of essays, Science and Hypothesis, was one
item on the reading list of Einstein's Olympia Academy in Barron.
You'll recall as well that Poincare was, along with Pierre Duem, one of the defenders of
the point of view in the philosophy of science known as conventionalism, a point of view shared
by the Einstein who studied both Poincare and Duem.
Conventionalism is one name.
Another determinationism was another, for the idea that there are always different empirically
equivalent theories from among which scientists choose to describe a given domain of phenomena.
The view is called conventionalism because the scientist's choice of one theory over
another is held to be not something driven entirely by logic or evidence since the evidence
doesn't suffice to pick a single best theory but a matter of convention or agreement.
A famous debate in the first decade of the 20th century pitted the moderate conventionalist
Poincare against the radical conventionalist Édouard Lois.
This around the time of Einstein's miracle year of 1905 and Picasso's first steps toward
cubism with painting like the De Moiseuil d'Avignon of 1907.
The question debated by Poincare and Lois was important.
Must there always be among a set of alternative theories or a set of alternative possible
conventions some common core, some central truth upon which all agreed that possible
common core was dubbed the universal invariant?
Poincare said yes, there must be such a universal invariant, Lois said no.
Einstein sided with Poincare.
We talked about this crucial question in lecture 8 where we noted that Einstein grounded
the requirement that the fundamental physical equations keep the same form in all frames
of reference in the deep assumption that only that which is invariant, the same in all frames
is real.
And that there was in Einstein's relativity always some such invariant content is shown
by facts such as that the speed of light is the same for all observers or that while lengths
and durations are frame dependent, the more fundamental structure that blends both length
and duration, the structure called the metric interval or the space time interval, is the
same for all observers.
Such invariant or frame independent physical structures would have been part of the universal
invariant in Einstein's description of the universe.
That there is and must be a universal invariant was for Einstein a point of fundamental importance.
Einstein was very much annoyed by the fact that so many people misunderstood this basic
point about relativity.
Too many people emphasize the relativity of position, time, speed, length and duration,
ignoring the invariant structure underlying these frame dependent measures.
Einstein seriously proposed in the early 1920s trying to change the theory's name from relativity
theory to invariant theory, precisely to emphasize that it was the invariant core that represented
reality.
But he soon realized that the name relativity theory was already so deeply entrenched in
the scientific literature and in the popular mind is to be ineradicable.
It's an interesting question to ask now whether Monet, Picasso, Brach, Durell and other champions
of modernism and art and culture would have followed Poincaré and Einstein in insisting
on the presence of the universal invariant behind the multiple perspectives that each
in his own way put in the foreground.
My own guess is that yes, on this point they all would have agreed with Poincaré and Einstein.
There is one cathedral at Rouen, one man with a guitar, one actual sequence of events in
Alexandria, one metric interval.
If that is right, that all of these scientists, artists and other thinkers associated with
modernism would agree about the universal invariant, then perhaps we have identified
here another recurrent feature of modernism.
It's not just the fracturing of unities and the multiplication of perspectives, it's more
subtle than that.
Modernism lives in the space between unity and perspective.
There's no easy and immediate access to the truth and the real.
Perspective interposes itself.
Its role, its distorting influence must always be kept in mind.
But keeping in mind the biasing effect of perspective is the way to a clearer understanding
of the truth and the reality behind the perspective, that the true and the real are the invariant
is something that one could not understand, were it not for one's first understanding
what it is that varies.
Denying the existence of the universal invariant leads one beyond the modern, into the postmodern,
wherein to adapt a phrase, its perspective all the way down.
It's one thing to assert the inevitability of perspective, the necessity always to be
aware of and to specify the frame of reference from which one speaks, views or does one's
physics.
It's quite another to assert that perspective is everything.
We learned already that Einstein worried so much about the slide from the former to
the latter, from the modern to the postmodern, if you will, that he thought about changing
the theory's name from relativity to invariant theory.
One place in the public arena, where the effects of this confusion were most worrisome
to Einstein, was in the too-frequent move from relativity in physics to relativity in morals.
For a variety of contingent historical reasons, it was especially in the United States from
the 1920s through the 1940s that this became a big issue.
And in the United States, the charge that relativity physics, relativity in physics
led to relativism in morals came too frequently from conservative religious groups, both
Protestant and Catholic.
In part, this happened because religious interests were already bruised and therefore aroused
by the big public argument over religion and evolution that had culminated in the Scopes
trial in 1925, which had been as significant a national media event as any Einstein visit.
In part, it happened because Einstein's theory of relativity came to America packaged together
with the public image of Einstein the Jewish champion of progressive political causes,
and Einstein, whose person and work had already been attacked in Germany by right-wing interests
fearful among other things of his sympathy for leftist politics.
The memorandum submitted to the State Department by the Woman Patriot Corporation in 1932 in
an effort to block a visa for Einstein, which we discussed in lecture 21, makes interesting
reading in this connection with this association of leftism, relativity, and moral relativism.
The authors of the memorandum wrote, and I'll quote extensively from the memorandum,
they wrote,
Albert Einstein has promoted lawless confusion to shatter the church as well as the state,
and to leave, if possible, even the laws of nature and the principles of science in confusion
and disorder, and subject to revision with every new proclamation of an Einstein theory.
Therefore the relativity of this arch-anarch's shattering influence and activities that tend
to promote confusion and disregard of all authorities except Einstein in matters of
science and religion is well worth noting in connection with his affiliations with anarchist
and communist groups, and his admittedly illegal efforts to arouse individual resistance on
the part of all peoples against the most essential laws and principles of all organized government.
Throughout the 1930s and 1940s, there were many public expressions of opposition to relativity
and physics because of its presumed threat of relativism and morality.
But Einstein had learned in the early 1920s in Germany that his participating publicly
in such arguments only stoked the fire.
As friends urged in 1920, 1921, take the high road and leave it to others to confront the
critics.
Many people spoke up on Einstein's behalf, but most effective proved to be Einstein's
old friend and future biographer Philip Frank, his successor in the physics chair at the
University of Prague, who had resettled at Harvard in 1938 as yet another Jewish refugee
from Nazism, and hence a seasoned veteran of political assaults and relativity.
Frank was distinguished by his willingness to devote time, not just to writing and speaking
on Einstein's behalf, but also to meeting regularly with Einstein's critics in the hope
that dialogue might produce common understanding.
The main form for this dialogue was the annual series of meetings held in New York starting
in 1940 under the title Conference on Science, Philosophy, and Religion.
Among the many distinguished participants in these meetings were Louis Finkelstein, President
of the Jewish Theological Seminary, Henry Sloane Coffin, President of Union Theological
Seminary, and Gerald Walsh from Fordham University.
After 10 years of these meetings, Frank published in 1950 a book summarizing his contributions
to the discussion titled Relativity a Richer Truth.
His main argument regarding morality reflects the book's title and the just discussed question
about the universal invariant, the truth or reality behind the perspectives.
After making the obvious and essential point of there being little or no connection in
fact between physical relativity and morals, Frank nevertheless argues that as a metaphor
or an analogy, relativity in physics properly understood draws attention to the way in which
even absolute moral principles require for their application to real human situations
and operational definition of key terms, just as in physics one cannot speak of simultaneity
without stipulating the frame of reference from which judgments about simultaneity are
being made.
Frank gives the example of a strict moral prohibition on killing.
Clearly one has to define killing, and depending upon how that definition goes, one might or
might not find it morally permissible to bomb a city during war or assassinate a tyrant.
Frank's point is a subtle one.
Could it really have been effective in blunting a conservative religious critique of relativity
and finding a middle ground?
That's a hard question to answer, but it's noteworthy that one hears rather less of
this kind of critical assault on relativity today than one did 50 and 60 years ago, even
while the passions on every side of the science and religion argument with respect to evolution
have escalated in recent years.
Perhaps Darwin needs a Philip Frank on his side.
Many people are surprised when they first hear the story about Einstein's wanting to
change the name from relativity theory to invariant theory.
This is if he was running away from the most revolutionary aspects of his own new physics,
or perhaps in a way he was.
Think about it.
Einstein invented the light quantum.
He proved that the electromagnetic field really lives in the form of photons, discrete
energy, quanta of electromagnetic energy.
But his own preferred framework for fundamental physics, his unified field theory, posits
as its basis a spacetime continuum, and deliberately repudiates the discreteness central to the
quantum world.
Einstein discovered all the quantum craziness, but in the end he couldn't accept it.
Likewise, Einstein destroyed the old Newtonian notion of absolute space and time, but then
he regarded as the heart of his new relativistic physics precisely those aspects of spacetime
structure that are invariant under coordinate transformations.
And time hasn't permitted by telling you the story of how in the 1920s the Einstein who
destroyed the ether concept started arguing that in general relativity, spacetime itself
now played the role of an ether.
Einstein was very much the reluctant revolutionary.
History celebrates with its attentions the revolutionary radical who never looks back.
But how common is it really for a revolutionary to be a bit overwhelmed by the change that
revolution induces?
In the early American Republic, the Federalists worried about the nation's fate in the hands
of more radical Democrats like Thomas Jefferson.
In the next lecture, I'll tell you about a young fan of Einstein's who was a Marxist
revolutionary in China in the 1940s, but who by the late 1950s had developed serious doubts
about the direction of China under Mao and looked to Einstein for continuing inspiration
in his decades-long campaign for democracy.
Einstein has lots of company as a reluctant revolutionary.
