Welcome to this, the concluding lecture 24 in our series on Einstein.
We've covered a lot of ground, learning about Einstein's biography, his physics, his philosophy,
his many humanitarian endeavors, and his impact on the world.
In this lecture, we're going to step back a bit from Einstein the person and ask about
Einstein the icon.
Einstein wanted no monuments.
That's one reason why he directed that after his death, his body be cremated and the ashes
scattered in an undisclosed location.
But in spite of Einstein's wishes, the monuments were built.
There's a wonderful memorial statue in front of the National Academy of Sciences in Washington,
D.C., done by Robert Birx in 1978 to commemorate the centennial of Einstein's birth.
And another statue in Moscow, a statue more whimsical in style, shows those two friendly
antagonists, Einstein and Bohr, seated side by side.
Einstein's picture is to be seen in every physics department in the world.
It's on t-shirts and calendars, Halloween masks and sticky notes.
In his book, The Biographies and Books about his Physics, Poor from the Presses, the 2005
centennial of his miracle year having produced a new flood.
Einstein's collected papers, being edited at Caltech and published by Princeton University
Press, will eventually take up more than 20 volumes.
Already in the book, Einstein's book, The Biographies and Books about his Physics, Poor
from the Presses, the 2005 centennial of his miracle year having produced a new flood.
Already on Einstein's first visit to the United States in 1921, he was overwhelmed by hordes
of reporters and fans.
The same thing happened whenever he appeared in public.
In his later years, Einstein achieved truly iconic status.
The unruly hair, the intense eyes, the gentle enigmatic smile, Einstein's image became the
very definition of another worldly intellect.
But Einstein's legacy and doors says much about us and one wants to think even more
about him.
It all begins with his physics.
With good reason, he stands out among physicists as a different kind of thinker.
How and why that is will be one question for this lecture.
Another will of course be why the world still cares so much.
The first word that comes to mind when thinking about the example and the legacy of Einstein
is genius.
If anyone deserves that title, it's Einstein.
But does that label really tell us anything?
Well we mean the label as an honor.
To often are labeling someone a genius or an intellectual accomplishment as an active
genius does more to obscure than to explain the person or the achievement.
The suggestion is that genius is so far beyond the realm of normal human achievement as to
defy comprehension.
Because if there is value for us and the Einstein legacy, it's important that we make the effort
to understand.
After all, Einstein was a human being, not a freak, not an aberration.
And if we're better off for his having lived among us, we might ask what made his accomplishments
possible on the chance that if we can figure it out, we can arrange our world in such a
way as to make more likely the appearance of other Einstein's who can provide us again
the same kind of moral and intellectual leadership and inspiration.
Some of Einstein's distinguishing traits are obvious, even if not all that common.
We've already noted several.
He had an unusual capacity for intense and sustained focus on a problem.
He had an unusual knack for finding the perfect picture or thought experiment to express even
the most arcane scientific ideas.
He was uncommonly inventive and he trusted his sense of simplicity, harmony and beauty
as a guide to scientific truth.
Moreover, contrary to popular mythology, he was a very good mathematician, even if his
approach was a bit more intuitive than analytic.
Right here we have some clues about how we might cultivate more Einsteins.
One of them being that scientific talent and an artistic temperament should perhaps be
seen as complementary, not contrary endowments.
The left side and the right side of Einstein's brain were clearly talking with one another
all the time.
What might that suggest about how we educate the young?
Other distinguishing traits are perhaps less obvious.
Though Einstein was puzzled and more than a little embarrassed by his fame, he did reflect
upon how his way of doing physics was different.
More than anything else, he emphasized as crucial the independence of judgment that
he displayed already as a young person.
His independence was partly a matter of temperament.
The headstrong but unemployed Einstein, who wrote at age 22, a foolish faith in authority
is the worst enemy of truth, did not lack confidence in pursuing his own path through
life as we've seen many times over in these lectures.
But when it came to being a physicist, Einstein was quite explicit about his long and careful
study of the philosophy and history of science as most influential in making him an independent
thinker.
Speaking of an outlier in this as in so many things, Einstein was not as different from
his scientific contemporaries as he is from the typical scientist of today in being so
well read in Kant, Hume, Spinoza, and Schopenhauer.
Einstein repeatedly urged the inclusion of history and philosophy of science in the training
of young physicists.
And it's noteworthy that one very prominent contemporary physicist, Lee Smolen, has urged
exactly the same revision in physics education as a remedy for what he sees as the lack of
progress in fundamental physics over the last three decades of the 20th century, this in
his 2006 book, The Trouble with Physics.
Educational reform more generally was another recurrent theme in Einstein's thinking.
The Einstein who fled the militaristic discipline of an elite Munich gymnasium for the freedom
of a small town Swiss secondary school was a lifelong opponent of rote instruction, strict
systems of grading, and too many requirements.
He preferred schools in which a student's individual talents and enthusiasm were identified
and encouraged.
Einstein's own example might also suggest that the educator's respect for the student's
independence should extend beyond just art and science to a tolerance, perhaps even an
encouraging of independence in matters social and political.
It was, after all, in the comparative freedom of the Argao-Cantonal school where Einstein
roomed with the free thinking Jost Vinteler and in the Bohemian student world of Zurich
that Einstein first began to flower.
It's not obvious that all of these separate traits, focus, perseverance, a strong aesthetic
sense, facility with mathematics and independence of judgment, add up to genius.
But they are part of what made Einstein Einstein.
And while there might not be a simple algorithm or formula for making more Einstein's, can
there be any harm in our trying to reproduce those circumstances that seem to have played
a part?
One might try to analyze Einstein more deeply still.
Many have noted, and we have ourselves several times discussed something that Einstein knew
well about himself, which is that in his work in physics and in his music, he found a
escape from the trials of everyday human life and his own personal moral failings.
The Schopenhauer who gave Einstein a vocabulary for understanding this side of himself is
often cited as one of the 19th century precursors of Freud, one of the first who, along with
Friedrich Nietzsche, explored the unconscious side of mental life.
Were there unconscious roots of Einstein's creativity?
Was it repressed rage or some other mildly neurotic trait that was the source of Einstein's
extraordinary intellectual energy?
It was obviously not the sublimation and redirection of his sexual drive.
Those who think Freud passé might today be tempted to find the key to Einstein's mind
in that mild form of autism known as Asperger's syndrome.
That might explain the quick penetrating mind and the seeming emotional coldness that Einstein
too often displayed toward those nearest to him.
But the Einstein who was also a good friend to many others, the Einstein who glittered
in many social settings and the Einstein who excelled at the violin doesn't really fit
the clinical definition of Asperger's.
Trying to understand the manner of Einstein's difference with a clinical diagnosis of Asperger's
or some other mild disorder might well be like labeling him a genius, just another way of
declaring what and how he was so different in kind from ordinary normal human endowments
as to make his model not one worthy of emulation.
My preference is instead to try as best we can to humanize Einstein, to see him as a
being like us, not unlike us.
How otherwise can we value his example?
It is not our projecting upon him the image of genius, the surest proof that we do indeed
value him as a model.
The sheer intellectual brilliance that we call genius is surely central to Einstein's
having become an icon, but the 20th century was populated with lots of really smart people,
lots of brilliant scientists, many of whom we honor for their talents and achievements
with awards like the Nobel Prize and more than a little media attention.
Why did Einstein come to mean so much more?
Was he that much smarter than Heisenberg?
Did his ideas revolutionize science all that much more than the ideas of frothing or bore
or looking farther afield, James Watson and Francis Crick, who discovered the double helical
structure of DNA?
That Einstein was admired so much, surely also has to do with the fact that as we've
discussed at length, he early on determined to put his scientific fame to use in service
to the humanitarian causes about which he cared so deeply.
Our culture honors Einstein the foe of Nazism and Racism, Einstein the champion of social
justice and peace among nations, as much as it does Einstein the discoverer of the photon
and of relativity.
Our culture honors Einstein the whole person, or rather our culture once did so honor Einstein.
Here we come upon what might be a somewhat difficult or uncomfortable issue to discuss,
but it's one that must be addressed in thinking about Einstein's legacy.
History has its way with all people and events.
Each generation tells the story of the past anew with its own questions and concerns.
That's the way it is and probably ought to be with a history that makes the past part
of the present.
But we should always be alert to how the story changes and we should always ask ourselves
why new emphases come to the fore while others recede.
In Einstein's case, history has of late tended to focus more and more narrowly on Einstein
the physicist.
Said bluntly that's too sweeping a generalization.
Still, by comparison with Einstein's public image of 50 years ago, today one hears ever
less about the Einstein who put heart and soul into the campaign against nuclear weapons
or the promotion of world government.
One is far more likely to hear or read about Einstein's vegetarianism than about his ardent
fight for civil rights.
And today one almost never hears about Einstein's proud membership in a labor union or his deep
commitment to socialism.
The recent public obsession with new revelations about Einstein's infidelities, his fathering
and illegitimate daughter, and his more than shabby treatment of Malava and Elsa also displaces
popular interest in Einstein the public moral leader.
Am I right to sense in some of the more lurid recitals of Einstein's private moral failings
the not so subtle suggestion that a man's treating his wife callously, disqualifies for
serious public consideration, all that he might say or do regarding questions of peace
and war, Einstein's private moral failings are without question part of Einstein's story.
To understand Einstein is to understand the whole person, but surely there can be no easy
inference from infidelity to incompetence in affairs of state.
In 1950, J. Edgar Hoover ordered his agents to report any derogatory information that
might contribute to silencing and possibly even deporting an Einstein who had become
a potent and influential voice in the big controversies of the day.
We all shake our heads in dismay and disbelief at the brazenness and crudeness of such attempts
to silence dissent.
But don't we deserve a little blame ourselves if we simply choose not to remember the Einstein
who once was as much a presence on the political stage as in the classroom and the lecture hall?
Let me try to make vivid what Einstein the whole thinker and person once meant to a world
in need of heroes by telling a story about Einstein's influence that you almost surely
never heard, a story that should be better known.
In 1937, Zhu Linying was a 17-year-old high school student in Hangzhou, China.
He eagerly bought and devoured the Chinese translation of Einstein's 1931 collection
of essays, Mind Belt Build, The World as I See It, when it was published in February
of that year.
When Zhu graduated with a degree in physics from the National Zhejiang University in 1942,
China was at war with Japan.
Zhu had already become a Marxist and joined the revolutionary underground.
After the Chinese communists took power in 1949, Zhu became a member of the Institute
of Philosophy at the Chinese Academy of Sciences and seemed launched on a career of power and
influence.
Within a few years, however, his enthusiasm for the malice dictatorship had waned.
In 1957, he was condemned as an extreme rightist, deprived of all of his privileges and exiled
back to his home village to work as a peasant laborer.
While still in exile in 1962, Zhu was asked to take on the task of translating Einstein's
works into Chinese.
This is part of a larger state-directed program to translate the writings of leading anti-Marxist
figures so as to make possible they're being subjected to criticism within China.
The work took 14 years.
Three volumes of Einstein's writings in Chinese were published between 1976 and 1979.
Zhu himself was finally allowed to return from exile in 1978 and was restored to his
position in the Academy of Sciences, from which he had been expelled 21 years earlier.
From that point forward, Zhu became one of the most important and prominent advocates
of democratization in China, more than once exposing himself again to the risk of punishment,
as in the months surrounding the student-led Tiananmen Square protest movement that was
violently suppressed in June of 1989.
A frequent theme in his own writings of the last 30 years has been the essential links
among science, democracy, and human rights.
To honor his lifelong dedication to science and human rights, Zhu was awarded the 2008
Andrei Sakharov Prize of the American Physical Society, a prize named after the great Russian
physicist and champion of human rights in the Soviet Union.
The audience for Zhu's acceptance speech might well have been surprised to learn about the
role that Einstein played in shaping Zhu's life and career and in laying the foundations
for the larger democracy movement in China.
Zhu explained that when he first began thinking about democratization in 1954, it was Einstein's
words and example that inspired him.
Zhu went on to tell his audience that in the thaw that began in China in 1980 under the
new and comparatively progressive party general secretary Hu Yaobang, the Chinese edition
of Einstein's collected works began to exert a strong influence on intellectuals throughout
China, and Hu Yaobang recommended it to both the Communist Party and the Communist Youth
League, guaranteeing a wide readership.
There's a longer and very interesting story of Einstein's influence on the development
of Chinese thought.
A deliberate and self-conscious appropriation of the best new science was a hallmark of
the modernization movement that started in China in the late 1910s, long before the Chinese
Communist Revolution.
There being no history of physics education in China before then, and no tradition of
classical physics to oppose, Einstein and relativity enjoyed a warmer reception in
China than perhaps anywhere else in the world, and it was the students' wholesale immersion
in this new physics in the new universities, springing up in China in the 1910s and 1920s,
that helps to explain the country's remarkable and rapid production of Nobel Prize-level
physics talent by mid-century.
So in China, Einstein already enjoyed a certain cachet as an important voice of the modern
and the progressive, a circumstance that gave his writings on topics other than just physics
and impact after the revolution that they otherwise might not have had.
In an August 2006 New York Times article about Zhu Danying, Einstein and the Chinese
Democracy Movement, the author Dennis Overby describes Zhu sitting in his Beijing apartment
under an Einstein poster, the inscription on which reads, Great Spirits have always
encountered violent opposition from mediocre minds.
About that inscription, Overby quotes Zhu as saying, those are some of his best words.
Similar stories can be told of the influence of Einstein's example in other places and
on other individuals.
But the story of Einstein's impact on Zhu in China is edifying, especially because
it makes vivid the point that Einstein's intellectual authority as a physicist, first and foremost,
made possible his being heard and taken seriously also is a voice engaged with a wide range
of other interests and issues.
Does it need to be said that competence in physics doesn't imply competence in political
theory?
That should be obvious.
And social and political views have to be assessed on their own terms and by the standards
appropriate to the arena in which they live.
Does it also need to be said that cynically exploiting one's authority and reputation
in one domain to gain standing in another domain is in most cases not commendable?
But isn't that what Einstein did, one might ask, when he decided in the 1920s to venture
out upon a larger public stage?
Isn't he just using his fame as a physicist to promote his pet political causes?
Isn't it as silly as an athlete promoting an aftershave?
Well to some extent, perhaps.
But if one sees no farther than this, then one misses something profoundly important
about Einstein's example.
Consider the case of another physicist with a well-earned reputation for moral leadership,
Hans Veta, who was mentioned in lecture 20 as a member of the Emergency Committee of
Atomic Scientists, that Einstein and Leo Zillard established right after the end of
World War II.
Though he had serious moral reservations about the hydrogen bomb, Veta did important theoretical
work on the super.
But by the late 1950s, he had walked away from active bomb research and was working hard
to build an international community of physicists who could help the two nuclear superpowers
find a common ground, a basis of agreement on reigning in the arms race, as with the
limited test ban treaty of 1963.
In later years, Veta became well-known for counseling his fellow physicists simply to
cease all work on weapons of mass destruction.
Obviously not everyone he did the call, but Veta's high regard as a moral voice among
physicists led to his being a subject of SS Schwaeber's 2000 comparative study titled
In the Shadow of the Bomb, Veta Oppenheimer and the Moral Responsibility of the Scientist.
One of Schwaeber's major themes is that Veta enjoyed such high regard as a moral voice
because unlike Oppenheimer, he never lost what Schwaeber calls his anchor in integrity.
What Schwaeber means simply is that Veta continued throughout his life to do the first rate work
in physics that earned him the 1967 Nobel Prize.
No more than in Einstein's case did Veta's expertise in areas like stellar nucleosynthesis
entail an expertise in moral matters.
Instead, physics was the center of his competence.
It was where he earned his stripes.
It was not the knowledge gained in theoretical nuclear physics that carried over into politics
so much as the integrity one gained from doing well what one does best.
It's as if when Veta spoke about such issues as the morality of weapons research, those
who heard him thought this is a serious person, a person of integrity who's known from his
work in physics never to speak without careful consideration and do regard for the importance
of the message.
He gets his facts right and his logic straight.
Such a serious person is someone always to be taken seriously on any important topic.
That's how it was with Einstein too.
Physics was his anchor in integrity.
He never stopped doing serious work in physics and even if many other physicists thought
that he had bet on the wrong horse with his pursuit of a unified field theory, they and
the larger public knew him to be a serious physicist and always respected him for that
fact.
This was the real source of Einstein's authority in the public arena.
His work in physics proved him to be a serious person of integrity whose views on any topic
were therefore to be taken seriously.
Einstein didn't become an icon simply because he was a good physicist and freely spouted
his opinions about peace, war, race and economics.
He became an icon because we made him one.
We must pause for just a moment at least to ask what Einstein's having become an icon
says about us.
There's no question that Einstein's fame was partly due to the fact that, as they say
in the press, he made good copy.
His striking image, his quick wit, his winning way with words, all of that played very well
in a new electronically interconnected media world where Chicago newspaper readers were
beginning to get the same stories with their morning coffee that Londoners saw with theirs
and where live radio reports of Einstein's arrival in New York were heard around the country.
But it's too easy to be cynical and leave it at that with Einstein joining Charles Lindberg
and Babe Ruth as just another celebrity in the early years of the media age.
No, the Einstein image conveyed a message.
The image embodied the contradictions that made up Einstein's character.
He was very much of this world, embroiled in all the sad and happy business of his day.
But he was also not of this world.
The dreamy detachment seen in so many pictures reflects accurately the Einstein who sought
refuge in the abstractions of physics, the Einstein who self-consciously sought to transcend
what one of my favorite gospel hymns calls this wearisome land.
In choosing that Einstein as our icon, we project upon Einstein our own dissatisfactions
with the world as we find it, a world of suffering and woe, and we project upon him as well our
own hopes for something higher.
A world where reason aligns with passion in service of a better future.
If that's why we've made Einstein our icon, then good for us.
How do we capture all that Einstein was and is?
Or if that's an impossible task, what is it about Einstein that we most want to bear in mind?
The brilliant physicist, the insightful philosopher, the inspiring humanitarian, what do we do
with the plain facts about his life?
How balance the aura of genius against the obvious failings of Einstein, the husband and father?
Einstein himself had a ready answer to these questions.
Nearing the age of 70, he wrote the following.
What is essential in the being of a person like me lies in what he thinks and how he thinks,
not in what he does or suffers.
Very well then, how should we think of Einstein the thinker?
For my part, I'm helped by a few favorite lines from Canto III of the early poetic tour de force
that made Lord Byron famous, Child Harold's pilgrimage, where Byron wrote the following.
The race of life becomes a hopeless flight to those that walk in darkness, on the sea,
the boldest steer, but where their ports invite.
But there are wanderers or eternity, whose bark drives on and on and anchored ne'er shall be.
For me, Einstein epitomizes that wanderer or eternity.
But Einstein said much the same himself, and these lectures being about him, he deserves
the last word.
Listen to what he wrote to a friend in 1920.
Measured objectively, what a man can rest from truth by passionate striving is utterly
infinitesimal.
But the striving frees us from the bonds of the self and makes us comrades of those who
are the best and the greatest.
