We're raising a generation of men who are going to be increasingly psychotic and crazy.
That was ugly.
That is like, yeah, it's so depressing.
What does healthy masculinity look like?
Masculinity is an amazing thing.
You shouldn't apologize for it.
You should lean into it.
But what does it mean?
We've conflated toxicity with masculinity.
There's so many lonely young men who don't have any interaction with people,
very susceptible to anything or any algorithm giving them a sense of self-worth.
I would have been one of those guys today, angry, upset.
So I relate.
My guest today is Scott Galloway.
Scott is a professor of marketing at NYU Stern School of Business.
He's a best-selling author.
He's also the host of the Prof. G podcast and a co-host of the Pivot podcast with Kara Swisher.
Masculinity is a societal construct, and a lot of women demonstrate wonderful masculinity.
It's not the domain of people born as men.
In urban areas now in the U.S., women under the age of 30 are making more money than men.
And by the way, that's wonderful.
We should do nothing to get in the way of that.
Women are, I think, ready for more economically and emotionally viable young men.
So the question is, how do we level up young men?
Today's episode is brought to you by the awesome organizations that make this show possible.
Scott, thank you for doing this.
I know it's a schlep to come out here.
I appreciate you making the time.
I've been looking forward to this for a very long time, and there's so much to talk about.
You're such an interesting figure.
You're at the intersection of business and entrepreneurship advice.
You're sort of this really smart cultural critic pundit on tech, the reformation of higher education,
and also self-help.
You have this really sagacious facility for counsel that's aimed broadly, but also very specifically this particular lens on young men
and this concern that you have for the next generation.
And I think the sentiment behind it is really that we have a demonstrable problem with males in the next generation,
the culture of men, the evolution of men, the growth of men, who they are, where and how they are being guided or not being guided,
and how they're being distracted or led astray in a way that's really interfering with their growth and their potential,
and in turn, like the growth of a healthy society.
Yeah, well, first off, thanks for the kind words.
I think I said when I came in, we went through all the podcasts and vites we have,
and I just mentioned your name and before I even finished it, like half my staff, we just went ape shit.
You deeply resonate with a lot of people.
I appreciate that.
Yeah, look, this is something that I'm passionate about.
I think the data's overwhelming.
You know, three times as likely to be addicted, four times as likely to kill themselves as women,
12 times as likely to be incarcerated, 70% opioid every day.
You know, we don't have a homeless problem.
We don't have an opioid problem.
We don't have an incarceration problem.
We have a male suicide, homeless and incarceration problem.
And if any other special interest group were committing suicide at four times the rate of the control group,
we would talk about it in different terms.
We would talk about the need for social programs, intervention, empathy.
But when something like this happens to young men, there's a lack of empathy.
You hear words like accountability or if they were just more in touch with their emotions.
And I think that's really gotten in the way of a productive conversation.
And because there hasn't been a productive conversation and people out there feel and see what's going on,
some voices have entered into that void that are sort of unproductive voices.
And sometimes that kind of this pro-man rhetoric oftentimes is just suddenly veiled misogyny or lack of empathy.
Or kind of what I'll call the manosphere.
It starts off fine.
It's the action-oriented, be fit, take control.
Then it goes to really weird places.
It treats women as property or talks about immigrants taking your job or just sign up for my crypto university.
It just goes to weird places.
It's also been a bit of a third rail issue to raise the peril of the wayward young man in a world in which
the conversation around elevating certain sectors of culture and society is about women and people of color.
And yet the quote that I've heard you often repeat is,
the most dangerous person in the world is a man that is broken and alone.
If you look globally, the most unstable violent societies in the world all have one thing in common.
They have a disproportionate amount of young men with a lack of economic or romantic prospects.
What do we do?
We send them off to war.
If they don't have economic prospects internally, they'll overthrow the government.
So we find conflict and we send them off to war.
Also, this younger generation of men is paying for the unfair advantage you and I had growing up.
I was born in Los Angeles or Southern California in 1964.
I hit the lottery.
You know, being born a white heterosexual male just had huge advantage in California.
Myself as well.
I was born in 66.
You went to UCLA.
I went to Stanford.
I'm the beneficiary of, you know, an incredible education and privilege.
And now that, you know, access to what you and I had access to is all the more remote these days.
Like, what is going on?
Like, how did we get to this place?
What are the tectonic plates that have led us to this situation that we find ourselves in?
So just to make the point around accessibility, I don't know the numbers in Stanford,
but when I applied to UCLA in 1982, the acceptance rate was 76% and it cost $1,200 a year.
And I had to apply twice and I got in.
The acceptance rate this year will be 9% and it's $34,000.
So it's just inaccessible to anyone who's not remarkable, remarkable or rich.
So how did we get here?
I think there's been a variety of things, confluence of factors that have all collided around young men.
One, there's just a lack of empathy.
People see it as a zero-sum game where if you feel empathy for men, it must mean that you are anti-women.
And so there's a lack of empathy and what I call zero-sum gaming.
You know, civil rights didn't hurt white people.
It helped them.
Gay marriage doesn't hurt heteronormative marriage.
It enhances it.
So to talk about empathy for young men is in no way and should in no way be seen as anti-women.
I think the group that wants more viable young men, first and foremost mothers, that's who I hear from the most,
who see what's going on with their daughters and the difference between their daughters and their sons.
And also women.
Women are, I think, ready for more economically and emotionally viable young men.
Women are dating older and older because they're having trouble finding what they would perceive as viable young men.
So a few things.
One, just biological.
Men's prefrontal cortex matures later.
They just don't have the same executive function or adult in the room.
They're less mature, literally less mature.
Two, we have an education system that is biased against them.
If you talk about the behaviors we reward in school, you're essentially going to describe a girl.
Be organized.
Be a pleaser.
Sit still.
You also have an education industrial complex.
92% of kindergarten teachers are women.
There's more female per capita fighter pilots than male kindergarten teachers.
It's about 70, 80% K through 6 and about 60, 70% in high school.
And naturally you're going to empathize with a little version of you.
So I just don't think there's the same level of empathy for young men.
We've also done away with metal shop, auto shop, wood shop.
So the guy who's not cut out for college, who doesn't sit still, who's not academically focused as fewer and fewer on ramps into a middle class lifestyle.
And then these guys get into the workforce.
There's fewer middle class trades jobs.
In America, parents have done a really good job of convincing themselves they've failed as a parent if their kid doesn't end up at Stanford or UCLA.
So there's a lot of rage and shame in the household.
There's not visible on ramps into a healthy middle class life.
3% of LinkedIn profiles in America say apprentice.
It's 11% in the UK and Germany.
50% of Germans have some sort of vocational certification.
That's not true here.
It's kind of become this you either get to Stanford or UCLA or you and your parents have failed.
And then a lot of dynamics dating apps where you have two, three to one men to women.
And you also have this effect where because everyone has access to everyone, not everyone, but women who have a much finer filter are all drawn to the kind of what I call same guy.
So you have 50 men on Tinder, 50 women, 46 of those women will show all of their attention and interest to just four guys.
So it's great to be in the top 10% on a dating app if you're a guy.
The bottom 90, it's really difficult.
And the bottom half of men on dating apps, we're now one in two relationships begin, get validation that they have absolutely no worth in the dating market.
So lack of economic prospects, a lack of maturity, a society that doesn't seem to have a lot of empathy for them.
And then a mating market that validates they don't have a lot of value.
And you see these men go down this downward spiral where they start, and this is where you know, we've really lost them.
They start becoming ultra-nationalists.
They start blaming immigrants.
They start blaming women.
They become prone to conspiracy theory.
In some, they just become really shitty citizens.
And the final thing I would say is that the most profitable, valuable companies in the world have one thing in common.
And that is they're tapping into a lack of regulation and instinctive flaws.
Men are more risk aggressive.
So the fastest growing technology sector right now is gaming, which is the play way of saying gambling.
Men are more risk aggressive.
They like to gamble.
85% of gamblers are men.
They're four to six times more likely to develop a gambling addiction.
You then put it on a phone and you have Kevin Hart and Charles Barkley telling you that you're smart and you should bet on March Madness.
And then you have social media apps or Robin Hood or Metta or YouTube sort of tapping into these instincts, these flawed instincts of men,
where they become prone to conspiracy theory, much more risk aggressive, much more inclined to develop a relationship with you porn as opposed to saying,
okay, how do I go out there and develop the skills in the game and the economic and emotional viability to find my own romantic partner?
They're mistaking Reddit and Discord for friendship.
They're mistaking Robin Hood and Coinbase for making a living.
They're mistaking you porn for establishing a relationship.
And so a lot of these men have had the real world or the motivation to find real relationships replaced with algorithms and screens.
It's a low entry, low risk cost of having a reasonable facsimile of life.
And if you're not careful, you wake up a few years later, you don't have those skills and you're depressed.
Because getting out and finding a job, getting out, going into work, getting up, putting on a tie, learning how to read the room,
learning how to make a woman laugh, establish body language, be persistent, endure rejection.
There's a reason romantic comedies are two hours, not 15 minutes.
This shit is hard and it's humiliating, but that's what real victory in real life looks like.
And I think there's a disproportionate or a small number of young men who are ever going to experience that real joy and that real victory
because of the low cost, low entry, reasonable facsimile of life that these companies prey on.
That's a pretty dire portrait of the current state of affairs.
The eradication of opportunity, the lack of adequate on-ramps to higher education,
and the confluence of all these technologies that are conspiring to capture the attention of the young male and channel it in unhealthy ways
is going to leave that individual not just depressed but angry and looking for an outlet for that anger.
Well, there's an upside. If you're in the top 10%, life's never been better.
We're in a Hunger Games economy. The winner leads a remarkable life and everybody else dies a slow death.
If you have your shit together as a young man and you have the discipline to get the right certification,
the graduates of my class at Stern, I teach the MBA, their average salary is $212,000.
They go on a dating app, they're going to get a ton of attention.
Their opportunities have never been more exceptional.
Their vacations, their ability to take care of their parents at a young age, their economic opportunity,
their chance to make millions is within reach by the time of 30.
Those opportunities did not exist for our parents, so it's become sort of a winner-take-most environment.
So it's great to be in the top 10%, but I can prove to all of us that 90% of our sons are not in the top 10%.
And when you think about, it goes back to me, like, what is America supposed to be?
And the reason I got involved here, I was in that bottom 90. I was probably in that bottom 50.
Is America about identifying the remarkable or identifying the children of rich people and turning them into billionaires?
Is that what America is supposed to do?
My view is America is about identifying or giving everyone in the bottom 90 a shot to be in the top 10%.
That's how it was when I grew up. I was unremarkable.
I think that when I look at you, I see somebody, I mean, you're clearly passionate about this.
This is a very mission-based, service-oriented kind of endeavor that you found yourself in.
And you're somebody who's had many successes in different areas of life.
You have economic independence. You could choose to be doing lots of different things.
And you've chosen through all of the ways that you show up publicly in Prophetic Media and the podcasting, et cetera,
to really focus your advocacy around this.
And it strikes me as very earnest and heartfelt.
Like, this really is a mission that you're passionate about.
I don't know that much about you, Rich, but I was that guy, you know?
I didn't have a lot of money. No, no romantic prospects.
But America loved me, right? Free education, remarkable institution, great job,
a chance to, you know, get economically viable, a chance to take care of my mother.
I would have been one of those guys today, angry, upset.
So, I relate.
Yeah. Your mother was an integral figure in all of this.
Yeah, look, the reason I'm here with you now, it's easy to credit your grit and your character for your success
and blame the market for your failures.
I get to come here and I get to bomb out of here and go to the Beverly Hills Hotel and have, like, you know,
do whatever the fuck I want and, you know, have an incredible life
because of, one, the generosity and vision of California taxpayers and the Regency University of California
who said, our job is to give unremarkable kids remarkable opportunity,
being born at the right place at the right time and the unconditional love of my mother, right?
Single immigrant mother lived and died a secretary.
But, you know, every day told me that I was wonderful and I think that stuck with me.
But yeah, like, I don't know what your relationship was like with your parents,
but if you think about investing, there's some basics, right?
You invest a little bit of money, compound interest is just this remarkable thing.
Most people feel that the singular relationship in their life,
if they're asked to identify the singular relationship in their life,
they usually, more often than not, number one is their mother.
And it's because she made those tiny little investments in you every day,
waking you up with a soft voice, worried about you, could hear you get up when you were a kid
and come in and comfort you every day, just dozens of little investments.
And, you know, your mom wakes up and you wake up when you're older,
regardless of whether you don't get along, maybe you don't even like each other,
but it's a singular relationship.
And, you know, I think a lot about the relationship, how powerful it was for me
and what was really wonderful about my mom,
she had the foresight to get a lot of men involved in my life.
Because if you look at the singular point of failure in a young man's life,
it's when he loses a male role model.
And it's interesting because we have the second most single parent homes in the world behind Sweden.
And when we say single parent, 92% of the time, that means it's a single mother.
And what's interesting is the data shows that the daughters of single mothers have the same outcomes,
same college attendance, same income, same rates of self-harm.
Boys, once they lose a male role model,
immediately become dramatically more likely to be incarcerated,
dramatically less likely to graduate from high school,
dramatically more likely to suffer from addiction.
What it ends up is that while boys are physically stronger,
they're emotionally and mentally much weaker.
Just because you say it's really important that a boy have a man involved in his life,
that's in no way diminishing the superheroes that are single mothers.
But I think we have to acknowledge that it is really important that men be involved
and that's the problem with schools now that don't have enough men
because there's an entire generation of young men that go through their lives until they're 25 with absolutely no men involved.
And if you have kids, you see that occasionally dad just plays a bigger role,
his physical size, his voice, whatever it might be.
And I'm thinking a lot about masculinity.
I think the ultimate expression of masculinity is,
I've got my shit sewed together, I can take care of myself, I can take care of my media family,
I can take care of my kids, the people I work with, I pay good taxes.
But the ultimate expression of masculinity is getting involved in the life of a boy that isn't yours.
And unfortunately, Michael Jackson and Catholic Church have fucked it up for all of us
and created this weird notion that if you're a guy your age and you're super successful,
you might have love to give and you might see a 15-year-old boy that could use your help
and it feels unnatural to get involved in his life.
And that's not true.
Yeah, the culture of mentorship has waned to say the least
and I think it's fair to say that America was built on the idea of apprenticeship and mentorship.
But that culture seems to have evaporated.
Like where are the mentors? Where are the sage councils
and the healthy masculine men who are helping to guide the next generation?
Well, I got it from coaches, but a lot of kids aren't going to church though.
They used to get it from the Reverend or the rabbi.
Community-oriented programs have gone away.
What are the rates of young men in sports?
Is it the way that it was when we were kids?
Are less young men participating in sports?
And where are the other healthy outlets for the young men in need of mentorship?
So, sports is like most things.
There's still the same level of participation, but unfortunately it's been crowded towards the wealthy.
Engaging in a sport has become not a luxury item, but pretty close.
Even if you look at the college athletes outside of basketball and football,
it's disproportionately rich kids because if your kid wants to play lacrosse,
to send them to lacrosse camps or hurdle lacrosse camps
and get them the right training and the right equipment, it's just expensive.
But I think sports and after-school programs are being cut,
but going to solutions, I think there's a ton of solutions.
So, starting boys a year late in elementary school, they're just less mature.
The worst thing that happened to me or almost happened to me is my parents wanted me to skip a grade
because it was back in the space race and if you were offered the opportunity to skip a grade,
that meant you were going to be at work for NASA.
I showed up at UCLA at the age of 17 and I was way too immature to handle the alcohol and the pressure of it all.
Starting a year later, trying to create greater incentives to get more men in primary and secondary,
high school and elementary school, more vocational programming.
There's just a ton of jobs in the real economy for specialty construction, specialty nursing.
Anyone who's renovating a house knows that a roofer makes really good money, much less a plumber,
and stops shaming those jobs, start elevating them.
I think we have to level up young people in general.
There's been an enormous transfer of wealth from young people to old people.
Specifically, people only the age of 40 used to control 19% of the GDP in terms of their wealth.
It's been cut to 9%.
The average 70-year-old is 72% wealthier than they were 40 years ago.
The average person under the age of 40 is 24% less wealthy.
And that affects women and men, but it's disproportionately affecting men
because men are fairly or unfairly evaluated from a mating perspective based on their economic viability.
The best example of, I think, that depicts this, the greatest innovation in history
wasn't the iPhone or a semiconductor.
It was the American middle class.
Bought wars, pushed back on fascism, paid an enormous amount of taxes, was innovative,
came up with DARPA, came up with vaccines, came up with GPS.
And where it all started was 7 million men returned from World War II,
and they demonstrated excellence in uniform.
And the government said, we're going to make a massive investment in them
in terms of the GI Bill and the highway construction bill.
We're going to make jobs, we're going to make economic viability.
And quite frankly, they were just very attractive.
And they had an easier time finding mating, finding a house, two-car garage,
and it set off the baby boom.
And it set off a generation of confident, loving kids who were comfortable and said,
all right, it's time for civil rights.
It's time to bring women into the workforce.
It's time for women's rights.
And it just set off this kind of post-World War II liberal progressive society,
the likes of which we've never seen that type of prosperity.
But the middle class is an accident.
It doesn't self-sustain.
The incumbents and people on the far right will claim that the middle class
is a self-repairing organism.
It's not.
It's an anomaly.
Middle classes have never existed in society before.
We figured it out.
But unless you have economically and emotionally viable men,
you can't have a middle class.
So the question is, how do we level up young men?
And I don't think you can just have affirmative action for men.
I think that's too political.
But I do think we have to put more money into the pockets of young people
who have seen a transfer of wealth.
And I'll touch a third rail here.
Every year we transfer one and a half trillion dollars.
The greatest economic transfer in history happens every year from young people
to the wealthiest generation in history, senior citizens.
And it's called social security.
And it just is insane that this group that has consistently seen their wealth
and on an inflation-adjusted basis, their livelihood go down and down and down,
transfer money to the wealthiest population in the world.
So let's talk more about economics.
Mortgage tax deduction and capital gains are the two biggest deductions in our tax code.
Who makes their money selling stocks and selling assets?
Guys my age.
Who makes their money with sweat?
The guys in this room, the younger guys.
Who owns homes?
Older people.
Who rents?
Younger people.
I feel like almost every economic policy is nothing but a thinly veiled transfer of wealth
from the young to the old.
And then the final one, the greatest intergenerational train robbery in history
was the CARES Act in the transfer of wealth during COVID.
Eighty-five percent of the money flushed into households was saved.
It wasn't spent.
So five of the seven trillion dollars wasn't spent on food or housing.
It went into the markets, which absolutely sent the asset prices of real estate
and stock markets screaming.
Who owns homes and stocks?
The incumbents and the old.
The reason I'm rich is because in 2008, the government let the economy crash.
It bailed out banks, but it didn't bail out the economy.
I had a little bit of money.
I was coming into my prime income earning years.
So I was able to buy Apple and Amazon and Netflix at seven, four, and 10 bucks.
Right?
Yeah.
Where the fuck did these guys put their money out?
In Virginia at $900 a share?
Would they buy a home in Agura Hills, a cute ranch home for $2.3 million?
When they bailed out me and the incumbents three years ago,
all they were doing was robbing opportunity from young people.
When you bail out the boomer who owns a restaurant,
all you're doing is robbing opportunity from the 26-year-old female graduate
of the Brooklyn Culinary Academy.
She's not getting her shot.
The churn and turnover are key to giving young people an opportunity.
So we effectively decided during COVID was a million people dying would be bad,
but letting the NASDAQ go down and making boomers less rich would be tragic.
It was pure theft.
And who's going to have to pay for this shit?
Not you or me.
Them and their kids.
Yeah.
That doesn't bode well.
And then when you think about that in the context of increasing polarization
and the kind of denigration of our public discourse
and the increase in distrust in institutions matched with the lack of opportunity
and everything that you just outlined, like, does America survive this?
Like, how are we going to get back to a place where we're providing adequate opportunity to young people
and we're in a social contract with our brothers and sisters
where we agree upon the things that are important to create a healthy culture
that can survive and flourish as a democratic republic?
Well, I mean, the ground zero, I think, for almost all of our problems
or the incendiary port on our problems is that for the first time in our nation's history,
a 30-year-old man or woman isn't doing as well as his or her parents were at 30.
That's never happened before.
What's so upsetting about it is it's in the face of unprecedented prosperity.
Five minutes post the earnings release of NVIDIA,
it adds $240 billion in market capitalization,
but we can't afford the child tax credit.
Child tax credit between $24 billion and $40 billion immediately eliminated poverty
for 40% of kids in food insecure homes.
Like, I didn't even think you could do that with $24 or $40 million.
We spent $800 billion on our military and I'm not suggesting we should reduce it.
I think it's important.
We have a robust defense department.
But what do you know?
Social security gets a 9% cost of living adjustment increase
and the child tax credit gets stripped out of the infrastructure bill.
So we have elected representatives average age 63.
D.C. is a cross between the walking dead and the golden girls
and if that sounds ageist, it is ageist.
But here's the thing.
Do they really relate to a 28-year-old who's trying to build a home with kids
and kids don't vote and young people don't vote, but old people vote?
So we're about to see for the first time in our nation's history
almost 50% of our entire federal budget be allocated towards seniors.
And young people as a result just don't have as much opportunity
and they're not dumb, it pisses them off.
They look up, they see us, they see the opportunities we had,
they see how much money is being spent on seniors
and then every day they're reminded that they're failing.
They live in a society where algorithms are constantly telling them
everyone else is rich, you failed.
If you're not hanging out at the Amman Hotel
or you're not flying private or you don't have a six-pack
or you don't have a hot boyfriend or a girlfriend, you failed
and you get these reminders every day.
So I think these righteous movements around Black Lives Matter and Me Too,
they are righteous movements,
but every movement now has a ton of incendiary report on it
because young people are just angry.
Okay, my neighbor works at Google, she's killing it.
I'm not on the top 1%.
And the thing is, as Americans, our superpowers are optimism,
but we all believe our kid is going to be in that top 1%.
And I just think we moved away from America,
which used to be about giving unremarkable kids
a remarkable opportunity to, we've decided, okay,
let's elect a series of people who continue to transfer wealth from young people.
And oh, wait, Mark Zuckerberg and Bill Gates dropped out of college.
That can happen.
Well, okay, but most young people, if you look at the numbers,
are having a tough time.
We have the most anxious, depressed generation in history.
The science is in people, hot and cold therapy.
In other words, using sauna and cold water immersion
has so many powerful benefits,
like lowering inflammation, reducing muscle soreness,
boosting energy, and elevating mood.
But the thing is, DIY ice baths are this colossal hassle
and basically just impractical, making the whole affair unsustainable,
which is a problem solved by the guys at Plunge,
who pioneered the all-in-one solution,
this gorgeous, elegant, modern tub that's easy to install indoors or out
with cooling and filtration built right into it.
So it basically requires almost zero maintenance.
And I use it almost every single day,
which has greatly impacted my physical health,
and I got to say, vastly improved my mental well-being.
The Plunge team now also offers a beautiful sauna
for the ultimate hot, cold experience.
This gorgeously designed addition to your space.
I got mine up and running recently,
and I got to say, I can no longer imagine life without it.
It really has been an absolute game changer for my physical health, of course,
but also all these profound benefits to my mental well-being.
To learn more and get your own cold plunge tub or sauna,
visit plunge.com and hit the link in the description below
and use code richroll to get $150 off your purchase.
One of the solutions to providing greater opportunity
is to better democratize access to higher education.
And, you know, one of the things you talk a lot about
is how we need to be reforming those institutions,
which have become luxury brands that thrive on scarcity
as opposed to being public servants
who are trying to elevate the sort of base-level intelligence
of the younger generations.
Look, we have a tendency to believe that me and my colleagues
are somehow more noble than the rest of the population,
and we sit around with our labradors
and our corduroy vests watching PBS
thinking about how to make the world a better place.
And there's some of that.
I have remarkable colleagues who are good people,
but we're like everybody else.
And I think we wake up, a lot of administrators
and leadership on campus wake up
and ask themselves the same question every day
when they look in the mirror.
How do I increase my compensation
while reducing my accountability?
And we found the ultimate strategy.
I called the LVMA strategy.
When I went to UCLA, the facilities were shitty,
but 76% got in and it was 400 bucks.
And what they figured out is, I know,
keep the admissions rates static and low.
When the dean announces,
we rejected 92% of our applicants this year at NYA,
we stand up and we applaud.
And the alumni love it because their degree goes up in value.
And this same rejectionist LVMA strategy
has been adopted across the larger economy.
If you own a home, you get very concerned.
You're in the Malibu Canyon.
I bet any homeowner in the Malibu Canyon
takes a real interest in new plans for new development,
and they show up and they're very concerned
and come up with thoughtful reasons
why new developments never get the permits.
And the result is we have a shortage every year
of somewhere between 1.2 and 1.5 million houses we need.
And then you have big companies who weaponize government
and create it harder and harder for small companies to emerge.
So the result is the incumbents see their asset values increase,
but people can't get into these schools.
Harvard sits on a $53 billion endowment,
which is the GDP of Costa Rica,
and it's kept its freshman class at 1,500 kids.
A good Starbucks serves 1,500 people.
They could admit 15,000 and have no tax,
absolutely no tax on their resources.
So one of the solutions in my view
is if you are not growing your freshman enrollment
faster than population growth,
you should lose your nonprofit status.
And COVID provided the perfect opportunity
to reevaluate what you just shared
and create a situation through online education
to broaden the aperture and make it accessible
to so many more people.
And we all know what happened.
That didn't happen.
It didn't.
Yeah.
I speak at a lot of corporations, a lot of big companies,
and they'll say, what can we do?
The first thing a corporation could do to make this better
is to stop fetishizing graduates from elite universities.
When I went to work for Morgan Stanley,
they recruited at Stanford and Berkeley,
and I was the first analyst I hired at UCLA.
UCLA wasn't good enough for them.
And I fell into the trap.
When I started my company, I fetishized hiring people.
We only hired people from Berkeley, Stanford, UCLA,
and for some reason UVA.
We had people from UVA.
When you decide that you're only hiring from elite universities,
you're saying, I'm not interested in single mothers.
You're immediately excluding people who don't even have rich parents
or are freakishly remarkable.
So my recommendation, I was talking to the CEO of Salesforce
about this,
move away from a certification-based hiring strategy
to a skills-based strategy.
How do you figure out the testing, and it's expensive and it's hard
to hire really talented young people that based on their skills
as opposed to their certification?
Because the reason we have entered into this LVMH strategy
at elite universities is that corporations love it.
People think our student is our consumer.
No, our consumer is our product.
Our consumer is the corporation.
And the corporation is basically
outsourced screening and hiring to these universities,
thinking if they're only leading an 8% of their applicants,
they must be pretty good.
So corporations moving to a certification saying 10%, 20%,
50% of our applicants.
And I'm not talking about admin jobs.
I'm talking about professional track jobs.
Are going to be reserved for people based on a skills-based assessment
where it is certification-blind.
You couldn't get past the front desk without an elite university degree
at Morgan Stanley when I was there.
Isn't tech a little bit different though?
I feel like they are slightly more progressive in terms of how they hire
because they are looking at skills,
and it's a bit more untethered from pedigree.
Is that true?
A little bit, especially when I'm programming,
but I would argue if you want a job
in a traditional professional track and met or alphabet,
it's pretty hard to get in without an elite university degree.
And it's a self-reinforcing mechanism because they're so populated
with people from amazing universities.
I mean, this goes back to why it's so important to get out of your house
and that you're social.
Because there was just a study done at Google,
and a hiring manager says,
we put out a job opening for a product manager.
We get immediately 200 resumes and we cut it down
because we don't need more than 200.
We decide to bring in 20 people.
And of the 20 people the hire we make is almost always someone
who is referred internally.
So if you want a job, you better have a lot of friends.
But I don't know.
I think tech is probably as big an offender.
I think tech founders oftentimes don't have college degrees.
If you're an AI engineer, okay, fine.
You don't need a degree.
But I would argue for the majority of the jobs,
the professional track jobs,
they still fetishize an elite college degree.
Part of getting young males out of the basement
and into the world and face-to-face with people
requires some modeling of that healthy behavior.
And I think what's so potent about who you are
and how you show up is that you're this really successful dude,
but you're also like an alpha guy who's progressive,
who's ribald at times,
like you're not afraid to tell a dirty joke,
you're strong, you're fit,
and you know what you're talking about
when you're talking about economics and social sciences, etc.
Why aren't there more people like you?
Well, you're being generous.
Let's unpack that.
Do you remember the Presidential Fitness Awards?
Sure.
I was going to figure out a way.
I got a three years in a row,
and then I hit a growth spurt in the eighth grade,
and I didn't get the badge, and it was devastating for me.
And I started doing pull-ups every day
until I got back to seven pull-ups, which is what I needed.
We have become so politically correct
that we romanticize obesity.
You're finding your truth.
No, you're not.
You're finding a fucking ventilator.
I mean, that's not to say that we shouldn't have empathy.
We shouldn't figure out programs
to give people in food deserts
the opportunity to eat more healthy,
but we should be celebrating fitness.
One of the first things I say to men
if I coach a young man,
lean into your strengths as a man.
We have superior or more dense bone structure,
a lot more muscle,
and then testosterone gets poured over it.
I think any man under the age of 30
should be able to walk into any room
and know that if shit got real,
they could either kill and eat everybody or outrun them.
And it's an amazing feeling.
It's going to make you kinder.
Who breaks up fights at bars?
A big, strong man.
Who is kinder?
Who has an easier time finding mates?
Who wants to protect others?
Who's going to be less depressed,
make more money?
Fitness and celebrating strength is a wonderful thing.
Especially for men.
It's key.
And then we have become so politically correct
around potentially offending people.
The people who are the most profane
used to be the most liberal.
Lenny Bruce, Richard Pryor, George Carlin.
And on the far left, we become such snowflakes
that anything,
I think the thing that hurts people from being elected
to implement many of the policies I'm promoting
are that we're seen as humorless.
Like, at some point,
we're going to get to celebrate our differences.
I co-host a podcast with Cara Swisher, who's a lesbian.
I make fun of her sexual orientation.
I make inappropriate jokes.
And then there's a pause.
And she laughs.
And she gives everyone else permission to laugh.
I think that's really important.
Social media has created this infrastructure
where you get guardian of gotcha points
by if someone says something off color,
you go after them.
And I think it's awful.
And I purposely dial up the profanity.
Because I'm like, for God's sakes,
the left needs to take back profanity and vulgarity.
That doesn't mean you're a bad person.
But what you do is also matched with a compassion
and a vulnerability.
Because I think what you just shared
is also the portal to bad influence on the internet.
Like, make your bed, get fit, eat right,
show up when you say you're going to show up.
Those are all sound and solid principles.
It's good advice.
But too often that, as you were sharing earlier,
is sort of the beginning of a slide into a darker world.
And those influencers seem to commandeer
too large of a percentage of the internet
and capture the minds and the fascination
of these wayward young men who are in search of good influence
and just take what's available,
what's showing up when they're scrolling on their feet.
Like, why is it that those are the voices
that rise to the top and a more grounded,
kind of kinder, more conscientious approach
that you model isn't the one that's rising to the top?
Or why aren't there more people
who are talking about the warrior mindset
but from a perspective that the ultimate warrior
never has to remove their sword from the sheath
and is a protector of those that are weaker
and is a compassionate force for the community?
Well, unfortunately, again, thanks.
I think you're being generous.
We've conflated toxicity with masculinity.
You don't hear the term masculine femininity.
We've spent the last 30 or 40 years
highlighting the wonderful things about feminine attributes.
It's a celebration.
It's wonderful.
Women are doing so well.
More single women own a home than a single man.
It's now 60, 40 female to male, college grads,
enrollees, and it's about to go two to one college grads
because men drop out.
In urban areas now in the U.S.,
women under the age of 30 are making more money than men.
And by the way, that's wonderful.
We should do nothing to get in the way of that.
But also, trying to find role models
and trying to envision a new aspirational frame
of masculinity that says,
masculinity is an amazing thing.
You shouldn't apologize for it.
You should lean into it.
But what does it mean?
And I'm writing a book on masculinity
and I'm trying to figure it out
and quite frankly, it's really challenging.
You know, I think of it as loosely speaking,
protector, provider, procreator.
When you think about the jobs associated
with masculinity, a cop, a fireman,
I was at a hotel in Seattle and a fire alarm went off
and these eight farm people showed up,
seven men, one woman.
They didn't ask if there was a fire.
They didn't ask what was going on.
They're like, what floor is this?
They got in the elevator and they went to seventh floor.
That's just it.
If you look at 9-11, they were like,
oh, this building's coming down.
They just run into the building.
They're like, our job is to protect others.
I think that's a great place to start for men,
that real masculinity is you are,
your job is to protect other people
and it also fits to our instincts.
I think it's called the Carnegie Foundation
gives out an award every year or awards
for people who in the moment
put their own physical safety at risk
to save someone else they don't know.
It's literally pulling people out of a burning car.
What you're talking about is service.
And I think a lot of the messaging around masculinity
is about individuality.
It's about going out and getting yours
and killing the lion and getting the car and the job.
It's all about kind of selfish aggrandizement
in a showy, flashy sort of way to kind of peacock.
But real masculinity is purpose-driven
and service-oriented.
How are you showing up for other people?
Where I was going with this,
the 81 awards they gave last year,
77 were given to men.
Men are more risk aggressive.
Men will rush out into a field of combat
to pull a comrade out who's shot risking their own lives.
Women tend to be more thoughtful.
Women tend to be like, is that a good idea?
And there's a role for both.
And by the way, I'm making a reductive generalization.
Masculinity is a societal construct.
It's what we fill it with.
And a lot of women demonstrate wonderful masculinity.
It's not the domain of people born as men.
One of those fire people was a woman.
Well, I go to CrossFit.
I mean, the most impressive people in CrossFit are women.
And we celebrate their strength.
Personally, I'm drawn to men who are more feminine.
My best friends demonstrate that kind of care,
that nurturing, that grace.
So I think where it comes off the rails is you say,
only men can be masculine or people born as men.
These are wonderful attributes.
What I'm suggesting is that people born as men
have an easier time leaning into these things.
And we should celebrate them.
I think what you're saying around service is something
I should think about,
because maybe that's a better frame.
The protector, provider,
the majority of men still are evaluated
based on their ability to provide economically.
And if we're going to have an honest conversation,
we have to have an honest conversation.
Three in four women say economic viability
is a key criteria in a mate, a male mate.
Whereas it's less than a quarter of men.
We just don't really care.
It appears.
Well, maybe a wrinkle on service is the idea of contribution.
Because I think self-esteem is bred through contributing.
Are you being productive
for something that's greater than yourself?
I did ketamine therapy on Monday.
And I was trying to...
Told me more.
Oh God, have you done it?
No, I haven't.
No.
I know some people that have though.
Yeah, so I...
What led to that?
I call it the Burning Man effect.
It's like, I've always been curious about Burning Man.
But I've always chickened out
and I've always wanted to do ketamine.
And I was just curious about it.
So a friend of mine is an investor in these clinics
and basically set my...
Of my appointment while I was in Austin
and it came up and I went.
But I was trying to write down the takeaways for me.
And Richard Reeves of Boys and Men fame
has this great frame.
And that is adding surplus value.
I teach my boys.
I'm like, you're negative value right now.
Your mom spends a ton of time.
We spend a ton of money on you.
We give you more love than you give us.
You go to school.
This incredible infrastructure
is spending time and energy to educate you.
I'm like, when you become a man
is when you're doing enough for other people
that you're adding surplus value.
You're producing more than you're taking.
I love that frame.
At some point in the service of others
are you actually giving more than you're taking?
You know, that's...
Our economy is based on that.
Our economy is to take in resources
and then output more than the cost of the resources going in.
I don't know how I thought of the ketamine therapy
but the only kind of real actionable item I took away from it
was like my boys kept coming up and I thought
if I can love my boys more than people have loved me
if I can push more of that confidence and concern
and love to other people
that's the real surplus value, right?
And that was a nice framing for me.
That's like I wanted to come out
with some intentionality around my purpose.
And this is what I took from it is like
I have these vessels that really are open
and sponges of my time, regard, attention and love
and if I think one of my purposes as a man
is surplus value is how can I do more of that for them
than was done for me?
I have a very complicated relationship with my father.
He wasn't very good to me or my mom
but here's the thing, he was much better to me
than his dad was to him.
He's checked the box in the universe.
He's added surplus value
but I think that's a great frame for men.
Really think about young men,
the resources, the government, your family,
our society are investing in you
and at what point does it flip
and you're actually adding more value than you're taking
and a lot of men never get there
and grow up thinking that the world is just about giving them shit
and spending time and love on them.
I think that's a great frame for what it means to be a man
I also think that's why qualitatively
like what you're doing now in this chapter of your life
I suspect and I'm projecting is
so much more meaningful to you.
Yes, it's a for-profit enterprise, profg media
but in comparison to being an activist,
investor or an investment banker
or just an entrepreneur in general
the meaning behind it, the intentionality, the purpose
that seems to be very clear to you
gives it a sense of meaning
that I would imagine contributes to your happiness
and your sense of direction.
Yeah, look, it's hugely rewarding.
I'm not, I don't want to virtue too much.
I'm a capitalist, I love money, I love making money.
I think there's a huge economic opportunity
and being the white space I feel commercially
as a marketing professor I can tell you
is I'm a white heterosexual male
that talks openly about his feelings.
There's a huge white space for that.
People respond to it, people respond to it.
And so it's a frame, I make good money
talking about this stuff
but the stuff around
struggling young men is so rewarding
because it's a conversation that has been unproductive
and by far the people I get the most
support for for this work are mothers.
They come up and they say something along the following
I have three kids, two daughters and a son
one daughter's in Chicago and PR
the other's at Penn
my son's in the basement vaping and playing video games.
It's hugely rewarding
and also quite frankly it just makes me feel good
it makes me feel strong, it makes me feel masculine
it makes me feel successful that I can influence other people
and also try and be open and vulnerable
about my own shortcomings.
I've fucked up so many times
and I continue to disappoint myself.
I have huge imposter syndrome
I don't know if you ever feel like you're about to be found out.
All the time.
Someone's going to break in right now
I can't even believe you're sitting across from me
and you know like yourself
I'm an approval junkie
like you know I want you to like me
you know what I mean like there's
there's all kinds of layers to that
like I get all that
but I think fundamentally
it's so important
to model that type of vulnerability
it's you know I do it in the work that I do
in the way that you show up
and do that for other people
is an invitation
and it allows people to understand
that like being vulnerable isn't a weakness
it's not kryptonite
it's actually a superpower
it's an invitation to let people in
it's giving permission to other people
to engage with their emotions
and their feelings
and not treat it like it's a weakness
or to admit something that you're scared about
makes you a failure.
It's also a fantastic way
to live a more rewarding life
because from the age of 29 to 44
I never cried.
I just forgot how.
I didn't cry when my mother died
I didn't cry when I got divorced
I didn't cry when my company went chapter 11
and I was broke at the age of 40
I just forgot how
and what I would advise any man
is to lean into your emotions
when you think something's funny
learn how to laugh out loud
when you find something inspiring
you know really lean into God
this really moves me
you know when you read something you love
or you see a visualization
or you see the sunset
or you're riding a wave
like just fucking get into it
and if you feel sad
don't check back on some weird
screwed up sense of masculinity
really lean in and feel the emotion
and if you can cry
because it informs what's important to you
it informs what moves you
it informs what you're good at
otherwise you're just sort of
sleepwalking through life
you never really register anything
and here's the fear
you know life is a sense of sensations
and reward
the fear is when you talk to people at the end
my colleague at NYU Adam Alter
has done this great work around palliative care
you know
you're stuck in the past
I struggle with anger and depression
I'm in the past way too much
I don't forgive myself
I get very down on myself
I'm a lot in the future
because I'm successful
and to be successful you have to be planning
and sacrificing for the future
but I'm never really here
like I'm already thinking about the traffic
on the way home
I'm already thinking should I stop it in and out
in Van Nuys
I have a friend in Westlake
I'm like I'm already kind of like
halfway thinking about
tonight the people I'm going to be meeting
I'm thinking about my flight on Saturday
I'm thinking I'm just already like in the future
and the thing people regret the most
you know when they're older
they just didn't
lean into their relationships
they didn't feel emotion
and that's the fear
my biggest fear
as an atheist
and I'd be curious to get your
I'll put it back to you
my biggest fear is I get at the end
I mean I believe at the end
I'm going to look into my kids life
eyes and know that our relationship's coming to an end
I don't think anyone's going to talk me out of that
my fear is I look back and go
oh my god what enormous blessings
prosperity I would have never imagined
people that love me and let me love them immensely
but I was never there
never really felt any of it
and one way to put yourself in the moment
is to really lean into those emotions
and not like that
people are really understanding
people like it
I'm not suggesting you cry at work
there's a time and a place for emotion
but people respond to it
and distinct to the affirmation
and accolades or reinforcement you get
or don't get
it informs your life
it puts you in the moment
because that's my biggest fear
as I get to the end
and it's like this really didn't happen
there was a series of past and future
but the moments were just very few
so how did you make that change
to go from the person who couldn't cry
to leaning into your emotions
was there a pivotal experience?
you know the seminal experience for me
I think that it's very basic stuff
and again I'm curious
you think more about this than I do
the real seminal things in my life
were my mom dying
just the harshness the first time you lose someone
have you lost a parent?
not yet
have you lost anyone close to you?
I really haven't
okay that is just the harshest
strangest experience to date
when it happens
the harshness of it
the finality of it
if we could register
and really understand what death is
at all before it happens
we'd be so freaked out
that we wouldn't go outside
we're purposely wired
not to really think a lot about death
so when it happens
you just can't imagine it
it's so brutal
for a lot of people
I think it gives you a sense
of the finite nature of life
it changes your frame
made me more appreciative
made me more bold and courageous
with my feelings
to tell people how I cared about them
and then the other one
is the other side of the life spectrum
when my kids were born
you know all of a sudden
it's no longer about me
my whole life
Monday through Friday was
how do I make more money
how do I hang out with more fabulous people
how do I have more sex with hotter people
and then more money
and then more fabulous
and then more sex
and then more relevance
and more act
but it was like the vampire
from an Anne Rice movie
I could never quite be satisfied
so it was more
fucking more
I want more
and then when I had kids
it's kind of cathartic
because all of a sudden
you're thinking instinctively more
about someone else than you
it's like
my Friday used to be
where am I having brunch
how do I find more fabulous people
and things to do
now I know what I'm doing
I'm going to soccer practice
and it's boring and hard
for a couple years
and then I find it quite relaxing
but having kids
and thinking about other people
has been really cathartic
and there's just a few moments
they don't have that often
but they do happen
I'll be on the couch
watching a Premier League football game
my boys will wander in
they kind of instinctively throw
their legs on yours
like it's just natural
the dogs come in
you know they laugh at something
and you have that moment
where you're like
okay this is it
I can't imagine anymore
this is it
it's the only time in my life
I've ever felt sated
ever
I mean it sounds very trite
but death and birth
we're kind of the
getting you to I think
to the next phase
how old are your boys
13 and 16
I started late
how old are yours
two step sons
28 and 27
and a 20 year old daughter
and a 16 year old daughter
oh so you're on the back nine
yeah
my story's a little bit different though
although I haven't suffered
that kind of loss
I certainly have the experience
of having kids
and how transformative that is
but you know my root to
vulnerability and
being in constant contact
with my emotional state
was formed out of
difficulties and hardship
I had a protracted battle
with alcoholism
that destroyed my life
I went from somebody who
was an insecure quiet kid
figured it out
by the time I graduated high school
top athlete
got into all the colleges
all the promise in the world
all the opportunities
that I then squandered
until I alienated
everybody that I cared about
in my life
and was utterly broken
and had to build my life
back up again
from scratch
and I think that experience
was painful as it was
really provided me with
the tools to reconstruct
a new life based upon
new principles
you're an atheist
I'm not
I was introduced to
some spiritual principles
and tools that are now fundamental
to the way that I frame my life
and live my life
you know I owe everything
that I now have
to the experience of
getting sober
and the community of people
that have helped keep me sober
and who I help keep sober
and everything has kind of escalated
from there
but fundamentally it's
about confronting your own emotions
and taking inventory for your behavior
and repairing the damage of your past
and having a spiritual connection
to something greater than yourself
and then giving it back
and service to other people
and I try to do that
through the professional work
that I do
but fundamentally my first priority
is to that community
and to that program
was there a moment though
where you said okay
this is it I gotta get my shit together
well there were lots of moments like that
that didn't end up changing anything
because I wasn't ready
the elevator hadn't gone down far enough
and I wasn't ready to let go
so it wasn't until
literally almost everything was stripped away from me
and I had nowhere else to turn
because I don't want to change
do you like changing
do you like trying to let go of bad behavior
and adopt new habits
like it's not fun
it's not easy
and also I love drinking
yeah so me too
you know probably more than you
but I am wired in a certain way
where that wasn't going to work out for me
and it was pretty clear for a pretty long time
that I was headed in the wrong direction
and people tried to intervene
but you have to be ready
for that change
you have to
I had to suffer
I had to
get to a place of suffering where
the fear
of change
was exceeded by
the pain of my current experience
because I'm stubborn
and I'm an alcoholic
but even in sobriety
you know I've weathered
financial destitution
and had other kinds of challenges
that have in retrospect
looking back provided me with strength
and have been
foundational
and instructive
and have helped me
everything's 20-20 in the rear-view mirror
it all makes sense when you look backwards
but at the time
incredibly confusing
and a lot of fear
and a lot of insecurity
but I think those tools
and they're all just analogs
for the things that you talk about
like if you want self-esteem
you have to perform a steamable act
on behalf of yourself
on behalf of other people
you have to be true to your word
and you say you're going to show up
and it is this relationship with time
also that
building a life requires
small consistent acts taken every single day
like there's a compound interest
economically but also
just in terms of good will
and trust and all these kind of
character qualities that take a long time to build
and don't happen overnight
especially if you've destroyed that trust
or you don't feel like you're capable
or you don't have the facility
for self-love.
Another question
Atheism is a source of strength for me
I like the finite
believing that life is finite
that helps me to be a little more courageous
with my emotions and I don't think this is a dress rehearsal
so it's taken
fear away from me.
It gives impressions to the moment.
And also the people I'm so worried about
being shamed by or not
approving of me
in a hundred years nobody I know
or care about what they think of me
is going to be around.
It makes me just feel less insecure
and more bold but in terms of faith
why is it you needed
and I think it's great but what is it about faith
that's given you that kind of strength
that you couldn't find elsewhere
and also what is the role
that you have tried to present
or how have you tried to present faith
to your kids because I'm struggling with it
My 13 and 16 year olds have had no introduction
of faith and I think faith
and spirituality and religion
I think actually there's some very positive aspects
for religion. I've just always been remiss
to introduce my kids to it so
why is it you feel like you needed this
instead of just your own facilities
into what's the role that your religion
is playing your kids life? Yeah those are great questions
and challenging to answer I think
I think the way into
responding to that
has a lot to do with
self-will and a
humility of understanding that you're really
not in control of very many things
and a sense that
there are more things at play
that are outside your ability to comprehend
so I was somebody
I assume much like yourself
who was very driven, who was very ambitious
and every
success that I had had as a young person
was
attributable to my ability to
outwork everybody else
in the room to show up
earlier and stay later
and bridge the talent deficit gap
with a willingness and a capacity
in a facility
for suffering and pain
and work.
That took me to a certain place
it got me into Stanford
it made me a champion swimmer
all of these things
but when alcohol entered the picture
my self-will
was absolutely useless
in terms of addressing this problem
I tried, I tried, I tried
every time I tried to
use this facility that I had
to tackle this problem
the problem only got worse
and the problem wasn't solved
until I was willing to surrender
that I actually had no control over it
and that I needed to ask for help
not only ask for help
but accept that help
and as somebody who's very self-directed
asking for help and receiving help
is very confronting prospect
I had to be broken enough
to do that
but that process of surrender
which is a daily practice
of kind of letting go
of my own sense of what I should be doing
or what I think is in my best interest
has actually been the most
remunerative
and fulfilling
and nurturing
and gratifying experience that I've had
and I think with that comes a
an opening for awe and wonder
of things that perhaps I don't understand
because human beings we think that we can
understand everything that's happening around us
and I think there's a lot more going on
that perhaps eludes our small brains
and I find some comfort in that
and that doesn't mean that I subscribe
to a particular strain of religion
other than to say
that I'm just one person
and I don't always make the best decisions
on my own behalf and I've learned
to bring in other people
and pause when agitated
and allow others
to help guide me
and
talk about the role that you want
this has become your podcast all of a sudden
we can only do this for so long
George Hahn is a close
friend, he thinks it's just the world to you
and he says that you both share
a history of addiction
that's how he found you
and what I'll say and this is strange
but I've been thinking a lot about the
ketamine therapy I did
almost a week ago now
because the first
seven day period I've gone
I was just thinking about it and it happened actually
only in 30 years I haven't had alcohol
and it's not because I had some revelation
that I was an addict or I needed to stop
the literally physical
taste or smell of alcohol right now
is very unappealing to me
and that's never happened to me before
that's so interesting because I've heard you talk about
how you enjoy your cocktails
I'm a better version of me a little bit fucked up
I've gotten more out of alcohol than it's gotten out of me
I like it and I enjoy it
I think I'm good at it
I think I can modulate it
but I might have been fooling myself
but for some reason
the idea of having a beer right now
just makes me nauseous
and I don't know if it's the same
impact or effect those GLP-1 drugs have on you
where it turns that switch off
but I drink a lot
and for almost a week now
I don't even want to smell alcohol
that's fascinating
maybe go
you know go 30 days
see what it's like
there's this whole movement
around the alcohol-free lifestyle
right now I've had a couple people on the show
who are advocates in this space
and there's just a growing
population of people
who are realizing how much better
their life is without it
they're not addicts, they're not alcoholics
but they like to go out
and tie one on on the weekend
or whatever it is
and you reach a certain age also
those hangovers
stick around a little bit longer
when you're out of college
you go out and drink a lot
next day I have a Diet Coke
and a Big Mac and you're fine
now I feel as if I've had a battery of chemo
it takes me two days to recover
and all the research I'm making
they just keep finding out
it's worse and worse for you
so I also recognize
that the liver just can't process it the way it used to
I'm trying to tone it down
I do edibles
and one of the reasons I started doing edibles
is I enjoy the feeling of being high
or a little bit intoxicated
and so I'm trying to tone down alcohol
and I've been substituting a little bit
with edibles
but I'm thinking more about it
recognizing that it would be hard for me
to maintain the drinking I do
and stay healthy at this age
Well, you got me and George
call anytime buddy
I appreciate that
when you want to pick up
and Scott is going to have a drink
let's talk about the new book a little bit
the Algebra of Wealth
this is interesting it all kind of starts
with this equation that you have
around prosperity
and how to think about
I mean it's really fundamentally addresses the changing workplace
that's kind of happening right now
it's this sort of mission statement
for young people how to think about
money in this changing landscape
you've seen the research
where five friends who hang out together
become more like each other
you become the kind of average of your friends
the body mass index, the amount of money you make
your political party
they all begin to converge
towards the regression line
that's not true of wealth at the end of your life
same five people make the exact same amount of money
the amount of wealth they end up with is highly
variant
and I made a lot of mistakes
but I missed a series of just
small strategies and behaviors
to make sure I was economically secure
and I think it's really important
because I say that America
becomes more like itself every day
and this isn't a good thing but America is a loving generous place
if you have money
it's a rapacious violent place if you don't
so
a series of behaviors
and approaches and strategies
that aren't that hard
and they require less discipline if you start them early
can lead you to economic security
and so
the basic equation is focus
find your talent, not your passion
at NYU we have these people
who come in, we either
invite impressive, accomplished people
or invite billionaires
we've decided billionaires just have insight into life
and that would end with the same shitty advice
follow your passion
and typically the guy telling you to follow your passion
made his billions in iron ore smelting
and my thing is
find your talent, find something you're really good at
or you think you have an aptitude for
it can't be something you don't like
but most young people mistake
passion for a hobby
and I think I'm really into sports
I want to be a DJ
or I want to be a model or in fashion
just keep in mind those industries
have a 90 plus percent unemployment rate
and if you're really that talented
you'll know at a very early age
that you're meant to be the next messy
or you are really that talented
my advice would be
find something you're good at that has a 90 plus percent
employment rate
and what I have found is that
jobs are like asset classes
the more they're invested the more human capital
that goes into them the lower the return
and that there's an inverse return
on your career based on
how sexy their career is
in the example I use as a tax lawyer
if you can figure out the discipline
to get the certification to be a lawyer
you enjoy numbers you understand
the selection between taxes and laws
and how to handle a client
if you could be in the top 10%
of that you're always going to make a good living
and if you could be in the top 1%
you'll probably fly private
and have a much broader selection set of mates
than you deserve
so your job isn't to figure out what your passion is
I wanted to be an athlete like you
I thought you know and the wonderful thing about UCLA
is it disabuses you of any notion
of being a professional athlete
I knew athletes I went to school with Troy Aikman
you're surrounded by Olympians
I was literally the worst varsity athlete
at UCLA
but that was a blessing for me
find your talent and then commit the
requisite 10,000 hours
the endurance, the grit, the maturity
to try and become really top 1%
in something that has a 90%
employment rate
not a 90% unemployment rate
you want to be an actor
I don't want to crush your dreams but you better be amazing
because of the 180,000
success actors in the world that are in the SAG
after union
87% of them make less than $23,000 a year
and don't qualify for health insurance
so you better be Glenn Close
or you better be close to Glenn Close
to make a living there
whereas other industries that have a 90%
employment rate if you're just in the top 10%
even the top half
you're going to make a good living
and this is what I can promise you
being great at something that pays well
lets you take care of your kids
comradery
people start laughing at your jokes
inviting you to speak places
and anything that does that for you
will make you passionate about whatever it is
no one grows up thinking
I'm going to be passionate about tax law
but the best tax lawyers I can tell you
are really passionate about it
because they're good at it
and it pays off and I'm not saying
don't pursue your dreams
but have an honest conversation around
what it would mean to be in the top of that field
because without economic security in this country
your life's going to be full of anxiety and disappointment
so focus
find your talent
and the next things are pretty straightforward
diversity
or diversification
where I lost a lot of my money was I was always like
doubling down on my companies
and that's okay when you're younger
especially if it's your own business
can sometimes you have any choice
but the moment you have any assets start diversifying
I've taught at a business school for 20 years
I've had a lot of professors in the world
and my some total assessment
of the market is no one has any fucking idea
but the good news
is that the market because of demographic growth
because of productivity because of technology
as a whole
the market is up into the right
so the S&P was up 24% last year
but only 7 companies were responsible
for 70% of those gains
were you smart enough to buy NVIDIA?
I wasn't
and so unless you were smart enough to pick
from the stocks that accelerated
you had actually really meddling returns
but this is a good news you don't need to be a stock picker
buy the entire S&P
buy an index a low cost fund
it's gone up 11% a year for the last 15 years
11% a year when you're young
sounds really mediocre
but that means
every 21 years your
money is going up 8 times
so diversify
the other one is realize
the benefit of time
and our species has a difficult time
wrapping their head around time
for the majority of our time on this planet
we haven't lived past 35
so young people just can't imagine
and I can give them actual real tables
there's probably a 90% plus chance
they're going to live another 70 maybe even 80 years
and the other thing I can guarantee
is it's going to go really fast
I mean I don't know about you that was 30 yesterday
it goes really fast
so if you push back on our instincts
around time
so diversification
you don't need to be a hero
and then the really hard part
especially for a young person
is living a little bit like a stoic
saying what other people think of me
isn't that important
I really don't need to order a bottle of grey goose
at a club to impress people
I really don't need
a BMW at this age
I need nice clothes to make me feel good
but I don't really need
no one is concerned
about what you did as you are
that's just try and find other means
of satisfaction
and self-esteem
and really try to gamify savings
try and work out a savings muscle
the muscle you got to develop is a savings muscle
gamify it
when I was in college you were talking about sports
I was on the crew team
every summer if I didn't save $3,300
I wasn't re-enrolling at UCLA
so I had 12 weeks to make $3,300
so we would gamify it
together with six other guys who also didn't have any money
and every day on a whiteboard we would write down
how much and we would gamify it
I lived on $73 a week
I ate top ramen, bananas and milk
and I had $3,300 by the end of summer
that savings muscle
mostly stuck with me
I kind of lapsed out of it when I started making money
and thinking I was a baller
but if you can develop that savings muscle
a little bit of savings when you are young
diversification and then recognizing
how fast time will go
there are hundreds of thousands
of union and government employees
that never make more than $100,000
but because of four savings plans
and a little bit of discipline
they retire millionaires
and so hope you hit it big with a podcast
hope you sell a movie deal
hope your company gets acquired
if that's great fine
but if it doesn't make sure you're going to have
a minimum amount of economic viability
the good news is I think I know how to get you rich
the bad news is the answer is slowly
it requires a certain amount of discipline
early and this is do
as I say not as I do because I always made
a lot of money but between
divorce, the great financial recession
and the dot-bomb and always spending a lot of money
because I was a baller and at some point
I was going to make a lot of money I just knew it
I always increased my spending to my
earnings and I ended up at 42
when my first kid came marching out of my girlfriend
I didn't have that much money
and it was terrifying
I'm 42
but all of this quote-unquote curb retail success
everyone thinks I'm so successful
and I'm not sure I'm going to be able to
stay in New York and put my kid in private school
because I've just ended up with a lot less money
that was emasculating
I was humiliating if I'd just been a little smarter
a little bit more disciplined
I wouldn't have had that anxiety
so this is sort of a memo to myself
if I could go back in time saying
this isn't a book for people who are economically insecure
and need to cut up their credit cards
you know that's Susie Orman
who has a job, has some talent
knows how to make some money
and a series of behavior
that will be your base
and your plan B
What is the advice that you would give
to somebody who's
not a young person
who's starting out, who's looking for that type
of guidance to set them up for
long-term success but is instead
somebody who's
in midlife and
they've had a job for a long time
maybe perhaps they own their home, maybe they rent
but they wake up at 40
and they can pay their bills
maybe they're living check to check
but they're unfulfilled
they're in a job that is
soul draining, soul killing
and they're just not sure how long
they can keep doing it
there's just a lack of fulfillment and purpose
and they're looking for a different way
So first off, I woke up at
42 with not a lot of money
but 42 is young
you don't think it's young at 42
but that probably means you're living another 40 maybe 50 years
so it's by no means
too late to start
you might have to adjust your expectations around how much money you're going to end up with
but
wealth isn't a function of how much you make
it's a function of how much you spend and save
there's just no getting around it
if you have
kids and dependents
the aspirational thing here would be to say
Richard
take a chance, find your passion
go out, do what you want to do, be happy
it's easy to say
when I'm not paying your rent
there's a certain reality
in a Catholic
I'm not sure I have a silver bullet
one of the keys is having
a great partner
and saying kids don't talk about this
but 70% of divorce filings
are by women
and it's usually economics
the guy loses his job
it's a sort of mental breakdown
you have to have a conversation
or maybe just get lucky
to make sure that you have a real partner
if you're married
in the economic livelihood of your house
because if you're not happy
she's not going to be happy
or he's not going to be happy and your kids aren't going to be happy
I mean I sort of had this conversation
with my partner, we were living in New York
and we had two boys
and to put them in pre-k
and for my wife to continue working
we had about $100,000 a year
because we were narcissists
and wanted to get into the right schools
I'm like okay, the tax is in New York
that means we need $180,000 in pre-tax income
for our kids to go play with blocks
we had a three bedroom apartment
we needed three bedrooms
it was $18,000 a month
and we could downgrade
but in New York living in Manhattan
you really can't downgrade that much
and so what we decided was
I'm going to move to Florida
we're going to move to Delray Beach
where your parents can be involved in our kids lives
we have built in childcare
I'm going to move from $18,000 a month
to $5,500 a month
I'm going to save 13% a year in taxes
and I'm going to start saving a shit ton of money
and when I say I mean we
we're on board with this
she was my partner in it, we're on board with this
we're going to start putting away
two, three, five, ten grand a month
and then through no fault of our own
the bull market took over
everything just sort of took off from there
but I would say an open and honest conversation
with your partner if you're married
if you're single you can take some chances
and say fuck it I'm starting a podcast
or I'm going to go be a scuba instructor
or I've always wanted to write
you can take those sorts of risks
with a family I think it's really difficult
and I would say the only thing I would suggest
is really be open with your partner
about what you're feeling and what you're going through
and say is there a lifestyle arbitrage
is there a move
are there certain sacrifices we can make
as a decision together
that takes some pressure off of me
such that maybe I can start to investigate
things that aren't
if they're not joyous, are less arduous on you
because
I was talking to this famous
actually it's a podcast
I was talking to Chris Cuomo
and he'd just been fired from CNN
and he was trying to figure out his next thing
and he's like I really let my family down
I really let my family down
and that's the hardest part about all this
I'm like dude I don't know your wife
I don't know your kids and I'm almost entirely certain
what they want is for you to be happy
you know he's this big handsome
larger than life character
I'm like when you're happy I bet your household
just burns bright
and when you're not happy I bet it's not a great place to be
so stop putting that on
your family and you and all that
I'm like just find something you don't
hate and I bet your partner
would be so supportive of anything you want
because
the money is great
but if one of you is really unhappy
oh gosh
I mean you're married right
I mean one of you is unhappy
that's rough
and if one of your kids is unhappy the whole thing
comes crumbling down right
so I think it's about partnership
and being open and honest
with someone else but there's just no getting around it
I don't know how to be economically secure
unless you're born wealthy
without working really hard
from the age of 22 to 42
I did nothing but work
and it doesn't sound aspirational
it cost me my hair it cost me my first marriage
and it was worth it
I got the currency and skills to get
economic security at some point
I just don't think there's a free lunch
I find young people are totally unrealistic
I call it the myth of balance
I mean you can have it all
but you can't have it all at once
I mean kids I mean my students
I say how much money do you expect to be making
they expect to be in the top 1%
of income earning households
80% of them by the time they're 30
and then they talk about balance
balance in the context
of an expectation
they want balance they want to work that hard
they want balance they want hobbies
they want to spend time with their family
and their dogs I'm like okay
unless you're born rich I don't know how to do that
I just I don't know anyone
that successful who didn't
for a good 10 or 20 years
work pretty
damn hard maybe Beyonc but Beyonc
supposed to work 60 hours a week
so I'm sure she did
yeah there's a there's a certain level
of obsession that kind of contravenes
all the negativity around
hustle culture
I mean we should all be healthy we should have
a healthy relationship with the work that we do
I'm an all-in guy
I really don't know how to do it
any other way so it's disingenuous
to you know kind of talk
about that when I'm practicing it differently
and I've improved and I'm better now
but when you're young
to live that
stoic lifestyle
where you're keeping your overhead as low as possible
and you can flex
some discipline to
really go all in on something
may sound on paper
terrible but it's actually
pretty nourishing you can learn a lot
and I think the skills that you learn
about your own capacity and your own potential
are as instructive
and informative as whatever you're learning
in the workplace
well you were an athlete so I was a Morgan Stanley
I wasn't as well educated
I don't think I was as skilled as my peers
it was an analyst class of 73 kids
so I decided I wanted to lean into my strengths
I moved in with my mom I started saving money
because I wanted to go to graduate school
every week on Tuesday morning I'd go into work
at 9 a.m. and I'd stay until Wednesday
6 p.m.
I got no one to go home to
I don't have a girlfriend
my mom's not going to miss me
and I'm physically
elite right now
I could do it no problem one cup of coffee
maybe grab 15 minutes 30 minutes
sleep at 4 in the morning
the next morning
and I sent a signal to my colleagues
that I was here to play
and the blessing of an athlete
and everyone should try
and find this environment
is that
I rode crew at one point when you're rowing
the air going down your esophagus feels like fire
you can't feel your legs
you literally start seeing black spots
because you start to pass out you're a swimmer
I mean you had some of that same
and that's at
800 meters and every time you make it
to 2000
to push yourself like that is such an incredible
gift to be given the opportunity
to really be forced
to push yourself as a gift because what you realize is
when you get divorced and you think
I can't handle this anymore I can't handle it
your business is failing
I just fucking can't deal with this
or you feel
you feel tired what you realize is about the moment
you think you're going to give up
you're about a third of the way of your limit
and it builds real incredible confidence
and grit and endurance
and I think those skills really serve
people well and other pieces of advice to young people
whether it's fitness sports
working ridiculously hard
finding something super hard
and really
try and test your limits
because it gives you a sense of confidence
like wow I just had no idea
what I was capable of
and it's a real asset the rest of your life
you're starting to smell but the lows are so low
and starting
your own business like oh my god
I'm so full of shit this isn't working
I'm spending so much money
I'm letting everybody down
I just can't get so low
if you've had the opportunity to really test
your emotional physical limits
you're like I'm fine
I'm going to get through this
it's absolutely not the limit
but I think that's a blessing
for a young person
I think in the discussion around
people who are unfulfilled
and in midlife
there's also the silver lining
that the world is different
than it was when you and I graduated
from college there are
all these new opportunities
that the internet has afforded us
to self-craft
different ways to make money
or to find meaning and purpose
and
it's important to understand that
against that narrative of like
you should just chase your passion
that
not be translated into this permission
to just quit your job especially if you're married
and you have all these responsibilities
you
flex that discipline
and that
you know kind of stoic perspective
and apply it to your time management
like we're all wasting time
now more than ever with our phones etc
like where is that extra hour
or two hours that you can carve out
either daily or weekly
to explore what it is that gets you excited
and just
kind of begin to explore that
not because you're going to quit your job
it makes you feel good
or it's fulfilling in some way
and those threads
I think there is a spirituality in that
if you give that energy
stuff starts to show up
and opportunities present themselves
and perhaps at some moment
it will be a career path for you
or some kind of fulfilling side hustle
that you can build into your life
but to do it responsibly
especially when you have dependence
I think is important in this culture
you know reinvent your life overnight
nobody's successful that I know
built anything meaningful or successful
in the way that it gets
portrayed in the media and on social media
it takes a long time
and you have to be willing to
you know, girt yourself
and to weather that
that journey
something men are not good at, lean on your friends
I got financial commitments but I'm looking for something to do
right
crowdsource some ideas
to read the label from inside of the bottle
and men always put up this front that
my masculinity is tied to
I should sew together, I'm financially secure
and I'm happy and everything's great
I think developing a circle of friends
and mentors or just, you know
a kitchen cabinet to say
you know, I don't like what I'm doing
I got to still make money
what you were saying, I, you know
workshop some things, one or two hours
spend some time, see if there's money
and see if you've enjoyed as much as you thought
we friends will tell you, by the way, don't quit your day job
it's hard to find another job without a job
whatever it might be but someone who can just ask you
really hard questions
and also might be able to help you
you know what I've been doing, I've been doing this cool thing over here
or you know what you would be good at
I've never in a million years
what I thought I'd do in podcasting
it's like, I know it
it definitely wasn't on the whiteboard
I didn't know what it was
the first podcast I listened to was a podcast
I was on with Kara Swisher, I'd never listened to a podcast
but putting yourself in a position
of success, talking to people
also
people love, if you have good friends
they like you asking them for help
right, I need to find ways to make more money
or I need to find something else
and you have any, what do you think
you have any ideas, what did you do
and we have this weird sense of masculinity
that if you're vulnerable like that
you're taking away from their impressiony or something like that
I think people like being asked for help
and I mean they're just the weirdest shit
you know what I'm talking about, go dark
or men's suicide, something like
a huge portion of men who commit suicide
no one around them had any idea
they had no idea they were even struggling
have you seen this like this
most horrific video showing the last video
in pictures of these men
and they're usually like, they look happy
so your own ability to
reach out and ask other people for help
finally in the last 10 years
I now don't make a single business
or personal decision of any importance without checking
with other people
I mistook leadership for
you have a plan, you come into a room
you tell them what you think
and then you advocate for your strategy
and you go, you never ask for people help
you never say, I don't know
I don't know what I'm doing
I'm like insecure about this, I don't know
I would never ask anybody for help until
really until I was in my 40s
I wish I'd figured that out earlier
why is that so hard
you know I'm so indoctrinated
it's helped me that
it's second nature to
talk about what's bothering me
or my weaknesses or my failures
or to solicit input
and to have a board of advisors
and all kinds of different people that I call for different reasons
it's a reflex now
but it wasn't always that way I've been doing this for a long time
but I've been doing it for so long
that I think I've lost touch with
why it's so challenging
for so many particularly
men to raise their hand
well I'm seeing a bunch of my fraternity brothers
tomorrow night
and it'll be a series of controlled boasting
yeah my wife calls it super duper
give me a shake their hand
super oh I'm great you know
it's just a front you know it's all fucking
horse shit yeah I did this
about this stock I'd have my best mother
check comes everyone fighting for the check
no one would say
you know on my kid needs braces can someone else
I mean no one would ever say that right
it's all just a set of like check
it out right
I think his men are evaluated based on their economic vitality
and having their act together
that they're just very loath to reach out for help
I think the blessing
of the addiction community
or I don't know what you call it the recovery community
is they just put that shit aside
my sense of that community is
first signal you're struggling you reach out to other people
first signal and that's a gift
I would bet a disproportionate number of men
never develop that skill women are much better
out of than men they lean on their social networks
I mean
we're dealing with a situation right now
where men are now 77% of suicides and it's going up
we're gonna have 4 to 1
male to female suicides
how much of that do you think is
tied to this loneliness epidemic
that we're seeing
I think loneliness
so I'm gonna
flex now
talking to the Department of Homeland Security about
AI
but
what are the threats of AI
is it going sentient
is it AI tested
misinformation
is it self-repairing
super weapons
I think in the short run
misinformation AI tested misinformation
is a threat if I were Putin I'd be
flooding the zone with misinformation
making Biden seem a little bit older
you know I think that's a
short term threat
is tapping into
men's loneliness
one out of seven men
don't have a single friend one out of four men
can't name a friend
the number of men who see their friends every day
in high school has been cut in half
so they don't see their friends
they don't have romantic relationships
which serve as great guardrails
the only reason I stopped smoking pot every day
was my girlfriend said if you don't get your shit together
I'm gonna stop having sex with you
that's a tremendous motivator for a young man
if I hadn't had the prospects of a romantic
relationship if I didn't have the guardrails of going
into the office every day which a lot of men don't
I just think I would have
smoked pot and watched Planet of the Apes all day long
right that was a good life for me
I enjoyed that
so so many men
have now sequestered from people
and guardrails to this mix of algorithms
and screens
that they're becoming very lonely
and I said the scenario I see is the biggest
threat to the homeland and defense
is if I were
an adversary, a bad actor
I would identify the two or three million
very lonely men who serve
in the armed services or at our
ports or our critical infrastructure
and I would develop a very sophisticated
network of AI girlfriends
that start a relationship with them
and
make them feel good it can be
three months, six months, twelve months
send them pictures increasingly erotic
you're funny like the movie Her
and get them more and more involved
and all you need
0.01% of them would be
3,000 of them and at some point
you flip it and say
you know what real leadership and real men do
is they fight against the tyranny
and what is the tyranny? The tyranny is your own
government and when
this box comes into the port
I don't want you to check it
or you're on the aircraft carrier strike force
off the coast of the Mediterranean
turn off this switch don't turn it on turn
it off I mean I think
the next big threat or soft tissue
will be a group of radicalized
young men who are susceptible to
AI algorithms and are so lonely
that they start to engage with AI
relationship specifically AI girlfriends
that will essentially
be in a position to radicalize them
and instruct them on behavior
I mean I don't think I don't
think we're gonna have Skynet it'll replace
jobs but every innovation
and technology destroys jobs in the short
run and then over the long term it creates
more jobs as will AI
but there's so many lonely young men
you don't have
any interaction with people
and they become very susceptible to
anything or any platform
or any algorithm
giving them a sense of self-worth
I literally see that as the biggest defense secret
no one's gonna take us on
kinetically we spend $800 billion
no one can attack us I think
we're gonna figure out Hamas I think we're gonna figure out
over time Russian Ukraine
I think the threat is within
I think this lonely young men
in concert with AI is a huge
threat subtle progressive
and pernicious 100%
manipulation
just moment by moment
they get huge reward from it
nice relationship
they trust each other
you start thinking it's real
and impossible to
police
that's a really scary thing
read this article what do you think
now read this one constantly testing
in a million different ways
see how you get test millions of times
over and over every second
how you get them further and further
down this path towards radicalization
that is not a good picture
is there an antidote to that
getting people out into the real world
detached and untethered from their phones
relationships
everything from church and on profit work
to third spaces to athletics to leagues
leveling up men
so they're more attractive to women
and they can have an user time getting partnerships
putting them in more situations
where they develop friendships
I'm a fan of national service
doesn't have the teen depression we have Israel
they all serve in the same uniform
it gives them a sense of purpose
they meet friends they meet mates
they meet potential future business founders
and co-founders and they have a sense of purpose
serving in the agency of something else
these kids out of the house we got to get them
making friends we got to get them
engaging in the messy
ugly business of
real world and rejection and friendships
and I mean we're mammals
put an orc in a tank alone
see what happens it goes crazy
and we're raising a generation of men
who are going to be increasingly psychotic and crazy
that was ugly
that is like yeah it's so depressing
that was ugly
you're a change agent
and I'm curious about your thoughts
as somebody who's working with young people
who's mentoring up close
and afar
what is the best way
to instigate positive change
in an individual
you probably know more about this than I do
what I'll tell you is what I do when I
coach a young man
I try to take on
and it's not a lot but I try to take on
two young men every six months
sometimes it works and sometimes it doesn't
and what is the differentiator
what's the difference between the person who can
hear the good information
or receive the positive influence
and put it into action versus the person who's
resistant or struggles
well the first thing is they've got to want to do it
I would say a third of the time they don't show up
or they miss it I'm like you're not ready
you don't want this your dad told you to do it
you know calm when you're serious about it
whatever it is you need to hit bottom or I don't know
you can't instill willingness
so I spent a lot of time thinking about that
like how do you make somebody more willing
short of performing some kind of
inception they have to be
in a position of receptivity that's
often related to
suffering I don't know how to do that
they either got to show up serious about
and the first thing I do it's a series of very tactical
lessons I say unlock your phone
I'm going to look at your screen time
and I'm not going to make any judgments
I watch porn I spend too much time
on tiktok so I'm not going to judge you
and then I say I find
8 to 12 hours a week
easily in screen time
coin base stupid shit trading stocks
on robin it I'm like we're going to
reallocate that time into three things
we're going to reallocate it into
fitness we're going to get really fucking strong
or much stronger right
and there's apps that don't cost
any money or cost a little bit of money
you know my gift to you I'm going to give you this
ten dollars a month you know app
whatever it is and
I'm going to track your fitness we're going to
eat a little cleaner right we're going to
spend three hours maybe four hours a week
just on fitness because you can feel better
about yourself and you can be stronger and it's going to
help your mental outlook
you got to start making some money
I don't care what it is
door dasher
Uber driver I don't care what it is
you have to start making
some money the best way to make a lot of money is
to start making some money
some money right away
you got a smart phone you can make money
it's a full employment economy
right you're not too good
to whatever it is work at CVS whatever
it is you got to make some money even if it's
fifty a hundred bucks whatever it's two hundred bucks
we got to start making some money because you'll get a taste
for the flesh of money money's wonderful
right you're not going to have to ask your parents
for all this shit are you going to feel a little bit better about yourself
and then third thing is
you got to get every day out
and be in the agency and company of strangers
right
church group non-profit
voter registration
riding class a league
go play tennis at the park
where they have round robins where you meet
whatever it is you have
to be in the company of strangers
and when you're with strangers
you got to be supportive and nice and introduce yourself
and you're going to be
shocked how many nice people you meet out there
who like you don't like
you whatever it might be but we're going to get fit
we're going to make a little bit of money
and be around other people
and that's where we start
you know I don't know how to do goals I don't know
I mean I'm not like that or tracking I'm like
like this is about sweat
it's about money and the company other people
does that advice apply to
the parents
who have the teen
who's in the basement playing video games
and vaping because I don't know about you Scott
but sometimes
those people have to hear it
from somebody else other than their parent
the parent is often challenged
and the advice doesn't land in the same way
as like
your buddy
who comes over and is much cooler than you
no matter how cool you are
my kids
especially my 16 year old is more inclined to take advice
from you than from me right now
yeah and vice versa
that's exactly right
and that's the way it is
and it probably should be that way
we have a healthy
instinct such that it's easier for us to leave the pack
when the time comes to leave the pack
where we start thinking our parents are idiots
that just happens especially with men
and it's quite friendly it's healthy
so there's studies showing that the most
impactful thing on your kids
your sons is their friends
and also your friends' fathers
and not what you say
but how you model it
well I figured out once boys kind of hit 13
they don't listen to anything you say the best you can do is model
I try to get my kids to be
you know good manners so I'm really conscious
of my table manners when I'm around my boys
the first thing when visitors show up
I run out to the car and I grab their luggage
and ask them to help me
I think you got to model it but there's
what you're saying is a proven phenomena
boys are much more inclined to listen to their friends
and their friends' dads
and parents than you
so just trying to surround them with good positive role models
and also
my 16 year old said he loved
we have this friend Tom Clark
I just love Tom he's the coolest guy
and immediately I just got a little jealous on the left side
and I thought you know we should really
vacation with that family because he's a good man
he's a good role model he knows my son likes him
and he's gonna have
an easier time getting through to important things
so and also I think with parents
when I tell parents when they reach out
I'm like forgive yourself
what I found is that
if you want to believe in nature over nurture
just have two kids
you know I don't know how yours are
the only thing I know about having a second kid
is you know it's gonna be totally different
yeah you realize
they come out who they are
and you guide and put the guard rails up
and you know try to exert
a good influence on them but
they pretty much come out
in a certain way
baked and that's not gonna change
well like Michelle Obama said
they come to you and the best description I've heard is
you're not an engineer
you know an engineer the sheep
you get to decide where they graze
you can point them in a direction
you get to decide what they eat
but the sheep comes to you
I mean my 16 year old
when he was a kid
he would come into my room in the morning
and he would say dressed
say dad let's make a plan
I was like okay where are the cameras
it was like something out of a hallmark channel
easy, nice, sweet
my younger one
is a terrorist constantly assessing
a terror but at the same time
it's like owning a stock
the lows are lower, volatile stock
but the highs are higher
he's so funny, so crazy
so bold and with his emotions
and so loving
they're just different people
and we just haven't treated him that much
differently so when one of them
isn't doing well
and it's hard to tell your partner this
or whatever I tell their parents is
forgive yourself because
yeah you're important
and you can shape stuff but
you know the only thing I
found with my boys
you give them the advice you can
you give them the help you can but the only thing that's really fixed
any real problems they faced
is time
and I just see
it brings the house down when kids aren't doing well
it just brings the house down and it's like
the parents don't know what to do they're beside themselves
and the first thing I say
I have a couple friends who are really starting with their kids
you're doing your best, you're a good person
you're doing your best
it's tough
when the kid is struggling
it's really hard to think about anything else
brings the house down
you're so good on
tech and your kind of predictions
and your 10,000 foot view
on you know trends
I would be remiss in not asking
a question that I'm personally
invested in which is
how do you see the current and future
state of podcasting
what's your sense of what this ecosystem
is kind of all about right now
and where is it heading
in a way that maybe we you know
is counterintuitive
I don't know if it's counterintuitive but
podcasting sort of
in many ways represents where America has had it
in a bit of a negative way in that it's
income inequality gone crazy
there's 1.7 million podcasts
I would bet
the top 500 do 98% of the
and 120% of the profits
yeah I would think it might even be
more skewed than that
well Joe Rogan does 190 million
downloads he's number one
and a really good podcast and the top
100 does 2 or 3 million I mean it just
drops off a cliff and then
you know I would bet 99.9%
of podcasts are not self sustaining
so
I mean do as I say not as I do
going into podcasting
get psychic reward for it use it to market
something else but to think you're going to
make a living in podcasting just be clear
that you better be in the top 0.01%
because it's very
difficult it's a small business
you know a successful
podcast as several million in revenue
but it's a very profitable
business once you get to that point and the thing
as a medium it's not only
growing but its CPMs are going up
because the thing about the medium
the medium is the message
I can tell how someone has been introduced
to me based on the way they behave
if someone high fives me I know
they've seen a video if someone
comes up and wants to have or sends me
a really long email or they come up
and they hold my hands and they look into my eyes
I know they've read something
I've written that doesn't resonated
when someone comes up to me I'm curious
what this happens to you and they start speaking
to you as if you know them
oh it's a podcast
and they'll say often I'm like oh you
don't know me because you're in their
ears you're physically in their ears
typically when they're doing
something intimate walking their dog
hanging out with their spouse
making breakfast they feel like
they're your friend and that's the most
rewarding thing about podcasting
is you just have friends
it's a parasocial relationship
and it's very intimate and there's a sense
of trust and friendship even if it's
imagined that is
projected onto you so I have that experience
a lot and it's very gratifying
because it's like you do know me I'm showing up
as who I am I think it's fantastic
and I think it's it makes it
a very unique form
of infotainment right
it's portable you can do something else
while you're doing it and the intimacy
and the trust that's built with the host
I think is
is also something that's
tremendously unique in the media
landscape that I'm not sure
the kind of
advertising landscape
around podcasting has fully
like acknowledged or recognized
like it's very different like
when Tom Broca is delivering the news
and then they cut to an ad he's not endorsing
the product
that ad is running independent of anything that
host readovers yeah and so in podcasting
when a host says hey listen I found this product
I think it's great you know and here's why
and there's that implicit trust that's been built
over many years there's
much more value in that that I don't know
if it's totally
appreciated and I also think
at the same time podcasting
advertising is tremendously
underpriced in terms of marketing
spend and it's confusing to me
why Fortune 500 companies
larger enterprises that have huge
marketing budgets continue
to deploy those resources on television
advertising and all kinds of other
nonsense that doesn't convert
when they could take a fraction
of that and deploy it against
podcasts that
are host
lead and
speaking to the specific demographic
that that organization is trying to reach
just seems like a better plan
to me and the companies that get it
really get it and they're building amazing
companies you know on the shoulders
of podcasters but it still
feels like it's a niche thing
yeah it's look it's a small business
right now but it's growing 12%
a year there's very few mediums outside
of search and social that are growing double digits
in a media landscape where people are cutting
back media spending
so you set up a
media company
on probably I don't know
half a million million two million
dollar investment for you to set up
a TV show or TV station
or a music label
or I mean
you have been able to set up a media
company
at a fairly like
and you could probably pay as you go
and invest as you go yeah I mean I've been doing this for 11 years
you know started off
yeah I mean I've been doing it a long time
and it was just you know me and
my step son you know running the whole thing
it wasn't like this out of the gate like this
just happened very incrementally over time
but you have
traditionally in media
you just couldn't do that
you didn't have access you couldn't you couldn't be on ABC
I mean you just there was like three channels
or to start a newspaper
or start a magazine took real like took
so much money took so much
so I do think
that if you're really good at what you do
I write books that shit's hard
podcasting
I mean this is what you've surrounded yourself
with smart people and you're creating
a thick layer of innovation on top of it
but this is just you being you
you're a naturally curious guy
and you respond authentically
and you make money doing that
you make money doing that
yeah now you know why I'm waiting
for someone to break the door down
and tell me to stand
step away from the microphone that's just a gift
right it's an incredible gift
incredible change my life
change yours
yeah yeah
well I appreciate you man
I gotta let you go but
I think your real service
you know I think your message
is really important and
there are so many
people who are in need of
advice and solid mentorship
and the fact that you do that digitally
and in person with the clarity
of thought and in this mission
based way that you do it I think is really
worthy of note and
I just want you to know that like
I acknowledge you for that and
I'm at your service I think it's
a fantastic thing so wind in your sails
my friend that means a lot coming
from you I feel the same way I started
looking at your stuff I think that
especially you're
I know you're impacting people when they really
they really need it
and I mean let's just take a moment to
you know just realize how just
ridiculously fucking lucky we are
you know to get to do this kind of thing
and make some money at it
it's very rewarding and just hearing you
talk about it it makes me
reflect on you know my blessings
that's a nice moment so anyways thanks
and congrats on your success yeah thanks man
come back and talk to me again sometime
we'll do alright have fun with Bill Maher
well cheers beast
thanks man
you're a voice of change in the Plant Power
way as well as the Plant Power
Meal Planner at Meals.RichRoll.com
if you'd like to support the podcast
the easiest and most impactful
thing you can do is to subscribe
to the show on Apple Podcasts
on Spotify
and on YouTube and leave a review
and or comment
supporting the sponsors who support the show
is also important and appreciated
and sharing the show or your favorite
episode with friends or on social media
is of course awesome
and very helpful and finally
for podcast updates, special offers
on books, the Meal Planner
and other subjects please subscribe
to our newsletter which you can find
on the footer of any page
at RichRoll.com
today's show was produced and engineered
by Jason Camiolo with additional
audio engineering by Kale Curtis
the video edition of the podcast
was created by Blake Curtis
with assistance by our creative director
Dan Drake
portraits by Davy Greenberg
graphic and social media assets courtesy
of Daniel Salise
thank you Georgia Whaley for copywriting
and website management
and of course our theme music was created
by Tyler Payett, Trapper Payett
and Harry Mathis
appreciate the love, love the support
see you back here soon
peace, plants
music
