You
You
Your lecture is Professor John Hawks. Dr. Hawks is Assistant Professor of Anthropology
at the University of Wisconsin-Madison, and one of the first paleoanthropologists to combine
fossil and genetic information to test hypotheses about human prehistory. His groundbreaking
work on Neanderthals was featured in the National Geographic Channel Documentary Neanderthal
Code. Professor Hawks also writes one of the most popular science blogs on the latest developments
in paleoanthropology.
One day I was walking through a museum. I love natural history museums. I always have
since I was a kid. And growing up in a small town in western Kansas, it was pretty rare
that I got to go to a real natural history museum. Now of course today, I have been to
some of the grandest natural history museums in the world. I've been behind the scenes
studying skulls and other remains of our early ancestry. But this day, when I was walking
through a museum was special, because I wasn't walking through the museum as a researcher.
I was walking through the museum as a visitor with my kids. We went through the museum,
we saw the dinosaurs, the whole scene of ancient life. And when we got to the very top floor
of the museum, and I won't say which museum it was, when we got to the very top floor
was when we got to the human evolution display. Of course, as a paleoanthropologist, I take
special interest in this. My kids are, yeah, that's what you do, daddy. What does it say?
And I looked at the wall into the case, and I saw the casts of ancient fossil specimens
and how they were arranged into a family tree. And at the top of the family tree, the ancestor
of all the others was an ape called Ramapithecus. Now I know, as a paleoanthropologist, that
Ramapithecus is not our ancestor. Yet there it was in this museum, the ancestor of all
of us. What was going on? Well, museums, like science, are a snapshot in time. You've got
the best scientific understanding that is contributing to the design and the layout of
a museum display, and you're trying to communicate that to people. When I've consulted with museums
about what should be included, that part of telling the story is so key, but also getting
the science right, getting the science accurate and up to date, and being ready for changes
in the science. That's another key. This museum was put together in the mid-1970s, at a time
when the state of the art was that the ancestor of later hominins was very likely to be an
ape called Ramapithecus. This first lecture is about why Ramapithecus isn't our ancestor.
But in order to explain that, I need to explain why it is that debates, great debates in particular,
are such a key aspect of the science. This debate, the debate about whether Ramapithecus
is our ancestor or not, is a debate that involves so many sources of evidence that come from
very different areas. It involves anatomy. Obviously, we've got fossil remains of something,
and they're similar to us in some respects, different in others, and anatomists specialize
in studying those differences. But it also involves genetics, because the key evidence
that threw into question the hypothesis that Ramapithecus is our ancestor is evidence that
came from comparing different living primates at the level of their molecules, and ultimately
at the level of their genes. That integration of different aspects of science is something
that is my specialty. I am a paleoanthropologist. I received my degree in 1999 from the University
of Michigan, and I specialized at that time in studying the fossil remains of our distant
ancestors. I really was interested in the broad scope of human evolution, and so I was
studying things from the earliest known hominins up to the very recent evolution of our species.
But while I was in graduate school, it became clear that the way of the future was really
going to be not comparing anatomy, but in being able to integrate that anatomy with
genetics. And so after I completed my PhD, I did postdoctoral work, learning and studying
human genetics. Today, that has put me in a very advantageous position as a scientist,
because I've been able to study molecular comparisons between living humans and between
humans and other kinds of primates, including molecular comparisons between living people
and our ancient skeletal relatives, the Neanderthals. And so for me, a lifelong interest in trying
to figure out our place in evolution is being deepened by looking at the direct genetic
evidence from the past and integrating that together with what we understand about the
fossil record. It can be challenging to keep up to date in this science. We've got changes
that are happening every day. There are new discoveries that threaten to revise our understanding
of the past, and in a few cases, give us new information that overturns some things completely.
And so that makes it a very exciting field to work in. But that excitement, for me, is
conditioned in the understanding of the entire history of the field. When we think about
the way that we understand our evolution today, that understanding depends on, of course,
fossil and skeletal and genetic and other kinds of evidence. In some cases, it's microscopic
evidence. In a few cases, it's chemical evidence. That kind of evidence, it's hard to keep up
with. But when we look back through the history of the field, we find that the fundamental
questions, the basic issues about how we're related to other kinds of fossil hominins and
how we are connected to other kinds of primates, those questions have been established from
the very start. So debates have always framed our study of our ancestry. Paleoanthropology,
the study of human evolution, it's something that often takes decades to resolve the questions
that people have. Sometimes you have to wait for just the right piece of anatomy to emerge
from the ground. One case where we wondered about the throat structure of ancient humans,
but there's only one bone that reflects the structure of the throat, that bone, the hyoid
bone, doesn't connect directly by bone to anything else in the skeleton, and no hyoid
fossils were known until the mid-1980s. It's a case where something that you might desperately
want to know because it pertains to language, you have no source of evidence about and you're
waiting. And so we're very clever in finding ways to work around these problems and finding
ways to connect our questions to other areas of science. Probably no better illustration
of that can be found than the question of Ramapithecus and how we ultimately came to
throw this fossil primate out of our ancestry and integrated into a different part of the
primate fossil tree. Ramapithecus was found first in 1932 by the British worker G. Edward
Lewis, who was working in the Seawallic Hills of Pakistan. So it's basically a South Asian
form of fossil ape. Rama is named after the Hindu deity, Rama, and Pythicus means in Latin,
ape. So you've got Ramapithecus. Ramapithecus, a fossil ape. This fossil ape comes from
late Miocene sediments. And when we contextualize ourselves in time, the Miocene is a time period
that we now understand dates to between about five million years ago up to as early as about
25 million years ago. That time period is, at the latest end, the very dawning of human
evolution. But throughout the entire period is a time of differentiation between the
different kinds of apes. And so although in 1932 when Ramapithecus was found, the dating
was unknown, it was clear that this fossil ape was very early in the possible context
of our evolution. Ramapithecus is a fossil that gives a very unique form of information
that we see lots and lots in the fossil record, but one that many of us might find to be not
exactly our ideal. And that form of evidence has to do with the teeth and the jaw. The jaw,
the mandible, is the hardest bone in the body. And the teeth are even harder. They're the
hardest substance in the body. And so oftentimes, jaws and teeth are preserved in the fossil
record when nothing else is. That means that if you're going to study fossils, you have to
become expert on how different animals, jaws, and teeth are similar and different from each
other. Well, that's sort of basic paleontology. Being able to understand that mammals have teeth
that are differentiated so that you have different teeth in your mouth, molars, premolars,
incisors, and canines, those teeth have different functions. And those functions are subject to
natural selection so that when we look at different kinds of mammals, they have different teeth to
adapt them to different kinds of diets. When we look at the jaw of Ramapithecus, what we
discover is that its teeth have some key similarities with human teeth. The upper jaw, the upper
jaw that Lewis found, is a jaw that lacks a canine, but it has a socket for the canine.
So we can sort of get a picture for how big that tooth was. Now the canine teeth are the teeth
that are fang-like teeth. If you look at a chimpanzee or a gorilla or a dog or a cat, these
are the long teeth that project out of the mouth. In humans, the canine teeth are very small.
And in Ramapithecus, it looked like the socket for the canine tooth was similarly small. In
other words, it looked like this canine was going to be similar to a human canine in terms
of its size. In comparison to other kinds of primates, that's surprising. It looks like
something that's a distinct similarity with humans. Likewise, when the teeth that were
preserved in the jaw were compared, the premolars and two of the molars, those teeth were similar
in shape and in anatomy to the teeth of a kind of early hominin, an early hominin found
in Africa called Australopithecus. So when people were comparing these, they thought,
well, maybe these are related to each other. Maybe what we have here in South Asia is a
form that's related to the earliest members of our own family, the earliest hominins.
It's only half a jaw, though. You've got one side of it. And so the question is, how is
it connected to the other side? Well, when Lewis reconstructed it, he put it together with
a mirror image and put them at a diverging sort of pattern so that the two tooth rows,
instead of lying parallel to each other, were actually departing from each other at the
back of the mouth. That's a human-like pattern. And when he was looking at the small canine
socket, he thought, well, this is a logical pattern for this to have. The front of the
mouth is reduced in size, the back of the mouth is bigger, and so it would have a diverging
sort of pattern. That pattern, in particular, made the jaw look a lot like a possible member
of the human lineage. Meanwhile, long after Romapithecus had been found and gathering dust
in a museum, other scientists were beginning to work on the question of how humans are
related to other kinds of living primates. They were doing this not only with anatomy,
but also by investigating molecules. The first suggestion that you could use molecular
evidence to try to relate different species to each other was made by the Nobel Prize
winner Linus Pauling and his student, Zooker Kendall, during the early 1950s. Their assumption
was that different species would evolve in their molecules in a similar way to the way
that they might evolve in their anatomy. But that molecular evolution, it may be different
from anatomical evolution in some respects. For example, when you look at the anatomy
of an animal, it's obviously limited in terms of how it interacts with the environment. You
can't continue to evolve bigger and bigger and bigger forever and ever, because eventually
you get to be too big for whatever resources you have available. There's some limit on
your size. Likewise, there's a limit on the proportions of your anatomy. If one part of
your body was to get larger and larger, it can't keep doing that indefinitely. There's
going to be a limit placed on the size of your overall body. But molecules change in a
slightly different way. It's not a question of them getting bigger and bigger or smaller
and smaller. For proteins, which are encoded by genes, it's a question of substituting
one amino acid for another. And when you have a sequence of things, it's sort of like the
sequence of things in a book. If you've got letters in a book making up words and you're
changing those letters, well, you're obviously going to change the meaning of the book. But
it's not clear that there's a limit on how much you could change. It seems like you could
change these things many, many, many times. In particular, if the rate of change is slow
enough, you might change them a lot without having much of an effect on the book. Pauling
and Zuckerkandel looked at the question of molecular evolution and said, let's assume that
species become different from each other over time because their molecules are evolving. If
that's true and if there's not an immediate limit on how fast they could diverge, then the
amount that species are different from each other might be a measurement of how much time
it had been since they diverged. That's interesting. There are lots of reasons why we might not
think it was true. For example, molecules, although it seems like they're very tiny and
internal, actually do interact with the environment. When we think about blood types, which is a
very simple kind of molecule displayed on the surfaces of red blood cells, when you think
about blood types, blood types interact with environments. They interact with the environment
inside your body. They also interact with the environment created by pathogens that try to
attack your body. The reason why different blood types have bad interactions with each
other sometimes is because they're adapted to be recognized differently. They're adapted
this way because of their role as binding sites for pathogens to invade. So molecules do
interact with the environment. There may very well be some limit on how they can change. It
seems like when you compare different kinds of animals that sometimes there are molecular
aspects that change faster than anatomical aspects. When we compare species of monkeys
that are very similar to each other in their body form, we nevertheless find that their
blood systems, their immunology has become quite different. So that means that there's
maybe a different pace of evolution that occurs in some molecular systems. Whereas other
molecular systems, considering the ones that contribute to anatomy as an example, might
evolve at a different pace. So there are reasons why we might challenge the idea that molecular
divergence is a measurement of time. Nevertheless, as a starting assumption, Pauling and Zucker
Kendall propose that this might work. And so they set about to find ways to measure the molecular
differences between different kinds of animals. This measurement as a way of trying to figure
out how closely the animals are related to each other. Nowadays, we do similar kinds of molecular
comparisons. We do them with gene sequences now. And we understand at the level of gene
sequences, there's a dynamic that's not necessarily clear at the level of proteins or other molecular
sequences. Genes make up three billion base pairs of information across a human genome. But out of
that three billion base pairs, only about one part in a hundred is actually involved in doing
things, coding for products. A lot of the genome can be changed without having a clear effect on
your body, on your molecules, on your phenotype. And so much of the genome evolves in a way that we
call neutrally. It can change one way. It can change the other way. It doesn't make much of a
difference. When we do genetic comparisons today, we often do them in parts of the genome that we
believe are neutral, or that are likely to include a large fraction of neutral sites, because that
lets us talk about the process of mutation at the gene level and get a somewhat more accurate point of
view of how those genes have changed over time. But in the late 1950s and early 1960s, sequencing
genes and comparing them to compare neutral evolution, that really wasn't possible. They didn't have that
technology yet. These were just the beginning days of being able to compare the molecular evidence from
different kinds of creatures. In 1961, the first effort to try to resolve the relationship between humans,
chimpanzees, and gorillas by using molecular evidence was carried out by Morris Goodman. Goodman
reasoned that humans, chimps, and gorillas, they form a trichotomy, a tree that has three branches, and we
can't tell how closely any two of those branches are related. Darwin believed in the 19th century that humans
were close relatives of chimps and gorillas, more so than any of us were to orangutans. But it wasn't obvious
whether chimps and gorillas were each other's closest relatives, or whether humans were specially related to one
or the other. Resolving this trichotomy was really challenging from the standpoint of anatomy, because
chimpanzees and gorillas look a lot like each other. Neither one of them looks all that much like humans,
but the ways that chimps and gorillas look like each other are mostly things that are ancestral to them.
They're ape-like things that they shared with our all constant common ancestors. So that's a problem.
It makes the comparison difficult. Goodman was going to use molecular evidence to consider this question.
And so he took blood sera from chimpanzees, from gorillas, and from humans, and put them on a plate and let them diffuse
into each other. And then he added to this plate an anti-human antibody. That antibody would bind
preferentially to human serum albumin, one of the major protein components of blood plasma.
So as he was treating this plate, he expected that the pattern of reaction would show one of these pairs of species to be
closer than either was to the other species. And what he was able to demonstrate is that the human and chimpanzee
pattern formed a fringe where the antibody was reacting to them and it was reacting less to the gorilla.
And so this was the first clear evidence from a molecular point of view that humans and chimpanzees were close relatives
and that gorillas are more distant relatives. Well, let's return to the question of fossils for a minute,
because we left fromopithecus sitting in a museum drawer and we need to bring it back into the story.
Goodman is doing his work in the early 1960s. At that time, there's a revival in interest in trying to work out the
relationships of primates with more distant miocene forms of primates. Because if humans and chimpanzees are close relatives,
then that introduces the possibility that we might find fossil evidence of the human chimpanzee common ancestor,
or of the human chimp gorilla ancestors, or fossil evidence that was related to humans after our divergence from chimps.
There are an abundance of fossil apes from the miocene period from between 5 and 25 million years ago.
Those apes have been found in Africa. They've been found in South Asia and in East Asia.
And so, it was really a hunting game to try to figure out how these apes might have been related to us.
Romapithecus, it was not clear when Lewis found it how old it was, but as Elwin Simons and David Pilbeam began to re-examine the
Romapithecus sample and return to the Seawallic Hills to try to find more evidence, they began to put this into a closer context.
They showed, on the one hand, that Romapithecus was potentially similar to some African miocene apes.
One African ape form, Kenyapithecus, had been found by Lewis Leakey.
Lewis Leakey returns to our story in many subsequent lectures, but this is one of the earliest things that he found in its context in our evolution,
Kenyapithecus, about 12 million years old. Well, Kenyapithecus, like Romapithecus, has a relatively small canine.
And so, looking at a reconstructed version of Kenyapithecus, you get the picture that you're looking at something that, in the jaws, is not all that ape-like.
It might be a relative of humans. Are we looking at the earliest ancestry of humans?
The key problem, to answer that, is the date. How old exactly is this? And is it the right age to be a member of the human lineage?
Or is it older than that? So it has to be an ancestor of humans and other primates, chimpanzees and gorillas.
Well, by the late 1960s, early 1970s, radiometric dating was possible. People could look at rock deposits, and when those rock deposits included layers of volcanic ash,
they had a method of finding out how old they were. That method showed that Romapithecus was more than 10 million years old.
That Kenyapithecus was 12 to 14 million years old. If those two forms were related to humans, then that would mean that humans and African apes,
chimpanzees in particular, must have diverged a long time ago, earlier than 10 to 14 million years ago.
The fossil evidence looking at that anatomy suggested a very, very old divergence. It's at this time that the museum I was walking through was putting together its display.
Romapithecus, as early as 10 million years ago, an ancestor of later humans and other kinds of human ancestors.
There was some sense to this. When we think about why it is that debates happen in paleoanthropology, one big reason is because people have explanations for the anatomy.
Clifford Jolly, who was a primatologist who did a lot of his fieldwork studying baboons, had a model for human ancestry in which the teeth were under strong selection because of eating seeds.
When Jolly compared baboons who are savanna baboons with their close relatives, gelata baboons, there's a contrast in the diet between those forms.
Gelata baboons will pick seeds off of grasses, sort of squat, picking seeds, and chewing the seeds, and for this purpose they have to have teeth that are well adapted to grinding,
thicker teeth that are made for grinding up those seeds.
Savanna baboons have a different dental anatomy.
So Jolly's model attempted to explain the differences between humans and our ancestors, early hominins, and our differences from apes in terms of diet.
His proposal was that smaller canines, larger, thicker molars, and shorter snouts were all products of needing to chew a lot.
And so bipedality, walking upright like we do differently from apes, came as a side effect of that, a side effect based on using your hands to manipulate seeds.
Well, that was a really compelling model for a lot of people.
They were looking at Ramapithecus and thinking, this really fits that model, if what you have is a diet change, and that causes the emergence of human-like creatures.
But during the early 1970s, the molecular clock comparisons became much more detailed.
Instead of just looking at the pattern of fringing and antibody reactions, people were beginning to put a scale onto this.
They were trying to work out not just which primate is our close relative, but how long ago did humans diverge from chimpanzees compared to how long ago we diverged from gorillas and orangutans and other earlier kinds of primates.
Vince Sarich and Alan Wilson were two scientists working at Berkeley who were trying to work out this dating technique.
And they did so by looking at the relative amount of binding between antibodies of these different species.
Later, other kinds of methods came into use.
First, looking at the amount of different banding patterns and chromosomes that had accumulated over time, looking at the amount that genes could hybridize with each other between different species, and running proteins out on gels where the charge is slightly different in different protein sequences.
All of these molecular methods began to arrive at a similar opinion about how long ago hominins had originated, how long we'd diverged from chimpanzees.
Sarich put it most famously, writing in 1974 that based on their work on the molecular clock, no fossil earlier than 8 million years old could be a hominid no matter what it looked like.
That was a direct challenge to the fossil analysts, to the paleontologists.
And the thing that really galled them was that it turned out that Sarich was right.
More excavations in the Sioux-Elec Hills showed that there were abundant remains of another kind of fossil ape, a fossil ape called Shiva Pythicus.
Now Shiva, another Hindu deity, is the destroyer.
And boy, Shiva Pythicus ultimately would destroy Ramapithecus, because it became clear that Lewis's reconstruction of Ramapithecus, the one that made it look the most like a hominin, was flawed.
It didn't have these parabolic, slightly diverging tooth rows.
It had a very V-shaped mouth, but in particular, Ramapithecus looked like a smaller aspect in almost every piece of its anatomy of Shiva Pythicus.
When you've got two kinds of primates living in the same time period, in the same place, and one of them is consistently smaller than the other, and is most small in the canine teeth,
we have a clear explanation for this in paleontology. This is male and female of the same species.
And that's the way it turned out with Ramapithecus.
Ramapithecus turned out to be a female version of Shiva Pythicus.
But Shiva Pythicus is very clearly similar in its face to an orangutan.
Shiva Pythicus is an Asian ape, and Asian apes diverged from the African apes early in the Miocene.
Those Asian apes are the ones that gave rise to today's orangutans and many other fossil forms, but they have nothing to do with human ancestry.
They are a side branch to our family tree.
So Ramapithecus was cast out of our ancestry, cast out by molecular comparisons that indicated that our origin from a chimpanzee human common ancestor must have been more recent than Ramapithecus lived.
But it was ultimately cast out by fossil comparisons, showing that this exceptional fossil, which was believed to be part of the human family tree, actually was part of somebody else's family tree.
That debate, which went on through 70 years of paleontology, ultimately was resolved by drawing together these different pieces of evidence.
Today, we can go back to that museum and look at the way that they have our family tree laid out and understand how the science has changed underlying those relationships.
So that's an exciting part of being a paleoanthropologist, knowing how the history and the debates have unfolded over time, drawn in new sources of evidence, and given us new perspectives on our relationships with other kinds of primates.
