The
first lecture about Ramapithecus was a real classic debate in the history of paleoanthropology.
The arguments on either side were sometimes strained, and you probably get the impression
listening to those arguments that it's not always just the scientific issues, it's
sometimes the personalities of the scientists that help to drive a debate forward.
This lecture is about one of the most classic cases in the study of human evolution in
which the personalities of the scientists have become really involved in the way that
a debate has progressed.
It's a debate between two of the most famous paleoanthropologists, Don Johansson and Richard
Leakey, and their debate about the status of one species, Australopithecus operensis.
To understand this debate, we need to introduce the subject of what a hominin is, and what
in particular Australopithecus is as a representative of early hominins.
Australopithecus is a genus, very much like our own genus, Homo, is a genus, but Australopithecus
represents an earlier form of human-like creature, a form that is entirely extinct.
There are no living Australopithecines today.
There are several different species of Australopithecus.
They were found first in South Africa in the 1920s.
That early discovery led to later discoveries throughout Africa.
Australopithecus today is known from sites ranging from South Africa up through Tanzania, Kenya,
Ethiopia, and across the northern part of Africa into north-central Africa, the country
of Chad.
So it's a genus that is known from a broad geographic distribution.
It's also known across a relatively broad range of times.
The earliest varieties of Australopithecus lived around 4.2 million years ago.
The latest forms of Australopithecus lived around a million and a half years ago.
And so over about a three million year time span, you had these kinds of human-like creatures
in Africa.
Human-like is a way to describe them, but they're not very human-like in a lot of important
respects.
We're going to see some of their anatomy in this lecture and think about the ways that
these Australopithecines compare to humans.
But to give the broadest possible picture as a way to start off, Australopithecines compared
to humans are quite small.
Most humans today are in a range of stature, a range of height, between about four feet
nine inches tall and a little over six feet tall.
Australopithecus was always smaller than the smallest humans in normal-sized populations.
Australopithecus didn't have a very human-like brain.
It didn't have very human-like behavior.
In many respects, it was much more ape-like than any of the representatives of our own
genus, Homo.
And so when we look at Australopithecines, we're looking at a kind of early hominin, which
is really quite different from us in many respects, more ape-like in many respects, which seems
to be an intermediate between humans and apes in some respects.
The debate over Australopithecus' offerances is a debate about phylogeny.
Where does this species fit into the human family tree?
Is it our ancestor?
That's one hypothesis.
We've got an ancient species.
It's represented by a lot of fossils.
It looks like an intermediate between us and apes in many ways.
Maybe it is an intermediate.
Maybe it is our ancestor.
But the alternative point of view is that it's not our ancestor.
It's a side branch of our evolution.
It's not closely related to humans, and it can't, in this hypothesis, be an ancestor
of humans.
Instead, we should be looking for some other ancestor.
Now, every paleoanthropologist, when they find a new kind of fossil, wants it to be
a human ancestor.
Human ancestor is the way that you get fame and, to the minimal extent possible, fortune
in paleoanthropology.
When you find something, you're going to think, wow, this could be the missing link.
This could be the ancestor of all of us.
But then there are other scientists who have their own fossils, who look more skeptically
at your fossil, who may have a different point of view, who may think that their own fossils
are the most important, or who may just have really valid points about the weaknesses of
your hypothesis, yours is an ancestor.
It's this situation that emerged with Australopithecus operensis after it was found.
Is it our ancestor, or is it a side branch of our evolution?
Well, the two men most directly involved in this question, Richard Leakey and Don Johansson,
had rival sets of fossils.
And that rivalry, the anatomy of one group found by Don Johansson and his team, operensis,
and the anatomy of another very special skull found by Richard Leakey, a skull called ER1470,
which he found on the east side of Lake Rudolph at that time, Lake Turkana now.
Those two groups really were at odds at each other anatomically, and they were at odds
at each other in terms of dating.
Australopithecus operensis, about 3.4 million years old.
ER1470 initially thought to be about 2.6 million years old.
These two things could be an ancestor and a descendant, and all of them ancestors of
humans, except for the disagreement of Richard Leakey, who thought that operensis didn't
make a good ancestor for his fossil 1470.
To introduce this story, the reasons for the rivalry between these two groups, it's important
to think about how this family tree of the scientists was connected.
It was Mary Leakey, Richard's mother, who really begins this story with her excavations
at Leitoli.
Leitoli is a site in northern Tanzania.
It's not terribly far from Olduvai Gorge, where Mary Leakey and her husband, Louis Leakey,
made their most famous discoveries.
We'll hear about those discoveries in another lecture.
But Leitoli is earlier than Olduvai Gorge.
It represents a fossil landscape that existed about 3.6 to 3.5 million years ago.
So it's going back at that time to the very earliest stage known in our evolution.
Today we know that human evolution may have begun quite a bit earlier than this.
We know that we have a form of Australopithecus that's 4.2 million years old, and as you'll
hear in the next lecture, Ardipithecus, which is potentially a hominin, and is earlier yet.
But during the early 1970s, Leitoli was the earliest site at which any fossils that were
plausibly related to us had been found.
It's best known today, however, not for the fossils, but for the footprints.
This is a site where we have the fossilized footprints of an ancient group of hominins.
These footprints track along for many dozens of meters, making very distinct trails, almost
like if you were looking at a beach and somebody had walked by you.
And they're so interesting because of the trace of behavior that they preserve.
For one thing, the best known footprint trail has at least two sets of footprints walking
side by side.
There's a large-footed individual and a small-footed individual.
We don't know whether this was a large male and a small female, or whether it might be
an adult and a child, but we do know that they were walking right along each other's
sides, pace for pace.
Anyone was a little bit behind following the other.
If they were next to each other, they would almost have to be touching for the prince
to be as close as they are.
It's a fascinating view into the behavior of an extinct form of hominin.
And one of the aspects of that view that's so important is that the anatomy of these
footprints shows that these creatures were fully bipedal.
They walked upright in the manner that humans do.
Not only did they walk on two legs, but their feet seem to have had the main features that
our feet have.
They had an arch, both longitudinally from front to back and transversely from side to
side, to support their weight and to absorb energy, springing it back as they walked.
That anatomy is so distinctively human.
It's one aspect of their anatomy that when we look at the rest of their skeletal remains,
we will have confirmed again and again these hominins were upright and adapted to bipedality
in the way that humans today are.
Well the footprint site is hugely important, but it's not the only aspect of Laitoli that
was of great interest to paleoanthropologists.
Maybe more important are the fossil remains themselves.
The most famous of these is a fossil mandible, a jawbone, called LH for Laitoli hominin 4.
LH4 is in all of the fossil record one of the ones that really sticks in my mind.
I mean it's such an important specimen because as you'll see it became the type specimen
of Australopithecus operensis.
That's really special.
When we define a specimen as the type specimen, that means that it stands in as a representative
of its species.
That's what was found and identified as being new to begin with.
But also it's exceptional because it's anatomy, which is so distinct from the anatomy of a
chimpanzee jaw on one hand and from a human jaw on the other hand.
This jawbone of Australopithecus operensis, it's not in between chimps and humans in
many respects.
In fact, it sort of lies off in its own direction in a couple of ways.
When I think of this jaw, I can envision in my mind as if it were the face of one of my
children.
It's one of those things where the anatomy is just stuck in my head.
And so let me describe it to you a little bit.
A human jaw of a person living today almost always has a chin in front of it.
That chin is a ridge of bone that goes right out in front of the mandible, in front of
the jawbone.
It doesn't go on the back surface of the jawbone.
Our jaws are strengthened by buttressing on the outside.
A chimpanzee jaw, on the other hand, is strengthened by buttressing on the inside.
When you look at a chimp jaw, it has a ridge of bone on the posterior, the back side of
the middle of the mandible.
That area slopes backwards so that a chimpanzee doesn't have a chin that sticks in front
of their face.
It has a sloping mandibular symphysis, as we call it, the point where the two sides
of the mandible come together, a sloping symphysis that has a ridge on the back.
Australopithecus operensis, LH4, has something that's sort of in between.
It's a very thick mandible, thicker than a human by far, almost thicker than a chimps.
And yet, it's thick and more vertical than a chimpanzee's.
It doesn't have a chin in the front of it, it slopes considerably.
But it's thickened in a way that's somewhat different from the thickening in a chimpanzee's
jaw to strengthen it.
The rows of teeth that go on either side of LH4, those rows of teeth diverge from each
other.
So that if you look at the incisors in the front, which have fallen out and you've got
the roots of the incisors preserved, to the canine tooth, to the premolars, and then back
in the mouth to the molars, you're looking at lines that diverge from each other, almost
like a parabola.
A chimpanzee's jaw has lines that are parallel to each other.
They're straight back and forth.
So this is human-like in the respect of the shape of the tooth rows.
What's not human-like about this jaw is the size of the teeth.
These jaws have very, very large teeth compared to any living humans.
When we look at the molar teeth, they're almost twice the surface area of an average
human's tooth.
And that double surface area is coupled with very, very thick enamel, the hard substance
that makes the coating of the tooth.
It's very thick.
So that these teeth in LH4, they're worn almost flat.
There's a little bit of topography left in them.
And when you look at that wear, it's ground down and only on the very edge of the tooth,
at the cusps on the side facing the cheek, do you see that the enamel's worn through
and the softer substance, the dentin, which is underneath the enamel, is showing outward.
It's that hardness of the teeth, the thickness of the enamel, the large size of the teeth
that differentiates this kind of hominin from us in the jaw.
So we're looking at something that is human-like in some respects, ape-like in some other
respects, and completely different from both in one respect, the size, thickness of the
enamel in those teeth.
Well, that's not the only jaw from the site.
There's a well-preserved juvenile jaw.
There's an upper jaw, a maxilla, with the teeth preserved, and there is one really
well-preserved canine tooth.
The canine in this species is relatively large compared to any human's today.
It's smaller than the average chimp.
It's a pretty big canine, and it has a clear cutting edge on it.
That became such an issue in identifying the earliest known hominins.
And here it is in Australopithecus operensis.
It's still not in a human-like form.
It's still retaining a larger-sized canine, not ape-sized, but still having that cutting
function.
As one of my friends put it, you wouldn't want to put your finger in this guy's mouth
because that canine would cut it off.
Well, Mary Leakey, as she's excavating at Lytoli, she's not herself an anatomy specialist,
so she's finding these fossils.
She's excavating the footprints.
It's a very important, promising site, and she decides to bring in a young anatomist
from the United States to work on the fossils.
This young anatomist, Tim White, has later become very famous for many, many fossil discoveries,
including Ardipithecus, which you'll see in its own lecture.
But in this early phase, he was himself just finishing his PhD, and working on the anatomy
of these fossils was a great opportunity.
He felt like, if he's going to understand the anatomy of the Lytoli fossils, he has
to compare it much more broadly with other fossil sites from around Africa, and of course,
the South African sites that had produced Australopithecus had long been known.
But one of the most exciting sites that was producing new fossils of Australopithecus was
in Ethiopia, where, beginning in 1973, Don Johansson was finding fossil evidence of another
kind of Australopithecus.
The most famous fossil from Hadar is the Lucy skeleton.
This is about a 40% complete skeleton of an Australopithecine, where the skull is only
in tiny fragments, but the jaw is complete, and there are complete arms, some hand bones,
a halfway complete pelvis, and one femur on one side, and a tibia, shin bone on the other
side, giving you representation of the arms, the legs, the pelvis, the mandible, and some
of the vertebrae and ribs.
It's a really exciting skeleton, and provided such great evidence about the proportions
of these hominins, but more importantly, about their adaptation to bipedality.
That human-like pelvis, with muscle attachments that are basically the same as living people,
showed that this is a creature which, although it's much smaller in body size, Lucy we estimate
stood about 3 feet 4 inches tall.
And although its ape-like, in its brain size, was adapted to walking and standing very much
in the way that humans do, Lucy was incapable of being a quadruped.
Well, Lucy's not alone, and when we consider the fossil sample known from Ethiopia today,
and include other fossils known from Hadar, we get a picture of a much more variable species
than we might imagine if we're just looking at one skeleton.
For example, another site called Maka, which is about 3.4 million years old, so maybe 100,000
years or 200,000 years earlier than Lucy, produced another upper arm bone, a humerus, which is
vastly larger than Lucy's in size.
This upper arm bone almost human-sized in the size of its attachments and the breadth
of the bone, but much more muscular in some respects.
These guys, when they were larger, were heavily muscled creatures, in a way even more extreme
than we see in other kinds of apes for their body size.
Hadar was, during the mid-1970s, a hugely productive site.
Don Johansson and his group of workers were finding dozens of fossil localities that were
producing evidence of some kind of early australopithecine.
It was quite clear that together with Laitoli, Hadar was earlier than any australopithecines
that were then known.
The South African australopithecines were believed to be younger than 3 million years old, and
we now know that that dating is probably even a little more recent than that.
This offerensis, as it turned out, the Ethiopian and Tanzanian specimens, were quite a lot
older.
They were all older than 3 million years old, ranging up to 3.6 million years.
This was the earliest known sample of hominins.
They were the most primitive known in terms of representing a more ape-like anatomy than
any other hominins then known, and so it was so fundamentally important to bring them together
and compare them with each other.
That's exactly what Don Johansson, who was responsible for finding and analyzing the
Hadar fossils, and Tim White, who was responsible for analyzing the Laitoli fossils, that's
exactly what they did.
They brought these fossils together to try to interpret and understand them.
When they did that, they addressed these fossil samples with really clear questions in mind.
How do the jaws and teeth, which are the best represented parts of the skeleton, how are
they different from apes?
What is it that sets them apart as hominins in terms of their dentition and their jaws?
What functional changes did those differences suggest?
What was going on with the diet or the mechanics of these jaws to make them different from apes
and also different from humans?
Could the sample be regarded as a single species?
Is the variability shared between Laitoli and Hadar, or were there two different species
there?
If there was a single species, what would the variability mean about behavior?
Those were really fundamental questions, and looking at that question from the standpoint
of somebody active in the field now, I look at it and say, those are exactly the right
questions to ask.
When you look at a fossil sample like this, you're going to compare them in those ways.
By doing this, White and Johansson together decided that these teeth and jaws from Laitoli
and Tanzania and from Hadar in Ethiopia must represent a single kind of hominin.
And so the question arose, what do we call it?
They decided on the name Australopithecus afarensis, Afar, meaning the Afar Triangle,
which was where Hadar is located in Ethiopia.
Ensis is Latin for lives in.
So this was the kind of Australopithecus, the southern ape that lived in the Afar Triangle.
There's only one problem with that.
Tanzania is not in the Afar Triangle.
Laitoli lies far to the south.
And Johansson and White really felt strongly that these two samples should be in the same
species, and they came up with a plan to make it so that their view would stick.
Their plan was, set up as the type specimen of this species, Laitoli hominid 4, LH4 from
Laitoli.
If that's the type specimen of Australopithecus afarensis, well, now the rules of taxonomy
come into play.
Taxonomic rules say that when you name a species, you assign it the name to a type specimen,
and that name has to stick to the type specimen.
Somebody can't come along later and call that type specimen some other species unless they
get rid of the first one entirely.
And so if you believe in Australopithecus afarensis, if you think that is a species, that Hadar
is a species of hominids, today you can't refer to it without referring to LH4, the
type specimen.
You might wonder what Mary Leakey thought of that.
She found LH4.
She wasn't in the room with White and Johansson when they were comparing these fossils and
deciding that they were similar to each other.
Instead, they published the name and informed her later.
Well, Mary was furious.
Imagine you've got a field site, you've been digging there working hard, you've found
a bunch of fossils, and you invite somebody in to analyze them, and they name the fossils
without your consent.
There are lots of reasons why you might want to have the privilege to name the fossils
that you find yourself.
For one thing, you might like to reward the people who gave you grants.
You might like to set up your own opinion about how things should be related to each
other.
You might want to at least leave yourself the option that these are two different species.
Mary thought all of these things, and she wasn't happy about it.
But today, when we look at this fossil and the series of fossils from both sites and
from other sites, we recognize that afarensis is a species that explains a lot by considering
this as a sample that's connected across this entire space.
For example, when we look at the variation among the jaws of Australopithecus afarensis
found at these different places, we find that that variation matches really well into sex,
so that you have larger jaws and smaller jaws, but not only larger teeth and smaller teeth,
but also when you look at the premolars in those jaws.
What you discover is that the females tend to have third premolars that have just one
cusp on them, and the males tend to have third premolars that have two cusps on them.
The females tend to have those premolars rotated a bit in the tooth row, and the males tend
to have them pretty much parallel with the other teeth in the tooth row.
That difference is a difference that exists in living apes and in myocene apes.
It's really distinctive of sexual dimorphism, two forms, male and female, in these fossils,
and when we see the variability in these fossils classifying out that way, it's really clear
that the variation is consistent with the variation in a species that's sexually dimorphic.
Natural apithicus operensis is a name that's here to stay.
Which leaves a question, is it our ancestor or not?
Well, this is a question that was taken up by Mary's son, Richard.
Now, in contrast to Don Johansson and Tim White, who are both young Americans who were
setting out, finding fossils, analyzing them, making a name for themselves in paleoanthropology,
Richard was coming from a family that had been making important fossil discoveries for
years.
But unlike these young Americans, Richard didn't have a formal training.
He wasn't a formally trained anatomist.
He wasn't a formally trained paleoanthologist.
His training was on site, in the field.
He had a real practical training.
So there's a contrast between these groups of people, the young, highly trained Americans
setting out to make their own name, and the established, practically trained Kenyan who
was setting out to, in some sense, defend his family's honor.
Well Richard Leakey, in 1972, had been excavating on the east side of Lake Turkana, which is
in Kenya.
And one of his field crew, Bernard Ningeo, found what has become one of the most important
fossils in the entire fossil record.
A skull called KNMER, and that's for Kenyan National Museum, East Rudolph, 1470.
I'll call it the 1470 skull.
The 1470 skull is big brained.
It has a brain size of, we now understand, about 750 cubic centimeters, which is half
the size of the average human, but much bigger than any australopithecine.
And when they found this skull, they found it underneath a stone layer called the KBS
Tuff, which they believed at the time, was laid down 2.6 million years ago.
So they thought, this is a very old specimen that's very homo-like, because it has a big
brain.
For Richard, this meant that homo, the genus that his father had studied, that they'd
found a species, habilis, an older viagorge, it must extend further back in time.
And so Richard held out the possibility that there would be some earlier form of homo that
they might yet find that would be living at the same time as australopithecis operensis.
This came to a head in a very famous episode in the American Museum in New York, where
the two men, Don Johansson and Richard Leakey, were brought together in a panel moderated
by Walter Cronkite.
And when Don Johansson started talking to Richard Leakey, he said, where do you think
my fossils, my australopithecis operensis fossils, fit?
And Richard demured.
He said, I don't know where they fit.
I don't have an opinion yet.
And Don took out a piece of paper and wrote a tree on it and said, where do you think
on this tree my fossils will go?
And Richard took the pen and made a big question mark.
That was the encounter.
It's one of the stunning episodes in the history of paleoanthropology.
I think he did exactly the right thing.
But the debate about where these fossils fit, it has gone back and forth over the years.
Today, it's really difficult for us to evaluate whether a particular fossil species is the
ancestor of another one.
You're always looking for the right anatomical features to link something up.
In recent years, Meave Leakey, Richard's wife, has been running the Turkana field site.
And today, their daughter, Louise, is key in charge.
And in 2001, Meave found a fossil skull on the west side of Lake Turkana, a fossil skull
that was the same age as Australopithecus operensis, but that shared some facial details with the
1470s skull.
They called this new skull Kenyanthropus.
And Kenyanthropus was a possible ancestor of Homo.
It looked like the 1470s skull.
And Tim White began a debate about Kenyanthropus, saying that the skull was too badly preserved,
that the fossil was broken into pieces and distorted in such a way that it wasn't clearly
different from Australopithecus operensis.
In other words, the same characters, the same scientists who began this debate in the 1970s
are still carrying on this debate today over this one issue.
Is Australopithecus operensis our ancestor, or is there some other kind of more human-like
ancestor that we're going to find at the same time?
It's still a mystery, and we won't know until new fossil discoveries might uncover another
species that's closer to us than Australopithecus operensis.
