It's hard for me to imagine being as lucky as Louis Leakey.
He was born in 1903 to missionary parents in Kenya.
He was raised learning the local Kikuyu language, and then he went to England, ultimately to
be trained at the university.
But he had it as his goal to return to Africa and to become a successful archaeologist,
to find the earliest evidence of fossil man in the African continent, and potentially
the world.
You see, for Louis Leakey, he really believed that Darwin had the right idea when Charles
Darwin suggested that early man had originated in Africa, and had spread from there to the
rest of the world.
Well, Louis had a lot of success.
By the time he was 23 years old, he had gone to Africa, led an expedition, and had had
some success finding archaeological remains.
He returned to Africa again and again, and in 1932, he found what he believed were the
earliest evidence of humans in the African continent.
These human remains, a jaw bone from a place called Canam, and a series of cranial fragments
from a place called Kenjera, they came from relatively close to each other, sites at the
edge of Lake Victoria.
Those places he believed represented real, genuinely old sediments that contained fossil
mammals and evidence of ancient man.
They were comparable, he believed, to the ancient evidence of man that was being unearthed
elsewhere in the world.
This really had the potential to put Africa on the map as a place of human origins.
Well, I said that Louis Leakey had good luck, and during the course of his entire storied
career, he made finds that are just amazing.
But in the case of the Canam jaw and the Kenjera skull fragments, Louis Leakey had extraordinarily
bad luck.
You see, when he went back to find the exact places where he had found these things, he
wasn't able to locate the places where he found the things.
The markers that he had left were gone.
And so, Louis Leakey's first important find, the one that really had the potential to put
him on the map as an important archeologist, it almost slipped through his fingers.
Today's debate is about whether Africa or Asia was the real heartland of human origins.
And you would think that this basic geographic question, did our species originate in Africa?
Did it originate in Asia?
You would think that that would be relatively simple to resolve.
Darwin certainly thought it was simple to resolve.
He looked at humans, and he looked at the African apes and the Asian apes.
He concluded that we're related to those apes because we share so many characteristics
with them.
But he claimed that we were closely related to chimpanzees and gorillas, the African apes.
From a Darwinian perspective, the answer is clear.
We should come from the place where our relatives lived.
And so, for Darwin, an African origin seemed very likely.
But Darwin was a little bit unlucky in that claim, because continually, again and again,
the earliest evidence of ancient humans was found in Asia or Europe.
It wasn't being found in Africa.
And so, by the time around 1920 to 1930 rolled around, it really looked like Asia was going
to be the heartland of humanity.
And there were elaborate theories that were laid out to explain why this is.
This basic debate, Africa versus Asia, has stayed with us today.
And although it might seem like we have a pretty clear answer to this, certainly from
what you've seen so far in the course, it actually turns out that new discoveries put
a new perspective on this question.
So when we look at some of the most recent fossil discoveries, we still are left with
this basic question.
Here was the important center of our evolution, Africa or Asia.
Most of the history that I'm talking about here unfolded before 1950 and 1960.
And it's difficult for us today, as paleoanthropologists, going back into those days, because today we
have such a highly resolved idea of how old the earth is and how old the things are that
we're talking about.
Before 1960, there was no absolute chronology that told us how old the span of human evolution
was.
When I'm talking about the 1930s and 1940s, people's idea of how old the earth was was
about 65 million years.
Today of course, we know that that's not anything like the age of the earth.
That's more like the total span since the extinction of the dinosaurs.
Total evolution from the point of view of the 1930s and 40s, the time since the extinction
of the dinosaurs, was really thought to be a very short time span, something like a
few million years.
And human evolution, well human evolution might have unfolded over only a few hundred
thousand years from their point of view.
Today we understand that human evolution unfolded over four, five, maybe seven million years
and when we're talking about the span of tool making humans, the span of our genus,
Homo, we're talking about at least two and a half million years.
Well that's something like three or four times as long as the time period that was imagined
to be the case before absolute dating methods came in.
So when we're talking about the discoveries that were made before about 1960, we're really
talking about people fitting together pieces of a jigsaw puzzle that they believed would
be very close to each other in time.
When they found fossil evidence from Europe, something like the pilped down fossil, which
we'll talk about in another lecture, they really believed that that was something that
was coming from a few hundred thousand years ago and when they found similar fossil evidence
from Asia, something like Pythaganthropus, which you'll see in a few minutes, they thought
that was coming from a few hundred thousand years ago, these were so close to each other
in time that it became a real question of which was earlier and could you establish
that one was definitely earlier than another?
That was so difficult.
They made tremendous progress on the basis of correlating species with each other of
other fossil mammals to try to figure out which had come first.
But it was so difficult to compare different regions with each other because different
regions would have different fossil mammals.
This was, in many senses, an insoluble problem.
It was ultimately solved by technology.
But just to lay out the map very clearly, we have a timeline that in this lecture is
unfolding over about two million years, but in the point of view of the people who were
finding these things, they thought it was unfolding over a much shorter time span.
Well, the Darwinian point of view about human origins was that humans had originated in
Africa, that we had evolved from an anthropoid type of ape that was similar to chimpanzees
or gorillas, and that the mode of our evolution was a mode that involved changes first in
the brain and consequent changes in the rest of the skeleton.
From Darwin's perspective, what was going on in our evolution was we became smarter.
It led us to use tools and weapons.
If we're using tools and weapons to become dominant over the rest of our environment,
then we need to have hands to do it.
If we have hands that are being used for tools and weapons, then we're going to have to
get around on two legs.
So for Darwin, the brain was the leader in our evolution.
It came first.
Tool use, weapon use, followed the brain, and bipedality followed tool and weapon use.
When we lay out that chronology, it becomes very clear what we should expect to find in
our earliest ancestors.
We should expect to find big brains.
The rest of the skeleton should come later, and so when people were looking for fossil
evidence of ancient humans, they had in their minds that they weren't looking for something
that was ape-like in its skull.
They were looking for something maybe that was ape-like in its face, something that was
ape-like in the rest of the skeleton, but something that should be very human-like in
its skull.
Interestingly, the very first evidence of fossil humans seemed to fit this pattern.
When we think about Neanderthals, who were found in Europe, they have big brains and
they have less human-like other aspects of their anatomy.
A less modern human-like face, a skeleton that seems to be derived in a direction different
from modern humans in some respects.
People looked at Neanderthals and they said, that's exactly what we should find.
And so they went looking for earlier versions of this.
Darwin wasn't alone in theorizing about the origins of humans.
In Germany, the most popular evolutionary theorist was named Ernst Heckel.
Heckel was tremendous in the scope of his knowledge about the diversity of organisms.
He became really famous for his work, which intricately made artistic representations of
tiny organisms called radiolarians.
These beautiful illustrations just gave a tremendous ability to illustrate the beauty
of nature.
But Heckel was, in all respects, a big thinker.
While he's thinking about the relationships of these tiny organisms, he's also thinking
about the ways that higher organisms should go together.
Heckel had an entire theory for how the evolution of humans should have taken place.
And I mean, today we would really consider this to be the height of arrogance.
But in the 19th century, in the absence of data, it's amazing to what extent ideas made
an important difference in the way that people actually went to look for evidence.
Heckel sketched out the way that humans should be related to other primates.
But in Heckel's point of view, Darwin had been an error.
When Darwin thought that humans should be related to chimpanzees and gorillas, Heckel
thought that humans shouldn't be closely related to those African apes.
That we might be more closely related to Asian apes, like the orangutan or gibbons.
But certainly, our ancestors were in a location that had not yet been found.
That location, from Heckel's point of view, was Lemuria.
Now, Lemuria, I've got to tell you, doesn't exist.
But in the 19th century, there was a real problem explaining the distribution of different
animals across the old world.
If you think about it, Asian animals and African animals, there's some similarities
between those places, but the fauna that occurs in those two continents is by and large different.
The reason we now understand for those differences has to do with the continents in the distant
past and the way that they were separated from each other, so that African animals evolved
somewhat in isolation from Asia for many millions of years before those continents came back
together.
There were dispersals that exchanged animals between those continents, but those dispersals
were not complete.
The two continents didn't come to share all of their fauna with each other.
Heckel and other evolutionary theorists at the time were faced with the problem of explaining
why it is that we have apes in Southeast Asia, apes on the islands like Sumatra, Borneo, and
apes in Africa, but not apes elsewhere.
This wasn't the only biogeographic problem, the problem of where the animals end up.
This wasn't the only biogeographic problem that pressed on them.
Let's take lemurs as an example.
Lemurs today are, of course, primates.
They're related to other kinds of primates.
They live on Madagascar.
Madagascar is an island, and it's a very ancient, old island.
A lot of this island get lemurs on it.
If lemurs are related to primates, and primates have been evolving for millions of years,
but Madagascar has no other kinds of primates on it, and seems like it doesn't have very
many other connections with animals in other places, getting the lemurs there is a real
problem.
Today we understand that the reason why lemurs are in Madagascar is that in some ancient event
a raft of vegetation probably carried them across what was once a much narrower strait
between Africa and Madagascar, and that they evolved in place after that time.
This is the same way that primates got to South America, another in the past island
continent that had its own fauna and wasn't connected to other continents.
But before we had a theory of continental drift, before it was clear that the continents
moved over time, and that the reason for biogeography was this movement, the only way
that you could get things from one place to another was by sunken land bridges.
And so the theory of Lemuria was that there was a land bridge that was originally in the
Indian Ocean that was sunk.
That's where heckle thought ancient humans should be found.
Now Lemuria isn't Asia strictly, but it does sort of key us toward the idea that Asia is
a credible place where one might look for ancient humans, because if ancient humans
had actually evolved in this location that's no longer accessible to us, well it makes
just as much sense to look for them in Southeast Asia as it does anywhere else.
That idea might have sunken into the past, just like Lemuria the hypothesis sank into
the past, but actually it was surprisingly influential.
A young Dutch physician, doctor named Eugene Dubois, decided that he in 1886 would get
himself stationed to the Dutch East Indies, and he would go find heckle's ancestral form
of human.
This was maybe a surprising decision, but as we'll see again and again, people who were
drawn by the lure of studying the fossil past were finding ways to do it.
And in a time when it wasn't possible really to make a career as an archaeologist, well
getting yourself stationed to the colonies where you might find something new was a really
powerful way to do it.
Dubois went looking for fossils in Sumatra for about two years, and he found a few fossils
but he didn't find any promising evidence of ancient humans.
So he got himself restated to Java.
On Java in 1891 he started having some success.
He found what we call a skullcap, the top part of a skull, and a femur, a thigh bone
from a site called Trinil.
Those two fossils he found within about 15 meters of each other, so something like 50
feet apart.
He believed in the context of the other ancient mammals that he was digging out of that place,
he believed that these two things had to go together, they were the same individual.
The important thing about them is that the skullcap, it's ape-like in some respects,
it has a low contour, it has a brow ridge that sticks in front of it, but it's bigger
than an ape's skull.
With a total estimated size inside of it of about 800 cubic centimeters, it's not human
sized but it's bigger than any of the living apes by quite a lot.
So Heckel looked at the skullcap and said, well this is something special, but when he
looked at the femur he realized that this is the femur of a human.
It's about the right length to be a human's femur, it has key features that are related
to upright stance, the kinds of features that we saw in Lucy's skeleton.
It has an angulation at the knee, it has the muscle markings around its head and neck that
show that the body's in an upright stance.
Those features made it very clear that he's looking at an organism that is bipedal, stands
upright, and so Dubois interpreted these fossils as the evidence of something in between humans
and apes, something that was upright in its stance but that had a more ape-like skull.
That combination of features, as we've seen, is something that anatomists at the time really
did not expect to be the ancestral version of humans.
Dubois had a problem.
He was looking for something that had a human-like brain and an ape-like body.
What he found was something with a human-like body and an ape-like brain.
So the problem is, how do you interpret this?
How do you show the connection between these features that he'd found and human evolution?
For Dubois, solving this problem involved math, and that's a little bit surprising.
When we think today about science, we think about mathematical approaches.
But in the 19th century, Dubois was doing something that was highly surprising.
He said, I've got a problem to solve.
I know that animals have different sizes of brains, and the size of their brains depends
on how big their bodies are.
But it doesn't depend on it in a straightforward, straight-line way.
As we saw in the lecture on brain size and brain structure, when you get bigger animals,
their brains are bigger, but not as much bigger.
There's a curved relationship so that elephants don't have as big a brain as you would expect
if you just blew up a human or an ape to elephant size.
Their brains are smaller than you'd expect.
This relationship in biology is called allometry, and allometry just means different measurements.
Well, allometry, today we understand, between brain and body size, is such that the brain
increases about two-thirds as much as you'd expect based on the size of the body.
Dubois was in the position of trying to figure out what this relationship was without being
able to study nearly as many animal brains and bodies as we can today.
Dubois reasoned that he should find pairs of species where one is small and the other
is big, but that they're close relatives of each other.
Because by his logic, if you took something small and blew it up to be bigger, but kept
it closely related, they're probably behaviorally more or less the same, so that the kinds of
effects that you're seeing between those species and the size of their brains come from the
size of their bodies.
To do this, Dubois picked two species that may surprise you.
The domestic cat and a lion, small and big, and for Dubois, these are both hunters.
They both have similar behaviors in many respects.
He says, if I'm going to blow up a cat to lion size, that's the size of relationship
I should expect.
When he applied the same formula to his fossil, Pythocanthropus, he asked a very simple question.
If we take Pythocanthropus, if we take Pythocanthropus and draw it back so that it has a smaller
body, what size of brain would it accord with in a smaller size of primate?
The answer to that question for his equation that evolved cats and lions was a gibbon.
Dubois was thinking in terms of an ancient kind of gibbon that had expanded in size and
given rise to this kind of primate.
It was upright, so he called it erectus, but it was in between apes and humans.
He called it Pythocanthropus, so Pythocanthropus erectus, this was the famous Java man.
Today, we have other evidence of ancient humans from Java.
We know a lot about their anatomy.
We don't call them Pythocanthropus anymore.
We think that they're our close relatives and we call them Homo, but the name erectus
has stuck.
Most paleoanthropologists call these guys Homo erectus.
They understand a lot about their anatomy and they're a central feature of our understanding
of how humans came to disperse throughout the world.
From today's point of view, the real question is not where did these guys ultimately come
from?
We now understand that we're closely related to chimpanzees and gorillas, just as Darwin
thought, but the question is where was the action in their evolution?
Did Homo erectus evolve substantially in Asia and disperse back into Africa, or did it originate
in Africa and disperse into Asia?
The Asian origin, which seemed to be established by Pythocanthropus, really hit the ground
and ran with it.
This is partly because of the overall scheme of evolutionary theory, an American paleontologist
named William Matthew looked at the distribution of animals in Asia and Africa and reasoned
that the most primitive forms of animals, the ones that are most like the ancestors,
should be farthest from the origin, and that the origins, the center points of a species
ranges should be places that they continually were having progress and moving out of.
For Matthew, this argued that species should be continually originating in one place, Central
Asia.
He formulated a theory where species were coming out of Central Asia all the time.
The other prominent paleontologist, Henry Fairfield Osborne, took this theory and applied
it to humans.
He said, we shouldn't be looking in Africa, we shouldn't be looking in the tropics for
evidence of these ancient people, we should be looking in Central Asia.
That's where we'll find the dawn man, the man that connects us to our more distant
anthropoid ancestors.
And so Osborne helped to organize a famous expedition, an expedition ultimately led by
Roy Chapman Andrews that went to Central Asia and the Gobi Desert and tried to find evidence
of fossils there.
They made tremendous discoveries of fossil dinosaurs, and those of course became very
famous.
They did not have a lot of luck finding fossil humans.
Central Asia was not the place to look for this.
What was already clear by that time, the mid-1920s, was that Africa was potentially a very interesting
place to look for evidence of our fossil ancestry.
As we saw, Raymond Dart had found Australopithecus by this time, 1924 he described it and showed
that the features of his Tong specimen were features that were in many cases more similar
to humans than to the other apes.
Tong also faced this real barrier.
It doesn't look like the kind of ancient human you'd expect to find if you thought that Darwin's
theory was correct.
Because Darwin's point of view was, big brains lead the rest of our evolution.
Tong had an ape-sized brain.
It was, as Dart argued, somewhat human in some features, but it was very clear that this
was not something where the brain was leading the evolution.
During the 1940s, more and more fossil evidence of Australopithecus was unearthed in South
Africa.
While before that time, Asia had looked like the real center point of our evolution, the
place where all the evidence was coming from, by the 1940s, actually very substantial finds
began to make it clear that there's something very important in Africa.
Dart found further discoveries at a place called Makapansgat, another cave that preserved
evidence of Australopithecus.
Meanwhile, another paleontologist named Broom was finding evidence of fossil hominins at
Sturckfontein and Swartcran's caves, the robust Australopithecines from Swartcran's,
the grass-style Australopithecus africanus from Sturckfontein.
These fossil sites were tremendously important in re-evaluating the pattern of our evolution.
It became clear that these sites were preserving a much more primitive form of ancient hominin.
But, nevertheless, there was this question as to where the advanced forms of hominins
were.
This was a question that, during the 1950s, really occupied people.
It was a time when the Piltdown fossil, a fossil that had appeared to show Darwin's
theory, big brain, ape-like face, was correct.
Remember, Piltdown was a hoax, it had an ape's face and a human's brain.
When that was discredited, people were still looking for evidence of this ancient, more
advanced form of human, but no longer were they looking in Europe, now they were looking
other places.
Louis Leakey, of course, in 1932, had found fossils in Africa that he believed were this
more advanced ancestor.
The Can-Am jaw, the Cangera skull fragments, those seemed to represent a more advanced
form of human in what he believed to be Middle Pleistocene sediments, something that he thought
were about a half million years old.
Well, it turns out, we now understand, that Louis Leakey was basically right about the
ages of these things.
They really were within the last half million years.
They weren't very recent, they were genuinely old.
They are homo, they are relatives, but Louis was in a very poor position to show it.
You see, when he went to Can-Am, and he went to Cangera, he took the places where he'd
found the fossils, and he marked them.
He took iron stakes, and he pounded them into the ground and set them in concrete so that
he would be able to find the same place when he went back so that he could prove that he'd
found those things in situ.
But during the years that he was gone, organizing new expeditions and preparing to return, local
fishermen had extracted the iron stakes and had beaten them into fish hooks so that they
were now gone.
Iron's a valuable resource for these people.
If you took, it's like today, if you took solid silver and pounded it into the ground
to mark where your spot was, it just, it didn't work.
So Leakey was unable to show in the 1930s that this was genuine evidence of ancient people.
But Leakey went back again and again.
He established himself within Kenya.
He stayed there with his wife, Mary Leakey, at Olduvai Gorge, excavating archaeological
remains, ancient tools that showed that people in Africa were just as old and quite probably
older than people that were being found with early tools in Europe.
The problem was, who were the people?
Well, 1959, they found fossil evidence of a robust australopithecine.
That was genuinely old.
It showed that their fossils were comparable with the South African fossils.
But it wasn't until 1960 when they found evidence of a more human-like ancient creature, something
with a bigger brain than australopithecus, that it became clear that Africa really was
the place where there was a transition point between the more ancient hominids, the australopithecines,
and our modern form of hominids, Homo.
Well today, we can return to this question.
We now just sort of have a settlement to the debate.
Humans ultimately originated in Africa.
But the question hasn't totally gone away, and the reason why is that at present when
we talk about Homo, some of the earliest forms of Homo are still known from Asia, from outside
of Africa.
One of my favorite sites at the present time in the fossil record throughout all of human
evolution is a place in the Republic of Georgia called Domenici.
Domenici is a beautiful site.
It has a medieval church on it.
And underneath the foundations of this medieval churchyard are fossil remains.
Those fossil remains today represent the oldest form known of Homo erectus.
At 1.8 million years old, they are older than any clear evidence of Homo erectus inside
of Africa.
This of course raises a question.
When we're looking at Homo erectus, are we looking at a species that originated in Africa
and spread very rapidly to Asia?
Or are we looking at a species that may have originated in Asia?
Because some earlier form of hominin, potentially an australopithecine, had left Africa earlier
and evolved into something else.
That's a question that today is still with us.
So when we look at the fossil record of Homo, we have this really basic question.
Where did it originate?
And was Asia possibly a central point of its evolution?
It's the same old question that we have from the very beginnings of paleoanthropology.
Today we know that Africa is the ultimate origin of all of the hominids, that Darwin
was right in that respect.
But yet the biogeography, how these species got from Africa to Asia, ultimately to Europe
and other parts of the world, that remains something of a mystery.
Next time we'll talk about the African origins of Homo in its earliest incarnation and get
a broader picture of the way that our adaptations as a species are rooted in the earliest archaeological
record of Africa.
