Welcome back.
Today's lecture is about Homo habilis.
Homo habilis is one of the most famous of the fossil species of ancient hominins.
It in many respects is like the perfect transitional species between Australopithecus and the rest
of our genus Homo.
And yet being the perfect anatomical transition in between in many aspects of its anatomy
is not the perfect thing for Homo habilis to be because it didn't live at the perfect
time to be in between Australopithecus and later forms of Homo.
So Homo habilis has actually given rise to a surprising debate.
Here's a species that seems like it's got the right anatomy to be our ancestor, but
it doesn't clearly exist at the right time to have been our ancestor.
Is Homo habilis then something that's related to the relatives that Australopithecus gave
rise to that later led to humans?
Is it really genuinely part of the evolution of our genus?
Or is it possibly a side branch, a separate kind of species that originated from some
earlier point in our evolution?
Homo habilis existed between about two million years ago and about one and a half million
years ago.
So we're looking at a time frame in East Africa, which is very much the beginning of
the early Pleistocene.
That time period is about a million and a half years after the time period that we find
Lucy's skeleton.
So it's long after Australopithecus operensis.
It's also a time period that early humans, Homo erectus, are emerging within Africa and
within Asia.
So when we look at the time span in this lecture, we're going to look at two to one
and a half million years ago, and the time immediately preceding that after about two
and a half million years ago, the time that our genus Homo should have originated.
Up to this point, we've really been considering the anatomy of Australopithecus.
All of the earlier hominids before two million years ago are members or relatives of that
genus, and when we look at Australopithecus, you can imagine the anatomical features that
we found in Lucy's skeleton.
First of all, they have relatively small body size.
Lucy, as you'll remember, stood just over a meter tall, so about the size of a seven
year old girl, but much stockier than your average seven year old girl.
Lucy weighed about 35 kilograms, something like 90 pounds.
So we're looking at a species that's shorter than us in stature, but more or less comparable
to us in width.
At the same time, Lucy and her species had relatively big molar and premolar teeth.
Those are teeth that are adapted to a more grinding type of diet than today's humans
have.
They're different from the teeth of other kinds of apes, and that indicates a specialization
that occurred in early hominin evolution in terms of diet.
They had, in addition to their small teeth, relatively small brains compared to us, but
slightly bigger brains than what have occurred in chimpanzees or gorillas of the same body
size as Australopithecus.
There was a slight advance in brain size, a market change in the teeth, body size remains
small, sort of chimpanzee-like in size, and the anatomy, otherwise, is human-like in
its adaptation to upright walking.
That's Australopithecus, and that's many of the features that, when we look at them, look
at early hominids, this is not very much like the other people that we see around us.
Well, Australopithecus is, as a genus, really well known, and we know quite a lot about
its variation, especially from some of the South African sites, Sturkfontein, as an example,
where we've got dozens of partial crania that show us the variations that occur within
that genus.
There are variations that all occur along a common theme.
They all have relatively big, post-canine teeth, they all have brains that are smaller
than 600 cubic centimeters, bigger than about 400 cubic centimeters, they all have faces
that slope forwards, they, in other words, fit an anatomical pattern that's quite recognizable.
When we compare that anatomical pattern to the pattern that occurs in later humans, we're
looking at humans having a more vertical face, humans having a larger brain, humans having
smaller teeth, and of course humans having a larger overall body size, a taller skeleton.
Those are the things that we expect will have to change at some point in human evolution
if we want to get something that's like Australopithecus into something that's like us.
Well, at Olduvai Gorge, Lewis and Mary Leakey, by the 1950s, were searching for that potential
common ancestor.
They were looking in levels of archeological time that were much older than the levels
that were then known anywhere else in the world, 1.6, 1.8 million years ago is what
we now understand these deepest Olduvai levels go to.
They were thinking that they were at least the early Pleistocene in age, and therefore
the earliest potentially known anywhere, and they were looking for the kind of creature
that would have made them.
Well, as they excavated at Olduvai, they began to find older and older fossil remains.
The most famous of those fossil remains early in their excavations was OH5, Olduvai hominid
number 5. OH5 was a skull of what we now today call Australopithecus boisei, a robust Australopithecine.
This skull and the associated dating that began to show that the ash layers in which
these fossils were stratified, those ash layers dated back to as early as 1.5 million years.
This created a real sensation because the availability of that evidence of how old are
these layers really, which was never known before, but now with the availability of sampling
radioactive elements inside of the ash, now it was clear that as ash layers were laid
down, the radioactive potassium inside of them would gradually decay and you could use the
amount of radioactive potassium that was left in those to get an estimate of when the volcano
erupted, when that ash had originated as molten magma. So those ash layers provided the key
that showed that human evolution was almost twice as long as anybody had envisioned before.
Well, Australopithecus boisei, a robust Australopithecine, Lewis and Mary Leakey jumped on it and
jumped on it right away as being potentially the hominin that was making the stone tools
that they were finding, but it never really fit very well as an intermediate between Australopithecus
and today's humans. Robust Australopithecines, as we've seen, have their own series of distinct
specializations. They're quite different from us. They have massive post canine teeth much
bigger than any of the other early hominins. They have specialized more vertical faces.
They have giant jaw muscles. They're made for grinding heavy, powerful chewing and that's
something that doesn't look like it's the direction that humans are taking. So they
continued to look for further evidence of other fossils and the next year, 1960, they
found it. They found a fossil that today is numbered Old Avaihominid 7, OH7. OH7 consists
of parts of a skull, a jaw bone and a hand. These three parts of the skeleton are so
essential to being able to make the comparison between this fossil and present day or later
human fossils and the earlier Australopithecine fossils. It became so important that it was
clear right away that this represented something that was very new and something potentially
that was in between the anatomy of Australopithecus and Homo.
Let's begin with the size of the skull. Now the parts of the skull that are available,
they don't actually meet each other. So as they were interpreting the size of the skull,
there's a decision that you have to make. How do you orient these with respect to each
other? Put them closer together and OH7 becomes a smaller skull. Take them farther apart and
it becomes a bigger skull. They had to make a careful study of the anatomy of this specimen
to get a good estimate of its size. When they did that, they estimated that its size was
basically in between the size of Australopithecus as then known and the size of Homo erectus.
They were looking at something that was around 700 cubic centimeters in size, right in between
where you'd expect it to go. The jaw was also sort of in between where you would expect
Australopithecus and later Homo to be. The jaw had incisors and canine teeth that were
basically like earlier Australopithecines and later humans in size. That's an aspect where
we don't differ that much from earlier Australopithecines like Australopithecus africanus. The post canine
teeth are where the real contrast was. Australopithecus has larger premolar teeth, larger molar
teeth than we do. Oldivai hominin 7 had premolar teeth that were a little bit larger than ours
but not as large as Australopithecus. It had molar teeth that were substantially larger
than ours but not as large as Australopithecus. In other words, this jaw was in between the
morphology of Australopithecus and Homo. Other jaws from Oldivai Gorge began to be unearthed
and they sort of confirmed this pattern. So when we look at fossils like Oldivai hominin
13, we're seeing that same contrast of the teeth are in between in size. They're not
Australopithecus size. They're not Homo size. There's something that seems anatomically
intermediate. Lewis Leakey brought in an anatomist from South Africa, Philip Tobias, to interpret
these fossils. Tobias and Leakey together, as they're discussing these fossils coming
to a decision about what they represent, they immediately saw that the larger brain that
these fossils represented was potentially very informative about the role of this species
relative to the tools. They interpreted the larger brain as evidence that this species
is there adapting in a new way, using new cognitive powers to make those stone tools.
And so this becomes a real argument in favor of the brain as being the most important diagnosis
of something that belongs in a human-like direction as opposed to an Australopithecine-like
direction. So their argument was that this species, whatever it was, was the toolmaker,
that it was linked to us because of its large brains and that the change in the brain and
the consequent use of tools was necessary to reduce the size of the teeth. This hypothesis
really laid the groundwork for their identification of a new species. They called it Homo, believing
that it's closely related to us and that the brain is the most important feature that
relates it to us. And in addition to that, they gave it a species name, Habalus. Habalus,
which means able. This was a species that was able to make the tools that were found
at Olduvai Gorge. It became nicknamed Handyman, and that's sort of the way that we can think
about it. The first kind of creature in their hypothesis that was responsible for the traces
of the archaeological record that show us that humans were beginning to interact with
their environment in a new way. Well, no evidence about this could be clearer than the evidence
from the hand of Olduvai Haman in 7. You see, the hand bones of chimpanzees are very different
from ours. As we've seen, chimps have a relatively short thumb and very long fingers. That is
essential to their adaptation to climbing and suspension. Our fingers are much shorter,
our thumb is much longer, and that gives us the grip. We now know that that grip is not
something that's uniquely human. It's something that also occurs among Australopithecines,
something that we saw in Australopithecus operensis, for example. But what's interesting and unique
about the hand of Olduvai Haman in 7 is that at the tips of its fingers, what we call the
distal apical tufts, the little circles of bone that underlie basically your fingernails,
those are relatively broad, they're big, and those distal tufts are what we use to impose
force through our fingertips. If you're a Hamanan that wants to make stone tools, you
have, as we saw in the last lecture, to use the hand to grip onto those stone tools very
powerfully. That's something that Olduvai Haman in 7 would have been capable of. It's
something that Lucy's species, Australopithecus operensis, apparently wasn't as capable of,
because they don't have the very thick, broad fingertips that humans and Homo habilis does.
So, technology, in this sense, seems to be central to this shift to a species that has
a larger brain, that has manipulatory behaviors. It's able to do these things with its hands
that Australopithecus doesn't necessarily have the capacity for, and it has smaller teeth,
smaller teeth, which goes together with those tools, because we know that those tools were
used to process meat. So, we've got a dietary change that's driving the evolution of this
species. Mary Leakey went on to find a number of famous specimens of Homo habilis from Olduvai
Gorge. One of my favorites is OH16. This skull she found one morning, and it was beautifully
preserved. It was laying on the surface of the ground, and so she marked it, and then
she was going to go back later and excavate it properly. And in the intervening time,
before she got a chance to go back, a group of locals took their herd of cattle over the
very path that she'd found it on, and the skull was smashed into little bits. So today,
if you see the skull, it's smashed into little tiny pieces that have been painstakingly reconstructed,
many of which are missing. It's a sort of a sad story. It's not an uncommon one in paleontology,
but it's one that just makes your heart sort of sink, that, you know, we had great evidence
of this, and it was eventually lost. The most famous specimen of Homo habilis
today, however, is not any of the ones from Olduvai Gorge. It is a specimen called ER1470
from the east side of Lake Turkana. ER is for East Rudolph. The name of Lake Turkana used
to be Lake Rudolph. ER1470 has a very large brain compared to any of the other specimens
of Homo habilis. The size on the inside of it of 750 cubic centimeters, that's the largest
known for Homo habilis. It has, coupled with this large brain, a sort of a large face,
but it's not a very human-like face. It's a face that has roots for its molars and premolar
teeth that are substantially larger than ours. It's a face that's substantially flatter
than ours. It doesn't have a nose that projects out in front of the face. It's a skull that
doesn't have the kind of structures around it that we'll see in Homo erectus skulls.
It's a skull, in other words, that anatomically, again, sort of fits in between. It's Australopithecus-like,
in some respects, it's Homo-like, in other respects. ER1470, when it was found, was excavated
from a layer that was believed to be about 2.6 million years old, and this really would
have made it the oldest evidence of our genus that had ever been found. Richard Leakey really
emphasized the importance of this very early date for his specimen, and he believed, as
we've seen in comparison with Australopithecus operensis, that even more ancient forms of
habilis-like hominids might still be found. Well, later geological work revised the dating
of the layers of sediments around the east side of Lake Turkana. The site where ER1470
was found, Cubifora, has continued to yield more and more fossil evidence, but all of
that fossil evidence now is known, at least in terms of Homo habilis specimens, to be
later than about 1.95 million years old. So, like the old-device specimens, the Turkana
specimens are in the later-than-2-million-year time interval. They're fitting into an early
increment of the evolution of our genus, but they're not very much earlier than the known
early specimens of Homo erectus. That creates a bit of an issue. Is habilis a potential
ancestor of erectus if it existed at around the same time as erectus? This is a real problem.
Maybe these two are close relatives to each other that share another older ancestor, or
maybe there was an older group that was basically like habilis that gradually transitioned to
erectus, or maybe it's possible that habilis left Africa, established itself in Asia, and
as we know, the earliest specimens of erectus come from there at this time, so maybe this
is an evolutionary transition that we haven't found yet. These kinds of scenarios are all,
at the moment, possible. What's clear among the Homo habilis discoveries of Easter
Turkana is that there's a real difference between some of the specimens in terms of size.
ER1470, as we've seen, is a large specimen, but a little bit later in time, another specimen,
ER1813, is a very small specimen with a brain just over 500 cubic centimeters. Its brain,
its face, and its teeth are more Australopithecus-like than any of the other kinds of early Homo,
but it doesn't match any of the known Australopithecines. It's a littleish kind of cranium. A littleish
cranium, compared to a big cranium at the same time, that's what we often interpret as
being consistent with sexual dimorphism. If ER1470 was a male and ER1813 was a female,
well that might explain their differences in apparent size with each other. That contrast,
big versus small, however, has been explained by a number of paleoanthropologists as being
two different species. Maybe we're looking at a bigger kind of species and a smaller
kind of species. You see, even though ER1470 and ER1813 by themselves might look like one
was male and one was female, when we look at the old device sample, where we've got
a number of other specimens, we don't see any that have the features or the size of
ER1470. ER1470 starts to look like it's sitting by itself and not like it's the extreme of
a distribution. Many paleoanthropologists would call it a different species, Homo rudolphensis.
And so we've got potentially multiple species of Homo habilis-like hominids that are existing
at the same time in East Africa, at around the same time that we will see Homo erectus
that we will see Homo erectus also existing there, at around the same time that we also
have Australopithecus boisei, the robust Australopithecine in East Africa. This starts to look like
a part of the world that has an incredible density of hominin diversity. Well, there's
one major issue with early Homo that I haven't mentioned yet, but it's one that has created
more of a puzzle than any other. As we've seen, Homo habilis or Homo rudolphensis,
if they're two species, both have relatively larger brains than Australopithecus. They both
have potentially anatomy that's consistent with tool making, but what they don't have
is a body size that's anything like Homo erectus or later humans. Homo habilis is essentially
Australopithecus-like in the size of its body. We know this most well from a specimen called
OH62. OH62 was discovered in the 1980s when Donald Johansson, who was famous for finding
the Lucy skeleton, was unable to work in Ethiopia because of the political situation there.
He went to Olduvai Gorge to work, and at Olduvai Gorge, he found a partial skeleton of Homo
habilis. We know that it's Homo habilis because part of the upper jawbone is preserved and
we can see that it's got habilis-like teeth, but its skeleton is essentially like Lucy's
in size. It's a very tiny kind of hominin, and its arms are relatively even longer than
Lucy's arms. It looks like it has a more ape-like anatomy than even Lucy does. That's
an anatomy that seems also to be present in some of the skeletons in South Africa. Australopithecus
africanus has relatively long arms. So if we looked at that characteristic, we would say
that, well, maybe the East African version of Homo habilis is very much like, maybe related
to, or maybe descended from the South African Australopithecus africanus, and not necessarily
the East African Australopithecus afarensis. Afarensis, of course, has more human-like proportions
in this comparison. It's got shorter arms, relatively longer legs. So it starts to look
like Homo habilis might be a different kind of creature in some respect. It starts to
look like a different kind of creature in some respect. Maybe it traces its ancestry to some
branch that's actually quite different from the branch that gives rise to other forms
of Homo. Anatomists who've concentrated on that difference who've said that we're looking
at a kind of hominin that has an Australopithecus-like body size. It seems to have not especially
human-like teeth, although not as large as many kinds of Australopithecus, and it seems
to have proportions that are unusual compared to humans. Maybe we ought to call this Australopithecus
because it fits in with them better in an adaptive sense. Maybe for our ancestors we
should be looking for something else. Well, that raises an obvious question. What are
we looking for? The thing that we shared with Homo habilis was a relatively larger brain
than Australopithecus. And so it's sort of logical to think that if we're looking for
something that is our ancestor, either because it's a different ancestor than habilis, or
because it's our common ancestor with habilis, or it's an earlier form of habilis, we should
be looking for something with bigger brains than the known species of Australopithecine.
We might also be looking for something with smaller teeth, and teeth are real convenient
for us because we have a lot more of them in the fossil record than we have of anything
else. There are, in fact, a series of teeth from East Africa that are sort of habilis-like
in size that go back to as early as two and a half million years ago. Those East African
specimens, none of them preserve any of the upper part of the skull, the part that encases
the brain. So we can't say whether there might have been a bigger brain kind of hominin
in East Africa earlier in time. But we can say that the teeth that Australopithecus has
and that later Homo has are different from each other, and that there seems to be a Homo-like
dental adaptation in at least some of the fossil specimens in East Africa from before
two million years ago. Those fossils, one of the most distinctive of them, is actually
from the site of Hadar, the same site that produces Lucy, but about a million years later
in time, from about 2.4 million years ago. That Hadar specimen is an upper jaw, and that
upper jaw contrasts with the upper jaw of Australopithecus afarensis in many ways. One
of the major contrasts is that the teeth are a little bit smaller in size, but in particular
the back tooth, the third molar, is a little bit smaller. But more distinctive, the front
of this face, the part that leaves down to the incisors, is more vertical. The face's
vertical orientation and the reduction in size of the back teeth, that gives rise to
sort of a parabolic shape to the jaw, and that's something that we see in later Homo.
So there are candidate fossils, things that are in the right time and potentially the
right place to be an ancient form of something like Homo habilis. What we don't know about
them is what their brains might have been like.
Well, moving on and thinking about how we're going to resolve this debate, where does habilis
fit? Is it our ancestor? Is it not our ancestor? One of the most important fossil discoveries,
which is really made very recently in South Africa, is from a site called Malapa. Malapa
is a totally new site to science. They're not so hard to find these sites in South Africa
nowadays with technology, because the thing is that if you know the geology of the region
of South Africa that has limestone caves, and you've got a good aerial view of the region,
that today, of course, we can get by Google Earth, when you've got that kind of technology,
you can sort of look at the aerial imagery and try to pick out places that likely have
caves. And this is something that the scientist Lee Berger has been doing for the past several
years. And in 2009, he found one of these caves that seemed to have a lot of promise.
And it was actually his 10-year-old son, who chasing after the dog down into the pit where
this cave had been, stumbled across the first fossils out of the cave. As these were excavated,
it became clear that there were at least two relatively complete partial skeletons of a
kind of early hominin. Those two skeletons date to just around 2 million years old, and
they're different from earlier hominins. They're different from other forms of South African
Australopithecus in having extremely small teeth and a very grass-sile face. They don't
have big brains. The brain size of these skeletons is around about the same size as the brain
size of Australopithecus africanus. But these teeth are so much like the teeth of later
Homo. One of the skeletons, which is presumed to be an adult female, has teeth that are
more human-like than any of the teeth of Homo habilis that I've had the chance to examine.
They really make it look like the dental change, the change in the function of teeth, the change
in diet, might have been going on in a species that actually had a relatively small brain.
That creates a contrast with what we might have expected, thinking about the East African
record. We had small teeth, but we kept expecting that we would find a large brain that would
go with them, because the brain would be consistent with the early evidence of tool manufacture,
which begins at Gona, Ethiopia, as early as 2.6 million years ago. Looking for larger
brains, because we expect some sort of cognitive enhancement, some sort of increased abilities,
that may be misleading when we consider what the ancestry of humans actually was. When
we think about, from a perspective of ape behaviors, the kinds of flexibilities that
apes have in tool manufacture, making that transition to a new diet, one that involves
more animal protein, and is richer in terms of caloric input and protein input, that may
have had more of an effect on the teeth than it did on any other aspect of the anatomy,
including the brain. Malapa has become a very important site in thinking about what the
origin of homo may have been. Its comparisons are very puzzling. Compared to Australopithecus,
it's similar in the brain, it's also similar in its proportions, but that similarity, the
proportions of South African Australopithecus, is also a similarity with the proportions
of Homo habilis. We may be looking at the ancestor of Homo habilis. What remains as
a mystery is whether or not that ancestor is also the ancestor of other later humans.
To try to get at that question, of course, we'll have to consider what the variation
is in early Homo erectus, and how it compares to Homo habilis, it's existing at more or
less the same time in East Africa.
