Welcome back.
This lecture is about a really basic point of anatomy, and that's the size of the body.
But this really basic point has actually given rise to what is today one of the most,
I guess you could say, acrimonious debates in paleoanthropology.
And that is about the species Homo erectus.
How big was it?
We have, for really the past almost 25 years, thought that Homo erectus was, characteristically,
a really large species in terms of its body size, that it not only contrasted with Australopithecus
which was small in body size, but also it contrasted with more recent people in many cases.
The biggest piece of evidence for that is a skeleton from the west side of Lake Turkana
called the naryocotomy skeleton.
It's abbreviated WT-15000, and we often call it the 15K skeleton.
15K is the skeleton of about a 9 or 10 year old boy, and at 9 or 10 years of age it stood
about 5'7 or maybe even 5'8 inches tall.
We estimate on the basis of how complete naryocotomy's long bones were that it would have had several
inches more of growth, and so it would have represented an individual that stood over 6' tall.
If that was the average for its species, then we would expect that Homo erectus, represented
by this skeleton, was quite a tall species indeed.
But in the last few years, further discoveries have really caused us to revisit that claim,
and as we'll see, it wasn't the original idea of people who found Homo erectus that it was
especially large in body size.
So a debate has really emerged.
Is Homo erectus a fundamentally larger species than Australopithecus, and so much so that
that creates many kinds of contrasts in its anatomy and its behavior?
Is it big in the evolutionary sense, or is it more human-like in its body size, which
means that it has a real range of body sizes, different sizes of bodies and different habitats,
some of them potentially quite small?
How big was it, in other words?
And if we say that some specimens of Homo erectus were small, how small are we talking
about?
So it's a very basic debate.
It's one that seems like, like I said, it ought to be simple to resolve.
But I've got to tell you that there are today scientists who stand up at meetings and argue
with each other about this very point.
Is that skeleton really as big as you say it is?
Is it really the anatomical form that you say it is, or should it be reconstructed in
a different way?
To go back to where we are before the appearance of Homo erectus, it's helpful to really think
about where we are on the timeline and also what exists before the first evidence of
Homo erectus shows up in the fossil record.
We're talking today about really the period of time between about 1.8, 1.9 million years
ago, and about 1 million years ago.
It encompasses the first evidence of Homo erectus in Africa, in Asia, and in island
Southeast Asia, in Java.
So we're looking at a species that, at that point, is spread across at least parts of
two continents.
That species has fossil evidence from different places.
Much of the fossil evidence that we can recognize and really identify is fossil evidence from
the skull.
It becomes more difficult to associate bones of the rest of the skeleton with the cranial
remains, and I'll explain why that is.
Before 2 million years ago, the only hominins that we know of definitely existed were Australopithecines,
and the Australopithecines, like Lucy's skeleton, were relatively small in body size.
Females stood just over a meter in height, and so that really puts them just a bit above
my waist level.
Males were probably a little bit bigger than that.
They might have stood as tall as four and a half feet or so, but in terms of body size
compared to living people, they would be at a maximum around the body size of the smallest
statuered individuals in normal populations today.
Female pygmies in Central Africa, for example, sometimes are around that height.
So we're looking at hominins that, before 2 million years ago, really contrasted with
living people in terms of their body size.
With Homo erectus, the question is going to be, are they immediately really contrasting
with Australopithecus and having quite tall bodies, tall even compared to most living
human hunter-gatherers, or are they basically human-like in size, which would be a much
smaller increment of size increase compared to those earlier hominins?
Well with Homo habilis, it was quite clear that the earliest forms of hominins that we
often put into our genus were in fact Australopithecine-like in size, and those hominins persisted
alongside early Homo erectus, at least until a million and a half years ago.
So Homo erectus was emerging into an African habitat where there were already hominins
that were small-bodied who were already walking around.
I think of this as being very much like the scene at the end of Close Encounters of the
Third Kind, where you've got the aliens spilling out of the spaceship, and they're all little
toddler-sized aliens, and you've got this tall human that's walking around among them.
That's sort of what I envision Africa as being like a million and a half years ago.
You've got other kinds of upright walking bipedal creatures, which are all small in
body size.
You've got Homo habilis, you've got Australopithecus boisei, the robust Australopithecine, they're
all there coexisting, and among them you have some bigger individuals.
And the question that we really have before us is, how much bigger are we talking about?
Well, the earliest fossils that can be attributed to Homo erectus within Africa are fossils
that aren't especially diagnosable in terms of what their teeth and their skulls look
like.
We call them Homo erectus because they're big.
One example of this is a hip bone, side of a pelvis, from the east side of Lake Turkana.
That hip bone is substantially bigger than the hip bones of any of the other Australopithecines
that we know about, so we look at that hip, we look in particular at the socket joint
of that hip bone, the socket that in anatomical terms is called the acetabulum.
We see that the femur, the thigh bone that would have attached to this must have been
quite big.
That's a major way that weight is transmitted through your skeleton, of course, to the ground,
and the force that your skeleton transmits is the force of your body size.
So when we look at that joint and see, wow, it's really big, that makes us think that
we're looking at a big organism, something that's quite large.
We have big thigh bones from the east side of Lake Turkana that also date to the right
time period between about 1.8 million and about 1.5 million years ago.
Some of them are as long or longer than my thigh bone, and I'm a tall person.
I stand six foot two.
So when we're looking at these thigh bones, we could say that our estimate of what the
size of these individuals might have been, some of them must have been quite tall.
However, other thigh bones from the same deposits are actually quite short, and the average of
them is about an average that would indicate a person that stood about five foot five or
five foot six.
That's a nice average body size for humans today that live in non-developed industrial
countries, live in more small scale agricultural or hunter-gatherer type communities.
So when we're looking at the average, we're looking at somebody that is not stereotypically
a real elevated height individual.
What do we make of this?
Well, in East Africa, we for a long time had a problem.
If we find a fossil thigh bone and it doesn't have a jaw bone or a skull attached to it,
what species did it belong to?
Was this the thigh bone of something that we would call homeorerectus?
Was it a thigh bone of Homo habilis?
Was it a thigh bone of Australopithecus?
We have no way of telling because all of those species coexisted at the same time in
the same place.
So it becomes really difficult to take a distribution of body sizes from the fossil record and say,
we're looking at the body size of this ancient species, because in fact, we don't really
know which species we're looking at with any particular bone.
In that context, it's been, we've had a tendency, I would say, to look at the skulls and say
that, wow, Homo erectus has a much bigger brain size, a much thicker skull, much bigger
anatomy to its skull than Homo habilis does.
Take a basic contrast, at Olduvai Gorge, Olduvai homidinine is an extremely large skull.
It dates to about 1.2 million years ago, so it's a little bit after some of the earliest
evidence of Homo erectus, but it is the most massive in the fossil record in terms of the
extreme size of its brow ridge, very thick, and in terms of some of the thickness of its
bone, it has a brain that's over 1,000 cubic centimeters in size.
It's a big skull.
Next to it, one of the habilis skulls from the same site a little bit earlier in time,
but you can just see the tremendous contrast in size.
When you look at that contrast, it's very tempting to say, well, we're looking at a
much bigger organism here.
This is clearly something that's much bigger.
With other fossils, it is not so terribly obvious, and so our judgment in these matters
is really conditioned on the fossils that we have relatively complete skeletal evidence
about.
The most important of those is the naryocotomy skeleton, a skeleton from the west side of
Lake Turkana from an individual that died around 1.5 million years ago.
That individual was about nine or 10 years of age.
We can assess age both by looking at how complete the long bones are, because during the course
of your growth, the long bones, your thigh bones, your tibias, your shin bones, the bones
of your arm, they begin as three separate parts.
The end parts, the epithesis, those are relatively bony very early.
The middle part, the shaft, what we call the diaphysis, this is also relatively bony early.
The way that a bone grows is that there's cartilage in between the end of the bone and
the middle of the bone, and that cartilage is continually increasing in length, and as
it increases in length, it begins to ossify.
Bone cells invade it and lay down bone in the matrix of the cartilage so that it's a continuous
process of the bone getting longer and longer because the cartilage keeps growing and keeps
getting replaced by new bone.
We can tell how much growth is yet to go in many cases by looking at the extent to which
this process has been undergone by an individual.
Different bones ossify, become complete at different times, and the extent to which they've
grown varies with age.
So we can look at bone growth and talk about that, but of course in the case of a fossil
skeleton that we don't know grows in exactly the same way as living people, we have a bit
of a problem.
What if this was a species that wasn't going to be quite as big as living people?
Then we would infer that its skeleton at the size it is now is closer to being completed,
and it will be difficult for us to find evidence against that if what we have to go on is how
much the bones have grown.
So we can compare the amount of bone growth on this skeleton to the amount of dental development
that has occurred, because the major way that anthropologists have of finding out how old
a skeleton is, is by looking at where the teeth are in their development, different
teeth erupted at different times.
Now when we look at the teeth of the naryocotomy skeleton, these teeth are actually relatively
mature for an individual that is supposed to be 9 or 10 years of age.
That might indicate that the individual was older.
If it's older, it would have been closer to completion of its growth, and so we should
look for an adult stature which is closer to its current stature, something like 5'5',
5'6' maybe, instead of something like 6' or higher.
That basic disagreement, how much has this skeleton grown?
How much is there left to grow?
That's a basic disagreement that today is at the heart of many debates about the size
of Homo erectus.
It's hard to describe just how influential this skeleton has been to the study of human
evolution in the last 25 years.
When it was found and described and published in the late 1980s, people really lined up
every element of its anatomy, looking at its growth in comparison with Australopithecus
and in comparison with more recent humans, looking at the shape and size of its pelvis
in comparison with Australopithecus, it has a very narrow pelvis, a small pelvis.
In comparison with humans, it seems to have a more human-like shape to its pelvis than
Australopithecus does.
So here we have a contrast.
We've got a human-like pelvis, a human-like body size, a human-like arm-to-leg proportion.
There's even in this skeleton, if we compare the length of the thigh to the length of the
shin, that length in human populations today relates to climate.
People who live at high latitudes, who live in cold places, they tend to be a little bit
smaller in stature, they're shorter in other words, and they tend to be a little bit bigger
around.
And if you're thinking of what this looks like, think about the anatomy of an Eskomo
person.
These aren't the tallest people in the world.
They're stocky, they're also a little bit broader around, and they're adapted to living
in a cold place.
Their adaptation is one that reduces the surface area of the body relative to the mass of the
body.
And heat is produced through your mass.
The more mass you have, the more heat you can produce.
Heat is lost through your surface area.
The more skin you have, the more heat you lose.
And so if you can conserve heat by increasing mass and reducing surface area, that should
be an effective adaptation to the cold.
The naryocotomy skeleton, the proportion of its thigh bone to its shin bone, is just
the opposite because when a person reduces in stature to become adapted to the cold,
the shins reduce more.
The thigh reduces less.
So you get relatively short shin bones, relatively long thigh bones.
When you're adapted to a hot place, your legs become more elongated, your arms become
more elongated, your stature is taller, and your body becomes thinner.
So when we look at equatorial climate people today, we're looking at people who either
are very tall and linear in body form.
People like the people of East Africa, the Dinka people of Sudan.
They're very tall, they're very linear.
Or we're looking at people who might be short, like pygmies, but are short and very thin.
And it's that high surface area to low volume, low mass ratio that constitutes a heat adaptation.
When we look at the naryocotomy skeleton, it looks like it's adapted not to cold, but
to heat.
Sharing a climate adaptation, that looks like really convincing evidence that we've got
something that is human like in the way its body size relates to its climate, to its ecology.
And again and again, when people went to compare the naryocotomy skeleton with Australopithecus,
they drew out these contrasts.
Look at the naryocotomy skeleton in terms of its overall size.
If it really is bigger, if it stands something like six feet tall as an adult, and if we
look at Lucy, who stood something like three and a half feet tall as an adult, well that
makes a tremendous difference in how long their legs are.
The legs make a tremendous difference in how far you can walk with a given energy input.
If you're longer legged, you can walk farther with the same amount of energy.
How far you can walk with the same amount of energy, this determines how far you can
get away from water before you have to have another drink.
And so that impacts how big a range you can go over when you're looking for food.
So we can predict the home range from the stature if all of these things hold constant.
There is no aspect of the behavior and ecology of early Homo erectus that somebody hasn't
gone through and made this basic comparison.
Let's take the size of Australopithecus and blow it up, and then take the proportions
of the naryocotomy skeleton and shrink it down and see how those compare with each other.
And again and again, if you do those comparisons, you discover that early Homo would have had
many different aspects to its ecology than Australopithecus would have.
The only problem with this is we're not quite sure that it's true.
The reason why is that, as we've mentioned, the development of the naryocotomy skeleton
really impacts our ability to say how big it would have gotten.
There are some long femurs in the East African fossil record, so we know that there were
some tall individuals.
But what's tall, the average.
One of the best pieces of evidence that had suggested that it was was a partial skeleton
also from the East side of Lake Turkana, the opposite side from the naryocotomy skeleton,
called ER1808.
ER1808 is a partial skeleton and it had a unique disorder.
When you look at its bones, the outside surfaces of its bones had a really disorganized form
of bone growth.
The bone had overgrown on the outsides of these.
When Alan Walker, who described the skeleton, talked about it, he looked histologically,
he took sections of this, and he said, what's going on with the bone inside of the outside
surfaces of this bone?
He said, this disordered growth, well, it's a side effect that we often see when people
have had too much vitamin A. Vitamin A, hypervitaminosis is a condition where if you get too much
vitamin A, it's actually poisonous to you, and one of the reactions your body can have
is to have this bone growth that goes on.
He looked at this and said, ah, where do you get hypervitaminosis A in living people?
It turns out that the richest source of vitamin A, we all know about vitamin A from carrots,
but the richest source of vitamin A is actually eating liver, and in particular, if you eat
carnivore liver.
For Alan Walker, this discovery that we have hypervitaminosis in this skeleton became a
way of talking about how homeoeurectis was fitting into its ecology in a new way.
How does a hominin, which is helpless except for the weapons that it can carry, how does
that hominin get access to the livers of carnivores as a diet source?
The only way you can do it is by facing down the lions, by being basically the top predator
in your environment.
And so we had a story where homeoeurectis had really made a transition from being the
bottom of the food chain to being the top of the food chain, where Australopithecus had
been clearly subject to predation.
We find the scars of predator's jaws on Australopithecus remains.
It's not true of homeoeurectis, he said.
Well, that was the prevailing picture of homeoeurectis until about five or six years ago.
At that time, we had a transition to discovering that there were actually some rather small
skulls in East Africa that had erectus-like, not habilis-like characteristics.
One of these small skulls is ER42700, again, east side of Lake Turkana.
This one, a small skull that has a classic brow ridge, classic angulation on the back
of the skull, things that we've seen in Java man and other specimens of homeoeurectis,
but in a very small size, a brain size overall of less than 700 cubic centimeters, habilis
size in other words.
More important, even then, the East African evidence of small-bodied homeoeurectis is
the evidence that's coming from the very gates of Europe.
Diminici is, as I mentioned before, one of my most favorite paleoanthropological sites
today.
It's in the Republic of Georgia.
It's at a place that has a medieval church, and the churchyard has stonework, and people
who were excavating under this stonework found fossil remains that date to the early Pleistocene.
We now know that these remains date to around 1.7 to 1.8 million years.
They existed during an interval when East Africa had lots of lakes, as it does today,
but Diminici in Georgia was also the site of a large lake.
Very much like East Africa, that lake was formed by volcanism, and so when we see the
Diminici environment, we're looking at something that's outside of Africa.
At a very early time, the Diminici fossils today are the earliest known fossils that
we can say definitely, with cranial, dental evidence, this is homeoeurectis.
Those fossils are living in what is very much like an East African sort of environment with
species that occur in Asia and Europe.
So it's a really unique kind of place.
It's a place where humans are coming together with a different, a new ecology, an ecology
that the African continent didn't have to offer.
Well, unlike the Nereocotomy skeleton, it's very clear that the Diminici skeletons represent
somebody who's quite small compared to probably most of the people that you know.
We're looking at people who had a body size that was along the same lines as today's South
African hunter-gatherers, the Bushmen.
That's a body size where the males, the men, stand a little bit, just a shade over five
feet tall, sometimes five foot two, five foot three.
The women, usually shorter than five feet tall.
And that's the size that we have when we're looking at these fossil skeletons.
The skulls themselves are strikingly like East African and the Javan evidence for homeoeurectis.
They like them in having a brow ridge, they're like them in having a low cranial contour
and having an angulation in the back of the skull.
They're like them in having faces that have a nose that projects forwards, but the face
is more vertical, the teeth are tucked more underneath the brain case.
They don't look like homo habilis.
They don't look like Australopithecus.
They look like homeoeurectis, except for one thing.
Their brains are about 600 to 800 cubic centimeters.
They're smaller than the homeoeurectis that we have in most of that species range.
These are little people.
They're little homeoeurectis people.
I don't want to go too far overboard in describing them as small, because although their bodies,
their statues, as far as we can determine them are small, at least one of the crania
from this site, one that hasn't yet been fully excavated to date, but the jawbone has been
fully excavated, one of them has very large jaws, quite large teeth.
When we think about the range of variation among these early humans, the fossils that
we have indicate that that range of variation is more than you would see among people that
you drew randomly off the street, especially if you said that I'm going to take three or
four people at random and see how different they are in size.
You would never get jaws that are as different in size as the jaws that we have from this
one site in the early Pleistocene.
Homeoeurectis was, by this evidence, a variable species.
It was a species that had variation from place to place in terms of its body size.
This has developed over the course of the last few years that Homeoeurectis might have
been less human-like than a lot of us expected in some aspects of its anatomy.
The most important of these is the pelvis, one very important complete pelvis from Gona
Ethiopia, the same place that has produced the very earliest stone tools, but much later
in time.
Pelvis dates to around 1.2 million years ago.
One pelvis shows us that the reconstruction of the nearyocotomy pelvis, the one that made
it look very human-like, actually looks like it was in error.
The nearyocotomy pelvis was complete in the sense that we had bones that represented its
parts, but those bones were juvenile bones and they're broken around the edges in such
a way that made it very hard to reconstruct them.
The Gona pelvis is much more complete.
We can reconstruct it accurately, and it's the pelvis of an adult female.
Its pelvis indicates, on the one hand, that hip socket, that joint that we talked about
is being related to the size of the body.
It's quite small, so this pelvis belonged to a small individual, somebody that might
have stood something like five feet in height, certainly not a very, very large female skeleton.
It was female.
The way that its pubic bones come together, it's consistent with Lucy's anatomy and the
anatomy of other female humans in having an angulation that shows that this birth canal
is widely placed as large as it could be on the size of the pelvis that it is.
But also like Lucy's pelvis, this pelvis is oval-shaped.
It's wider from side to side than it is from front to back.
That's a real contrast with the pattern that's in a human female, with a much more circular
pelvic inlet, as we call it.
The form of the pelvic inlet is a major constraint on the birthing process, and so when we're
looking at a pelvis from a female, from Homo erectus, we're looking at the best evidence
that we have about the way that babies were born in that species.
That birth process in Homo erectus may have been much more Australopithecus-like than we
would have expected.
That slightly oval shape to the pelvis tells us that the baby's head, when it's entering
that birth canal, might have been heading in somewhat sideways instead of in the normal
human birthing pattern, really front to back.
Normal human babies, not all babies are born this way, and a substantial fraction are born
in atypical orientations, but the normal pathway is for the back of the skull to come out first,
and that allows the skull to deform and conform itself to the birth canal as it's coming out.
Homo erectus was almost certainly the first species for which the size of the baby began
to create a severe problem in contrast with the size of the female's pelvis.
Australopithecus had small babies, it was a small species.
A little bit of growth to what is today a human hunter-gatherer type size is enough
to create more of a conflict.
Giving birth to bigger babies, which is part of becoming a bigger species, creates its
own constraints, and we can study those constraints by looking at the anatomies that support them.
So in terms of where we understand this today, it's very clear that Homo erectus was not
a gigantic species compared to living humans.
It instead had a range of body sizes which was similar to humans today in body size.
There were places where we find Homo erectus where we find nobody that was real tall, so
it looks like there were populations that might have varied in body size, just as there
are populations today that vary in body size.
Homo erectus wasn't totally human under the neck.
There was still a lot of evolution that was going to happen in different aspects of its
anatomy, in particular its pelvis.
But that contrast in size from Australopithecus and Homo habilis, which were small, to a human-like
body size, that contrast laid the groundwork for the adaptation of this species to a broader
geography, to existing in multiple continents with larger ranges with what is probably a
hunting and gathering type of adaptation.
