Welcome back.
Today's lecture deals with what is, to my mind, one of the most mysterious aspects
of our evolutionary history, certainly within the past million years.
It's about a division between East and West.
On the East side of Eurasia, in China, Southeast Asia, there's consistently, over the course
of the past million years, a different kind of archaeological remain, and to some extent
a different kind of fossil hominin that occurs in the Western part of the human range, in
Europe, West Asia, and Africa.
That division is one that appears to have been really persistent over time, but it's
one that's very difficult for us to explain.
Why should it be that these ancient people who are, by all appearances, able to move
very effectively across their landscapes, who are able to occupy relatively large home
ranges and walk long distances, who are able to adapt to new habitats really rapidly, which
we can see from the fact that they dispersed from Africa in the first place to spread throughout
the rest of the world?
When we think about their adaptability, it becomes a bit of a puzzle.
Why should we see consistent differences from place to place if the people were able to
move so easily from one place to another?
That interesting aspect of the archaeological fossil record is most clear when we consider
the time period between about a million and a half million years ago, when most of the
rest of the world, in the West, was using a technology called the Ashulean technology.
The Ashulean technology is based essentially on large bifacial tools.
A bifacial tool is a large rock that's been flaked on both sides, that's bifacial.
When you flake it on both sides and make a sharp edge all the way around, well then you
end up with an object that we call a hand axe.
Hand axes are typically sort of tear drop shaped, pointed on one end more so than on
the other end.
They're generally oval and sometimes they range to being purely oval, sometimes they're
almost circular, but in all cases they're relatively thin sort of lens shaped objects
that are sharpened around all the edges.
A few years ago, people found these kinds of hand axes in the south of China in an area
called the Bosa Basin, and that's really uncharacteristic of the archaeological record
of the rest of China or indeed of the rest of East Asia.
That find, finding something somewhere where you didn't expect it, it wasn't characteristic
of the area where you were looking, but it was characteristic potentially of somewhere
very far away.
That kind of find tells you that there's something interesting going on that you don't understand.
Was it a group of people that dispersed to this new place and carried their technology
with them, or were there circumstances that made it so that this technology could take
hold in that part of the world, but not in the neighboring areas over large spans of
the Asian continent?
So today's debate is really about how to explain this distribution.
The distribution is real, things are different in the east and the west, but we can explain
that in several possible ways.
One way to look at it is maybe this is because there were really fundamentally different kinds
of hominins that occurred in the eastern part of our range and the western part of our range.
Maybe we're looking at different species, for example.
If so, then it could very well be the case that one species dispersed early, got to east
Asia, established itself there, had a technology that worked for it, and then later in western
part of Asia and Europe and Africa, another technology took hold, but wasn't able to spread
into the east because there were already other kinds of people there.
That's one scenario, but another scenario is that there's something different about east
and west that made these tools work better in different parts of this continent.
Maybe there was something about the Asian ecology that made it so that different kinds
of stone tools were the most effective ways for people to try to adapt to that local environment.
Maybe there's something about the west that took a different kind of tool.
This phenomenon, east versus west, was first noticed by an archaeologist named Hallimovius.
He was working in the 1940s, and as he first initially had worked in France, he became
very, very familiar with the European upper paleolithic record, but as he dug deeper down,
he became more familiar with the European middle and lower paleolithic records.
This was really archaeology that today we understand goes back to something like 300
or 400,000 years ago at the very base of the sites where Movias was working in Europe.
At the base of those European sites is the Ashulean type technology.
Ashulean technology is based on these large bifacial tools, the characteristic tool is
a handaxe, and these things are so common and so recognizable in the archaeological record.
If you're digging a site and you've got a large tool that's flaked all the way around
on both sides, it's sharper on the edges, it's sort of pear shaped, that's a handaxe.
There's nothing else that looks like that, and there are a lot of them.
Well, after he had worked in Europe for some years, Movias started to go to other parts
of the world to study the archaeology, study the assemblages that people were developing
there.
He went to Southeast Asia.
He went ultimately to China, and he was finding things that didn't seem to accord with what
he understood from the archaeological record of Europe.
When he looked in West Asia, when he looked in the western part of India, he saw that
there were these Ashulean handaxes again and again and again.
He didn't know for sure that they all represented the same time, but they certainly seemed to
represent some continuous kind of culture, something where the people were making the
same kind of tool again and again.
But in the east, he didn't find that.
In the east, the handaxes were rare.
And that really gave him a message.
There was a fundamental split between the technologies of east and west.
Movias characterized this as Ashulean-like in the west.
West Asia, everywhere basically west of a line that extended from the Ganges River to the
west, from northeastern India, upwards northwards and westwards.
We found Ashulean west of there, and we knew that Ashulean handaxes were already being
discovered by Lewis and Mary Leakey at Olduvai Gorge.
This was the archaeology of the west, and it meant old, wherever you found it.
But in the east, he was finding a different kind of technology, a technology that became
known as the chopper-chopping tool technology.
From the archaeology that we've seen so far in the course, this would be most similar
to what the Olduvai-type technology was like.
Technology that's based on simple flaking tools, making cores that end up with sharp
edges that become choppers, potentially, but not flaking those cores intensively, bifacially.
Not making the kind of handaxe-like artifacts that were so common in the west.
That split, east and west, became known as the Movias line, because it was Movias who
first identified it.
When we think about these technologies, understand that technology is the way that people use
to adapt to what their needs are, what their ecology is.
When we find humans making a certain kind of tool, the natural thing for us to do is
to try to explain exactly what goal they had in mind, why they were trying to make this
tool, what purpose did it serve.
There is no kind of tool in the archaeological record that this has been done more for than
handaxes.
A handaxe is, in principle, quite a simple kind of artifact.
What it is, it's a fist-sized rock, it's got a sharp edge all the way around.
Functionally, you think, what can I use this for?
Well, you can use it for anything that you'd want to cut, because it's got the sharp edge,
but it's not necessarily the most effective thing if you're going to cut something that
requires a lot of fine work.
That's sort of like taking a butcher knife and using it to very finely fillet a little
fish or something.
You wouldn't want to do that.
So when we think about a handaxe, it's typically something that we would think might be used
to disarticulate the limbs of animals, so you can get a large cutting tool in between
the bones.
You might think about it as skinning potentially a very large animal where the skin is relatively
thick and takes some force, and a big blade might help with that.
We know from the wear on the surfaces of these handaxes, as they're used, tiny microscopic
scratches can occur.
Sometimes they catch material in the tiny notches on the edge of them, and you can see
that if you look at it with a microscope.
When you look at that kind of use wear, we can discover that sometimes they're used
on plants, sometimes they're used on wood.
So it's in some sense what many archaeologists have called the Paleolithic Swiss Army Knife.
It's useful for all kinds of things potentially, of course limited by the fact that it's sort
of a big thing.
Those big cutting tools seem to have been really useful for people.
They made them a lot.
So much so, in fact, that at some sites, handaxes literally are littering the ground.
There's a place called Ulurgacyli in Kenya where an ancient living floor is exposed,
and you can see that there are hundreds of handaxes assembled around this living floor
so that people were really intensively making these things.
They were gathering in one place, they were discarding them, maybe they were gathered
a little bit by water action, but clearly there was a very intensive use of this technology
at one place over a relatively short period of time in an archaeological sense.
People seem to be making an awful lot of these things, and so it becomes even more of a puzzle
when we look at the eastern part of Asia and people weren't making them hardly at all.
Why is it that they're so common in one part of the world?
Why do handaxes seem to be so important, and in the other part of the world, they're not common at all?
Well, people have really speculated about whether handaxes might have some other purpose
that would have differed between these parts of the world.
Some archaeologists argue that, well, handaxes are really quite a specialized kind of thing.
They're not especially, they might be used for cutting and so on,
but what they're really for is for throwing almost discus-like to try to take down animals from a distance.
People have done experiments to see if they really work that way.
I tell you that you don't really want a handaxe if you're going to go and throw a rock at an animal
and try and break it down. You'd be a lot better off taking two roundish rocks and making a bolo out of them
by bringing down the legs, but I have to admit it's possible that with a good aim you could do some damage on an animal.
Some people say, well, the handaxes, they're so symmetrical, and that's one of their aspects.
They are symmetrical. When you look at them, the left and right side are usually mirror images of each other,
and that's a shape that seems to have a lot of resonance for people.
Why do they make this shape again and again? Maybe it's because they were attracted to that shape.
Maybe it's because the shape meant something to them.
If that's true, of course, it doesn't necessarily have to have meant the same thing for every kind of person.
So maybe they had a significance in some societies that they didn't have in others.
That significance has been examined in some detail in certain respects.
Handaxes are symmetrical, but as people develop finer and finer abilities to make them,
they do get finer, they get more finely crafted, they look like nicer kinds of artifacts.
In those cases, sometimes strange things happen.
For example, there are a few handaxes that have little fossil shells.
The natural rock that handaxes can be made out of is sometimes sedimentary rock that includes fossils.
And so those fossil shells that are embedded sort of centrally in the handaxe,
people look at that and say, wow, maybe these people had a conception of the symmetry,
and this is something that just pleased them. It's like a curiosity.
Could be. Sometimes the edges of them are, it seems deliberately just chanted off a little bit
so that they're not perfectly symmetrical.
And to some archaeologists, that has meaning.
Maybe they're deliberately doing this in some respect.
It's a real puzzle, the handaxe.
My tendency is to think that handaxes are what they are.
They're useful, they're easily transmitted, easily learned,
because once you see that shape, it's something that sticks with you,
so that you're automatically going to make that shape again and again.
My tendency is to think that if there's a difference between east and west,
we need to look for it in terms of explaining it by the humans that we're making them,
either the nature of the humans themselves or their interactions with their environments.
To think about this, it's useful to go to China and see what the fossil humans there look like.
The fossil humans in China, really the record begins during the 1920s,
when a Canadian named Davidson Black is there in Beijing,
he's working basically as a doctor and he's going around and he's interested in fossils.
Well, in China, the collection of fossils is sort of systematized,
because it's part of their natural pharmaceutical regimen.
They'll collect fossils from caves, they'll grind them up,
and they use this as treatments for various kinds of disorders,
sort of a homeopathic remedy.
And so the way to collect fossils in China in the 1920s was to go to drugstores
and see if they've got something interesting.
Well, Black discovered it in a drugstore, a human tooth that looked like it had some great antiquity,
and so he started to investigate where are these things coming from.
Where they were coming from was a place that in Chinese is called Dragon Bone Hill,
but when we look at the word for this, it's Zhekou Chen.
And Zhekou Chen became one of the most important fossil discoveries of the early 20th century.
Black first investigated the site, then he died, wasn't able to work it obviously,
and so it was a German scientist, Franz Weidenreich, who went to Beijing,
started working at Zhekou Chen, conducted the rest of the excavations,
and reconstructed and interpreted the fossils.
Weidenreich is really one of my heroes in science.
As I mentioned, he's a German.
In the early 1930s, he's a Jewish person in Germany.
He leaves Germany, he escapes, but he's a man without a country,
and he was unable at that time to obtain a visa to get to the United States.
He had to find somewhere to go.
The Rockefeller Foundation, who was funding scientific work in paleoanthropology
quite broadly at that time, sponsored him to go to China to work at this site.
So Weidenreich, an eminent anatomist, very smart man,
but sort of outside the English and American traditions of paleoanthropology,
goes to do what is essentially incredible work on this new fossil discovery.
Well, when Weidenreich gets to China, he begins to reassemble the fossils,
and he makes careful casts of them.
These casts today are all that we have left of the discoveries that Weidenreich made,
because at the onset of World War II, as the Americans became involved,
well, this was the same time that Japan had already invaded China
and was making substantial advances toward Beijing.
And so the fossils had to be packed,
and they were going to be shipped out of the country.
Weidenreich, as a man basically without a passport, had to escape before them,
and so while he carefully packed the fossils,
he arranged for their delivery onto the ship that would bring them to the United States.
He was unable to accompany them.
That's the last that anybody has ever seen of what was the P. King Man discoveries.
That's one of the great mysteries in science.
Many people have written books, novels, adventure stories.
What happened to P. King Man?
There are all kinds of stories about this.
Some people say that they were taken captive by the Japanese and returned to Japan
and that they still exist there somewhere.
Others say that it was a Japanese scientist that had taken them
and they were buried along with him in the ground.
It's probably most likely that the P. King Man fossils, after they were packed,
were lost either in the course of being taken to the port
or I think probably most probably were on the ship that they were scheduled to be on,
which was sunk.
December 7th, 1941, the onset of World War II, we all know it as Pearl Harbor Day,
but in fact the Japanese attacked American shipping all over the Pacific,
and one of those ships was the one that was scheduled to carry these fossils to the United States.
So it's likely that the fossils are on the bottom of the Yellow Sea.
It's possible that they were taken by somebody and are still unrecognized.
There's still an official organization that tries in China to recover these.
So it's possible that we'll get the fossils back, but I have to say it's not real likely.
Meanwhile, what we have is the Cass, and we have Weidenreich's interpretations of them.
P. King Man is of such fundamental importance.
Weidenreich recognized right away that the features that this had were very similar to the features of fossils from Java.
Those fossils were already called erectus.
We call them today Homo erectus, at the time they were called Pythocanthropus.
Weidenreich erected a new species to describe his fossils, Sinanthropus pecanensis.
But in Weidenreich's point of view, these names were not strictly really important.
They were names that we call things because it's convenient to have names for things.
For Weidenreich, he saw these two samples, one from the north of China and one from the extreme south, Southeast Asia.
He saw these two samples as being continuous, as representing one species that had differences in different places.
He also saw connections between this population and the population of the west.
It's in recent years that those connections have been the most at issue, because when we look at the fossils in the east,
they have characteristics like a very sloping forehead, a prominent brow ridge.
In China, the Zhokochen fossils have arching brow ridges that go over both of the eyes.
In Southeast Asia, in Java, those fossils have relatively flat brow ridges that go from side to side.
So there are differences in these different places.
In Weidenreich's point of view, those differences were consistent with the kind of differences we see between people now.
They were racial differences in that sense.
He also thought that a similar pattern of difference obtained between the eastern populations and the western populations.
He saw these things as connected to each other in space.
But in recent years, people have looked at these same samples and said,
well, I don't see the kinds of connections that you're arguing.
If we go back to the African fossils that we've already seen of early Homo erectus,
think about the Nereocotomy skeleton.
Here's a skeleton with a skull that has a slightly more vertical forehead than we saw in the east,
that has a more grassile, a less pronounced brow ridge,
that has the back of the skull not angulated, but a little bit rounder.
When we look at other African fossils, for example, the specimen KNMER from the east side of Lake Turkana, 3733,
we see similar kinds of things.
They're built more lightly.
They're a little more compact in the skull.
They seem to be a little bit rounder.
That difference has been really accentuated by some paleontologists who say,
well, what we've got is two different species of things.
In the east, we're looking at Homo erectus.
That's where we found it.
But in the west, we're looking at something else, something that's potentially a closer relative to us,
more of an ancestor than in the east.
They call that species Homo ergaster.
There has been, for about 30 years, a real trend toward interpreting these differences
as differences that reflect species that are really distinct populations.
One argument against that is given by a famous fossil that was found by Louis Leakey in Olduvai Gorge.
That fossil, Olduvai Hominin 9.
OH9 is an African fossil.
It's slightly younger than the earliest African fossils that we've already seen.
That fossil is very much like the Homo erectus that occurs in the east.
It has a very thick brow ridge.
It has a skull that is relatively flat, that has a very receding forehead,
that has a distinct angulation at the back of the skull.
Those characteristics, they're characteristics that Weidenreich recognized in China.
They're characteristics that have been recognized in the fossil record of Java.
This seems to indicate a continuity.
It's the same kind of thing potentially in those places.
What's different between Africa and East Asia is mostly time.
The earliest part of the African record doesn't have the extreme of the expression of the characteristics
that would later become common and be found in Africa and in the east.
There's a real argument that the populations of these hominids were somewhat different,
but not so different necessarily that we would call them different species.
In terms of what that would mean behaviorally, of course, it's very difficult for us to say.
When we return to this question of the Movias line,
and is there a real reason why in the east they make one sort of thing
and in the west they make a different kind of thing,
it's not easy to point to biology and say that the humans are different.
They could have been, but it's not obvious that they were.
We can turn to other kinds of explanations.
The most compelling of these explanations involve ecology in some way.
One kind of ecological explanation is that these might have been the same kind of people in these places,
but that doesn't mean that there was the same number of them.
If in one part of the world there had been a denser population, more people per unit area,
they would have had more opportunities to exchange ideas.
They would have had a greater facility for using technology and for keeping it going.
And so maybe what we're looking at when we see the Ashulean is their ability to keep this technology going.
It was useful for them, they accentuated it, and they had the population to keep it up.
Whereas in the east, possibly, their population wasn't as dense.
They weren't able to keep these ideas going quite as easily.
Well, that's certainly a possible interpretation.
We don't have any evidence at the moment that would confirm it,
but it does fit with what we know about the exchange of ideas.
A more direct kind of explanation involves the ecology in a very concrete sense.
If we look at where the Mobius Line is, sort of stretching from the northeastern corner of India, north and westward,
well, at the southern end of this, the India versus southeast Asia transition,
this corresponds relatively well with the natural distribution of bamboo.
Bamboo is a grass, but it's a very tall, very woody kind of grass.
And like all grasses, its stems grow in layers.
Those layers make extraordinarily good cutting surfaces.
Many of the hunter-gatherer peoples of southeast Asia and the early farming peoples of southeast Asia were using bamboo intensively.
With bamboo, all you have to do is take a stem, cut it so you need a sharp edge to cut it with,
but once you've cut it, you've got a sharp edge in the bamboo,
and when it becomes dull, you sort of peel off one layer and it's sharp again.
So people are using bamboo knives that have this property that they're highly disposable.
They're obviously not something that's going to show up in the archaeological record,
but they're so much more useful than a tool made of stone and so much easier to get
that they just replace stone as a technology where they're available.
Does bamboo explain the distribution? Does bamboo explain the Mobius line?
I sort of like that idea because it tells us that we can test this with reference to what we can see in the ecology today.
There really are some differences east and west, and maybe what we're looking at archaeologically is the difference.
It also tells us that where we find hand axes in the east, we find them in Korea, for example.
We find them in the Bosa Basin of China. We have to investigate intensively to see
if those places had the ecology that would have supported this kind of bamboo
or whether they had an ecology that was rather more similar to the ecology of the west.
If those places turn out to be the places where you make the Ashilean type tools
because you don't have the other things, then that really fits that explanation very well.
Well, to sort of consider this problem moving forward in time, in the west,
the Ashilean ultimately gives way to other technologies, middle paleolithic type technologies.
And in the east, the chopper chopping tool technology gradually gives way to other kinds of things,
and that transition is going on after 300,000 years ago, so things move forward in those places.
But in many respects, the eastern part and the western part of the human range
still remain relatively distinct in archaeological terms.
It still sort of looks like there's a difference that persists over time between east and west.
The way that today we can get some information about this is actually from ancient genomes.
There is a unique fossil from the Altai Mountains in the southern part of Siberia.
The fossil is really a piece of bone. It's not fossilized.
It's a skeletal remain, and it's part of a pinky bone.
This pinky bone is from a site called Denisiva Cave.
In Denisiva Cave, its pinky bone preserves a complete genome that we've recovered,
and that complete genome tells us that this individual represented a population
that was very distinct in some ways from the populations of the west.
Now we're going to talk about Neanderthal genetics in some detail,
and that comparison of the Denisiva genome with a Neanderthal genome
and the comparison of those two genomes with, of course, the genomes of living people,
it actually tells us quite a lot about the population structure that occurred
within the east and the west during the Middle Pleistocene,
around 200 to 500,000 years ago.
That time period is one that, when we look at these genomes, looks like there was a diversification,
a branching that had occurred between an eastern population represented by this Denisiva specimen
and the western population represented by Neanderthals.
That branching seems to have occurred with little movement back and forth,
and that's despite the fact that nearby the Altai Mountains we have Neanderthal specimens
that have yielded some DNA that are very similar to the Neanderthals that live further west.
It really does look like there was a division between east and west
that's characterized and evidenced by these genomes.
Now, our study of genomics is going to continue.
This is a field that I actually, my lab, actively investigates,
and we're discovering new things about these genomes every day.
But when I think of the Movias line and the way that it relates to our record of evolution in the past,
that just brings forward the idea that when we look at genomes,
we're finally able to test ideas about these paleontological distributions.
It's a really exciting time for us to be able to integrate these sources of evidence.
And so when we think about the Movias line today, we can show that it really is different between east and west.
The difference is not especially easily explained by saying that there were distinct kinds of hominids in east and west.
We don't know that their minds were different, for example,
but we can show that at least over much of this time there were diversified populations in east and west
that were somewhat genetically different from each other.
But the ecology is probably where we're going to find an even more convincing explanation
because as we're able to test the distribution of things that we find,
we'll be able to match whether those things make sense in an ecological framework.
