Welcome back.
It's really remarkable in some cases what we can tell from the archaeological or the
fossil record about the lives that individual people in the past lived.
There's a real forensic ability that we have to investigate the events that happened in
individual lives that gave rise to the scars on their skeleton, or that gave rise to odd
morphologies to some of the things that we discover, or that explain the distribution,
the scatter of things that we find with them, or where we find them.
When we are looking into the past to interpret the events of human evolution, sometimes
these little individual things can get lost.
But there are many aspects of human behavior that are really built out of the individual
decisions that people make, and how they interact with each other.
It's that aspect of our evolution that I want to talk about in this lecture, the aspect
of whether we can interpret people's interactions with each other, and whether we can show that
the human-like qualities of cooperation and compassion are present in the archaeological
and fossil record.
To give an example of interpreting the behavior of individuals from their skeleton, I want
to turn to the Neanderthals, which is where we have the richest evidence of this individual
aspect of what lives were like.
One really clear aspect of some Neanderthal individuals is the amount of wear that they
have on their teeth.
When your teeth erupt, when they come into your mouth, they're unworn, and during the
course of your life, as you're using them, they will have wear on them, just like any
tool that you use will tend to wear out.
Well with teeth, this wear forms a regular pattern, it's a pattern called dental attrition,
and it tends to show the evidence of grinding in the back of the mouth and clamping in the
front of the mouth so that every tooth is wearing down along a level.
But there are some Neanderthals that have a very different pattern of wear to their
teeth, a pattern in which the wear is tilted toward the outside of the incisors, both on
the top and on the bottom.
This outside surface showing that it's being worn as something is being dragged across the
teeth and pulled down or being pulled up.
That kind of wear is very distinctive, it occurs in several specimens.
What it's telling us is that those individuals were probably using their teeth for a certain
kind of tool production.
They're probably using their teeth to strip leather and soften it, and that repetitive
motion is wearing their teeth off in a curved pattern that's curving toward the outside.
We also find Neanderthal teeth have scratches on the incisors sometimes, and those scratches
tend to be tilted.
The reason why teeth get scratches on them in a hunting and gathering society in ethnographic
terms is people will take chunks of meat and big chunks, you say, well, how are you
going to eat a big chunk, you can obviously chew on it, but lots of people will take
a stone tool and cut on that meat after they've clamped it in their mouth to cut it apart.
If you're cutting at an angle like that, it's going to make scratches on your incisors
once in a while at a similar angle.
The incisors of Neanderthal teeth tend to be scratched in a direction that's consistent
with them using the tool in their right hand, much more often than scratched the opposite
direction consistent with left-handedness.
So we've got evidence from the archaeological traces on the human skeleton that Neanderthals
were probably right-handed in a very much similar proportion to recent people being right-handed
more so than left-handed.
Is that kind of trace on the skeleton that gives us the potential to have a window on
the behaviors of individuals?
How would we know about handedness?
How would we know about their possible processing of leather in this way if we didn't have
that kind of record?
And yet some individuals lived what we might consider today to be catastrophic lives.
The clearest example is a skeleton from a site called Shenadar, which is a cave in
northern Iraq.
This cave is one of the places where Neanderthals lived in West Asia, and they lived there
approximately 45,000 to 70,000 years ago.
The first skeleton to be described from this site, Shenadar 1, the first skeleton has something
very odd about it.
One of its arm bones, the upper arm bones, the humerus, is perfectly normal in its anatomy.
The other arm bone is withered away.
It looks like a tiny stick that is missing its end.
This is a person who had his arm amputated during the course of his life.
It's not the only amputation known from Neanderthals, there's another upper arm bone and lower
arm bone from Crapina that show evidence of the arm having been severed during life.
It's that kind of event that we look at and we say, how did this unfold?
And how did this person survive what must have been grievous injuries?
Was this a case where we can show that there's cooperation in the archaeological record?
Well, that really gives the context to this debate about what does it take to show evidence
of cooperation from the fossil record?
Can we look at instances like this and interpret them as evidence about the cooperation of
individuals?
Can we take a specimen like Shenadar 1 and say that other individuals in his group must
have been taking care of him, must have been giving him some compassion that allowed him
to survive his injuries?
And what was it about him that enabled other people to say, we really value this person
and we want to give him the assistance he needs to survive?
Or is every case possibly distinct?
Is it the case that the sum of all of these things in the archaeological record is still
too weak to show that we have a systematic ability to cooperate and show compassion for
each other?
It's about the quality of evidence.
It's not about the evolution of the trait necessarily.
It's about what does it take for an archaeologist to demonstrate that we have a clear case
where somebody needed some help in the archaeological record?
Well, when we think about how it is that humans interact with each other, we have to think
about the kinds of groups that we're talking about.
Groups of primates are really varied in how many individuals live in a group and in what
the pattern of that group life is.
For example, do males disperse to other groups?
Do females disperse to other groups?
When you're living with a number of other individuals, is there one male there or are
there many males there?
Chimpanzees have a population structure that's called a fission fusion society.
Fission fusion meaning that a group of chimpanzees will occupy one area, a home range, and within
that area will be something like 30 to 70 chimpanzees, but something like 30 to 50 in
most places.
That group will divide up into smaller task-oriented units to go looking for food, and they might
not get together except for once in a while, but the entire community will fuse at certain
points to do some kinds of social interactions.
That fission fusion lifestyle is made possible by the large home rangers that chimpanzees
have and a pattern of cooperation among males, multiple males living in the same area, defending
their territory from incursions from males in other groups.
That kind of group life is something that is found in chimpanzees, bonobos, some other
kinds of primates.
It's certainly within the capacities of any kind of hominin in terms of social interactions,
but it hasn't been clear whether that kind of group living was actually present in the
archaeological or fossil record.
The only clear case in Australopithecus where we can talk about group living is a site called
AL333.
AL we've seen before, this is the same kind of number that Lucy has, and that's because
this site is in the Hadar area of Ethiopia.
AL333 is a site where a couple of dozen different individuals of Australopithecus were buried.
We've got that minimum number of individuals from the different skeletal parts that are
represented.
It's not obvious what happened to bring all of these people together into one place.
For a long time, people thought that what had happened was that these individuals had
died and been carried to one place in a catastrophic flood, that they were caught in a flash flood,
that they were buried in the flood sediment.
But nowadays, it looks like it's not a flood that explains their distribution.
The actual sediments that they're embedded in don't look like they've been transported
very far by water.
Instead, nowadays, we tend to think that it might be carnivores that ambushed a group
of hominids at the same place at the same time.
But whatever accounts for this, it's very unusual to find a group of individuals together
where there are kids, adults, both young and old adults, all buried together in one place,
males and females.
One of the key aspects of the AL333 assemblage is that there are multiple adult males there.
This is a case where it looks like hominids were group living in the sort of way that
chimpanzees were, but it's a unique instance.
It's really the one site in the early part of the human fossil record where we can say,
we think we've got individuals that are living together.
There are later sites where we also have individuals that arguably were living together.
For example, Atapuerca in Europe, the site that's at the bottom of a pit in a cave because
people were buried in there, we've got that evidence of many adolescents and young adults,
a few older adults, a few kids.
It looks like that's representing part of at least a natural group.
When we think about what that group's composition is in terms of males and females, it's very
much like a hunter-gatherer group today.
Human hunting and gathering is based on a sort of cooperation.
That cooperation is a very basic level of cooperation in the sense that males are pursuing
one kind of resource, meat, and females are pursuing other kinds of resources, and in
order to make their adaptation maximally effective, they share food with each other.
Food sharing is seen in other kinds of primates, so you can make this happen without having
a human-like ability to cooperate and communicate with each other, but it's very clear that
human hunting and gathering depends on the obligation to share with your group members
in a greater respect than chimpanzees are obligated to share with each other.
Looking at the earliest stone tools, archeologists who were initially investigating these at
Olduvai Gorge were trying to interpret what the scatter of stone tools meant in terms of
where groups would use their space.
Was it the case that hunting and gathering was enabled by living in one place and getting
resources and bringing them back to that home base?
That's a pattern that we do see in living human hunter-gatherers.
People will go out and forage, they'll be looking for food, they'll be hunting, but
at the end of the day, they'll tend to return back to one place.
If we could show that there were those kinds of central places in the archeological record,
that would help to substantiate that people were cooperating with each other in a human-like
way.
Initially, the early excavations at Olduvai Gorge seemed to be showing that there were
what we call living floors, places where people were accumulating in the past and were bringing
things back with them.
They were making stone tools there so that there were scatters of tools.
They were bringing back animals to eat, and so there were animal bones there, and you
found all of these things together.
But there was a difficulty of interpreting sites like this, and that's when you're digging
an archeological site, even if you're finding things in a fairly restricted area and you
think, well, this is where people brought stuff.
It turns out that when people brought that stuff there could vary over a very long period
of time.
One little level in an archeological site might represent a soil surface that existed
sometime in the past, but that was the soil surface between major events when new sediments
were laid down there, and so you could be looking at a thousand years of time in one
archeological scatter.
It's very difficult to say that the things that you find there were all left by the same
people.
Now, the fact that you find them together does sort of help, because it shows that the people
were coming together, but people can come together at different times if there's something
there that brings them there.
If this is the right place near the water source where you can see things and be at
minimum risk of predators, or if it's a shady spot because a tree has been growing there,
that's a reason why people would come to the same exact place at very different times.
Interpreting these archeological sites is very difficult.
It was Lou Binford, who we've seen before in his arguments about the archeological record,
who argued that we couldn't show that early Oldowan people had been using home bases.
And for the past 30 years, a series of different archeologists have reinterpreted different
sites at Oldivy, where scatters of stone tools are found.
Some of those stone tools clearly represent what we would call ephemeral scatters.
They used the place at one time, probably because that's where they killed an animal,
or they killed an animal and dragged it a short distance, and then they processed the
animal and left.
And so you find the evidence of one time that people were there, a real individual instance
in the archeological record.
But in at least one case, the site called FLK Zinge, which is basically the same site
where Lewis and Mary Leakey found the Zingeanthropus Skull.
At that site, there was a dense accumulation of artifacts that clearly had been carried
to that site from different places and seemed to have accumulated at the same time.
There were also animal bones that had clear evidence of cut marks on them, and those animal
bones were transported some distance.
How do we know they're transported?
Because when people kill an animal and carry the parts off somewhere else to eat, they
don't carry all of the parts.
They carry the parts that are most efficient to transport, the parts that are the most
meaty and have the least amount of waste, and the least risk that predators are going
to catch you as you're carrying it away.
And so they tend to transport the meaty parts, the arms and the legs, the skull more so than
the jaw, the axial skeleton, the vertebrae and pelvis.
They tend not to transport as much because it's got a lot of bone and it's relatively
heavy.
To the extent that they can get the viscera, the organs, they will tend to eat that on
site.
They can transport them some distance, but that doesn't leave a bony record.
And so when we find an archeological scatter that contains a higher proportion of limb
bones and a lower proportion of the rest of the skeleton and more skulls than mandibles.
When you know that the skull and the mandible used to be attached to each other, you know
that humans have altered this deposit in some way.
It's human activity that you're seeing here.
FLK Zinj is a living floor.
It's a place where people gathered where they shared resources.
We have other living floors in the archeological record.
One site called Gesher Benak Yaakov, which is in Israel and dates to around 800,000 years
ago, which is about a half a million years after the old device sites where we find the
earliest living floors.
This site is interesting because it's the first site that has evidence of campfires.
It's a site where people were making fires and were structuring their activity based
on where the fire was.
Think about going camping.
You have a tent, you have a fire, you might have a little kitchen area where you're preparing
food to go to the fire.
That seems to be exactly what was going on at Gesher Benak Yaakov.
People had established themselves near a stream.
They had built a fire.
At different points, we see campsites where they had built multiple fires.
There was an area that they used where they had caught fish and they used to cut and process
the fish.
We find the fish bones there.
Then there are fish bones associated with the fire.
There are burned evidences of nuts in the fire, burned pieces of pistachio, for example.
We've got this site that's showing you that people are using different parts of one space
for different kinds of things.
It's showing you something about the way that they structure their activity.
When we look very acutely at individual cases in the archaeological record and try to go
a little bit further and say, okay, well, people were living a hunting and gathering
lifestyle.
That means that they were cooperating with each other to some extent.
But can we take this a step further?
Can we go beyond cooperation and talk about compassion or empathy?
Well, let's return to Shenadar-1.
This is the skeleton from Iraq, about 50,000 years old, that shows evidence of an amputation.
Shenadar-1 was an individual who lived a hard life.
He probably lived to his mid-40s, maybe 45 years old.
We can tell that from the amount of wear that he's got on his teeth, and that's old for
Neanderthals.
Neanderthals didn't live above that age very much.
When we look at his skeleton, it's not just the amputated arm that's a problem.
He has a wound on his ankle that shows that he was probably lame during his life.
He's got eye orbits where one orbit is misshapen a little bit.
It was probably injured during his youth, and it's very likely that he was blinded in
that eye from that injury.
We look at his skeleton and say, this is a person who would have had maybe a challenge
surviving as an active, moving around adult.
He clearly was not able-bodied in the sense that most Neanderthal males were.
If males were hunting, and we know that in the course of their lifestyles, they were
hunting large mammals like horses, bison, reindeer, red deer, which are a European version
of elk, they're hunting these big animals.
They have to cooperate in order to do it.
That we know.
Their technology is very rudimentary.
They're using spears that they have to hold with their hands.
They have, in many cases, points that the Neanderthals have made from stone and hafted
onto those spears.
At some sites, we find evidence of the glue that they used to connect these together.
They were very sophisticated in making the spears, but these were not distance weapons.
These are spears that were suited to holding in your hands and thrusting into an animal.
Think about hunting a bison by walking up to it with a spear in your hands and thrusting
it in.
This is not a happy prospect for me, at least.
I've been around bison enough to know that this is, you know, wandering up to them in
open territory with a spear is not going to go well for you.
So Neanderthals had to cooperate to do it.
They had to have multiple males laying in wait to get a bison like this, and probably
they either knew where the bison was going to go, or they had other members of their
group working to drive the bison toward them.
This was, in other words, an ambush hunt.
We know that the ambush was effective because it shows a trace in the death distribution
of the animals.
If we look at most kinds of carnivores, they're persistence hunters.
They're going to take the animals that are weakest, and that usually means the old, you
know, both wolves who will chase after animals for a long time until they tire out, and lions
who will wait for animals and then go and get them, they have a selectivity.
They're selecting the ones that are young and old.
But some kinds of predators, like mountain lions, lie in wait and will jump on the first
animal that comes by.
They're ambush hunters.
They leave a distribution that's not biased to the very old and the very young.
They leave a distribution that's biased toward the prime age adults.
And that's the same sort of distribution that Neanderthals were leaving.
They were using a strategy that involved communication and cleverness to have different
roles for people in the hunt.
Well that lifestyle, despite being very sophisticated, was also very risky.
When we think about Shenadar 1, somebody who underwent enormous injuries during his life,
he's not alone.
We find the evidence of these injuries in Neanderthals from across Europe and Western
Asia.
They have injuries in their skulls.
They have injuries to their ribs, injuries to their upper limbs.
The one kind of injury that's most rare is to their upper legs.
And that's probably because those injuries were more or less death sentences.
If you've got a broken thigh bone and you can't walk, you're not going to be able to
survive long enough for that to heal in most early hunter-gatherer populations.
But the rest of the skeleton, we've got an injury pattern in Neanderthals, it's very
similar to the injury pattern that occurs today in rodeo riders.
People who work with big animals, and you think about a bull rider being thrown off
of a bull landing on the ground, that's the same kind of injury profile that we're seeing
in the Neanderthals.
So there is a real clear evidence of their lifestyle that's being drawn out in the injuries
that they get, and it does indicate a lot about the way that they had to interact with
each other.
We can also tell quite a lot from their pathology what must have been true of their lifestyles.
One of the most famous of the Neanderthals skeletons that's known is from a site called
La Chapelle-Sance in France.
That site, the skeleton dates to around 50,000 years ago, and this skeleton found in the
early part of the 20th century was reconstructed in such a way that it looked like it was hunched
over, walking in sort of a semi-bipedal kind of way, almost like an ape man would walk.
Neanderthals were not ape men, they were human in every sense of the word.
They are descended from hominids that had been bipeds for 7 million years.
Why was this individual reconstructed so that he was hunched over?
Part of it was the bias of the time, Neanderthals were the well-known in-between humans and
apes, and so they should be in-between humans and apes in the way that they walk.
But part of this has to do with pathology.
La Chapelle-Sance was another of the oldest known Neanderthal individuals.
He might have been over 50 years of age, and he has severe osteoarthritis affecting his
skeleton.
His vertebral column is affected by it, his hip joint is affected by it in such a way
that a separate sort of cup of bone has grown around the socket joint of the hip.
Almost all of his teeth were lost during his life.
So we look at a skeleton like this, and we say this is a person who lived with great
challenges.
Is it possible that he needed some help to do it?
Is this a case where humans are showing compassion by allowing older individuals to survive by
helping them out?
Well La Chapelle-Sance is not alone.
There's a much earlier skull that shows evidence of a similar kind of thing.
This skull is from Domenici, the site in the Republic of Georgia that represents the first
hominins known outside of Africa.
Domenici is Homo erectus in terms of what we call it as a species, so it's a much earlier
time frame than the Neanderthals, not 50,000 years ago, but 1.8 million years ago.
But this skull from Domenici, D34-44, this skull is a skull of an adult female, probably
relatively old, certainly older than her 20s, maybe her 30s or 40s, an adult female who
during the course of her life lost all of her teeth.
She has no upper teeth and no lower teeth.
Now that's not so uncommon today.
We have lots of people today who've lost their teeth.
In western societies, we give them dentures and it has a characteristic effect on their
skull.
The bone around the tooth roots resorbs so that you have a very thin mandible and a very
less projecting upper jaw.
That morphology is present in this individual.
She lived for a long time without her teeth.
When you think about what it takes for a hunter-gatherer to live without teeth, there's no artificial
teeth that you can use to replace them with.
You've got to have access to food that you can eat without a lot of chewing.
Or you've got to have somebody to process the food for you by cutting it into tiny pieces
that are edible or by chewing it for you.
Did this woman have that kind of help?
It's a natural kind of question to ask.
However, it's hard to answer from the archaeological perspective.
The thing is that we do find wild primates once in a while who live without teeth for
a substantial amount of time.
I've studied chimpanzee crania where the teeth were lost and they were probably gone for
years and yet this chimpanzee survived in a wild chimpanzee group with that compromise.
So looking at the individual's life doesn't necessarily tell you that they required help
from other individuals, although it's quite plausible that they got it.
When we think of social interactions, it's tempting for us to think of kids.
We know a lot about Neanderthal kids.
We know that their growth and development seems to have been maybe a little faster than
ours but was very much like ours in comparison with earlier hominids.
So that's a useful thing to know about them.
It implies that the social group is taking care of children in a similar way to human
social groups do.
But we also know a lot about Neanderthal kids because we find dead kids in caves and those
dead kids sometimes are died under what we would consider tragic circumstances.
Neanderthals are a case in which we've got really clear evidence of cannibalism.
They ate each other sometimes.
We know this because we have sites where the bones are broken apart and they have cut
marks on them just as animal bones would have been cut apart and broken for the marrow.
People were eating each other.
That processing human bodies begins very early.
The earliest site in Europe up until recently was Grandolina at Adapuerca and that site
has a zygomatic bone, a cheekbone with cut marks on it.
There's a cheekbone from a site in Africa, Bodo, that's around 600,000 years old that
has cut marks on it.
So when we see again and again in the archeological record evidence of cannibalism, it's telling
you that humans are interacting with each other in the past in a way that we know humans
to interact with each other in some historical context, but it's a way that reflects either
desperation or ritual.
There are some signs of ritual among the Neanderthals.
For example, at Crapina, the most numerous site in terms of the number of Neanderthal
specimens, at Crapina there's a skull called Crapina C and that skull has a frontal bone
that has parallel markings on it all the way up the frontal.
Those parallel cut marks were put there either deliberately to make incised lines up the
frontal bone or they were put there in the course of scalping the individual, removing
the flesh.
We can't know what the intentions were behind that kind of behavior, but we can say that
this is a behavior that shows some clear signs of interactions in the archeological record
that are recognizable in the context of human history.
So when it comes to interpreting compassion and cooperation in the archeological record,
we've come a long way toward demonstrating that humans in the past must have been cooperative.
They must have had elements of cooperation that supported their lifestyle and their
ability to hunt and gather food, but the clues that we get from individuals, often difficult
to interpret, are pointing us toward different cases in human history where we can see that
people interact with each other in violent ways sometimes, in compassionate ways sometimes,
and we see the potential for that in the archeological record.
What remains to be shown is the extent to which that potential is translated into our
behavior toward each other on average.
How did it affect our evolution?
When we consider the role of symbolism in the archeological record, that question will
come to the fore.
