Welcome back.
In northern Spain, there is a hill called Atapuerca.
This hill, near the city of Burgos, is a place where, in the 1800s, a railway line was cut
through.
Today, there is no rail that still goes through there, but there is a big cut through the mountain,
and that cut has produced a lot of evidence of ancient humans.
Well, in this hill are a number of caves, and one of these caves has yielded what has
become the largest sample of fossil humans found anywhere in the world, a sample that
numbers by this time some 4,000 total specimens that represent at least 30 individuals who
died and were buried in this cave.
It's an exceptional place, a place where amateur cave explorers were going through
and they found cave bear remains.
The cave bear was a species that lived in Europe in the Pleistocene, but now is extinct.
They found the cave bear remains and realized, oh, this is a really old site.
They brought in paleontologists.
The paleontologists began exploring this, and they found a pit inside the cave.
Pit Sima de los Huesos is the name that has been given, Sima de los Huesos, pit of the
bones.
At the bottom of this pit were cave bear bones, the bones of lions, the bones of foxes, mostly
bears, that as the paleontologists began to remove these bones, they eventually found,
underneath the animal bones, human bones, and these human bones, which we now know date
to something like 600,000 years ago, these human bones continued to go all the way down.
They haven't yet reached the bottom of this pit of bones, and so Atapuerca and the Sima
de los Huesos has become a central site in the way that we understand the biology of
early humans, especially some of the earliest humans who reached Europe.
Today's lecture is about those early Europeans.
The European fossil record was among the first to really accumulate.
People had found fossil humans in Java very early on, and of course people had found fossil
australopithecines in South Africa relatively early in the history of paleoanthropology,
but during the really first half of the 20th century, most of the action in paleoanthropology
was in Europe.
People, amateur prehistorians, were going out exploring caves, digging in them, finding
stuff, and as they found stuff, they began to professionalize, they began to try to
systematize where different things came from and how old they were relative to each other.
That process of systematizing, which was done in a time when they didn't have good means
of figuring out the absolute ages of things, that process was really guided by ideas, it
was guided by theories, and today's lecture is about a debate between two of those theories.
On the one hand, many anthropologists believed that there was an ancient form of humans that
was essentially like modern humans in many respects, that had existed long ago in Europe.
They thought they had the fossils to prove it, and the name for this theory was the pre-Sapiens
theory, the idea that long ago there was a kind of ancient human that would lead to today's
Homo sapiens that existed far in the past.
The other theory that I'm going to talk about is the pre-Neanderthal theory.
The pre-Neanderthal theory held that there wasn't any ancient form of modern humans that
had existed long ago, what there were were primitive humans that didn't have any of
the specializations of today's humans, but also didn't have the specializations of the
later fossil humans called Neanderthals.
These primitive forms of humans were our ancestors, but they were Neanderthal ancestors
also, and so we had evolved from an earlier form of Neanderthals in that point of view.
Both of these theories are about the fossil record of Europe, because that was the fossil
record that people had to work with, but they were widely applied outside of Europe to understand
the relationships of other fossil samples.
So this debate, pre-Sapiens or pre-Neanderthal, is about the time span over which modern humans
originated.
Did we emerge very deep in the past and live alongside other kinds of humans for a long
time, or did we emerge in the recent past only recently diverged from some other kinds
of humans?
To give you a sketch of what these two theories are like, it's most relevant to talk about
the time span over which these things would have happened, and understanding that today
we have a much more sophisticated view of how long things took.
I'm going to talk about the time span in terms of how we understand things now, because
that'll be the quickest way for us to relate these events to the current fossil discoveries
that continue to inform it.
Humans existed in Africa, as we now understand, something like 200,000 years ago, and Neanderthals
began to exist in Europe something like 200,000 years ago.
So those two populations were existing at around the same time.
As we'll see in a later lecture, those populations mixed with each other to some extent.
But if we go back before 200,000 years ago, it becomes more and more difficult to show
that these populations are really distinct from each other.
When we look inside of Europe before 200,000 years ago, there are hominids there that don't
have the characteristics of later Neanderthals.
They're not specialized in some of the ways that Neanderthals are.
Their skulls are more like the primitive forms of humans that we've seen in other parts
of the world.
For example, Peking Man in China, or Java Man in Java.
Those kinds of characteristics gradually become weeded out of the population in Europe, and
over time, what happens is that the skull becomes larger and larger.
This is a time when the brain is rapidly increasing in size during the past three or four, five
hundred thousand years.
And what we see in Europe over that time is this progressive change that's reflecting
larger and larger brain hominids.
Today's lecture is about how those hominids relate to each other and how they relate to
us.
The two basic theories propose that, on the one hand, the presapiens theory, that these
fossil hominids in Europe were divided into two branches, so that before two hundred thousand
years ago, there were still two quite distinct forms of hominids in Europe, and that they
were already evolving into Neanderthal-like and more modern human-like forms.
So you could trace those two forms back in time.
The pre-Neanderthal theory said that before that time, basically we're looking at one
population in Europe.
More than two hundred thousand years ago, this is one group of people, and that they
diverge after the last interglacial, so that they become separate really relatively recently
in time, probably within the last hundred thousand or certainly two hundred thousand
years.
Those two theories lay out the facts in different ways.
It was Henri Valois, a French paleoanthropologist who first made the distinction very clear
between presapiens and pre-Neanderthal theories.
But in fact, the presapiens theory was much older than that.
It was really the brainchild of Sir Arthur Keith, the most prominent anatomist, certainly
student of prehistory, that lived in Britain during the first half of the twentieth century.
Arthur Keith is famous for lots of things in anatomy.
He was a mentor in some ways to Louis Leakey, as Leakey went to discover fossils in Africa.
But Keith, at the height of his career, made a strong commitment to the reality of the
pilt-down fossil, and it's pilt-down that created the real moving force behind the idea
of a presapien's population of humans existing distant in the past.
Pilt-down was a hoax, I just want to lay out at the beginning, it was faked.
It consisted of a human skull that had been taken from a medieval cemetery.
So it was old looking, and in addition to that, the hoaxer had colored it with iron
so that it was even darker, so that it looked like it was more ancient.
In addition to this skull was a mandible, but this mandible was of an orangutan, and
it was broken in such a way that it wasn't obvious.
I mean, when you think about, okay, we're going to put a human skull together with an
orangutan mandible, you'd think, somebody's going to tell.
But the person who made this hoax was rather clever.
They broke it in such a way that it wasn't obvious that this was from a recent ape.
They distinctly stained it so that they looked like they belonged together.
They threw in a couple of chimpanzee teeth so that it was even more jumbled.
In addition to all of this, they took the teeth and filed them down with a file so that
they wouldn't look like they had been worn in the manner that an ape would wear them.
They looked like they'd been worn in a more human-like way.
Those things together were really misleading.
And so when this specimen was unearthed by a fellow named Charles Dawson, that became
very convincing that it was found alongside basically ancient gravels that contain fossil
animals.
These things were near each other, so they looked like they belonged to the same individual.
And as the anatomist found the parts and thought about how they had to go together and how
they had to be reconstructed, those parts fit together in a way that was very predictable.
If you were thinking about a point of view of our evolution that was held by Charles
Darwin, the idea that our brain preceded our postcranium in terms of its evolutionary
development.
If the brain comes first, well then everything else follows.
The brain is more inventive.
It's making tools and weapons.
You're carrying tools and weapons with your hands.
You need to have your legs support your weight all the time so that your hands can be free.
This was Darwin's idea and Piltdown seemed to fit it really well.
It also fit a certain kind of prejudice on the part of British scientists.
Where should we look for the evidence of the most advanced form of human ever found in
the Pleistocene?
Clearly, there's an obvious place where you should look.
England is the place.
And so there was this huge emphasis on the reality of a British fossil being the earliest
most advanced form of human known.
It's hard to express in the pre-World War I context how important that aspect of the
discovery was.
It was putting Britain on the map as a site where there were really important fossil discoveries
to be made.
So Sir Arthur Keith was one of the most prominent supporters of this idea.
He reconstructed the fossil.
He showed that it had a human-like brain case and an ape-like face.
And that idea that the brain case had come first and the face had come later became a
lens through which many paleontologists began to view the human fossil record.
Not everybody.
Franz Weidenreich, for instance, was never convinced by the Piltdown fossil.
And he's the discoverer of Peking Man that we talked about in a previous lecture.
He immediately said, look, this is an ape-jaw and a human skull.
They don't belong together.
There were other people who noticed the hoax right away, but there was a real trend toward
accepting this idea that there was a pre-Sapiens population, population that existed distant
in the past in Europe that had given rise to modern humans.
Other kinds of fossils were added to this.
For example, in France, a site called Fontesgevaude produced a part of a skullcap, and that skullcap
was interpreted as being quite modern and as dating to before the last interglacial,
so in the time period when this would have been a part of a potentially pre-Sapiens population.
Well, this skull is broken off just behind where the brow ridge would be.
So it was a generous kind of interpretation that said that this was a modern-like skull.
In fact, the anatomy that you'd want to look at just wasn't there.
The other thing is that the skulls would quite a bit later, as we now understand, dates
to sometime within the last 40 or 50,000 years, not to before the last interglacial, more
than 120,000 years ago.
Another fossil that was interpreted as being pre-Sapiens-like was Swanscomb.
Swanscomb was another English fossil that was found in river terraces of the Thames River.
Initially, there were parietal bones, the bones on the side of the skull that were found
later, an occipital bone was found that matched them.
So we've got the back of the skull of one individual.
The back of that skull, from my point of view today, looks like the back of a Neanderthal
skull in a lot of ways.
But it didn't have that piece of anatomy that people looked at to determine whether we're
looking at a modern-like human or a more primitive type of hominin.
It didn't have the front of the skull, didn't have the forehead and the brow.
And so when they looked at Swanscomb, they said, this is strikingly modern.
Now from today's point of view, when we do careful comparisons between fossils, we're
always comparing like parts with like parts.
It doesn't make any sense to look at Swanscomb, which doesn't have the front of the skull,
and start talking about how it has a modern-like skull.
We have to look at the parts of the skull that it preserves and put them into the context
of a broader sample of things.
In the early days, people seem to have been much more affected by their biases in terms
of what they're looking for and what they're likely to see.
And when we look at a case like Swanscomb, to me it's a very clear case where what you
expected to see was not disconfirmed by this fossil.
It didn't preserve the part that you were interested in, but that made it consistent
with the point of view that you had held.
And so in some sense, it reinforced people's viewpoints of a presapien's population.
Lewis Leakey, when he went to Africa initially, was looking for evidence of this presapien's
population, but he wanted to tie it to Africa to show the importance of Africa in our early
evolution.
When he found the Can-Am jaw, the one that ultimately he wasn't able to track back to
its source because the iron stakes that he used to market had been stolen.
When he found that jaw, it was in his views a real presapien's representative of a population
that existed early in Africa that was of equal antiquity to the kinds of presapien's specimens
that were being found in Europe.
So this extension of the presapien's idea was really influential on the way that people
then set goals to go look for new remains and try to integrate them into our understanding
of the past.
Well, the idea that there's a presapien's population naturally implies that many of
the kinds of fossils that we find are something else.
That something else in Europe is probably best represented by the Maur mandible, a jaw bone
that comes from a large quarry in Germany near Heidelberg.
And that specimen, the jaw bone, has become the type specimen of a species called Homo
Heidelbergensis.
Now if there's any name that's going to apply to the fossil record of Europe today, Heidelbergensis
is probably the name to do it.
It's the Maur mandible was the first to be named, so it has priority.
But also, that population, which is a little bit distinct from us and a little distinct
from later Europeans than Neanderthals, it sort of does look like it deserves to have
a recognition that there's something going on here.
What's going on is a population that is different from Homo erectus in terms of it having larger
brains.
The brain size being larger means that the forehead is more curved, more vertical, that
the back of the skull is more rounded.
It doesn't have the consistently low skull that Homo erectus does.
It doesn't have a brow ridge that sticks directly in front of the brain case as most
Homo erectus specimens do.
It has a face that's somewhat lower relative to the brain case.
That basic shift, a basic shift in the size of the brain relative to the size of the face
defines a different kind of architecture to the skull.
And we see that architecture reflected in other kinds of fossils.
Across Europe, at sites like Steinheim in Germany, at sites like Aragot in France, sites
that are dating to between about 600,000 and about 300,000 years ago, across Europe during
that time we see this similar anatomical pattern, an anatomical pattern with a brain size that
is a little smaller than ours, certainly a couple of hundred cubic centimeters smaller
than the average today.
So we're looking at something that's an average of around 1,100 cubic centimeters instead
of around 13,315, but it's substantially larger than the average in Homo erectus.
Why are they larger?
They're larger in this context because they're mostly later.
We're looking at fossils that existed within the past several hundred thousand years and
not more than several hundred thousand years ago.
So it's a consistent trend across the old world that the brain grew and we're looking
at that stage in time when the brain had gotten to be in between erectus-sized and the size
of modern humans.
F. Clark Howell looked at the fossil record a little bit differently.
He was an American archaeologist, he came from Kansas and he studied the fossil record
of Neanderthals looking for evidence about how the Neanderthals had evolved.
Howell came to a different point of view about how Neanderthals had originated and how they
were related to us.
To understand that point of view, it's helpful to start thinking about the immediately pre-Neanderthal
part of the European fossil record.
Skulls like Ehringsdorf, a skull from Germany that is very Neanderthal-like in many respects.
It has on the back of its skull a projection, sticks out from the back, Neanderthals have
this also, we call it the occipital bun, it's a projection that sticks out from the back
of the skull, it's not a narrow projection, it's quite wide and it's full of brain on
the inside, so it reflects something about the shape of the brain case and not just the
anatomy of the muscles outside the skull.
It has a high rounded forehead with a brow ridge underneath it, that rounded forehead
we call a frontal boss.
It looks Neanderthal-like, in other words, in many respects.
But it doesn't have all of the features of Neanderthals.
For instance, it doesn't have on the side of its skull right behind its ears, there's
a knob of bone called the mastoid process.
If you put your palm behind your ear and sort of rest your head on it, that's generally
what you're resting it on, your mastoid process.
This is a muscle attachment that goes to the muscles of the neck.
The mastoid process in humans is usually large, in Neanderthals it's small and that's a characteristic
that Neanderthals are unique in.
Other kinds of hominids don't have the really small mastoid process.
Ehringsdorf doesn't.
It has, in other words, Neanderthal-like characteristics, but not all of them.
For F. Clark Howell, this was a pre-Neanderthal specimen.
It was something that hadn't yet gotten all of the specializations that later Neanderthals
would get.
Looking at a pre-Neanderthal population, Howell thought that this might be a really good population
to derive the anatomy of more recent humans from.
The most important site from around the time of the last interglacial, around 100,000 to
120,000 years ago, at this time in history, the 1950s, was the series of caves that occur
within Mount Carmel, Israel.
These caves had been excavated during the 1930s by Dorothy Garrett, a British archaeologist,
and the anatomy of the fossil specimens that had been found had been analyzed by Sir Arthur
Keith, together with an American colleague, Theodore McCown.
Those guys looked at these fossils and they discovered that the fossils have a blend of
characteristics.
The blend ranged from Neanderthal-like brow ridges that were quite clearly expressed,
that extended across the front of the skull in some specimens, but not in others.
In some specimens, the face projects very much forward, much the same way that it does
in Neanderthals, in others they don't.
Some specimens had Neanderthal-like teeth, others didn't.
The caves that they examined, a cave called school and a cave called taboon, seemed to
present evidence of one biological population, a population that was making the same kind
of archaeology, it was making the same tools, but it had a blend of characteristics with
some individuals, like the taboon skull, looking more Neanderthal-like, and having more Neanderthal-like
proportions in the rest of their skeletons, others looked more modern-like.
Keith and McCown, comparing these fossils, said, what we have here is a population in
the throes of evolution, it's evolving from one thing into another, and the thing that
it's evolving into, this is a bit of a surprise from the modern population perspective, the
thing that they thought it was evolving into was a Neanderthal, they thought it had been
a more primitive population at the beginning that had more modern-like characteristics
because these were more ancient, they had come from a presapiens form, and that it was
specializing, becoming more Neanderthal-like.
Other people took these same fossils and interpreted them somewhat differently.
For example, Theodosius Dobjanski, who was a prominent geneticist, famous for his work
on working out the population genetics that apply to fruit flies, but he was broadly interested
in evolution, and he was a real synthesizer, he was bringing together facts from many different
areas.
Dobjanski looked at these fossils and said, what you have here is a population of hybrids.
There were Neanderthals, and they were modern humans, and they mixed with each other.
This is very much like the perspective that you would hear about these samples today.
When we talk about the Neanderthal genome, and the evidence that humans today have some
genes from Neanderthals, these Near Eastern sites in Israel become really central to this.
Today we understand that some sites, like Kafsa Cave, have a range of anatomies that's
very much like what we saw at school and taboon, but that extends further on both ends of the
range.
Some are very much like human-like individuals, some, like the Amudiskol, much more Neanderthal-like
individuals.
When you look at that overall blend, it's today relatively straightforward to say that we're
looking at where the population is mixed.
This is the site where we have population mixture.
But that wasn't the point of view that would have been common at the time of the presapiens
and pre-Neanderthal theories were common.
When F. Clark Howell considered the anatomy of the taboon and school samples, when he
looked at the Mount Carmel samples, he was looking at them thinking about the evolution
of a pre-Neanderthal form, something that had potentially originated within Europe,
that had some specializations of Neanderthals, but that was evolving toward humans in its
anatomy.
So he looked at this as the evidence of a pre-Neanderthal origin for humans, that we'd
come from basically an early form of Neanderthal and had modernized after that point.
He called these people protochromagnons because he thought that after having a pre-Neanderthal
origin and evolving into a more modern-like form, they would then invade Europe, replace
the Neanderthals, so that this was the locus of evolution that was really important to
explaining the European fossil record.
Well, I want to return to Atapuerca because this site is of such dominant importance today
for many reasons.
One, the hill itself, Atapuerca, of course, it contains many caves.
One of those caves, Grandolina, is the cave that presents some of the earliest evidence
of Europeans in Western Europe.
Today, the first fossil that's known from Western Europe is from Sima de la Lofante,
which is also in Atapuerca.
So this is a hugely important site to look at the origin of European populations.
But it's also a hugely important site to look at what their anatomy was like, because when
we look at these populations, we have to understand that the reason why people interpreted things
in terms of one aspect being more modern-like, or another aspect being more Neanderthal-like,
was that we're looking at the ancestors of those populations that hadn't gotten all
of the specializations.
Atapuerca and the Sima de los Huesos has 30 individuals that were buried there sometime
around 600,000 years ago.
Their anatomy is very illustrative.
For example, Neanderthals, who lived in Europe after about 120,000 years ago, they have short
limbs and they have very robust, curving bones that have thick bone inside of them.
The Atapuerca hominids were evolving toward this anatomy.
They also have thick bones.
They also have slightly curved bones with large joint surfaces, but they don't have the shortness
that the Neanderthals do.
They're not as specialized in that direction as the Neanderthals.
Their skulls very much like other skulls that have been attributed to Homo heidelbergensis,
and so people who excavate at Atapuerca call these guys Homo heidelbergensis.
From my perspective, I would look at these and say, well, look, we've got a population
that we know genetically is connected to us.
Whether we call them heidelbergensis or not, we have to recognize the ties that might exist
between us and Neanderthals, because we know that we made it with Neanderthals, and being
us and them.
So here's a population that's showing us what the first inhabitants of Europe are like.
Tremendous representation of skeletal parts.
There are many, many copies of some parts of the skeleton.
There are more than 30 pieces of temporal bones.
There are hundreds of teeth.
We just have a tremendous record of these people.
What we don't have is a record of the artifacts that they made.
In the entire pit full of thousands of bone fragments, there's exactly one stone tool.
There's an argument to be made that this stone tool is special.
It's made on quartzite, and that's a rare material at the site.
It's a hand axe.
It's very nicely symmetrical.
Some of the archaeologists think that this might have been an offering that somebody carried
this here and tossed it into the pit with the people.
It's part of the mystery.
How did the people get into the pit?
We can't explain it at present.
There's very little evidence for carnivore activity on them.
So it doesn't look like they were accumulated by carnivores.
Their death distribution, when they died, it looks like a catastrophic distribution.
Half of the specimens are teenagers, between 10 and 18.
None of them are older than 40.
That's not too unusual.
People didn't live a long time in the archaeological record.
40 is near the maximum age that we find.
There were several kids, but it wasn't hugely kid-biased.
Looking at that sample, it looks like prime age people are being killed.
Maybe this is a death site, but a death site that's influenced by other people.
There are some wounds on these bones that might be consistent, but not a lot of them.
It's just really a problem.
How do you get more than 30 bodies into a pit that's deep in a cave without taking
anything with them, except for one handaxe?
It's a real mystery.
But what we're learning from their anatomy is that the ancient Europeans have a diversity
of anatomy that, over time, in Europe was changing to more Neanderthal-like morphology.
That's the origin of the Neanderthal population.
From the standpoint of the Pre-Sapiens theory, there is no Pre-Sapiens anatomy in any of
these individuals.
This isn't a population that has Pre-Sapiens variants in it.
The only clear Pre-Sapiens specimen, the Piltdown fossil, was a fake, and so the Pre-Sapiens
theory is just not true.
The Pre-Neanderthal theory, however, seems like it starts to come a little bit closer
to reality, because looking at our comparisons with Neanderthals, and the extent to which
we share genes with them, and the time period over which those differences emerged, this
is a little bit longer than what's proposed by Clark Howell, looking at Neanderthals of
120, 150,000 years ago, but looking at things that are 200,000, 250,000 years ago, this
is sort of the pattern of our evolution.
So we've come to a real understanding of how Europe fits into the rest of the fossil record.
It's peripheral, and yet it remains connected to Africa and other continents.
Our origins involve these people, but aren't centered on these people.
And when we talk about the Neanderthals and their contribution to our population, we'll
be looking at that legacy to see how it remains to be expressed today.
