Welcome back.
I want to take you with me to France, to a place called the Grotte de Bernafal.
It's outside of L'Aziz, and L'Aziz is in the Dordogne region of France.
It's what is popularly known as the capital of prehistory.
You go to this place, it's got lovely limestone cliffs that stand above the river valley.
The Vizier River goes through the bottom of it.
And in those cliffs are rock shelters and caves.
And those caves were used by people as early as hundreds of thousands of years ago.
They were used by Neanderthals, and some of the early most important Neanderthal discoveries
were made in the valley.
And they were used by the modern humans who followed the Neanderthals, the people of the
Upper Paleolithic.
And we have archaeological deposits all the way from the very beginnings of prehistory
in Europe right up to the most recent archaeological discoveries of agriculturalists in Europe.
But the Grotte de Bernafal, to my mind, is special.
Because you drive outside of L'Aziz, just about a mile or so, and there's a little
gravel parking lot.
And you pull into the parking lot, and there's a sign, and it says, come back at 3 p.m. for
a tour.
And so you drive away, and you do something else, and then at 3 p.m. rolls by, you come
back, and the parking lot's full of cars.
And you get out, and you go to the corner, and there's a guide there waiting for you.
He's got a big torch-like flashlight, and he's got a skeleton key.
And you follow the guide up into the hills, and you walk through a forest with moss on
the ground.
And as you're walking, eventually you come up to a rock face, and in the rock face is
a big metal door.
And the guide walks up to the door, and he says, for the tour, it's just seven euros.
And so you give him your seven euros, and he takes his skeleton key, he opens the door,
and you're inside the world of the past.
The guide goes into the cave, he turns on his flashlight, and he's leading you around,
illuminating the walls, and showing you pictures that were put there 16,000 years ago by the
Magdalenean people, people of the Upper Paleolithic, modern humans, who had lived in the valley,
who had gone into the caves, and who had scratched pictures using stone into the walls.
Some of the pictures, they're about the height of your knees, and they're put in there by
somebody who was lying on the ground and using a rock to scratch pictures.
Some of them are very crude, and you can imagine that children might have been in there making
these pictures on the walls.
In other parts of the cave, there are pictures on the cave's ceiling, elaborately painted
mammoths, and scratched, incised reindeer.
It's the most magical place, and you're being led through with a guide who's taking a small
group of you through, and who's been doing this daily for years.
Because this is a cave that's owned by a farmer, and when you leave the cave, you'll
go back to the parking lot, and the farmer will be there in his old Citroen truck, and
he'll say, did you enjoy the tour?
Well, I enjoyed the tour, and this lecture for me is a real pleasure to give, because
you see, I'm an artist, and I appreciate the way that art gives us a means of expressing
things.
As a scientist and an artist, I'm always thinking about the relationships between the way that
we understand nature, and the way that we represent it, and the way that we can use
art to illustrate it.
But as an anthropologist, I think about art as being very special to us, because it's
something that's done across the world, almost every culture has a figurative art tradition.
And yet, it's something that we don't fully understand.
It's not like language, where it exists everywhere in the world, and it has an obvious sort of
function.
We know how adaptive it is to be able to communicate and use language with each other, but what
about art?
It's clearly a form of communication.
We use it to contact each other, to show each other our mental images, and to be able to
express our ideas across time.
It's that element of art that, in the archaeological record, is so fascinating to us, because when
people begin to make art, it's the first time that we can look into the past and get
a picture of what their minds were doing.
They speak to us in some way, in a way that stone tools and other kinds of artifacts don't.
And yet, the words that they're talking to us out of the past with are so enigmatic and
mysterious.
We feel like we can understand them, but there's such a distance between us.
The debate that I want to present in this lecture is, what's the purpose of art?
Was art something that made humans behaviorally modern?
Is it something that's essential to the way that we interact with each other today, and
therefore, a really important element of our adaptation as modern humans?
Or is art something that occurs as a side effect of other phenomena in our recent evolution?
Is it something that emerges naturally in creatures that can communicate the way that
we do with language?
Is it something that depends on our cultures in such a way that larger populations or more
communication would make people more likely to use this style of representation?
It's a debate that goes back to the earliest discoveries of art, and when we think about
the way that Paleolithic art has been imagined over the years, there are many different interpretations
of it.
We're going to see some of those in the course of the lecture.
Well, of course, art to us today is sometimes centrally important.
We have people who dedicate their lives to art, but it's also a subtle part of all of
our lives.
There's hardly anything that we produce that doesn't have art in it in some way.
When we think of the most utilitarian of tools, like a hammer, now here's something that has
its shape because of the function that it has.
It has to have a big pounding surface.
The claw hammers that have a claw coming off the back.
The claw is functional.
It's there to remove nails.
The handle has to be a certain length.
It has to have padding on it if you want it to be comfortable to hold for very long.
I mean, that's what we mean by utilitarian.
The parts that it has go with its function.
They're there for a reason.
And yet, not every hammer looks the same.
And it's not just differently functioning hammers like ball peen hammers that are different.
It's the style that's in the hammer.
The style speaks to you.
It's that stylistic component of tools that still exists with us today that really picks
up when people begin to make more sophisticated tools, when they're shaping bone in ways that
are functional, not every aspect of the shape of the thing is functional.
And when we think about architecture, just the shapes of our buildings, they don't have
to be the shape that they are.
The reason why they are the shape they are has to do with the function that we intend
for them.
What is this building for?
But it also has to do with the way that we envision it, the way that we style ourselves
in it.
And so when you think of Baroque cathedrals, buildings that have a real solidity to them,
but an airiness to the top of them, the roof arching over you and decorated intricately
with carvings and with paintings and with stained glass, art is integrated into our
lives with this sort of interaction between the practicality, what things are made for,
and the style, what we impart to them by means of our symbolic artistic representation.
Art in science is such a central aspect of the way that we understand things.
We think of very early artists in Renaissance who were also some of the premier scientists
of their time, people like Leonardo da Vinci.
Their ability to illustrate things, to draw things was central to their ability to understand
those things, putting them together visually, putting them together in the Renaissance,
as was new, a three-dimensional perspective sort of way.
That's so important to the way that art functions in the world of science.
As I look at that, I think, is this something that art is really about?
Is it there shaping our view of the world?
Could we have the same view of the world as we do if art wasn't around us, speaking
to us in almost everything that humans produce?
Some of the very earliest examples of aesthetics in the world of tools and stone are in the
Asciullian technology.
Asciullian, remember, is the technology that's based on hand axes.
And hand axes are themselves beautiful objects in many cases.
They're symmetrical.
They have a weight to them, but that weight is drawn out in the symmetrical shape, so
that the size of the hand axe actually is proportional to the extent to which it's elongated
or rounded.
Some hand axes have something special.
They have, in the center of it, a fossil.
Now, this isn't very common.
It's a rare sort of thing to find, but when archaeologists find these, they look at them
and they say, there's something interesting about this.
Why did the people choose to make this hand axe in this way?
Were they deliberately creating something that had this element to it?
That's a question that we have when we go back to this earliest part of what we would
call the aesthetic record, the earliest part dating back hundreds of thousands of years
in the past.
When we think about art that we can really show, you know, the people deliberately made
something that was meant to be artistic, we're thinking in terms of non-utilitarian function.
And of course, a hand axe, it's a tool.
It has its utilitarian function.
Even if it has a fossil shell embedded in the middle of it, you could imagine that this
was useful.
It was being used for things.
But there are, in early archaeological contexts, also objects that are not obviously utilitarian.
For example, in Europe at a site called Tata, there is a rounded piece of rock that has
a natural groove that goes right across the center of it.
It's like a diagonal groove across the center of this very rounded piece of rock that was
natural and going just at right angles to that natural groove is a groove that someone
incised across that, making basically a circular object that has a cross shape on one side
of it.
What did it mean to the person who did that?
Were they playing?
We might imagine somebody picks up something, thinks, hmm, I could make a right angle on
that.
But you've got something.
We have no idea.
It's the kind of artifact where it's not utilitarian as far as we know.
But it does show us that the person who made this thing had a conception of space, had
a conception of angle that caused them to make this artifact.
There are other relatively enigmatic artifacts from equally old.
For example, at Bilzing's Laban, there's a piece of bone that has a series of incisions
in it.
And those incisions are placed in a very regular pattern.
There are around a dozen of them and they're all parallel to each other.
They're not cut marks that were made for the purpose of removing flesh.
They're non-utilitarian in that sense.
Somebody had this piece of bone and they scratched parallel lines in it.
For what purpose?
It's not at all clear, but at an age of three or 400,000 years, it's one of the earliest
evidences of somebody making this kind of deliberate marking.
What were they doing?
Were they counting?
Is this an illustration of their use of space in some way?
Is this an indicator that they gave to somebody or were they just playing around?
It's completely mysterious from our perspective.
We can see that it was deliberate that somebody did it, but we can't see what it was meant
to represent.
At Barakat Ram, which is a site in Israel, there's a piece of rock that has...
It's about a little bit smaller than the size of a fist.
It would fit in the palm of your hand.
And it's got sort of a bulbous shape on one end of it.
It's got sort of a cylindrical middle, and then it has the other side is sort of long
and a little bit cone-shaped, blunted on the end.
And somebody used a rock and deliberately removed some of the rock from this piece of
stone, removed it in such a way that the rock sort of resembles a female figure.
I say sort of resembles.
I mean, it's a rock.
It's not intricately carved.
It's not beautiful.
It's been given just a little bit of a touch.
And if we were to interpret what it looks most like, it looks like a human figure and
a female figure based on the way that it's shaped.
But at 400,000 years ago, what were the people conceiving of when they made this thing?
What was it supposed to be?
Did they intend to make a figure like this?
Was it alone the first time anybody had ever done something like that and nobody ever did
it again?
Or was it part of a tradition that we haven't found the rest of?
It's this kind of question with the very earliest evidences of art that we're constantly faced
with.
When we find something that emerges from the ground, it speaks to us in some way, but what
is it saying?
This message is not clear to us.
Well, when we look at the more recent part of the archaeological record, we can find
a number of artifacts that have much more deliberate intention.
And although they're artistic, they also have a clear utilitarian function.
For example, after 100,000 years ago in Africa, we begin to find systematically carved eggshell
beads.
Eggshell, you would think, is not the greatest substance to make something out of and expect
it to last for tens of thousands of years.
But ostrich eggshell, ostrich eggshell is another story.
It's quite thick.
It's relatively durable.
It makes beads that will last.
It's work-intensive to make these beads.
When you imagine what it would take to take an ostrich eggshell and make tiny beads out
of it, well, you've got to chip away at the eggshell to make them the right shape, and
then you've got to get a hole in those, which means that you have to have a drill to do
that.
In Africa, after 100,000 years ago, people have the technology to do it, and they're
using it not only for these ostrich eggshell things, but they're also using it in other
ways.
For example, they're beginning to use fire to treat the raw material that they use for
stones.
There's a type of stone called silkrete that, when you burn it, it becomes much more easily
and finely flakable, and people were using fire to heat up this material and make very
fine tools out of it by 70,000 years ago.
The ostrich eggshell beads that we have took hours and hours of somebody's effort to make,
and when we find them, we know that those meant something to the people that made them.
Beads are an easy case to explain because we wear beads.
We ornament ourselves with them.
And ornamentation is about communicating with other people.
It's about showing them what your status is, where you fit in society.
We find those types of things, and they're easy to explain.
When we find ostrich eggshell that has in-sized lines on them in geometric patterns, as we
do a deep cloof in South Africa, those are somewhat more difficult to explain.
Now we know what ostrich eggshell is used for ethnographically.
When we go to South Africa, we see the Bushmen, they're using ostrich eggshell as containers.
They'll take an ostrich egg, they'll take the egg out of it, and then they'll use that
to store things in, and they often will decorate them.
It's quite possible that when we find ostrich eggshell in the archeological record, 70, 80,000
years ago, that's also what we're seeing.
We're seeing the remnants of containers that were used by people and decorated by them.
That element of decoration, that stylistic part of artistic representation, is something
that occurs everywhere that people make containers.
When they make containers out of pottery, you see all kinds of elaborate ways of decorating
them, using paint or slip or incising lines in them, the way that you coil the clay to
make it.
There are many ways that people decorate them, and those ways are highly cultural.
They go along with the style that people develop in the cultures that they have.
It's a natural part of human cultural production.
Those types of utilitarian objects that are decorated, that's one thing, but when we find
things that aren't utilitarian, but that have clear representational quality, that's interesting.
For example, in Namibia, this is southwestern Africa, there's a site called Apollo 11 Cave,
and Apollo 11 Cave has produced a plaque, a little piece of stone that's flat, that
has a painting of a lion on it, and that dates to the late Middle Stone Age, something like
30,000 to 40,000 years ago.
It's beautifully drawn.
It shows us that the people were able to represent things.
It's almost equivalent in age to the kind of cave art in Europe that occurs at the very
earliest end of the artistic archaeological record, and it tells us that people are interested
in depicting their environment in more complicated ways.
Modern humans aren't the only ones that make decorated objects.
Neanderthals also in Europe, after around 60,000 to 50,000 years ago, are also making
objects that are decorated in some ways.
For example, in Spain, there's a place where there's a scallop shell that has a natural
color pattern on one side of it.
It has sort of a red stripe that goes around the edge of it.
On the other side of it, Neanderthals painted a red stripe in the same place, although on
that side there's no natural color pattern.
They were clearly playing with the object.
They were making the pattern that they saw on the other side.
They were doing it with paint.
They were doing it deliberately.
We find a number of symbolic, we might call them, objects in Neanderthal sites.
They gathered clam shells that had natural holes in them that would be useful for potentially
stringing together.
They used pigment crayons.
When I say crayon, these are natural pieces of stone that are rich in manganese dioxide
or red ochre.
They used those to color on things.
We can see that they used them for this purpose because they have minute scratches in them
that were made by the surface that they rubbed them on.
But by looking at the microscopic detail of these rub marks, we can see that they were
using them on a soft surface.
They were using it to paint, presumably, skin or animal hide.
That kind of painting, of course, occurs in people today.
It's a natural kind of decorative behavior that people do that Neanderthals were doing
it is, to me, really evocative of what their society was like.
Recently found Neanderthal site has the remains of bird bones.
These bird bones had cut marks on them in just the way that you would use to remove the feathers
from them, not to remove the meat, but to take the feathers off.
We can imagine Neanderthals decorated with body paint and feathers and with animal pendants
that they carved.
It just creates a vision of them that's very human-like because modern humans are doing
this sort of thing also.
Well with cave art, which occurs after the Neanderthals, we have some really interesting
representations of the landscape and the world that ancient people were living in.
For example, the earliest known rock art site with art that's inside of a cave in Europe
is Chauvet Cave in France.
Chauvet Cave is very famous for its large pictures with lions and with rhinoceros.
People were painting aspects of their environment.
They were using charcoal, manganese dioxide, they're using red ochre, they're coloring
things in polychromes in some cases, in some caves.
Those kinds of representations are so evocative to us.
We look at them and we can imagine, this is what those people were seeing.
They were seeing these lions.
Some of their pictures, for example, the lions of Chauvet Cave, which are lions that don't
have manes, are telling us directly what these creatures were like, who now are extinct.
We wouldn't have known whether cave lions in Europe had manes or not if the Paleolithic
artists hadn't bothered to depict them for us.
We wouldn't have known that the cave bear has a hunch and a long forehead and a long
snout and that we wouldn't have known about its posture if it hadn't been painted by
the painters of Chauvet Cave.
Paleolithic artists in Europe also made portable art objects.
They carved mammoths out of ivory.
They carved utilitarian objects, too.
For example, there's a kind of tool called a straightener, which is a handle and sort
of a loop on the end of it, and that loop is used to run a stick through and make it
straighter, as you would do if you were making an atletal dart.
That straightener occurs in many, many, many sites and they're decorated in various ways,
and statistically, when we look at what have they got on them, what they have on them primarily
is animals.
The Paleolithic artists seem to have been obsessed with animals.
They were painting the animals that they were hunting, animals like mammoths and reindeer.
They were also painting the animals that they feared or that they respected, like lions.
Once in a while, they depicted people.
Sometimes they depicted parts of people.
And so you have this interesting mix of what are these people interested in?
What are they depicting?
We can imagine that kind of tool as archaeologist Dale Guthrie does, who studies this art.
We can imagine that kind of tool as a male-centric tool.
The men who are using these tools for hunting are depicting the things that are interesting
to them, that speak to them in some way.
We also find objects that seem to have a mystical quality.
For example, there's a famous figurine from Germany that's called the lion man.
And it has the head of a lion, but apparently the body of a human connected together.
There's a painting called the sorcerer that looks like a human figure that's hunched over
with a deer's head.
There's a magical quality to some of these artifacts.
There's a way in which people were imagining the world in a different way from as it exists.
And of course, some of the most famous pieces of art, for example, the Venus figurines from
Central Europe, are so interesting to us because they clearly don't depict a person as the
person would have existed.
They're not representational in that sense.
They're in some way talismanic.
They have a quality to them that represents a state of being.
Or in the case of the Venus figurines, we might imagine fertility.
That's very different from a straightforward drawing what you see.
It shows that the art to these people had some sort of special role.
When we think about the role of art in human evolution, it obviously comes down to the
end of our evolutionary trajectory.
It's really the last 100,000 years that we have systematic representations of any kind.
And the last 30,000 years that we have these very interesting, intricate paintings.
And that means that it probably is a phenomenon that goes along with the intensification of
the human population, our greater connectivity to each other, the way that we're communicating
with each other in larger and larger numbers.
When I think about the caves of Europe, and you go to a place like Rufenjak, Rufenjak is
an interesting cave because it's got a hole inside of the mountain and you go down inside
of it nearly a kilometer deep, deep, deep in the ground before you come across the major
artistic decorations.
You turn a corner and there on the wall is an orange sort of church nodule and on that
orange nodule is painted the little head of a bison.
Somebody was playful, somebody was thinking about the world in a different kind of way.
And it's that quality that I look at in the record of Paleolithic art and think that it's
definitely telling us something about the human condition.
It's telling us something about what it means to be human.
It's telling us that being human is about sharing this communication, sharing an image
of the world in a way that much more ancient people apparently never did.
So art is a really fundamental aspect of all of humanity today and it's something that
emerges quite recently in the archaeological record.
It tells us that as we became human we in some sense transformed ourselves into communicating
beings and representing beings.
