Welcome back.
Up till this point in the course, we really haven't had much to say about the New World.
We've seen ancient humans in Europe, we've seen them in Asia, we've seen them in Africa,
we've seen them in the islands of Southeast Asia, but we haven't, up to this point, seen
them in the Americas.
That's because people only reached the Americas relatively recently in our evolution.
But today's lecture is about the timing of that arrival and the pattern of that arrival.
Because over the course of the past hundred years, as we've made more and more discoveries
of archaeological remains in the New World, well, those of us who work in the Old World
have sometimes trouble appreciating the controversies that can arise in the Americas when it comes
to describing the earliest known people here.
And there's a real debate about when and how the earliest people arrived in North America
and dispersed into South America.
That debate concerns today a timing that goes either before or with the appearance of a
culture, an archaeological culture called the Clovis culture.
The Clovis culture existed around about 14,000 years ago and a little younger.
And so if humans arrived in North America at that time, the Clovis culture could represent
the earliest Americans.
But some archaeologists disagree.
They claim that people reached the New World earlier than that, and that there are some
sites that show a pre-Clovis occupation.
So this debate is about the timing and the pattern of dispersal into the Americas.
Did people reach the New World first around 14,000 years ago, or were they here earlier
in time?
This debate goes back to really the beginnings of physical anthropology as a discipline.
And one of the first very prominent physical anthropologists was named Alish Hurdlitschke.
Hurdlitschke was of Czech ancestry, and he was an immigrant to the United States.
He studied at medical colleges to become a physician.
But after being trained here in the States, he went to live in Paris for a while.
And while in Paris, he became an anthropologist.
He became interested in the scientific study of humankind.
As an anthropologist in Paris, he had the opportunity to learn about the prehistory
of people in Europe.
He was really able to study the way that archaeologists were beginning to understand the antiquity
of humans.
He was able to study Neanderthals and learn about their anatomy and morphology.
And that made him an ideal person when he came back to the United States to understand
how the human fossil record, skeletal record in the New World related to the record in
the Old World.
Hurdlitschke very early on, by 1903, had decided that there was nothing in the New World that
struck him as having the kind of great antiquity that the archaeological record in the Old
World was producing.
So Hurdlitschke came up with a scenario by which we could explain why things were recent
in the New World and more ancient in the Old World.
His viewpoint worked with the biological characteristics of Native Americans.
When he looked at Native Americans and looked at their skulls and looked at the form that
their skulls take on, he saw the connection between Native Americans and populations that
live today in Asia.
And so looking at the archaeological record in the New World and this skeletal resemblance
between New World and Asian peoples, Hurdlitschke came up with the idea that they had dispersed
from Asia across an ancient land bridge into the Americas.
But because the archaeological record seemed to be relatively recent in the New World,
Hurdlitschke's idea was that this event had happened recently, probably since the last
glaciation.
So for Hurdlitschke, the bearing land bridge theory that people had come from Asia and
entered the New World and done it at the end of the last Ice Age, that was his real guiding
theory for how people had come to inhabit the New World.
Hurdlitschke made it his business to go around, to find skeletal remains and study them within
the New World, and to try to test his scenario for a recent migration.
Because obviously, if anybody had been in the New World longer ago than the beginning,
or than the end of the last Ice Age, then they would have left remains that were deeper
and had greater antiquity.
Possibly something that would have looked like the Neanderthals of Europe could have
lived in the New World if they had been there early enough.
And so Hurdlitschke went around and studied every claimed very ancient specimen in the
New World to try to get a picture of whether it was ever the case that something was really
genuinely ancient.
One example is a skeleton that became known as Lansing Man, and this is from outside of
Lansing, Kansas.
So this is real local for me.
I was raised in Kansas.
Lansing is a few hours' drive from my house.
Lansing, outside of the city, they were digging a basement, and they found in it an ancient
skeleton.
And there was a claim that, well, this ancient skeleton is buried in sediments that date
back before 10,000 years, 10,000 to 40,000 years old, they thought these were.
Hurdlitschke went to examine the skeleton, and Hurdlitschke, looking at the condition
of the skeleton, knowing what the European skeletons that are of that age look like,
he looked at it and said, I just love the way that he describes this.
He says, the bones are quite hard and not at all brittle.
You couldn't even mark a chalkboard with them.
And I think of that, and I've studied lots of Neanderthal bones, where the organic material
in the bone is really gone, because they're so ancient.
And what's left is the mineral part of the bone, and that mineral part is very friable.
I mean, if the bones aren't shellacked so that they keep in all of the material and
are protected, it will rub off like a powder on your hands.
You really could draw on it like a chalkboard.
And for Hurdlitschke to describe this, it's clear that he has in his mind the demonstration
of whether something is genuinely ancient has to do with the condition of the thing.
He describes this and says, it's not fossilized at all.
It's not found along with artifacts that you can tell are really old.
It's probably more recent in his view.
It's buried into this from above, potentially.
It's not as old as you think it is.
He went through, and site after site demonstrated that they couldn't have the great antiquity
that had been claimed.
This wasn't self-evident at the time.
There really were paleontologists, archaeologists who expected that you would find things of
great antiquity in the New World.
For example, there was a tooth that was found in Nebraska that was claimed to be the tooth
of a very early kind of hominid.
This would be a kind of missing link in the New World.
It was later shown that this tooth, which became known as Nebraska man, that this tooth
was a pig's tooth.
Pig's teeth oftentimes look like sort of a big version of a human tooth.
It wasn't a silly mistake to make, but it was an incautious mistake.
The evidence just wasn't there for this.
That's what it turned out to be time and time again in Herdlichke's view for ancient
man in the New World.
There was never any demonstration that anything was here earlier than could have been the
case if people had arrived recently over the Bering Land Bridge.
Nowadays, when we consider the way that the archaeological record is arranged in the New
World, we have to consider what the possible pathways of people to come to the New World
were, and also the barriers that existed to them at different times.
Today, if we think of people originating in the old world, starting out in Asia and migrating
to North America, there's an obvious barrier in the way.
That barrier is the Bering Strait.
You could walk all the way to the easternmost tip of Siberia, but once you get there, there's
a big ocean in the way waiting for you as you look across the other side.
The Bering Land Bridge emerged from the Bering Sea during the last glaciation, and as the
glaciers receded, the water level rose and that was closed again, so that it was closed
by 10,000 years ago.
If people were to walk across it, they must have gotten here before then.
But that's not the only barrier that's in the way.
The ice sheets themselves that had expanded and covered most of Canada and large parts
of the northern United States, the ice sheets during the last glaciation were serious barriers.
If you walk into Alaska from Siberia, because the land bridge is exposed, once you get into
Alaska, you're looking at an ice sheet that extends across most of the continent and is
in many places a mile or more thick.
This is not a way that you can get to the southern part of the New World either.
For a long time, people believed that humans would have gotten through from Alaska to the
southern extent of the ice sheets by walking through an ice-free corridor, because for
a time there was a separation between the ice sheet on the eastern part of North America,
the Laurentide ice sheet, and the ice sheet on the westernmost part of North America,
the Cordilleren ice sheet.
Those two were separated at some times, but they merged together and were closed at other
times.
And so it was very key to try and think of the time that people could have dispersed
south of these ice sheets.
And that time, for many, corresponded with a culture that became known as the Clovis
culture.
Well, from North America, people would have had to get to South America, and these are
connected by land all the way.
So if we can get people into North America, we can get them to South America potentially
very rapidly.
But there's a question here, right?
Because we're talking about more than 10,000 miles of distance.
How long would it take humans to expand their population across that space?
We know that a person could walk it, and certainly within the course of a few years.
People have walked it recently, but could they expand their adaptation, expand their population
so as to occupy these places that rapidly?
This is a real question with the habitation of the New World.
How long does it take to get your population to grow and expand over space?
If you find something in South America, how long do you have to allow for things to have
taken to get there from North America and ultimately from Asia?
Is this a very rapid, almost instantaneous process, or is it a process that would have
taken some thousands of years?
In order to get to the New World, you've got to be able to occupy the northernmost
tier of Asia.
You've got to be able to get into Siberia and work with the climate that existed in
Siberia and in the exposed Bering Land Strait in Alaska, the region that has become known
as Beringia.
If you're going to get to Beringia, you've got to be able to master the climate and the
environment.
Turns out we know something about how long ago people were able to occupy that environment.
We know it because we have good archaeological sites in the northernmost parts of Siberia
and the European northernmost parts of Russia that dates to before 30,000 years ago.
For example, in northernmost Siberia, there's a site called the Yana rhinoceros horn site,
and it's got such a great name because there are, at this site, artifacts made of rhinoceros
bone.
For example, there's a narrow, thin artifact that's called a foreshaft, and that foreshaft,
it functions as part of an atlatal.
I want to explain exactly what an atlatal is because this is so key to the first habitation
of the New World.
An atlatal is otherwise known as a spear thrower.
What it is is a long handle that has either a hole or a little cup in it, and that handle,
you can set in that cup a dart, and a dart from an atlatal is a few feet long.
You set that into the handle, and then hold on to that with your hand, and on the business
end of this dart is a point.
The way that this operates is that you go back like this, like you're going to do a
baseball throw, and let go of the dart as you move the handle forward, and the function
of this is basically to create the functional equivalent of a third segment of your arm,
so that instead of doing something with a wrist, like you do with a baseball, your wrist
now is operating a long thing that has a lot of leverage to it.
An atlatal is surprisingly easy to get projectiles out a long distance.
It's really hard to describe how the throw is different than you'd imagine for a baseball.
You put a lot of effort into throwing a rock or throwing a ball.
It's just a minor motion with an atlatal, but it creates a very deadly projectile.
Well, atlatal darts, as effective as they are, there's one improvement that you could
make that would make them even better.
If you have this long dart, if you could interchange the points so that if you broke
a point you could quickly substitute another one in, because an atlatal point is made of
stone and it's bound onto the dart or else it's not going to function, so you use some
glue and you use some sinew and you bind it on there and that takes a while.
This is not the sort of thing that you'd want to have to do if you're out hunting in the
field and you want to get that animal.
Instead, if you have a little detachable shaft that would connect with the dart, but you'd
already connected this stone to it, well, that would be really useful.
That's what they have at Yana rhinoceros horn sight.
They have a four shaft that's made of rhinoceros bone and that four shaft fit into the atlatal
dart and made an interchangeable point so that you could use extra points as tools.
You could leave a point in the animal if you weren't able to chase it down or you could
reload quickly and reuse a dart that had a broken point.
It's an enhancement to the technology.
Now I say that that's real important when we consider the way that people moved into
the new world because the first new world people that we have archaeological evidence
of are big game hunters.
They've moved into the new world and they're using this kind of distance projectile weapon
technology.
That's the basis of the Clovis type technology.
Clovis is named after a place in New Mexico, which was one of the first places where they
found this type of artifact.
The Clovis artifact that's most recognizable is a very long spear point.
It's long, it's narrow, parallel sighted with a gently tapering tip.
At the base of it, the part where it attaches to the spear, it has what's called a flute.
A flake has been removed from the base giving it a narrower profile right in the center
of the base, which allows you to halft it onto the spear much more effectively.
That Clovis point is very recognizable, they're beautiful stone artifacts and they're found
across the western Midwest United States and into the southeastern United States.
We know a lot about the way that people made these Clovis points because we know where
they were able to get their raw materials.
We can trace, if we find a point, you can use chemical analysis to figure out where
it must have come from.
Across the Midwest, at places like Canorado in Kansas and even as far north as Wisconsin,
you find Clovis points that occur usually in small sites where people killed an ancient
animal.
Sometimes the animals that they killed are mammoths or mastodons.
In other cases, they're bison and other kinds of animals.
We find those points sometimes hundreds of miles away from the source of the raw material
so that we know that these people are highly mobile, they're making things in one place
and carrying them for a long ways as they hunt and that they're depending on this big
game hunting strategy.
But they're moving so quickly across the landscape that we don't find very dense accumulations
of their tools except in the extreme southeastern United States and in Texas where we have
places where there are thousands of Clovis type artifacts.
It looks like they might have existed in the southeastern Texas for a longer time and
have exploded across the Midwest in pursuit of herds.
Some people think that their effect on these herds of large animals was so great that they
drove them to extinction.
This is called the overkill hypothesis, the idea that humans have such an impact on the
large animals, animals like mammoths and mastodons, animals like ground sloths, animals that
today are extinct, the human impact on them by bringing down just a few extra percent
of the animals every year was catastrophic in their view.
Archaeologists and paleontologists still debate this idea, were humans primarily responsible
or was climate change the key factor or some other environmental factor?
It's probably that both of those factors are working together, but in any event it's clear
that the Clovis technology represents a technology that is familiar from the standpoint of Beringia
and Siberia and is highly effective in its ability to expand across large areas.
That's the sort of thing that you want to see in a technology that you think is the
first people that occupy a new place, something that's highly adaptable and rapidly explosive
and it's spread across space.
The problem with this scenario is that we don't have very much clear skeletal evidence
of the earliest people in the new world.
In fact, the skeletons that we have tend to date to rather later.
The Clovis technology dates to between about 13,200 years ago and about 12,800 years ago
at its maximum extent.
So we're talking about 500 years span sometime after 14,000 years ago.
Skeletal evidence is very rare in the new world until after 12,000 years ago.
We just don't have the skeletal evidence that represents what are potentially the earliest
people in the new world.
The skeletons that we do have are a little different than today's Native American peoples
in some respects.
They're more robust, they have more of a development of a brow ridge, they have more
of a cranial, what we call superstructure, the muscular parts, they have more robust
jaws in many cases.
That's similar to Asians that lived in North China at around the same time.
So it's not something that's unexpected in the context of this population, but it does
indicate that the population changed from the earliest inhabitants of the new world
up to today's recent American Indians.
In addition to this, there are some sites where we have well stratified places where
there are tools in layers that appear to be older than Clovis.
One of the most celebrated of these is Medocroft Rock Shelter, which is in Pennsylvania, and
that has tools that are in a layer that's about 15,000 years old.
So it's older than Clovis, they're not Clovis artifacts, so they're simpler artifacts than
that.
The dating of this site is debated.
Some archaeologists don't believe that it's really as old as others think that it is.
It's not alone.
There's a site in Kansas called the Lovewell site that has bones of mastodons that have
been flaked and apparently broken apart.
It looks like humans were altering those bones, and that's also older than 14,000 years ago.
There aren't any artifacts from that site, so it's difficult to show that the humans
were involved in this.
The topper site in South Carolina, which is sort of on the Savannah River, right near
the Georgia border, the topper site has a layer that dates to more than 15,000 years,
that has artifacts in it.
Archaeologists debate whether those artifacts are really the product of humans, or whether
those are natural broken rocks.
In every case, today, there are archaeologists who are still making Herdlichke's argument,
the argument that, well, yeah, there could be something here earlier, but this piece
of evidence for it just isn't as convincing as we want it to be.
We want something clearer.
The clearest example of an early site in the Americas actually comes from the southernmost
part of South America, Monteverde in Chile.
Monteverde has a lowest occupation level, and that's the one that's deepest in the ground,
which means it's the oldest, a lowest occupation level that dates to between 14,200 and 13,900
years ago.
If people are at the southernmost extreme of South America by 14,000 years ago, that
argues that they must have gotten into North America somewhat earlier than that.
How much earlier?
Depends how long it takes a population to grow and expand.
Now, when we think about biological invasions, and let's face it, when we think about humans
entering the new world, this is an invasive species.
It's a species that didn't evolve there, and it's come to this new place, and it's
rapidly spreading.
And biological invasions are not uncommon.
When we think of fire ants spreading across the American south, we're looking at a span
of 50 years, and they've basically spread from Mobile, Alabama across most of the south
in that short span of time.
You see, populations can grow very, very quickly if their growth rate is unconstrained by other
factors.
When humans reach the new world, initially, this is a big shock because they go through
what's probably a very small population to get there.
We've got some signs of the small size of that population.
Those signs come from genetics.
When we consider Native Americans today, they all belong to four different fundamental haplogroups
plus one other one.
Those five haplogroups altogether, they're numbered A, B, C, and D, and X.
A, B, C, and D were the first to be discovered, and that's why they get the easy letters.
X was discovered later.
X is more broadly distributed across the northern tier of Europe, Asia, and into the new world.
A, B, C, and D are basically Asian haplotypes.
They're also shared in the area today around Lake Baikal, which is sort of Central Asia.
Those haplotypes are so few because there were few people that originally got here carrying
them.
In fact, each of them has a couple of different variants that was initially in the population
that came across from Asia, but that's all they have.
If you look at all the people in the new world, they descend from a very small number of founders
that came from that initial population.
That tells us something very interesting.
It tells us that the population that initially got to the Americas was small enough that
it shed probably many of the parasites and pathogens that they would have been carrying
in Asia.
This was a population that's entering a new place where the animals are naive, where it's
easy to make a living because there aren't competitors that are very much like you, and
where you're relatively free of disease.
That's a wonderful situation for a hunter-gatherer to be in.
Interestingly, today, one of the clearest pieces of evidence about the early occupation
of North America comes from feces, an ancient piece of feces which is dried out.
It's called a coprolite when we find it in the ground.
That's a fancy name for feces.
With several layers of a site called Paisley Caves in Oregon, there are human fecal pellets,
and those are recognized early on as human feces, but it wasn't real obvious how old
they were and whether they were genuinely human or whether they might belong to some
other kind of creature until genetics was done on these feces.
Eski Willerslef, who's a researcher in Denmark, is such an interesting person because when
he goes out to a site, he's unafraid to try something new, and nowadays with genetics,
we've seen how we can get genes out of ancient bones, but actually there are very odd contexts
in which you can get genes now.
Willerslef went to Alaska and took drill samples out of the frozen tundra, and in those samples
of tundra, of soil, he found mammoth DNA.
This was odd.
I looked at that and I thought, how much mammoth do you have to have so that you can drill
in some random place and find evidence of their DNA?
Willerslef figured this out.
He said, what's going on?
And he was able to confirm this by going to Africa with game reserves where they today
have elephants.
What's going on is that the elephants urinate and defecate on the ground, and that percolates
into the soil, and it's carrying the DNA down, and the DNA will preserve because it
can be bound up in soil minerals, and so if you look at it in the right way, you're going
to find this DNA evidence.
He was able to do this with the human feces and paisley caves, and he was able to show
that this not only preserved one of the haplotypes that Native Americans carried with them from
Siberia.
So it's genuine, it's human, and it's the right age, but also they showed that this
definitely was in a layer that was about 14,300 years old.
So it's definitely pre-Clovis by around 1,000 years.
So all in all, we have a pretty good indication that there is a pre-Clovis occupation.
It's not a long evidence of occupation before Clovis.
It's somewhat a little before 14,000 years ago, and probably that's as much as we're
going to find in the sense that this is such a potentially rapidly growing population that
it would have quickly filled the space, and we should find evidence of it quite quickly
after it arrives.
So sometime a little before 14,000 years seems to be the time that people get here.
This is potentially a bit of a problem, because that's a time when it was very difficult to
move through the ice sheet.
It's not an ice-free corridor that could have gotten people here then.
Today, the tendency is for archaeologists to believe that they came down the coast, that
this was a maritime-adapted population with boats.
And we actually have archaeological evidence from along the western coast of the United
States that confirms this.
On the Catalina Islands today, there are archaeological deposits that date to before
13,000 years ago, shell middens where they were gathering seafood resources and piling
up the shells, and in those middens, there are little stemmed points, points that are
used probably for hunting birds or other kinds of small animals.
Those stemmed points might represent this maritime population, which would have been
equipped to rapidly spread all the way down the western coast of North America and into
South America very early.
So the habitation of the new world today looks like a very rapid process, but an interesting
one, because it's showing that people are shifting from one type of adaptation to another
type of adaptation, rapidly spreading across both North and South America and establishing
their populations there, which ultimately would lead to great diversity in the new world.
The next lecture, we're going to consider how the Old World compares in basically a
similar time frame, but as we'll see, there's the burst of population movements in the Old
World across this time as well.
