One of the major goals of this course is to have you view language as a biological, psychological, and social system that's the product of forces over multiple time frames.
We've been talking about the evolutionary and historical time frames, and soon we'll move on to shorter ones, like the developmental and moment-to-moment.
But first, in this lecture, I want to give you a taste of how these time frames converge across different levels of analysis to tell a story of what our earliest attempts at language might have looked like.
I'll do this by highlighting an everyday behavior that often flies under the radar, hand gesture.
My bold claim is that the human body, the human hand in particular, was the foundation on which humans initially built language.
To support this claim, there's no single piece of evidence, no definitive clue, so we'll need to put together four different pieces of the puzzle to make the case.
The first piece comes from neuroscience. Spoken language and manual gesture are bound in the brain.
The second piece stems from gesture's present-day prevalence. It's absolutely everywhere.
The third considers how humans use gesture uniquely compared to other species.
And the fourth concerns the many positive functions of gesture for present-day communication.
No one piece of evidence is strong enough to make the case alone, but when considered together, they tell a convincing story of how gestures had a powerful hand in the emergence of language.
Before we get into the brain, I need to set up some context.
Recall Noam Chomsky's nativist view that there is something special about human brains at birth that makes them uniquely adapted to language.
According to Chomsky, these language-ready brains allow children to make sense of any language they hear over the course of development without and even despite explicit instruction.
Chomsky's theory treats the brain like a computer with a hardwired and specialized module for knowing the fundamental rules of all languages.
When a child receives the input of a particular language, like French, Swahili, or Urdu, the module activates and the appropriate language develops.
Chomsky's approach to language is like that of a biologist who carefully dissects organisms in the laboratory.
Such an approach is great for describing the basic structure of a thing, but not so great at understanding how the thing actually behaves in the wild.
This realization has led to a shift away from Chomsky's approach of describing the structure of language in isolation to an approach that explains the function of language in context.
One big consequence of this shift has been to bring language back to its natural habitat, the human body.
Over the past 25 years, researchers across disciplines, psychologists, linguists, neuroscientists, anthropologists, and biologists, they've all embraced this embodied view.
Most scholars now believe that language is not a pre-made and specialized module in the brain at birth.
Instead, they see it as emerging from more general cognitive and social skills that combine with physical interactions with others over development.
Bringing language back to the body, its original home, has renewed interest in the evolutionary origins of language.
Have you ever been curious about the first humans to use language?
Ever wondered about the initial step from grunts and shrieks to words and sentences?
Many now believe that this missing link was not just more sophisticated grunting and shrieking, it was the hands.
Try to imagine this time in our evolutionary past.
How might have gestures functioned as an early precursor to language?
One basic function of gesture is to represent things in the non-here and now.
Our ancestors could point to places out of sight, over a hill or in a cave, and they could imitate actions on non-present objects, flinting two virtual stones together.
Those things are hard to represent with grunts and shrieks alone.
The example of the stones reveals another powerful use of gesture.
It's one thing to communicate how to build a fire using actual rocks.
It's another to do it with imaginary rocks.
Gestures require a cognitive inference.
The hands do not contain rocks.
They are symbolically used to represent the holding of rocks.
This representational nature of gesture is at the core of all linguistic communication.
Symbols are not things.
They stand for things.
And what's interesting about gesture symbols is that they are more iconic and therefore less arbitrary than spoken symbols.
Given that iconic symbols are easier to understand than arbitrary ones, gestures may have been the first bridge from acting on real things
to using symbols for things.
Now, this claim about the body being the first rudimentary form of language is not entirely new.
Darwin himself said something similar almost 150 years ago.
But he focused more on emotions conveyed through body expressions and body posture and facial animations.
This new twist provided by hand gesture is that communication could go beyond only expressing immediate needs and emotions.
The hands opened up new worlds by capturing more complex ideas about events occurring not just in the here and now, but in the past and future too.
Now, this is a great story, but it's very hard to find direct archaeological support for such a claim.
Unlike the origin of actual physical tools, there are no fossils for language and gesture.
Because of this, one approach is to study the brain structures of present day humans to get some clues about the past.
Human language is built on brain regions that contribute to controlling the hands.
For example, structures in the left hemisphere involved in language are also involved in grasping objects.
We know this not only from cases of brain damage, where speech and gesture both break down, but from neuroimaging studies with healthy subjects as well.
One powerful neuroimaging technique is functional magnetic resonance imaging, or fMRI.
FMRI uses extremely strong magnets to detect blood flow changes in the brain.
The technology is complex, but the logic is simple.
Where there is blood, there's neural activity.
Using this logic, dozens of fMRI studies have shown that traditional areas involved in language that are located in the left hemisphere are active when people engage in spoken language and manual reaching behaviors.
The overlap between language and action in the brain is not just general, it's highly specific.
We know from the pioneering work of American Canadian neurosurgeon Wilder Penfield that the human brain is organized in a topographical way, like a city with distinct but interconnected neighborhoods.
Penfield did brain surgery to treat severe epilepsy in his patients.
After removing a portion of the patient's skull while under local anesthesia, but wide awake, he delivered mild electrical shocks to different parts of the brain to know where to operate.
So if he stimulated the part that controls the right hand, patients would move that hand involuntarily.
And if he stimulated the part that controls the right foot, patients would move the right foot.
Decades later, Friedman Pulvermuller of the Free University in Berlin showed that language was also mapped onto motor areas in the brain.
Using fMRI, he explored what happened when people listened to verbs associated with different parts of their bodies.
He found that when subjects heard a word having to do with their hands, like throat, the region that controls the hands became active in the brain.
And when they heard a word having to do with their foot, like kick, their foot region became active.
Work like this has led to a theory of brain functioning called simulation theory.
This states that one way we understand language and concepts more generally is by neurally simulating how we would actually interact with real objects in the world.
So language uses the body just as much as the body uses language.
This neural link between language and the hands is perhaps most apparent in the case of sign language.
Like spoken language, sign languages operate according to a set of grammatical rules that vary by language but are consistent within the language.
This gives sign language the same power as spoken languages to create an infinite number of meanings by stringing together signs in novel ways.
From a neural point of view, the machinery underlying sign in spoken language is mostly the same.
Damage to traditional language areas of the brain cause the same problems in sign and speech.
And when you put a signer in an fMRI scanner, sign language activates the same neural network as spoken language.
To sum up, although there's no definitive archaeological evidence showing that language originated in the body, we can get clues about the past by looking at the present.
The fact that the hands are so closely tied to language in present-day brains suggests that language was born in the body and grew up from there.
Let's look a little closer at present-day behavioral fossils for language.
If gesture is still linked to speech in current language use, this would suggest an even tighter relationship in our past.
Research shows that people of all ages, languages, and cultures gesture when they speak.
In fact, children gesture before they speak.
And these early gestures don't seem to be random hand-waving.
Delays in gesture often lead to delays in speech.
And in many cases, absence of gesture can be a diagnostic feature of language and social impairments, like autism.
Gesture accompanies the nearly 7,000 distinct spoken languages documented in the world.
And it's not new to the scene.
Gesture has been depicted in religious art for millennia in all parts of the world.
And the famous Roman orator, Quintilian, even wrote a textbook almost 2,000 years ago on how to effectively use hand gestures when giving speeches.
If you've ever used the OK sign, that would have gone over very well in ancient Rome.
Not only are gestures so widespread, but they spring up in the most unexpected places.
For example, let me ask you a question, and be honest.
Have you ever noticed that you gesture while talking on the phone?
If you answered yes, let me ask you another question.
Why would you do that? Nobody can see you. It must look ridiculous.
And did you know that blind people gesture? Not only that, blind people gesture when talking to other blind people.
And their gestures look a lot like sighted people's gestures.
Blind people even gesture when giving directions.
The fact that most people haven't thought much about their gestures, on the phone or otherwise, speaks to another fascinating thing about these everyday hand movements.
They do not need to be taught and occur spontaneously without effort.
In fact, it's much more difficult to stop yourself from gesturing than it is to start doing it in the first place.
At this point, I need to pause to make an apology.
Now that I've told you how widespread and unconscious gesturing is, you might be a little self-conscious about what you do with your hands for a little while.
But I encourage you to let that pass, because as you'll soon see, gesturing has all sorts of positive benefits.
So here's this ubiquitous behavior that often flies under the radar and pops up in the most unexpected places.
Why on earth do we do it?
David McNeil, a linguist at the University of Chicago, has the most established theory for why we gesture.
McNeil argues that the reason we gesture when we speak is that gesture and speech are part and parcel of language.
They're actually two different, but tightly coupled incarnations of our thoughts.
Take speech.
As you know, because it's highly arbitrary and conventional, it means that words are not inherently related to their meaning.
For example, the word nomu, which means drink in Japanese, is just an arbitrary convention for capturing the meaning of drinking, just as the word drink is an arbitrary label in English.
On the other hand, gesture is imagistic and idiosyncratic, which means that the form of gesture directly relates to its meaning.
If I described drinking from a sake cup in Kyoto, highly recommended by the way, my gesture would shape itself to that particular action.
But if I described drinking from a beer stein in Munich, also recommended, my gesture would adjust accordingly.
McNeil's theory states that gesture and speech are simply two sides of the same thought, and only by considering them together would you be able to understand someone's complete message.
For example, suppose a friend described to you how he got into a car accident by saying, I didn't see it coming.
And now picture your friend showing how the cars collided by simultaneously making a T gesture.
The combination of the speech and gesture would reveal what happened.
The reason your friend didn't see it coming was that the other car blindsided him from the passenger side.
One way to think about this relationship is to consider the behavior of running.
To run properly, you need to coordinate your arms and your feet.
Sure, you can run without moving your arms, but it looks kind of funny and it just makes it a lot harder.
Just as it's most optimal to move your arms and legs together when you run, coordinating your hands and your mouth is most natural when you speak.
So if gestures are so prevalent and such a fundamental part of language in humans, we should use them differently than other animals that do not have language.
Let's turn to that piece of evidence next.
The leading expert on comparing gestures in humans and nonhumans is Michael Tomasello.
Tomasello theorizes that human language is unique, not because it's special in and of itself, but because it's built on special social skills that have evolved uniquely and distinctively in humans.
This quote nicely captures his position. Asking why only humans use language is like asking why only humans build skyscrapers when the fact is that only humans among primates build freestanding shelters at all.
What Tomasello is saying is that of course language is unique, but that's obvious. What's unique about language is so much broader than that.
What's unique are more fundamental social skills that comprise what he calls shared intentionality.
For one thing, we are driven to share attention and cooperate with one another.
And secondly, we are remarkable mind readers.
For Tomasello, both of these basic functions, these basic social functions manifest themselves first in children's hand gestures.
Even though animals such as chimps can be trained to point at things, their gestures all attempt to satisfy immediate desires, such as getting a reward.
Human gestures have two additional functions.
One is simply to share attention with other people.
To appreciate this, consider how much pointing happens when you read a picture book to a two year old.
The child is not requesting anything.
If she points to a picture of the moon, she doesn't really want the moon.
She simply wants to share attention to it, even if she's pointed to it a hundred times before.
That is a uniquely human behavior.
A second unique function is to offer help.
Imagine you're in a cafe and you notice another customer drop a $10 bill as she walks by your table to pay.
Most people would reflexively make eye contact with the person and point to the money on the ground, even though they would profit from taking the money themselves.
This cooperative use of gesture is distinctive to humans.
If a chimp saw food being dropped by another chimp, it wouldn't point.
If anything, it would act selfishly and take the food for itself.
In both of these examples, note the complex mind reading that is required.
In the first case, the adult and child each have to know that pointing to the picture of the moon is not a request for the moon.
And crucially, they have to know that the other knows it too.
And in the cafe example, the other customer has to know that you're not requesting the $10 bill for yourself in a finder's keeper sort of way.
The key is that you both mutually know that the intention is to be cooperative.
Without this mutual knowledge of intentions, both interactions would go quite differently.
This mind reading happens all the time with humans, and without it, gestures would take on quite different meanings.
I bet that some of you are dog people, so I should mention that canines are the kings of gesture compared to the rest of the animal kingdom.
Not only are they great at following human pointing gestures to identify objects that they desire, they can even produce gestures themselves to point out those objects to humans.
But still, dogs come up short in more sophisticated uses of gesture.
For example, they have very little interest in gestures about objects that do not benefit them.
And they can't use gestures to learn new things that are not in the here and now.
For example, imagine an infant watching an adult point to an opaque bucket and say the word MODI.
Then silently, the adult pulls out a novel object from that bucket and a different object from a different bucket and puts them both in front of the child.
If the adult then asks for the MODI, said, where's the MODI?
18-month-old infants would hand over the correct object, even though they never directly saw it labeled.
This is pretty remarkable.
But if you did the same experiment with a dog, it would just wag its tail.
It just wouldn't get it.
According to Tomasello, these differences in how humans and nonhumans use and interpret gestures are at the heart of what makes us different from all other species.
Humans use gestures as a way to read minds and coordinate actions with others.
This mind reading and social cooperation is what language is all about.
And the fact that gesture is such a handy tool for doing it speaks volumes about its importance.
So it seems that gestures are not only prevalent in humans, they're used uniquely by humans.
Let's turn now to the benefits of these uniquely human gestures.
But before I reveal the final clue, let me ask you a question.
Why do you think we gesture?
Or put another way, who do you think we gesture for?
If the first thing that popped into your head is that we gesture for other people, you'd have company.
That's what most people think.
And you'd be right.
We do gesture for others.
But that's only half the story.
The other reason we gesture is a surprise to many people.
Scientific research shows that we also gesture for ourselves.
You can think of these as the external function.
We gesture for the benefit of others.
And the internal function.
We gesture for our own benefit.
As you'll soon see, a single gesture often has both functions.
So let's break them down in order.
First, let's consider what gesture does for other people.
Outside of sign language, the clearest example of gesture that is designed for other people is what's called an emblem.
These are conventionalized hand shapes that often stand alone in their meaning.
The okay sign is an emblem.
So is the thumbs up gesture.
But don't make a thumbs up gesture in Greece because it means something very different there.
There it means something more like a gesture with the middle finger.
Don't do it.
According to Adam Kenden, one of the pioneers of modern gesture research, emblems have the advantage of not needing speech, which works well in situations requiring discretion or stealth.
Another advantage is that they're effective at a distance in noisy environments.
If you've ever wandered a crowded marketplace in a big city or been on the trading floor of a major stock exchange, you've no doubt seen a flurry of these emblems.
By the way, neuroimaging research shows that the brain treats these emblems just like actual spoken words.
The most widespread gestures are the ones that accompany speech, like the ones I've been producing in this lecture.
These co-speech gestures play all sorts of roles in communication.
As I mentioned earlier, young children use adult gestures to help them learn the meaning of words.
There's also evidence that gestures produced by parents affect children's language skills later in life.
For example, Meredith Rowe at Harvard has found that the more apparent gesture to children at 14 months of age, the larger the children's vocabulary three years later.
A second function is that gestures help make a message clearer.
If I were to tell you that a colleague was up late last night, my accompanying drinking gesture would help you better understand why he looked so under the weather this morning.
And research shows that people don't often notice when information is slipped by in gesture.
I wonder how many lawyers use this trick in the courtroom.
Because gesture adds meaning to speech, it can be used to help people learn new things.
Have you ever taken a foreign language course? I bet there was a lot of gesture.
Research out of my lab at Colgate shows that these gestures can improve recall and retention by up to 50%.
And even if your language skills have gotten a little bit rusty, you can always compensate in a foreign country by using your hands.
Just go easy on the thumbs up gesture in Athens.
Not only do co-speech gestures help make a person's message clear, they help a person make a better impression.
For example, in the context of the classroom, research shows that students like teachers who gesture during a lecture more than ones who don't.
Not only that, students say that they learn more from teachers who gesture.
Gesture can also function to build rapport between people.
As many successful salespeople and politicians already know, subtly mimicking another person's gestures can increase persuasiveness.
Kristen Casers of the University of Amsterdam has used fMRI to show that this mirroring of others' gestures even causes people's brains to become synchronized.
This sort of neural coupling can lead to feelings of trust.
But there's a catch. If others notice that you're intentionally mirroring them, the spell is broken.
To most people, it's a bit counterintuitive that gesture would also serve a purpose for the person producing it.
After all, why would moving your hands affect what comes out of your mouth?
Traditional views of language, like Chomsky's theory, they don't offer good answers to this question.
For them, language should be its own special thing, separated off from other things, like the body.
But embodied theories of language not only explain why we gesture, they actually predict it.
If gesturing is like moving your arms while running, it's no surprise that people gesture while speaking.
It makes speaking so much easier.
Have you ever been stuck trying to come up with a word only to be saved by your gestures?
That's because gestures have access to your thoughts in a different way than your words do.
So moving your hands can move your mind.
An extreme example of this is what Susan Golden Meadow at the University of Chicago calls a gesture-speech mismatch.
A mismatch is when someone says one thing with their words, but another with their hands.
Golden Meadow shows that the combination of both things reveals the complete thought.
You must combine them together.
For example, we all know as adults that changing the appearance of something, such as a tall glass of water,
by transforming it into another thing, say pouring it into a short, wide dish.
This transformation does not change the essence of that thing.
The amount of water is the same.
Only the appearance has changed.
But flashback to your seven-year-old self.
Back then, you would have not have understood this and would have been easily fooled by the change of appearance.
Here's the interesting thing.
Just before seven-year-olds figure this out, their gestures often lead the way.
Golden Meadow's research shows that children who are just at the transition of not being fooled by appearances,
they often produce gestures that complement their speech.
If they speak about the different heights of the containers, they may simultaneously gesture about the different widths.
In this way, the information in the gesture compensates for the contents of the speech and reveals a more sophisticated understanding.
The containers may be different heights, but that's offset by their different widths.
This basic phenomenon applies to any problem where there's a significant transition in knowledge,
and it occurs not just in children, but adults, too.
And here's the most interesting thing.
It's not just that gesture reflects people's changing knowledge.
It actually changes their knowledge.
For example, allowing someone to gesture on a hard math problem can give new insights on how to solve that problem.
And on the flip side, prohibiting someone from gesturing disrupts their ability to think about that thing.
To prove it, here's a good bar bit.
Ask someone to place their palms on the counter and then put two coasters on the back of their hands.
Then give them 10 seconds to explain how they tie a shoe.
If they can't finish in time or if the coasters move at all, they owe you a beer.
Trust me, you'll win that pet a lot more than you lose it.
The idea behind this goes back to simulation theory.
The knowledge of tying your shoe is not stored abstractly in the brain like a computer file.
It's stored more concretely in the form of how you would actually execute the action for real.
In this way, gesture is a handy tool for connecting language to actual actions on the world.
So gestures have multiple functions for both people viewing and producing them.
These benefits are not mutually exclusive.
A gesture that helps me can also help you too.
Not bad for a tool that comes as standard equipment for all of us.
Today, I presented four clues that language emerged from gesture communication in our evolutionary past.
From embodied brains to the widespread prevalence of gesture and from its human uniqueness to the many benefits it has for us.
The evidence suggests that language was born in the body and grew up from there.
This story of the origins of language will be useful for setting up our next sections on the developmental and moment-to-moment timeframes.
Hopefully you're starting to appreciate that the larger timeframes are necessary for understanding the smaller ones.
As we go forward and focus on questions about how we learn language and constantly use it to solve problems, try to keep this broader frame in mind.
As we go forward with social movements, a device linking, imagination and be positive that allow us to Спanittles the same way throughGet them in our country.
We're still using another
