Have you ever seen the film Invasion of the Body Snatchers?
Here's the basic plot.
Earth's been invaded by aliens who abduct people in their sleep
and replace them with exact duplicates grown in large pods.
Once hatched, these imposters pretend to be human while hunting for fresh bodies.
This makes for great science fiction, but it feels like a reality for people with a rare disorder.
It's called Capgras delusion.
In 1923, the French psychiatrist Dr. Joseph Capgras described the condition as a profound delusion
that a close loved one has been replaced with a perfectly disguised imposter.
Now, this is a very specific belief.
It usually only pertains to a single individual, like a spouse, parent, sibling, or even a pet.
Not only that, in some cases, the disturbance may be the only clinical abnormality a person exhibits.
In this lecture, we'll discuss the neural mechanisms of Capgras delusion
as a way to capture three basic principles of the human brain.
Following that, I'll explain how advances in neuroscience methods
are allowing scientists to ask new questions about how the brain works.
The goal is to set up the next few lectures on the neural mechanisms
for language on the moment-to-moment time frame.
Before I present the three big principles,
let me briefly start with a basic assumption about the brain.
You can think of this as a fundamental axiom of cognitive neuroscience.
Recall back to the first lecture when we discussed the dangers of reductionism.
Even though most scientists believe that the mind can't be reduced
to only what happens in the brain, all scientists do agree
that the brain is involved in every aspect of the mind.
That's just basic biology.
Denying this would be like saying that
heart cells aren't involved in every aspect of blood circulation.
Sure, they may be more or less important for different parts of blood flow,
but without them, the system just doesn't work.
Same with the brain and mind.
So to understand how someone could believe that a loved one was replaced by an imposter
looking for clues in the brain is a must.
The first principle is neural specialization.
During prenatal development, genes help to direct traffic,
guiding which cells should migrate to which parts of the brain.
Most of these cells are designed to go to very specific places
and to serve highly specialized functions.
And once they arrive, many require further input from the environment
to activate their particular roles.
Once a cell's function is set,
it usually serves a very specified and stable function
over an individual's lifetime.
For example, consider vision cells in the occipital lobe.
Cells in this area have very specialized roles,
and they're organized in a highly structured way.
There are different cells dedicated for processing color, edges, and motion.
And each of these cell types is located in its own neighborhood in the visual system.
This pervasive localization and specialization is called topographical organization,
and it exists not just in vision, but in all sensory systems in the brain.
So let's connect this to our CAPGRA example.
When a CAPGRA patient views her father as an imposter,
there's a very specific part of the brain that responds to the face of her father.
And you already know the name of this region from an earlier lecture.
It's the fusiform face area or expertise area.
The FFA is on the outer edges of the occipital lobe,
and as you know, it's specialized for processing highly meaningful visual stimuli, like faces.
Although the exact location of these face-specific cells is different across people,
they're in the same basic neighborhood for everyone.
This is important because it shows two things.
Although the brain shares the same general organization across the population,
the specifics of that structure vary greatly across individuals.
This principle of specialization works in tandem with the second principle, which is this.
The brain is an elaborate network.
Yes, some basic functions of the brain are localized in just one area,
like visual cells for processing color, edges, and motion.
But complex processes like vision must integrate these sub-processes,
so an interconnected neural network is required.
This means that for most aspects of the mind,
you must understand how the specialized sub-regions of the brain interact.
To illustrate this, the neuroscientist David Eagleman uses the metaphor of a city.
Suppose you're interested in where something as complex as the economy is located in New York City.
It doesn't make sense to pick out a particular address or even neighborhood and say,
there, that's where the economy is.
Instead, you need to think about it as something emerging out of the interaction of many different locations in New York.
Running with this metaphor a bit further,
it's worth pointing out that certain neighborhoods of a city have unique features,
and they even serve specialized functions,
like districts for finance, entertainment, and housing.
And for New York to function properly,
these different areas must be connected by things like sidewalks, roads, and bridges,
not to mention pipes, wires, and satellite links.
This metaphor highlights a crucial point about the brain as a network.
The specialized regions of the brain are no more important than the connections that bind them.
Breakdowns in either of these things cause major problems for the brain.
We've already seen this sort of breakdown with prosopagnosia.
Remember, that's when people can't recognize faces, even their own.
That disorder is caused by damage directly to face processing cells and the FFA.
But the connections to other areas are fine.
Kapkara delusion is the opposite.
The FFA is undamaged.
It's the connections that are broken.
The exact mechanism involved in Kapkara delusion is still being worked out,
but we know from research on brain damage that it involves links between the FFA
and other key brain areas.
One mechanism, favored by V.S. Ramachandran,
is that connections between the FFA and emotional hubs in the limbic system,
they're disruptive.
And this causes people to view faces of loved ones without that old familiar glow.
So a Kapkara patient would see her father, but feel nothing.
Another mechanism put forth by Michael Fox's team at Harvard Medical School
implicates connections with the right frontal lobe,
which is involved in reasoning about one's beliefs
and keeping those beliefs grounded in reality.
Putting these two mechanisms together,
it's possible that Kapkara patients are alarmed that they don't feel the right emotion
when they view a particular loved one.
And a disconnection to the frontal lobe allows the brain to spin an unbelievable story
to explain why.
Incidentally, the brain is a wonderful storyteller.
More on that in later lectures.
This network property of the brain is so important
that the National Institutes of Health have an official name for it,
the connectome.
We've made great progress mapping the location of specialized brain regions,
and the NIH is heavily invested in the next frontier of charting
the connections among these regions.
The expected payoff is not only to advance basic knowledge about how the mind works,
but also to help treat diseases of the brain like Alzheimer's and depression.
Now, let's turn to the third principle,
and it's one that we've already discussed at length.
The brain is plastic and built for change.
This is especially true early in life.
But even though it gets less plastic the older you get,
your brain is capable of change throughout your lifetime.
It had better be, or else you'd be in big trouble.
Every time you learn something new, no matter how old you are, your brain changes.
At the biological level, neural change is what learning is.
This plasticity is integral to the first two principles.
Even though genetics sets the basic blueprints for the brain,
experience with the outside world is necessary to activate and fill in the details for many functions.
For example, this is true in the FFA,
where experience with particular faces is necessary for specializing cells to process those faces.
Think about it.
Nobody is born with specific cells in the FFA that innately fire in response to her father.
Those cells must be first specialized through a meaningful visual contact with a person's father after she is born.
Same story with the connectome.
These brain networks are not fully in place at birth,
and they require extensive experience to connect up all the parts.
For example, at the same time the FFA is specializing for faces,
it's also making connections to brain regions that give meaning to those faces.
You know that familiar glow that comes from viewing the face of a loved one?
That's not built into the FFA.
It comes from connecting the FFA to the limbic system,
which produces a learned emotional response to the face.
This connection builds up through Hebbian learning,
which over time strengthens the links between the two areas.
If this connection gets damaged, it can cause major problems with face processing,
even though the FFA and the limbic system are perfectly fine.
Plasticity is also the key to recovery from broken connections in the brain.
There are no drugs to fix brain damage.
The main treatment is to undergo intense mental rehab.
This seems obvious in cases of most other physical injuries,
like a torn ACL, where extensive rehab is necessary for recovery.
The same principle applies to recovering mental functions.
What do you think clinical psychologists are doing for patients
suffering from psychological problems like depression or obsessive-compulsive disorder?
They're trying to rewire the connections of the brain
to change how the patient experiences the world.
So if a patient suffers from Capgras delusion,
one treatment may be to repeatedly associate pictures of a loved one
with positive emotions.
Over time, this may allow weakened connections to get stronger.
And in highly plastic young brains,
it could even help create new connections to replace the old ones.
So there they are, the three basic principles.
The devil's in the details,
but these general guidelines will help make sense of the next few lectures.
What I want to do now is to give you a little bit more background
on the techniques that neuroscientists use
to measure and test these basic brain principles.
So far, I've kept things pretty superficial with regard to neural methods,
but I think we're ready to dive in a little deeper.
According to President George Herbert Walker Bush and the National Institutes of Health,
the 1990s were the decade of the brain.
Looking back, it really was an exciting time for neuroscience.
There were so many areas of growth,
but one of the most significant legacies
was the spread of neuroimaging techniques available to scientists.
In general, these techniques investigate two basic things.
There are spatial tools for helping researchers pinpoint where things happen in the brain,
and there are temporal tools for recording when they happen.
This spatial and temporal information provides two pieces of the puzzle
in helping researchers know what is happening in the brain.
Think of each type of information as a clue
that brain detectives can use to solve a mystery.
Imagine a crime where a museum discovers that a precious painting
has been swapped with a forgery
while being transported from one city to another.
For any detective on the case,
one of the first orders of business is to find the crime scene.
Where did the switch happen?
Now, suppose there's a grainy surveillance video
that identifies two possible suspects
switching the painting just when it arrives to the new museum.
That's the location.
The next key step is to determine
whether the suspects were in the vicinity of the crime scene at that time.
If you could prove that they were there at the exact time of the crime,
that'd be a lot better than proving that they were there
days or even hours before or after.
Neuroimaging of the brain is the same.
Knowing where something happens helps you solve only one part of the problem.
You must also know when something happens to get the complete picture.
Together, this spatial and temporal information
is much more informative than either piece alone.
Traditionally, human neuroimaging techniques
have been good only at spatial or temporal measurements,
but more recent techniques have combined the benefits of both.
Let's take them up in order.
Spatial neuroimaging techniques answer the where question of brain activity.
The modern tools are called structural imaging techniques,
but for the longest times,
researchers had to mostly rely on post-mortem analyses of brain damage
to map out how different parts of the brain
relate to different aspects of behavior.
For example, in the mid to late 1800s,
the physicians Paul Broca from France
and Karl Wernicke from Germany
carefully documented the location of damaged brain regions
in patients who suffered from a disorder called aphasia.
The word aphasia comes from Greek and means lack of speech.
Before Broca and Wernicke,
aphasia was a hodgepodge sort of disorder
with patients showing a wide range of speech problems.
From not being able to understand speech
to not being able to produce it.
In post-mortem analyses of a few case studies,
Broca and Wernicke discovered that damage
to different parts of the left hemisphere
were associated with different speech deficits.
Specifically, damage to the area
in the left inferior frontal gyrus
was linked with deficits in speech production,
and damage to the area in the left superior temporal sulcus
was linked with deficits in speech comprehension.
Similar patterns were observed in many case studies
after Broca and Wernicke,
but it wasn't until almost 100 years later
when scientists could see this damage
in actual living brains.
One of the first spatial imaging tools
introduced in the 1970s
was called a computed tomography scan, or CT scan,
which basically takes an x-ray of the brain.
Since then, techniques such as positron emission tomography,
or PET, and magnetic resonance imaging, or MRI,
have become the preferred tools
for investigating how brain damage maps
onto behavioral deficits.
These tools are called structural imaging techniques
because they take static snapshots of brain structures,
and many of these snapshots can be compared
to determine what areas are reliably associated
with behavioral impairments.
So unlike the traditional case studies
that looked at a handful of brains,
these techniques allowed scientists
to compile entire inventories of brain images
to more precisely describe brain behavior relationships.
Another strength of these techniques
is that they can look at brain structures
immediately after damage,
before there is any time for the brain's plasticity
to compensate for the damage.
After all, traditional brain damage studies
had to wait until the patient died
to look at brain structure,
which could happen decades following the actual damage.
However, there is one giant limitation
of these structural imaging techniques.
Because they are static snapshots
of the structure of the brain at rest,
they can't directly measure brain activity
while it is actively engaged in some sort of behavior.
In other words,
it's not possible to link a brain function
to a particular cognitive or social behavior.
For that, we would need a tool
that can measure how the brain changes
from one moment to the next
as it is engaged in some activity.
Enter fMRI,
or functional magnetic resonance imaging.
In the early 1990s,
Dr. Seiji Ogawa and his team
at AT&T Bell Labs
added an important component
to traditional MRI techniques.
Standard MRI measures magnetic properties
of the brain
to make a map of brain structure.
But fMRI was also able to measure
real-time changes in brain function
by recording the magnetic properties
of blood flow within those structures.
The idea of measuring blood flow
is pretty straightforward.
Where there's a change in blood flow,
there's a change in neural activity.
So if you follow the blood,
you see where the action is.
This technique led to an exponential increase
in the research on brain function
and has given rise to several new fields
like cognitive neuroscience,
clinical neuroscience,
and even neuroeconomics.
These fields have made it possible
to answer questions
that were previously out of reach
using data from structural imaging.
For example,
disorders such as Capgara delusion
would likely be totally missed
by relying only on
structural imaging techniques
because the structures may appear intact,
but the breakdown is in how
the structures function
and connect with one another.
Looking at blood flow,
we can see which parts of the network
are working properly
and which parts are compromised.
Building on the fMRI technology,
researchers can use software
to map connective tissue
among brain areas
to map out the connections in the brain.
Diffusion tensor imaging, or DTI,
is one technique
that can create maps
of white matter tracks
to better understand
the information superhighways of the brain.
This innovation
is one of the reasons
we now have a much better understanding
of the neural connectome.
Now, as useful as it is
to understand
where things happen in the brain,
we also discussed
how important it is
to understand when they happen.
In terms of temporal resolution,
techniques such as fMRI
are actually pretty slow,
and this makes sense.
It takes time for blood
to flow to or from
certain brain areas,
meaning that current fMRI sensors
can only see brain changes
that happen on the order of seconds.
You might think
a temporal resolution
on the order of seconds
is pretty good,
but in terms of the speed
of neural processing,
that's a snail's pace.
To get a sense
of how slow
a second really is,
imagine being in a
head-on car crash
and your airbag goes off
one second late.
Milliseconds matter.
The number of computations
the brain makes
in one second
is staggering.
In 2013,
one of the three
most powerful computers
in the world,
a supercomputer in Japan
that could handle
10 quadrillion operations
per second,
required a full 40 minutes
to simulate
an approximation
of what the brain does
in just one second.
So to measure
neural processes
at this level
of temporal resolution,
neuroscientists must rely
on other techniques
that are built for speed.
One of the most
well-established techniques
is called
event-related potentials
or ERPs.
ERPs are portions
of the brain's
EEG signal,
which is measured
by an electroencephalogram.
This EEG signal
is produced
by postsynaptic discharges
of large groups
of neurons in the brain
that pass through
the skull
and are measured
by electrodes
on the scalp.
An ERP
is a time-locked portion
of this EEG signal.
Time-locking means
that an experimenter
records only
the brain's
repeated response
to a particular type
of stimulus,
like a face
or a word.
In this way,
the resulting
electrical average
reflects the neural activity
that is unique
to different stimuli.
So for example,
a researcher studying
a Capgrat patient
may be interested
in the timing
of how the patient
processes the face
of the supposed imposter.
There is a typical
time course
in topography
of a brainwave
that is produced
by a face.
So if the ERP
in response
to the imposter's face
is different
from the face
of a non-imposter,
you can make inferences
about what different
types of neural processes
are involved
when seeing
the imposter.
Specifically,
if the two brainwaves
differ within a couple
hundred milliseconds
of seeing the face,
it would suggest
an early event
that involves
low-level
perceptual processing,
such as how the brain
initially categorizes
the face.
But if the difference
occurs much later,
after about
five hundred milliseconds,
it would suggest
a late event
that involves
higher-level
cognitive processing,
such as how the brain
attaches emotional meaning
to the face.
This sensitivity
to timing
is very useful
for understanding
the downstream effects
of neural activity.
In the connectome,
neural events
that happen early on
have cascading influences
down the line
to influence
many different
brain regions.
In this way,
the timing and location
of neural events
gives us a much
richer picture
of how different parts
of the brain
coordinate their activity
to give rise
to the many functions
of the mind.
In the past few decades,
there have been
technological innovations
that allow neuroscientists
to measure the timing
and location
of neural events.
One of the most powerful
and expensive techniques
is called
magnoencephalography,
or MEG.
MEG uses a powerful magnet
that is supercooled
down to negative
452 degrees Fahrenheit,
which is very close
to absolute zero.
These cooled magnets
are able to detect
very small magnetic fields
that are produced
by electrical generators
in the brain
called dipoles.
By measuring dipole activity,
an MEG can measure
not only the location
of the electrical activity
in small clumps
of thousands of neurons,
but also the millisecond
to millisecond time course
of that neural activity.
Using this combined
spatial and temporal resolution,
an MEG could determine
if a Capgras patient
first processed
two faces similarly
in visual areas
towards the back
of the brain,
but later differentiated them
in frontal regions
of the brain.
This sort of pattern
would lend support
to the hypothesis
that the patient's problem
in Capgras
is not perceptual,
but more evaluative
in nature.
One of the most exciting
developments
in neuroscience techniques
is called
neurostimulation.
Unlike neuroimaging methods,
which are designed
to record brain activity,
neurostimulation
does what it sounds
like it does.
It stimulates brain activity.
The idea is that
neuroimaging
can show researchers
when and where
brain areas are involved
in some sort of process
or behavior,
and then neurostimulation
can actively test
whether that area
is an actual causal mechanism
of that process
or behavior.
For example,
transcranial magnetic stimulation
or TMS
uses handheld electrified coils
to shoot pulses
of magnetic fields
through the skull
into the surface
of the brain.
These magnetic pulses
can either depolarize
or hyperpolarize
large patches of neurons
in particular brain regions.
Generally speaking,
if the region
is depolarized,
it disrupts
that brain region's ability
to do its job.
But if it's hyperpolarized,
it can enhance
that region's ability
to carry out its function.
The disruptions
are sometimes referred to
as virtual brain lesions,
and the enhancements
are occasionally referred to
as neural augmentation.
So if you wanted
to determine
if capgratic delusion
is caused by breakdowns
in the right frontal lobe
during the familiar glow stage
of face processing,
you could test it
in people
who don't have this disorder.
You could use TMS
to disrupt
or create a virtual lesion
this particular brain region
at just the right time,
milliseconds
after showing pictures
of a familiar face
to people
who don't have the delusion.
If the right frontal lobe
is a key mechanism
for capgrat,
the stimulation
may cause problems
in people's ability
to cognitively evaluate
the faces.
This would lend support
for the theory
that capgrat delusion
is not a perceptual problem
as much as it's a problem
of attaching meaning
to faces.
Neurostimulation
has gone to the next level
with a radical technique
that comes straight out
of science fiction novels.
Neurostimulation implants.
Have you ever heard
of deep brain stimulation?
DBS was pioneered
in the mid-1980s
as a powerful new treatment
for Parkinson's disease.
It involves implanting electrodes
in the subthalamic nucleus,
which is a structure
deep in the brain
that produces
the neurotransmitter dopamine.
The idea is that
by stimulating
this part of the brain,
there will be more dopamine
produced in the patient
and this increase
in dopamine
can help reduce
some of the major symptoms
of Parkinson's disease.
Since this initial work
with Parkinson's,
there have been attempts
to place neural implants
in other brain regions
to treat problems
like obsessive-compulsive disorder,
chronic pain,
and even depression.
Some researchers
are now using implants
to record
from a variety
of brain sites
to determine
how and where
different brain regions
contribute
to different brain functions.
It's sort of creepy
to think about
using people's brains
like little skull-enclosed laboratories,
but these technological innovations
allow researchers
to ask questions
about the brain
that they could never ask before.
In the coming lectures,
we'll talk about
how neuroscientists
are using these neural implants
to better understand
how brains engage
in the everyday process
of using language.
But let me wrap up.
For this lecture,
I intentionally chose
an example
of brain functioning
that's pretty bizarre.
Something on the far edges
of the human mind.
That was no accident.
V.S. Ramachandran
has argued
that by understanding
the extremes
of human brain and behavior,
we can get a better sense
of the more typical functioning.
Kapkarad delusion
seems quite peculiar,
but really,
it involves
the same brain mechanisms
that are involved
in how we all process faces.
We owe a lot of knowledge
to the incredible advances
in neuroimaging techniques,
which have given us
new windows
into the mind,
brain, and behavior.
In our next set
of three lectures,
I'll discuss
how these techniques
have given us
specific insights
into how language works,
first in comprehension
and then in production.
Keeping in mind
that language
is not a single thing,
I hope you will appreciate
how the multiple
neural mechanisms
for language
are what make it
such an intricate
and coordinated system.
