Before we can ask some of the really big questions in this course, like where does language come from, or what happens in the brain when we use language, or how does language influence thought, before we can ask those, we need to take a step back and ask a more basic question.
What is language? In this lecture, I'll define five components of language, and then in my next lecture, I'll talk about what is universal to all languages and what makes it unique in the animal kingdom.
To define language, we can start by saying what it isn't. Language is not a single thing. It's a system of things working together as one.
This idea dates back to the late 19th century and comes from one of the founders of modern linguistics, Ferdinand de Saussure.
Although Saussure's ideas of language as a system, these ideas have been around for a very long time, most linguists and psychologists and neuroscientists traditionally approach language by isolating one of its parts and studying it in depth.
This has been great for understanding the components of language, but not so great for understanding how they work together.
To think about language as a system, here's a useful analogy. Language is like the digestive system.
If you want to understand how people digest food, you can't just point to one part of the body and say, there it is, there's digestion.
Instead, you need to recognize that there are several components of digestion working together to get the job done.
For example, the muscles in your jaw clench your teeth and this turns food into something you can swallow.
Then your throat uses smooth muscles to safely transfer the food down to your gut.
In your gut, your stomach releases enzymes that break down the food and then your intestines further break it down and absorb the nutrients.
And, of course, your liver, pancreas, and gallbladder get involved, but you get the idea.
There's no one piece that we call digestion. It's a system.
You should think about language in the same way.
Language has many parts, and each part needs to do its thing to get the job done.
Now, there's actually a very important way that language is not like digestion, and I'll return to that near the end of my lecture.
So, let's try to understand this system.
There are five major components of language, and understanding them individually will help you understand how they work together.
The components are syntax, semantics, morphology, phonetics, and pragmatics.
Just a quick note.
I'll sometimes refer to these as levels, and as a general rule, you can think about lower levels comprising smaller and simpler components
and higher levels containing larger and more complex ones.
Now, let's approach each component by focusing on the following utterance.
I'm getting really hot.
Okay, let's take this utterance and break it down.
Starting at the sentence level, we have syntax.
This component primarily concerns the rules for how a language orders words in a sentence.
In English, we often start with a subject and then follow with a verb, as in I, and then am getting.
Things are different in other languages.
I'm currently trying to learn Japanese, and if I were to say this in Japan, I might say,
which roughly translates into,
Note that the subject has been dropped completely, and now the verb is at the end of the sentence instead of the middle.
Let's take another sentence.
Maybe it's getting hot because the child opened the door.
Note the structure of this sentence, which is the default in English.
Subject, child.
Verb, opened.
Object, door.
This is called an SVO syntax.
Just over 40% of all languages conform to this SVO pattern.
In Spanish, in German, in Mandarin, or some other well-known examples.
However, other languages order sentences differently.
In Japanese, you would say,
That translates more literally as,
This is called an S-O-V language, subject, object, verb.
The majority of the world's languages, about 44%, are S-O-V.
In Turkish, in Hindi, or some other well-known examples.
And there are other combinations, too.
In Welsh, she would say,
Open, child, door.
Verb, subject, object.
And if you were from Madagascar and spoke Madagascar,
it would be,
Open, door, child.
Verb, object, subject.
The point is that there are multiple ways for syntax to get the job done across languages.
In the next lecture, we'll learn about the unique feature of syntax
syntax that allows for unlimited creativity within all languages.
Next, we enter the world of semantics.
In linguistics, semantics is the study of word meanings,
or more technically, the study of symbols and their reference.
So, if you take any of the words in our sample sentence,
you can look each one up in a dictionary and find its meaning.
The semantic component is interesting for lots of reasons,
but one of the most striking things is that the meaning of each word
is traditionally defined by other words.
This makes semantics an endless cycle of symbols referring back to themselves.
However, later in this course, we'll also learn from neuroscience
that word meanings can break free from this endless cycle.
For example, the word hot may be defined by Webster's as
having a relatively high temperature,
a definition involving more words.
But some neuroscientists argue that this understanding is much more concrete, too.
Recent research suggests that one way our brain understands the meaning of the word hot
is by simulating the physical feeling of actually being hot.
We'll come back to this, but I bring it up now just to show
how our understanding of semantics has become more nuanced
as the study of language has become more interdisciplinary.
Another interesting thing that's often taken for granted
is that linguistic symbols differ across languages.
Some of this variation is in sheer number.
One Korean dictionary lists over one million words,
whereas Oxford's Classical Latin Dictionary has about 40,000 entries.
As you may have experienced yourself,
having different words for the same thing can be a real headache
when you're trying to learn a new language.
If you tracked across every country in Europe one summer,
you'd have to learn over 35 words just to say that you are hot.
And that's just one word.
Connecting back to our theme of language as a system,
the semantic component of language is notable for being a system within a system.
There are different word types that have quite different properties.
For example, have you ever heard of open and closed class words?
Open class words form a category of words that can be changed, added, or removed from a language.
In English, these are nouns, verbs, adverbs, and adjectives.
In my lifetime, words like Davenport, meaning couch, and trousers, meaning pants,
have faded into obscurity, and they may soon vanish for good.
But words like email, Brexit, and cell phone have come into existence.
In contrast, closed class words are words from a more fixed category that's not easily altered.
In almost all languages, these are prepositions, articles, and pronouns.
When's the last time you can think of someone making up a new preposition?
Or what are the chances that an article like THEE will go out of style anytime soon?
Actually, pronouns may be different.
Words like I or you are rock solid.
But currently, pronouns like HE and SHE may be changing.
In American English, there is debate about whether HE and SHE should be replaced by the
gender-neutral THEY, or even a new word, ZEE.
It's an interesting time to be a pronoun.
Not surprisingly, these closed and open class words are treated differently by the brain.
In fact, if you ate your head just right, you might lose the ability to use closed class words,
but not open class ones.
The same is true even within word classes.
Certain types of brain damage preserve nouns but wipe out verbs from a patient's language.
There are systems within the system, and as you'll see, the brain is a window into all of them.
The next component is morphology.
This linguistic component is made up of morphemes, which are the smallest meaningful grammatical
units of a language.
Take our example, I'm getting really hot.
The word hot is a single open class morpheme, but every other word in the sentence has two
morphemes, I'm is a contraction of I and am, getting is the verb stem get plus ing, which
is how English indicates an activity happening in the present, and really is real plus ly,
which is how English turns an adjective into an adverb.
Note that ing and ly are closed class morphemes.
You can't just come up with a new verb conjugation or a novel adverb suffix.
You're stuck with the ones your language has.
Languages vary in how many morphemes they pack into a word.
English is pretty light on morphemes.
Most words are maybe one or two, but occasionally you'll come across a word with many more.
Here's a doozy, anti-disestablishmentarianism.
This mouthful of morphemes was created in the 19th century Britain to protest attempts
to remove the Church of England as the official state religion.
By your count, how many morphemes does it have?
The answer is six.
They are anti, dis, establish, meant, Aryan, and ism.
If you think that's a lot, consider the Bantu language, Kavunjo.
In his book, The Language Instinct, Stephen Pinker compares English morphology to checkers
and Kavunjo morphology to chess.
Check out this word that I will definitely mispronounce.
Nakimilia.
This word is roughly translated as, he is eating it for her.
I'm not exactly sure the occasion one would have to say such a thing,
but this 11-letter word contains eight morphemes.
The verb stem, L-Y-I, means eat, and that comes near the end of the word.
Other morphemes indicate tense, focus, and mood.
I won't go through all of them, but I'll point out one that's very different from English.
The second letter, A, with an umlaut above it, is a subject agreement marker.
Kavunjo is a gendered language with 16 genders.
Gender is a technical term in linguistics, and it means much more than just male or female,
as it does in French and Spanish.
It means kind of thing.
In this case, A refers to humans singular.
Pinker explains that other gender markers in Kavunjo differentiate nouns that pertain to several humans,
and even thin or extended objects, objects that come in pairs or clusters,
or instruments, animals, body parts, not to mention other things like abstract qualities,
precise locations, and general locales.
The list goes on.
If you counted up all the Kavunjo words with the verb stem, lia, eat,
and all its morphological possibilities,
that list would be over a half a million words long.
It's worth pointing out that with such complex morphology,
Kavunjo can get away with very simple syntax.
In fact, many sentences in the language are just one word long.
Contrast that with English, which can have some very long and convoluted sentences.
Ever read anything by David Foster Wallace?
His syntax is on another level.
This highlights an important point.
The systems of morphology and the system of syntax
are just two different ways to get the same job done.
They both add complexity to meaning,
but one does it within a word, and the other does it across words.
So it's no accident that a language with a very robust morphology
would have a relatively sparse syntax, like Kavunjo,
and a language with a very robust syntax would have a relatively sparse morphology,
like English.
There are trade-offs within the system.
The smallest part of language is the phonological or phonetic component.
Spoken words and morphemes are all made up of phonemes,
phonemes, which are the most basic, meaningful sound units in a language.
Or in a sign language, they would be the smallest manual units.
English has a total of 44 phonemes,
and in our example sentence, there are 14 of them,
which can also be written in a phonetic alphabet.
I'm getting really hot.
14 phonemes there.
Within a language, there are rules about which phonemes can and cannot follow one another.
So while Polish allows many consonants to cluster without a vowel,
English permits far fewer,
with three at the most at the front of a word, as in splash,
and four maximum at the end of the word, as in twelfths.
These rules are non-negotiable.
If you are a spy and combine phonemes in a way
that doesn't follow the rules of a language,
well, you just blew your cover.
As with morphemes,
there's a large range of phonemes used in different languages.
On the low end,
the Amazonian language, Paraha,
is thought to have only 11 phonemes,
and on the other,
there are African click languages that have up to 141 phonemes.
The range of phonemes reveals one of the challenges
in learning a foreign language.
Different languages often use very different sounds.
It's obvious how this would make it hard
for native English speakers to learn an African click language
because English doesn't use clicking phonemes.
But sometimes it's more challenging
when phonemes in a foreign language
are only slightly different from your own.
For example,
it's well known that Japanese speakers
have great difficulty making the R-L distinction,
and they often confuse words like rice and lice.
But it's not because the R-L sounds
are totally foreign to Japanese speakers.
In fact, Japanese uses an intermediate phoneme
called the flap
that is the phonetic middle ground between R and L.
It sounds like la, as in lamen.
That's the delicious Japanese soup.
Note the difference.
Ra, la.
Ra, la.
In this case,
when native Japanese speakers
hear the English R-L sounds,
they think they're hearing their own native phoneme.
Their brain is playing tricks on them.
And just so you know,
it goes both ways, too.
There are many mistakes that English speakers make
when trying to understand Japanese.
For example,
I always mix up two Japanese words
that have opposite meanings.
Ite in Japanese means stay,
but ite means go.
Such words are called minimal pairs.
They're identical except for one phoneme.
In this case,
the phoneme is called a geminate,
which is just a brief pause
before a consonant sound.
The second item in the pair
has the geminate.
So after the e sound,
you would put a pause
a fraction of a second
before you'd say the te sound.
Here it is exaggerated.
Ite, ite.
In a later lecture,
I'll talk more about these challenges
at the phonetic level.
So now we need to pull back
for a broader view
to talk about the final component of language,
pragmatics.
Pragmatics is all about
how people use language.
And it reveals language
as a powerful tool
for accomplishing social goals.
In the study of pragmatics,
these goals are often referred to
as intentions.
And as you'll soon see,
understanding intentions
can be tricky business.
Let's return to our example.
I'm getting really hot.
If you think about it,
there are many potential meanings
of this utterance.
One meaning is a literal statement
about my rising temperature,
sort of like an uninspired status update
on Facebook.
But it could also have different meanings.
It could be a metaphoric statement
that I'm getting really angry,
as in,
my blood is starting to boil.
Or it could be a sarcastic remark.
Imagine saying it like this.
I'm getting really hot.
Saying it like that
actually has the opposite meaning.
Or maybe it's not even a statement at all,
but an indirect request for something.
Suppose I'm in the backseat of a car
and I said,
I'm getting really hot
to politely request
that the driver turned on the heat.
Or maybe I'm,
maybe I'm requesting a drink of water
or asking someone to open a window.
Who knows?
And that's the point.
There's often nothing inherent
in the literal meaning of the words
that reveals a speaker's intentions.
To solve this problem,
a listener needs to make
a pragmatic inference,
an inference about the intentions
of the speaker.
If you pay close attention,
you might be surprised
at how often the literal content
of what people say
is quite different
from their true intentions.
One more thing.
We've talked about
how the other components of language
have interesting differences
across languages.
Pragmatics is no exception.
Because pragmatics involves social goals,
it interfaces with things like culture
in ways that other parts
of language do not.
In fact, pragmatics is the one component
of language that will probably get you
in the most trouble
when communicating with people
from other cultures.
Many Americans love their sarcasm,
but it comes across as confusing
or worse, rude in some other cultures.
Indirect requests are also highly variable
across countries.
When I speak to my Dutch and German friends,
they often find indirect requests
to be too disguised.
But when I speak to my Japanese friends,
they find my direct request
to be too blunt.
As I said earlier,
pragmatics is tricky business.
Now that I've laid out
these five components of language,
I hope you're starting to appreciate
the comparison to the digestive system.
Just like digestion,
it's not possible to point
to one linguistic component
and say,
there it is,
there's language.
Just like digestion,
the interaction of these
different components
is what defines language
as a system.
But do you recall
that I told you
that language and digestion
differ in one important way?
In digestion,
the sequence of the components
is linear
and operates in stages.
You've got to swallow your food
before your stomach
and break it down,
and this must happen
before your intestines
can absorb the nutrients.
You might be tempted
to think that the five components
of language
operate in the same way.
For example,
when I say these words right now,
you might expect that
processing of my utterance
goes through a predictable sequence
of small to large.
For example,
starting with an analysis
of phonemes,
moving up to chunking them
into morphemes,
and then words,
which is followed by
understanding the syntax
and finished by grasping
my intention.
Makes sense, right?
But language is non-linear
and multi-directional.
In addition to piecing
the smallest units together
into the larger ones,
language works
the other direction, too.
The largest units work backwards
to simultaneously guide
the processing
of the smaller ones.
This multi-directionality
is not how digestion works.
After all,
what happens in your intestines
does not affect
how you swallow your food.
Or an upset stomach
does not cause pain
in your jaw.
In digestion,
what happens down the line
does not have any direct
and profound bearing
on what happens early on.
Language is different.
Language goes multiple ways
at once,
not just some of the time,
but all of the time.
Let's take a look
at three examples
of how larger components
of language feed back
to influence smaller components
of the system.
Let's start with pragmatics.
Pragmatic goals
and intentions
are often the starting point,
not just the ending point,
for all other parts of language.
Returning to our examples
of I'm getting really hot,
note that the meaning
of the utterance
is largely dependent
on the context.
If the context
is that someone
is really angry,
the utterance may be seen
as a metaphor for emotion.
If the context
is that you're actually
in a chilly environment,
it may be interpreted
as sarcasm.
And if the context
is that you know
the speaker is thirsty,
it may be viewed
as an indirect request.
You might think,
well, fine.
First, people process
the literal meaning
of the whole sentence,
and then they consider
the context only later on
to reinterpret the message.
However, scientific studies
show that this is often
not the case.
How many times
have you heard requests like,
can you pass the salt?
Can you close the door?
Can you be quiet?
These are called
conventional indirect requests,
and they all mean something
other than their literal content.
Of course you're capable
of passing the salt.
That's not the question.
Actually, it's not a question at all.
It's a polite request.
What's interesting
is that neuroscience techniques
measuring electrical signals
in the brain
show that the time course
of understanding these requests
happens so fast
that people aren't even
interpreting them
as questions at all.
In other words,
it seems that the brain
bypasses the literal meaning
and goes directly
to the intention.
By the way,
we'll talk much more
about these neuroimaging techniques
in later lectures.
This is a classic example
of a higher component
or level of language,
pragmatics,
feeding downward
onto a lower one,
semantics.
The second example
is a case where
the syntax of a sentence
sets you up
to expect a certain meaning.
Consider this utterance.
Time flies like an arrow,
but fruit flies like a banana.
Strange, huh?
The syntactic trick here
is that flies
in the first part
of the sentence
is a verb,
but in the second part,
it's a noun.
Time flies like an arrow,
but fruit flies like a banana.
They like to eat bananas.
These are called
garden path sentences,
and they're called that
because they lead you
down one syntactic path
only to trick you
with a different one later.
There are all sorts
of examples
of these garden path sentences,
and many of them
are accidental.
Some of the funniest ones
are actual headlines
from real newspapers.
One of my favorites
is this headline,
which is also the title
of a book on the subject
by Gloria Cooper.
Squad helps dog bite victim.
Why on earth
would a canine crew
help a dog to bite a victim?
The key lies in realizing
that dog bite
is actually an adjective
modifying victim
and not the noun dog
doing the biting.
Squad helps dog bite victim.
In other words,
the victim of a dog bite.
These are just a few examples
of how readers and listeners
build up expectations
from syntax
to help anticipate
the meaning of words
before we even read
or hear them.
To illustrate
the third example,
let me play for you
a sentence that was used
in a classic study
by the experimental psychologist
Richard Warren in 1970.
I'll play it for you
three times,
and I ask that you
pay close attention
to how many times
you hear the first S
in the word legislatures.
There are two S's,
so listen for the first one.
Just to help you,
there will be a coughing sound
just to let you know
when you should pay attention.
Here you go.
The state governors
met with their respective
legislatures convening
in the capital city.
The state governors
met with their respective
legislatures convening
in the capital city.
The state governors
met with their respective
legislatures convening
in the capital city.
How many times
did you hear the first S?
If you answered
anything but zero,
your brain just played
a trick on you.
In fact, the cough you heard completely masked the sound in all three sentences.
This phenomenon is called the phonemic restoration effect, and it works like this.
The information in the sentence leading up to the missing sound sets up an expectation that you should hear the phoneme.
So when you heard the cough, your brain simply filled in what it was expecting.
This filling in is actually very common in perception.
In fact, in your field of vision right now, there's one spot in each of your eyes that does not have any photoreceptors.
They're called blind spots.
There's literally a hole in the back of your eye where a large nerve fiber sends signals from the retina to the brain, and you can't see anything there.
Does it feel like you have blind spots right now?
No, and that's because your brain usually fills in these visual gaps with information from the surrounding photoreceptors.
In this way, you use context to override the lower-level inputs.
The same thing happens with the phonemic restoration effect.
So to sum up, here are the two takeaway messages from this lecture.
First, language is not one thing. It's a system of things.
And second, the system is not unidirectional.
Smaller components assemble into larger ones, but the larger components also feed backwards to constrain the smaller ones.
Only by understanding how these components work together as a system can you understand what language is.
In the next lecture, we'll discuss some of the unique features of language and begin to explore what makes it different from all other communication systems on the planet.
Amen.
Thank you.
