To cap off this course, I want to go big.
In the first lecture, I presented the mind as an emergent property produced by a synergy
of the brain, body, and environment.
From the start, I've presented language as a powerful tool in this emergence.
In this final lecture, we'll explore the extent of that power.
But first, to get some perspective, let's consider a few ways that other much more recent
and concrete technologies have transformed the mind.
We've already discussed Archimedes' three simple machines, the lever, pulley, and screw.
These force multipliers revolutionized not only what humans could do, but what they could
imagine, too.
But even more modest tools have helped humans accomplish amazing things.
For example, in 2018, a team of archaeologists led by Roland N. Marg in England and Giannis
Gordon in France found evidence that the humble tools of a rope and a ramp were instrumental
for creating the Great Pyramids.
Beyond just helping to create these marvels, how much did this technology also inspire them?
It's a fascinating question.
Jumping to the present day, it seems like some new technology transforms life every year.
More and more, our everyday tools are becoming extensions of ourselves.
Take smartphones.
These ubiquitous devices allow for cognitive and social enhancements at the tip of a finger
that were once considered pure science fiction just a few decades ago.
At one time, it was edgy to ask if people were becoming addicted to their phones.
We're well past that now.
These days, the talk is more about how phones are turning humans into real-life cyborgs.
This is even playing out in the legal realm.
In the 2014 case, Riley v. California, the Supreme Court declared it unconstitutional to search
and seize the digital contents of a cell phone during arrests without a warrant.
The fact that the case made it all the way to the Supreme Court says a lot.
It shows just how much the lower courts considered cell phones as actual physical extensions of the body.
Chief Justice John Roberts highlights exactly this inclination in a memorable line from his final written opinion.
These cases require us to decide how the search incident to arrest doctrine applies to modern cell phones,
which are now such a pervasive and insistent part of daily life
that the proverbial visitor from Mars might conclude they were an important feature of human anatomy.
And with the promise of wearable technology like Google Glass, the lines are bound to get even blurrier.
Have you ever heard of Thad Starner?
Kind of sounds like a superhero, and I guess he sort of is one.
Starner is a professor of computer science at Georgia Tech,
who was one of the first people to make and use wearable computers.
When Starner was a graduate student at MIT, he stopped using a desktop computer for good.
In its place, he strapped on a smaller computer to his hip, put on a monocle that served as his monitor,
and carried a handheld device that he called the Twiddler to input data.
As the origin story goes, he was so connected to this technology at MIT
that his PhD committee had to decide whether or not he could wear this gear during his oral qualifying exams.
In the end, they gave him the green light, and he's been wearing a version of it ever since.
Now, if this seems like cheating to you, you might want to ask yourself some questions.
Is wearing regular glasses cheating for a baseball player?
What about a marathon runner glancing at her watch?
Or how about a student using a calculator on a physics exam?
And was it cheating in my dissertation defense when I used PowerPoint slides?
Or what about when I jotted down notes on a notepad?
Did those give me an unfair advantage?
By the way, remember Richard Feynman, the Nobel Prize-winning physicist?
He used to say that he literally thought with his notebooks.
There's even a method of learning called the Feynman notebook technique.
Fact is, we've been expanding and enhancing our mind with external devices for ages.
It's what humans do.
It's so natural to think outside our own heads that philosophers have even come up with a name for it.
Andy Clark and David Chalmers have dubbed it the extended mind.
Clark developed this idea in his 1996 book, whose title fits in perfectly with this course.
Being there, putting brain, body, and world together again.
Actually, our definition of the mind owes a lot to this book.
Clark's book does a couple of things relevant to our course.
One, as we've done, it dispels the view that the mind is reducible to the brain.
And two, it makes the case that because our minds evolved in brains housed in physical bodies
navigating particular environments, the only way to understand the mind is to return it to its natural habitat.
There's a lot of familiar stuff there, and we've already talked a lot about embodiment.
So at this point, I'll just focus on the mesh between bodies and the physical environment.
Clark challenges the traditional notion that our minds produce fully formed thoughts
that then prompt actions on the environment.
Clark points out that thoughts often emerge from actions on the environment.
Here's a great example.
The game of Scrabble requires a lot of thought.
With seven letters and an ever-changing board of more and more letters,
there are just so many ways to make a move.
To handle all this complexity, good players quickly learn the following strategy.
Rather than imagining different words just while looking at your seven tiles,
the smartest maneuver is to physically rearrange your tiles over and over to see what words pop out.
In fact, in Computer Scrabble, you can even press a button called Shuffle that'll do this for you.
Why would you do this when you have a perfectly good brain that can also perform such a function?
Simply put, it's a hell of a lot easier.
In fact, offloading work to the environment is not only easier, but more efficient and effective, too.
Clark argues that our cognition has been doing this sort of offloading for so long that it's become part of how humans think.
I encourage you to find examples of this sort of offloading on your own.
If you keep your eyes open, you'll see it everywhere.
Here are two places to get you started.
First, play the game Tetris and pay attention to how you use the rotate button.
And second, check out the film Memento.
The main character is an interior-grade amnestic named Leonard who has a very creative way of remembering what he wants to remember.
It's in this context that we should think about language.
Clark and Chalmers and many others view language as the ultimate tool for the extended mind.
Remember, just because your brain is encased in your skull doesn't mean language is, too.
Language is distributed among its many users, allowing them to cooperatively interpret, navigate, and act on the world.
We've already talked about evolutionary mechanisms for language, so now let's finish by considering its functions in this context.
What does capital L Language do for the extended mind in the present?
There are so many possible things to explore, but I'll leave you with just five.
For each, I'll discuss not only their benefits, but also their downsides.
Let's not forget, even if language is essential to what makes us human, that doesn't mean it's always a good thing.
Let's start with math.
It's pretty easy to see the conceptual lengths between language and computer programming,
and you certainly don't need a long lecture on how computers have transformed modern life.
But the connection to mathematics may be less clear.
Some people think about math and language as totally separate things.
As a professor, I've heard literature majors tell me that they're just not math people,
and math majors tell me that they're just not language people.
Or consider what a bona fide mathematical genius has to say.
Here's Albert Einstein.
Words, as they are written or spoken, do not seem to play any role in my mechanism of thought.
The psychological entities which seem to serve as elements in thought are certain signs
and more or less clear images which can be voluntarily reproduced and combined.
No offense to Einstein, but the truth is that mathematics is deeply grounded in language.
Remember the cognitive neuroscientist Stanislaus DeHaan?
Not only does he study reading, but he's an expert on math, too.
And that's no coincidence.
In the mid-1990s, DeHaan published a book called The Number Sense,
in which he explained that humans have two main mechanisms for mathematical ability.
The first mechanism, called the approximate system, is an innate domain general skill
that comes as standard equipment for human infants and is even shared across many other species.
The system can make basic numeric distinctions in an approximate fashion without doing formal counting.
For example, newborn babies can visually distinguish one item from two,
and adults can differentiate briefly flashed larger quantities of items like 50 versus 60 dots on a computer screen.
This is different from the second mechanism, called the exact system,
which is unique to humans starting at about age three.
The exact system uses symbolic processing to understand numbers.
For example, only humans can differentiate 59 dots from 60 dots, because only a human can count that high.
Now, if this second mechanism sounds familiar to you, it's because it taps into the symbolic property of language.
Einstein mentioned playing with signs in his head, but isn't a sign just a mathematical word for an arbitrary symbol?
And aren't numbers and other notations in math just symbols, too?
Given this, it's no surprise that math and language are thoroughly connected in the brain.
Using functional neuroimaging, Dahan and others have shown that when you solve basic math equations,
many parts of the brain's language network are activated,
and disrupting that network with neurostimulation disrupts your ability to do that math.
This disruption is most extreme in cases of aphasia.
Often, aphasics lose the ability to do even basic arithmetic,
but their ability to do approximate estimation remains.
So, they wouldn't know that two plus two equals four,
but they could tell you that four dots is more than two dots.
As the tool that makes other tools, language has produced math,
and now math has changed the way we see the world.
Galileo famously said that nature's great book is written in the language of mathematics.
But how far should we go with this?
How does mathematics of nature help humankind appreciate nature and take care of it any better?
And what would a mathematical theory reducing humans to complex equations do for us?
Would it help us know who we are and how to live a good life?
Would it allow us to be kinder to one another?
Would it give us a sense of meaning and purpose?
And what about all the scientific and technological feats enabled by math?
Should we celebrate and embrace them all?
Is it wise to trust artificial intelligence?
Are we comfortable stockpiling weapons that can destroy us?
What do we think about editing genes to build better babies?
I don't have answers to these hard questions,
but humans must reap what their mathematical minds have sown,
and these are just a few of the big things we're left to ponder.
A second major product of language with a close relation to mathematical thought
is the capacity for logic.
Logic is the cornerstone of enlightenment thinking,
and just like math, it's firmly grounded in the symbolic properties of language.
And what's not to love about logic?
It's like a butterfly.
It's kind of hard to think of many negative things about it.
Caterpillars are a different story.
But is logic always a good thing?
Take the poster child for logic in 1921, a young Ludwig Wittgenstein.
Early in his life, Wittgenstein embraced a view that came to be known as logical positivism,
which held that if you can't use a logical analysis to solve a philosophical problem,
it's not worth solving.
However, later in life, Wittgenstein started to see the dangers of logic.
By the way, I always pay extra attention when brilliant thinkers change their minds.
Here's a quote from 1953 in Wittgenstein's posthumously published Philosophical Investigations.
Philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language.
This quote is classic Wittgenstein, full of nuance and double meaning.
Here's my read.
When it comes to human thought, language is both a disease and the cure.
On one hand, philosophers can use everyday language, as we're using now,
to identify and investigate important philosophical problems.
But on the other hand, we can be misled by logical propositions of language, like if X, then Y.
Wittgenstein came to believe that these propositions can create pseudo-problems
and provide answers to questions that have no basis in reality.
That's what philosophy must fight against.
Now, this is all pretty abstract, so let's consider something much more concrete.
For millennia, Eastern philosophy has also been suspicious of the beguiling effects of logic and language.
Back in college, when I first read Lao Tzu's Tao Te Ching, it made a huge impression on me.
Its blatant distrust of language and provocative flouting of logic absolutely sent my mind reeling.
Here are a few memorable passages.
He who knows does not speak.
He who speaks does not know.
The way is empty, yet use will not drain it.
The Tao that can be told is not the eternal Tao.
The name that can be named is not the eternal name.
The nameless is the beginning of heaven and earth.
This last passage is particularly interesting when contrasted against one of the most well-known passages
from the Bible's New Testament.
Here's how the Gospel of John starts.
In the beginning was the Word, and the Word was with God, and the Word was God.
That's quite a juxtaposition, isn't it?
Buddhism has gone even further than Taoism in explicitly trying to disrupt the logic of language.
This is often accomplished through the practice of koans, which are riddles or parables meant to break old habits of the mind.
I bet you've heard a variation of this famous koan.
When both hands are clapped, a sound is produced.
Listen to the sound of one hand clapping.
Well, what is that sound?
Clearly, there's no logical answer, and that's the point.
Koans like this chip away at the ingrained habits of language and logic.
According to Buddhism, it's only after you break these habits that you'll come to doubt everything you thought you knew,
and this is a key step to enlightenment.
Another common Buddhist technique is to repeat words or phrases over and over and over until they are stripped of all meaning.
This can be accomplished by chanting or just silently repeating something in your head.
As with koans, this practice is meant to break the constraints of language and logic
and free your mind of habitual associations.
By the way, this really works, and if you want to learn more about the psychological effect,
look up semantic satiation on the internet.
On the subject of Buddhism, a third major use of language is to construct narratives.
I think it's a testament to the sway of stories that Buddhism requires one to break free from personal narratives
in order to attain enlightenment.
This is easier said than done.
After all, telling stories is a signature feature of being human.
Humans tell tales both grand and small.
Consider the powerful narratives driving human civilization.
Big picture historians like Yuval Noah Harari argue that it was the narrative and imaginative power of language
that built human societies over the past 70,000 years.
For example, in his ambitious book, Sapiens, A Brief History of Humankind, Harari argues that humans have used language
to create highly useful fictions that give artificial meaning and structure to our world.
Things like religious stories, political systems, financial markets, legal institutions, and those sorts of things.
Take one of our most useful and long-lasting fictions, money.
Money is not like water.
Water is an actual valuable thing in the physical world, but money is just an idea based on linguistic agreement among people.
What money is, and I don't mean U.S. dollars or Japanese yen, what it actually is does not exist in the world like water exists.
The essence of money is just a figment of our shared imaginations.
Hey, if this sounds far-fetched, consider this.
If every single person on the planet suddenly stopped believing that money existed, it would immediately revert back to mere paper.
But if everyone stopped believing in the existence of water, that's not going to stop us from getting wet when it rains.
The same idea holds for any of society's major fictions.
Companies, nations, laws, human rights, you name it.
If everyone stops believing in these things, the spell is broken.
We also create narratives on a much smaller scale.
What's the story of your life?
Our narrative identities are extremely important, and fostering them can help us have a meaningful existence.
And sometimes, sometimes, this means telling a story of one's life that's not entirely based on reality.
This isn't just true for people with psychological disorders, but everyone does this to some extent.
I have a question for you.
What do you think psychotherapists do?
Do they always try to get people to see things exactly as they are?
Of course not.
Don't they often help people create narratives that downplay negatives and accentuate the positives in life?
Doesn't therapy, on some level, replace old stories with new ones?
Healthy stories, but stories still.
Now, it's not hard to see the downside of this storytelling.
For some people, telling positive stories is so much harder than telling negative ones, and this can cause much psychological pain.
And on the larger scale, fictions at the global level have done incredible damage over the course of history.
Consider the destructive power of the grotesque narratives driving the Holy Crusades, or Nazi Germany, or American slavery.
Humans are natural storytellers, and we must accept that, big or small, these tales can take us to some good places,
but they can also take us to some pretty scary ones, too.
A fourth potent function of language is its ability to carve up the world into categories.
Shakespeare's Juliet famously proclaimed that a rose by any other name would smell as sweet.
But would it?
Don't names for things often change the experience of those things?
Have you ever wondered why wine tasters do blind tastings?
Or have you ever stared at something, not knowing what you're looking at, only to have a single word clear it up?
Or have you ever considered why someone would so fiercely resist being called by a particular gender pronoun?
In one of my favorite experiments in psychology, an MIT research team led by Leonard Lee went to real bars in Boston and had subjects do taste tests of two beers,
Sam Adams and what they called MIT Brew, which was just Sam Adams plus several drops of balsamic vinegar.
When knowing nothing about the secret ingredient, subjects chose the MIT Brew 60% of the time.
However, when they were told of the secret ingredient right before they took a sip, that number plummeted to about 20%.
So even though people drank the exact same thing in both conditions, naming vinegar as an ingredient left a bad taste in people's mouths.
The ability to categorize is certainly not unique to humans, but language greatly enhances categorization because it explicitly marks a category.
That's what words do.
They signal what they are and also what they're not.
When I say dog, you conjure up features like fur, tails, and barking, and simultaneously, you inhibit features like feathers, wings, and chirping.
Another powerful function of words is to create new categories where none existed.
Have you ever heard of the Dictionary of Obscure Sorrows?
It's a website and YouTube channel created by the artist John Koenig.
His mission, and I quote, is to fill holes in the language, to give a name to emotions that we all feel but don't have a word for.
His dictionary is made up of new words that capture unusual but oddly familiar categories of experience that, at least in English, have no name.
My favorite of his words is sonder, which means the realization that each random passerby is living a life as vivid and complex as your own.
You may have never felt that, but now that you have a name for it, I bet you will.
What's interesting about this is that some of these invented words have actually caught on with people.
One of my students told me of a cafe in her hometown in Colorado that is called Sonder Coffee and Tea.
After she graduated, after she took my class and graduated, she wrote to say that it has Koenig's definition painted on the wall.
I guess if you build it, they will come.
Now, even though categorical thinking is extremely useful, it is a double-edged sword.
Linguistic categories can exacerbate differences.
They can promote harmful stereotypes, and they can deceive us into thinking the world is simpler than it really is.
As with other products of language, we must be clear-eyed in taking the good with the bad.
Okay, our final major function of language is metaphor.
If you look closely, you may be surprised to see how much we use metaphor in everyday life.
Now, I've blatantly deployed a variety of analogies in this course, which are cousins, the metaphors.
I presented language as bacteria, disease, and cure.
As a tool, a game, an organism, a digestive system, and an arrowhead.
Not to mention analogies for language in the brain.
A house, a boxer, and even a tennis racket.
That's a new one for me.
But beyond these explicit comparisons, I've also used hundreds of sneaky little conceptual metaphors.
For example, here's a handful from just this lecture alone.
Cap off this course.
Building blocks for thought.
Categorical thinking is a double-edged sword.
Logic is a cornerstone.
And a mindset reeling.
Even this question is a metaphor in disguise.
How far should we go with this idea?
Technically, we have ideas.
But we don't literally go places with them, do we?
In 1980, metaphors like these were spotlighted in George Lakoff and Mark Johnson's splashy book,
Metaphors We Live By.
The book did two big things.
It described the ubiquity of conceptual metaphors and everyday language.
And by showing their prevalence, Lakoff and Johnson made the case that metaphors are much more than just artistic flourishes.
They're actually a fundamental part of human thought.
So what does metaphor do for our thinking?
For one, it makes the abstract concrete.
When Wittgenstein says philosophy is a battle against the bewitchment of our intelligence by means of language,
it captures the imagination much better than saying,
philosophers must recognize that language can confuse us and they need to work hard to ensure that never happens.
Where's the pizzazz in that?
Another function of metaphor is to extract specific elements of something.
If categories are good at drawing boundaries between different things,
metaphors excel at highlighting the similarities.
By using the familiar word battle,
Wittgenstein accentuates that philosophy is a process that can be violent, protracted, heroic, winnable, and painful,
just to name a few elements.
These connections help us to structure thought in targeted ways.
And the fact that we often forget that we're even thinking with metaphor tells you just how deep that structure goes.
And thirdly, metaphor is a fount of creativity.
It bubbles up in every possible place.
Music, law, art, poetry, film, literature, science, politics, absolutely everywhere.
Mapping one thing onto something similar yet different is a vehicle for seeing the world in a fresh way.
But therein lies its biggest downside.
Metaphor is never a perfect vehicle.
Something's always added.
Something's always lost.
By emphasizing a particular connection, you necessarily distort the thing you're trying to connect to.
To take a line, often misattributed to Freud, sometimes a cigar is just a cigar.
This is a big problem for anyone using metaphor to try to capture the truth about the world.
It's ironic, and perhaps intentionally so, that Wittgenstein used metaphor in his quote about what philosophy is.
And just to go meta, have I misled you with all the figurative language I've used to talk about language in the mind?
Or maybe, just maybe, this is getting it all wrong.
Maybe there's no meaning, at least from the perspective of the human mind, outside of metaphor and language.
Maybe metaphor is just the quintessential manifestation of minds that have capital L language.
Minds that understand one thing by mapping it on to another.
Maybe this means we'll never have direct access to the truth.
Maybe Wittgenstein was right when he said,
The limits of my language mean the limits of my world.
Okay, maybe you're not willing to go that far.
Now, I'm not so sure I am either.
But I hope you're at least convinced that language has radically transformed the human mind.
This transformation has given us tools to experience, know, and do things that are impossible
for any other species on the planet, and for all we know, maybe even beyond.
But let's not forget, and I'll finish up here.
Let's not forget that a mind filled with language isn't everything.
I leave you with a modern-day interpretation of a passage from Rumi,
the Islamic philosopher-poet from 13th century Persia.
Silence is an ocean.
Speech is a river.
When the ocean is searching for you, don't walk into the river.
Listen to the ocean and bring your talk to an end.
Traditional words are just babbling in that presence.
And babbling is a mere substitute for sight.
And I stay in theary後, there's only real death.
One, one, two, three.
One, three, three.
The-
One, four, five.
And there's a bioflow.
Everyone has all daily overıyorsun.
Two, one, four, five.
Five, six.
Four, five.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
