Answering the big question of how language makes us human requires the full power of the 3D framework.
We'll need to consider mechanisms and functions that operate on different time frames and across multiple levels of analysis.
Now, we've already taken this approach when exploring the uniquely human invention of writing, but why stop there?
Why not view all of language as an even older technology invented by humans?
Think of language as a prehistoric tool, like a hammer stone or a hand axe.
Tools like these were created about 3 million years ago, and one of their defining features is that they were precisely crafted to fit the hands of our ancestors.
And once these two things became meshed, it greatly enhanced and expanded what our predecessors' hands could do, like build fires, prepare food, defend territory, and so on.
These new and improved possibilities in turn led to tweaks of the tools themselves, making them more and more specialized for various old and new functions.
And with this, the process started all over again.
It makes sense to picture the invention of language in the same way.
Language was first crafted to fit the minds of our ancestors, and over time, the reliance on it started to enhance and expand what those minds could do.
This led to further refinements in the technology of language, and then the process started anew.
This is an evolutionary story, but it works over development, too.
Human babies enter the world with a brain that receives language like a hand that grips the perfectly shaped object.
It's just the right fit.
And once a child starts to use language, it ratchets up what the mind can do, and this propels development and learning.
This, in turn, allows the mind to handle increasingly sophisticated language, and with that, the cycle starts right back up again.
It's in this framework that we'll explore two ways that language can shape who we are.
One way considers how having any language molds various aspects of the mind, like emotion, personality, and thought.
You can think of this as the effects of capital L language.
A second way considers how having a particular language, like English or Hebrew or Navajo, how do these particular linguistic variations influence minds specifically?
You can think of this as the effects of small L language.
It turns out that this second specific effect of language is much more controversial than the first, so that's where we'll start.
And then, in a couple lectures, we'll move on to the big L effects of language.
But before we begin, let me preface this discussion with a warning.
Unlike much of what we covered earlier in the course, what I'm about to discuss is far from settled.
Don't get me wrong, there's still opposition to a few of the big ideas from early on, like the claim that language is unique to humans or that it's a new machine built out of old parts.
But the resistance to these things comes from an ever-dwindling scientific minority.
Things are different with what I'm about to present.
It's a real mess.
And rather than paint you a pretty picture, I'll intentionally emphasize the tangled and thorny nature of the debate.
Looking behind us, science often appears as a clear and well-worn trail.
But things are different when you're at the front, hacking away at the jungle, trying to find the path forward.
So grab a machete, and let's get to work.
Having signed up for this course, you've probably heard the old chestnut about Eskimos having dozens of unique words for snow.
And it's true, Eskimo Outlook languages have many words that describe snowy things.
This diverse vocabulary was first formally discussed by the eminent anthropologist Franz Boas in his 1911 work, The Handbook of American Indian Languages.
So take Inuit, for example.
Inuit has a few different word stems for snow, in addition to many more themes that can add nuance to the central meaning,
like suffixes for falling and blowing, or freezing and melting.
Nothing about this is currently debatable.
You've already learned that even though many languages like English generate most of their grammatical complexity through syntax,
other languages like Inuit put more complexity into their morphology.
What made this observation controversial was a much later claim made by the budding linguist Benjamin Lee Worf.
In 1940, Worf published a short paper called Science and Linguistics, where he took Boas's observation a few steps further.
He argued that possessing so many unique words for snow, words for snow falling, snow blowing, snow on the ground, slushy snow, hard snow, and so on.
Worf argued that these specific names actually caused Eskimos to experience the world differently than people whose language has only a few names for snow.
Eventually, these ideas congealed into what is now referred to as the Worfian hypothesis, or sometimes the Sapir Worf hypothesis,
because of the contribution of Worf's teacher, the linguist Edward Sapir, who, by the way, was trained by Franz Boas.
Here's a famous quote from Worf that nicely captures the position.
We dissect nature along lines laid down by our native languages.
The categories and types that we isolate from the world of phenomenon, we do not find there because they stare every observer in the face.
On the contrary, the world is presented in a kaleidoscopic flux of impressions, which has to be organized by our minds.
And this means largely by the linguistic systems in our minds.
As you can tell, Worf had a way with words, which was a big reason why his ideas made such a splash with the public.
The hypothesis sprouted two versions, one strong and one weak.
The strong version is called linguistic determinism, and the idea is that language enables or dictates thought.
As you might imagine, this view can lead to some pretty radical interpretations.
Like, if your language doesn't have an expression for it, you can't experience it.
This strong hypothesis is sometimes treated as the only game in town, and it's become quite a sport to tear it down.
Steven Pinker had an absolute field day with linguistic determinism in his book, The Language Instinct.
There's no question. If you take it to its logical extreme, you end up into some pretty absurd places.
For example, it would mean that babies don't think at all until they learn language.
Or it entails that aphasics who lose all ability to use language also lose all ability to think.
And most ridiculous of all, it leads to the conclusion that because only humans have language, we are the only species capable of thought.
Unfortunately, this extreme version distracts from the much more plausible version of the hypothesis, which is called linguistic relativity.
This toned-down version claims that differences across languages simply influence differences in thinking.
Don't get me wrong, this is still hotly debated, but the debate is more about the nature and extent of this influence and less about it being logically nonsensical.
Before we jump into the fray, I'd like to offer a helpful framing, one that's often absent from the debate that bolsters the logic of linguistic relativity.
Traditionally, linguists, anthropologists, and cognitive scientists have focused mostly on cross-cultural comparisons of adult cognition and language.
Largely missing from these inquiries is any significant attention to the underlying neural and developmental mechanisms that shape this adult product.
Think back to our three basic principles about the brain. Neural specialization, neural connectability, and neuroplasticity.
We know that massive exposure, massive input from the environment causes the brain to undergo extensive plasticity to modify and even create specialized neural networks over development.
We've discussed this at length, both within the domain of language and also outside of it, when we talked about face perception.
This is basic fact. It's Neuroscience 101.
So from this perspective, it's completely reasonable to hypothesize that learning different languages might be a mechanism for the brain to think, feel, and experience different things.
In other words, if acquiring a particular language makes the brain more specialized for that language, which we know to be true, why can't that acquisition also make the brain more specialized for other things, like memory, perception, categories of emotion, social judgments, you name it?
Consider our snow example. By having so many unique words for snow, it's possible that the habitual use of those distinct words induces neuroplasticity, causing Eskimos to become particularly good at perceptually differentiating among the various categories of snow.
Of course, you can still do this even if your language doesn't habitually make this distinction, but it could be much harder.
Does this sound familiar? This is reminiscent of Patricia Kuhl's perceptual magnet effect.
Recall that Japanese speakers don't have phonetic categories for Ra and La. Instead, they have a single category that subsumes them both.
So whenever a monolingual Japanese speaker hears the two sounds, they perceive them as one thing.
The mechanism is that the brain neurally commits to one phonetic category instead of two like we do in English.
It's a similar idea with linguistic relativity, but instead of a perceptual magnet, you can think of it more like a conceptual magnet.
Habitual distinctions in a language highlight distinct concepts, but habitual non-distinctions in a different language highlight a single concept.
And these conceptual variations may guide people to perceive different things in the world.
Okay, that's the basic logic. So with that in mind, we're ready to enter the debate.
Let's begin with the Eskimo snow example because that's the controversial meme that started it all.
One of the most well-known and most lively critiques was from the British-American linguist Jeffrey Pullum.
Pullum made his argument first in a witty little essay, and then later in 1991, he turned it into a book.
The title was not subtle. It was called The Great Eskimo Vocabulary Hoax.
One of Pullum's main arguments was that, in terms of semantics, there's nothing special about how Eskimos refer to snow.
Sure, they may have dedicated words to describe various snowy things, but other languages can do the same, just in different ways.
For example, unlike Inuit, English does not have a single word for snow drifting along the ground.
But English can still easily express that concept. You want proof? Well, I just did it.
Snow drifting along the ground is five words instead of one, but it works just fine.
We also have other options in English. We can create compounds like snowflake, or we can use related words like frost and slush.
Or we can put an adjective in front of a noun, making things like ice storm, hard pack, and whiteout conditions.
So the gist of Pullum's argument is that there's more than one way languages can get the job done.
But here's a reasonable counter-argument. Might there be something special about having a single dedicated word for a concept versus having many optional ways to express it?
So when snow is blowing sideways, there's no choice in Inuit to simply use a generic word for snow. Using the precise one is obligatory.
In English, we have the freedom to say what we want about this snowy scene. We can say snow, or blowing snow, or snow blowing sideways. You name it.
If you think about how habit and plasticity are related, this distinction between vocabulary that is optional versus non-optional might make a big neural difference.
Hey, imagine taking the same route home from work every day for a year. Now compare that to randomly trying different routes on different days for that period.
The habit of taking the same route nudges your brain to notice things about that particular route that you might miss if you always changed up your routine.
You can think of this as a type of neural commitment that guides your brain to experience and notice certain things.
Okay, at this point, you might be thinking, big deal. What does it matter that people habitually notice different things about snow, let alone snow blowing sideways?
Fair enough. So let's kick it up a notch. Let's switch to a different language and perhaps a more relevant mental habit.
As you know, I'm learning Japanese. One of the big challenges I'm facing is learning all the specific language that has to do with social relations.
It's really hard. Japanese has extensive vocabulary and morphology that highlight your place in the social world.
In some cases, the exact same verb is marked by different suffixes according to your social status in a situation.
For example, the generic translation of I speak is hanashimasu.
Now, suppose you were an employee in a company and you had to give a report to your boss.
In this case, you would preface what you are about to say with oh hanashii itashimasu, which roughly translates to allow me to humbly speak.
But now suppose you are rounding up fellow employees for a meeting where the boss was going to make an announcement to the company.
In this case, you'd have to say oh hanashii ni narimasu, which roughly translates as boss will honorably speak.
Same verb, different suffixes.
And the job of these suffixes is to make clear the social hierarchy between who's doing the talking and who's doing the listening.
These are called honorifics.
And you can think of them as linguistic signals that highlight and honor your role in any social situation.
Now, we have these in English, too, but they're different in a couple of big ways.
For one, they don't affect verbs and they're not marked by morphemes.
They're usually standalone nouns or adjectives like Mr. and Mrs., Doctor and Professor, Your Majesty and Madam President, and so on.
The second reason is that the use of English honorifics is highly variable, especially in America.
I have Colgate colleagues who explicitly tell their students never to refer to them as professor.
And I know others who would bristle at students calling them anything but professor.
And then there are those who don't care one way or another.
The important thing is that all of these are perfectly acceptable.
So what's all this have to do with linguistic relativity?
Well, in addition to these linguistic differences, Japan and America have some big cultural differences.
Respecting your place in the social order is an explicit value in Japan, whereas in America, it's much more fluid.
In fact, many Americans reject social hierarchies and actively try to disrupt them.
So you could say that the two countries represent opposite ends of a continuum in this regard.
Now, here's a great Worfian question.
Is it possible that these different value systems are influenced by the different honorific patterns of the two languages?
The idea is this. If you use honorifics all the time in Japan, you're constantly being reminded of your social position with respect to others.
Add to this that Japanese honorifics are often accompanied by the physical activity of bowing, another custom in Japan.
And you have a prime candidate for embodied language shaping the brain.
I think this is a much more compelling case than the snow example, don't you?
At least on the face of it, it makes sense how using honorifics may strengthen certain cultural habits of mind.
However, you may have spotted another problem, a bigger problem.
How can we be sure that it's the honorific structure of the language that's influencing the cultural value and not the other way around?
Isn't it equally possible that a culture that values structured social order would create a linguistic system that reflects that order?
This is the gist of the argument that John McWhorter presents in his 2014 book entitled simply The Language Hoax.
I told you, the Worfian hypothesis spurs some pretty strong reactions.
McWhorter's critique is that language merely reflects culture and it's culture that does all the heavy lifting in influencing thought across different groups.
Let's explore this critique in another well-known example.
Let's go from language and social hierarchies to language and spatial cognition.
The UC San Diego cognitive scientist, Lara Boroditsky, is fond of doing the following demo and lecture halls around America.
She asked the audience to close their eyes and point due north.
If you can, pause and try it yourself.
If you're like the audiences in Boroditsky's talk, you likely had a lot of trouble with this seemingly simple task.
By the way, I myself have tried this demo many times in my own Intro to Psychology courses and it's always interesting to see students pointing in every possible direction.
Not only that, it's a bit embarrassing.
Before each demo, I need to Google my own classroom just to make sure I have it right.
It's really hard.
Okay, now contrast this ignorance with the behavior of an Aboriginal community in Northern Australia.
The community lives in Pomperaw, on the western edge of Cape York, and the primary language is called Kuktheore.
The language is different from English in how it describes spatial relations.
Rather than relying on relative spatial terms like left and right, it uses absolute spatial terms like north, south, east, and west.
And this is not just for large-scale directions like, you know, we are east of the ocean, but it's for all directions.
So you would say that the spoon is to the west of the bowl, or the person north of my wife is my sister.
Interesting.
Well, here's what's really interesting.
It appears that speakers of Kuktheore also happen to be very good with cardinal directions.
If you asked them to close their eyes and point due north, they'd have little problem.
In fact, the linguistic anthropologist Steven Levinson has a great video of a girl from Pomperaw
who correctly identifies directions even after being blindfolded and spun around five times.
I've seen this video with my own two eyes.
It's striking.
And apparently, the girl is among many in the community who can do this.
To systematically test these spatial abilities, Levinson and colleagues have conducted a series of field experiments in Pomperaw
and other places where people use absolute directions in speech.
As a comparison group, they also tested Dutch speakers in the Netherlands who use relative spatial terms like we do in English.
The basic method was to present speakers of both languages three small objects in a row.
For example, from the speaker's perspective, a pig would be placed on the left, a horse would go in the middle, and a dog would go on the right.
Then subjects were asked to move to the other side of the building and rotate 180 degrees so that they were facing in the exact opposite direction from before.
After they moved, they were given the same three objects again and asked to reconstruct the sequence as they remembered it from before.
So where would you put the pig?
If you're like Dutch speakers, you'd probably say to your left where it was before.
But that's not what the Kuuk Theori speakers did.
They put it to their right.
Why would they do that?
Well, this is much less puzzling if you stop thinking in terms of left and right and start thinking in terms of north, south, east and west.
If you held a compass when you did this, it'd make a lot more sense.
Let's say the pig was originally the furthest west of all three objects.
Well, when you rotate it 180 degrees, it'd still be the westernmost object, right?
So it seems that Kuuk Theori speakers carry around a virtual compass in their heads.
By now, I bet you're applying the Worfian logic on your own.
Because Dutch speakers, like English speakers, habitually use left and right terms to describe spatial relations,
they encode that information in memory relative to themselves.
In contrast, because Kuuk Theori speakers habitually use absolute terms for space,
they encode that information in a compass-like way.
What would McQuarter say about all this?
Can you think of any other reason why people living in the Australian wilderness might be particularly good at absolute directions?
Isn't it possible that people who live off the land and sea need to rely on major geographical landmarks to navigate their environment?
McQuarter would argue that the landscape of Pompera is ideally suited for cardinal directionality,
and their language simply reflects this fact.
In contrast, Westerners like the Dutch live in a landscape where absolute directions may not be the best way to describe and categorize space.
After all, with so much of Western life operating indoors,
large-scale landmarks are less prominent and can't always be counted on.
This may naturally lock in relative spatial terms like left and right as the most useful form of language in these cultures.
So maybe it's the physical environment that affects thought and not the language.
This possibility is real trouble for linguistic relativity.
Now that you're getting the hang of it, let's do one more to finish up.
Let's talk about color.
This is a favorite in the Whorfian literature.
Have you ever had one of those 2 a.m. philosophical conversations where you ask,
Do you see color in the same way I do?
Is your blue the same as my blue?
Well, let's put a Whorfian twist on this question.
Do people see blue because they have a word for blue?
This is actually not as out there as it sounds.
It makes some sense when you consider that not all languages have words for every color.
Any trip to the paint store will tell you that.
And even some standard color words in English are relatively new to the language.
Did you know that blue itself made its appearance relatively recently?
Only after the arrival of other color words like white and black and then red, yellow and green?
Debbie Roberson and her team at the University of Essex studied color words of a community of cattle herders in Namibia.
They found that the herders language, herero, does not have as many color words as we do in English.
Whereas English has 11 basic color terms, herero has only 5.
For example, the single word, zuzu, subsumes a range of darker colors that English speakers would call dark blue, dark green, dark brown, dark purple, dark red,
or black.
It also turns out that the herero speakers do not sort colors the same way English speakers do.
So if I were handed 50 painted chips with all 11 color categories in English, I'd sort them into 11 different piles.
However, the herero speakers would sort them into far fewer piles.
So it appears that the two groups have categorical differences in how they perceive and organize colors.
Now, does this mean that the differences in color vocabulary cause the difference in categorization?
Of course not.
This logical fallacy was lampooned by John McWhorter through a series of fake news headlines he invented for his book.
First, he presented a real headline from 2004 in the highly respected science magazine Nature.
It was about number words and counting in the Amazonian Paraha community.
Here's the headline.
Tribe without names for numbers cannot count.
Note the connotation of the quote.
It has a distinct causal flavor.
McWhorter riffs on this and concocts these fake headlines.
Tribe without cars doesn't drive.
Tribe without paper and pencils mysteriously weak at portraiture.
And most outrageous of all, legless tribe incapable of walking because they have no word for walk.
These are comical because they show what happens when you take the Warfian logic to its extreme without questioning the causality.
Is the reason for not driving really a lack of cars or just a lack of necessity for driving in the first place?
Is the reason for not being able to count really a lack of number words or just a lack of cultural need for counting?
These more straightforward interpretations make for some pretty stale headlines.
Imagine this popping up on your Twitter feed.
African cattle herders categorize colors according to what matters to them most.
That's not going to get a lot of retweets.
As you can see, this causality problem is a major thorn in the side for linguistic relativity.
Does language influence thought?
Or is language just a vehicle for other things like cultural values and physical environments?
And these things are what actually influence thought.
And of course, there's another possibility.
All this could just be coincidence.
The honorifics, the spatial terms, the color words.
Maybe these linguistic features just randomly ended up with the cultural differences we see around the world.
After all, any sociolinguist will tell you that languages change over time for some pretty arbitrary reasons.
So anything's possible.
The point is that most of the studies we've discussed so far suffer from the classic correlation does not equal causation problem.
But luckily, there's a solution.
Whenever this sort of uncertainty arises, scientists can get creative and try to develop more tightly controlled experiments to better pin down causality.
In the next lecture, we'll explore some of the novel approaches to experimentally testing linguistic relativity across speakers of different languages.
Well, there are various fields that we've met, environments that come to try and learn very well.
At this point of view, our next slide is clear and we're now saying that you can use the отс命
of RIGHT zaczyTS.
You reason why these means you should graduate from EsteC相ون, from San Jose, to you if you stop using your situation.
Is any question C eens out of that?
