Have you ever seen, in person, one of the giant abstract portraits painted by the artist Chuck Close?
They're made up of hundreds of little boxes on a grid that, from a few feet away, look like a jumble of pixelated colors.
But if you stand back at a distance, the pixels all magically come together to create the clear image of a face.
The part of your brain that flips this switch from confusion to clarity has been called the fusiform face area, or FFA for short.
It also happens to be a part of the brain that does not work properly in Chuck Close.
The artist has a severe form of a disorder called prosopagnosia, which in his case is a hereditary condition that makes it extremely difficult to recognize faces, even his own.
In fact, according to Close, the reason he paints faces in his signature style is because it's the only way he can make sense of them.
In interviews, he explains that he recognizes real faces by systematically breaking them down into smaller and smaller quadrants in a grid.
So the artist paints what he perceives.
So with this in mind, let me ask you a question.
What do you think is the genetic function of the FFA?
Do you think it's designed to process faces specifically?
Or do you think it could serve a more general function like processing any type of meaningful visual information?
Throughout this lecture, we'll come back to this question because the answer is key to understanding how humans learn language and many other things throughout their development.
But before we jump in, let me just briefly set up this section of the course.
In the next group of five lectures, we'll be talking about the developmental timeframe.
Using the 3D framework, you'll see how language and the mind emerge from an interaction of developmental and evolutionary mechanisms.
By the end of this section, you'll be ready for yet another set of lectures in which we will discuss how all this comes together in the brain
to help us understand and use language from one moment to the next.
To introduce the scientific study of human development, we need to briefly build up some philosophical foundation for the big issues.
Probably the biggest issue concerns the age-old question of nature and nurture.
Historically, these have been treated as black or white options.
Either you're born with what you need to know about the world, or you have to learn it from experience.
The nature side of the equation can be traced back to many philosophical traditions, but probably the best known comes from ancient Greek philosophy.
Plato, in particular, is credited with being one of the earliest Western philosophers to embrace a view of innate knowledge.
In one of his most famous dialogues, Socrates has a conversation with an uneducated boy named Menno.
Socrates demonstrates with a series of questions that Menno knows a lot more about mathematical concepts than his lack of education would suggest.
Plato uses this dialogue to demonstrate that we're all born with knowledge of certain capital T truths that simply need to be unlocked or recollected, to use Plato's terms, by experiencing certain triggers in the environment.
In this way, acquiring knowledge of these fundamental truths is not so much the result of the brain learning as it is the soul remembering.
The competing nurture view also has a deep history.
Although he is often ignored in the West, the Chinese philosopher Confucius, who predated Plato by over a century, stressed the importance of learning, especially through parent-child interactions.
In fact, the most fundamental Confucian value, filial piety, or respect for elders, is built on these early family dynamics.
In his most famous work, The Analects, it was all about the importance of learning these basic virtues, suggesting that much of what we know is not innate within us, but must be acquired through discipline, practice, and education.
By far, the most famous Western philosopher associated with the nurture position is John Locke.
We talked about Locke a bit in the first lecture, and his idea of the tabula rasa is the quintessential nurture position.
We're born with blank slates, and it's our experience that fills them in.
Now, both philosophical extremes have carried a legacy into modern day linguistics, neuroscience, and psychology.
You're already familiar with some of the most prominent supporters of the nature position, such as Noam Chomsky and Steven Pinker.
And they clearly owe a debt to Plato.
And on the nurture side are the behaviorists of the mid-20th century, such as the psychologists B.F. Skinner and John Watson, and the physiologist Ivan Pavlov.
They believe that almost everything we are is learned through direct interactions with the environment, making them the clear intellectual descendants of John Locke.
These extreme positions have given way to a much more balanced view.
It's now commonly accepted that the human mind is the result of both nature and nurture.
And the origins of this philosophical view are a direct reaction to John Locke's tabula rasa metaphor.
The great German philosopher, Gottfried Leibniz, likened our minds at birth to a block of unshaped marble, containing natural veins that would naturally influence how much the marble would react when it was struck by a hammer and chisel.
Because each block of marble has a unique pattern of veins, it makes it easier for certain shapes to be formed and harder for others.
In this way, we are the product of some innate predispositions that interact with environmental influences.
This is essentially the position that most scientists take today.
Though the marble and hammer analogy is a bit rough, it captures the basic idea pretty well.
But current theories are much more specific and dynamic.
The most exciting questions now in developmental psychology and neuroscience are concerned with determining exactly what is built into humans at birth,
and how and when those things interact with the environment throughout development.
To guide us in addressing these questions, we'll borrow from one of my favorite little books on child development, The Scientist in the Crib.
I highly recommend it if you have a young child or grandchild or if you're just fascinated by kids.
It's written by three leaders in the field of developmental psychology.
Allison Gopnik at UC Berkeley and Andrew Meltzoff and Patricia Kuhl at the University of Washington.
The book takes a very similar approach as our 3D framework and it outlines three major mechanisms that drive development.
The big three are, one, innate knowledge, two, powerful learning tools, and three, unconscious tuition from others.
The first and the third best correspond to the classic nature-nurture dichotomy.
And the middle one serves as a bridge between the two.
Let's focus on them in order.
When developmental psychologists speak of innate knowledge, they're talking about the baggage that humans have accumulated over the course of evolution that they bring to personal development.
Everyone agrees that we bring some innate knowledge, but there's vigorous debate about the nature of this knowledge.
On one hand, there's the domain general view, which we've already discussed.
Domain general knowledge refers to built-in abilities that are very broad and can be applied to many different domains.
In the case of language, we've already discussed some likely candidates, like pattern recognition and perspective taking.
These skills can be applied to any number of domains.
The other type of innate knowledge is domain-specific knowledge, which is something that is innately specified for a very particular function.
A machine analogy makes this position clear.
The brakes of a car are in place to do one thing and only one thing, to reduce speed.
That's their sole purpose.
And if you think of humans as biological machines, organs like the heart have a domain-specific function.
Its day and night job is to pump blood through the body.
The domain-specific functions of biological organs are pretty clear.
But when it comes to the cognitive and social aspects of the mind, things get much more complicated.
The most promising domains that are candidates for innately specified functions are those that have been key for our survival for the longest time over evolution.
For example, Elizabeth Spelke of Harvard argues that babies are born with some innate core knowledge about fundamentally important cognitive abilities,
such as differentiating one object from many and understanding basic physical properties of the world, like gravity.
The idea is that because these abilities are so fundamentally important to survival, babies need a head start on knowing about these specific things.
As I said, this is a very contentious area of research.
There are other aspects of the mind that were once thought to be domain-specific, but that now seem to be domain-general.
This is where face processing comes in.
Back to my question about the FFA.
Do you think it's designed to process faces specifically, or do you think it serves a more general function?
Well, most researchers now believe that the FFA serves a more domain-general function at birth.
Evidence for this comes from clues on multiple levels of analysis and different timeframes.
Here are two clues for now.
First, although research does show that babies have a clear preference for faces over other objects at a very early age, in some cases just a few days old,
It's not clear that the preference is for human faces per se.
For example, compared to objects, babies also look longer at animal faces, such as those of monkeys.
From this, would you really want to conclude that there is an innate domain-specific ability for humans to recognize and prefer monkey faces?
That doesn't seem right.
In taking faces out of the picture completely, it's interesting that when it comes to objects, babies look longer at ones that are symmetric than they do than those that are asymmetric.
These findings suggest that a more general mechanism, such as symmetry detection, might drive our early preference for faces.
The second piece of evidence comes from neuroimaging studies on infants.
Recall the fMRI technique I mentioned in the last lecture?
Well, innovations in the field have adapted that technique to study face perception in very young infants.
For example, Rebecca Sachs and her team at MIT investigated brain activation of babies as young as four months old when viewing images of faces versus natural scenes.
They were looking at areas along the visual processing stream, which extends from the back of the occipital lobe, where visual processing starts, downward to the temporal lobe.
At the end of this visual pathway is the FFA.
In adults, the FFA is highly active when viewing faces compared to other objects.
If that were also the case with very young infants, it would suggest that perhaps the FFA is genetically programmed for processing faces at birth.
But the results suggested otherwise.
Although there were large scale brain areas that differentiated faces and scenes, it was not localized in the FFA like it is in adults.
One interpretation of these findings is that early visual processing uses a larger swath of the brain, and only with more experience during development does the FFA take on a more focused and specialized role.
In other words, it seems that the brain must undergo some significant changes in order for the FFA to become specialized for processing faces.
How is this specialization possible?
The answer leads us to Gopnik, Meltzoff, and Kuhl's second mechanism of development, powerful learning tools.
One way to think about innate knowledge is in terms of a head start or a nudge in a particular direction.
These nudges are either very specific, a preference for faces, or very general, a preference for symmetry.
A second way to think about innate mechanisms is in terms of a built-in set of tools for learning.
For example, suppose you do have an innate preference for things like faces.
If you don't have the ability to remember faces or associate them with meaning, what good is this innate preference?
So even with innate knowledge, specific or general, we also need some inborn cognitive and social skills to help us build on that knowledge.
Even the most diehard blank slaters concede that humans must have some basic innate or general abilities that allow us to learn from experience during development.
For example, consider one of the most extreme blank slaters, John Watson.
Watson is the psychologist who brought Pavlov's salivating dog paradigm from Russia to America in the early 20th century.
To make his point that the environment was responsible for all learning and development, Watson once famously quipped,
give me a dozen healthy infants, well-formed, and my own specified world to bring them up in, and I'll guarantee to take anyone at random and train him to become any type of specialist that I select.
Doctor, lawyer, artist, merchant chief, and yes, even beggar man and thief, regardless of his talents, penchants, tendencies, abilities, vocations, and race of his ancestors.
Now, even this extreme, very extreme claim requires some innate mechanism that would allow Watson's creepy world to make an impact on the developing child.
Without some built-in tools, like the ability to form memories and make associations or the capacity to experience emotions, without these things, the environment cannot do its work and no learning can take place.
By far, the most influential pioneer of innate mechanisms was the great Swiss developmental psychologist, Jean Piaget.
Piaget was a contemporary of Skinner and Watson and Pavlov, but he went so much further than they did.
Yes, the ability to make associations and experience emotions are necessary innate tools, but according to Piaget, children possess much more sophisticated ones too.
For example, Piaget argued that children are innately driven by curiosity and they are predisposed to a type of systematic thought and action that would be familiar to any laboratory scientist.
Just like scientists, babies are innately capable of making predictions about the world, manipulating things in it, and observing and recording the outcomes.
This is why Gopnik, Meltzoff, and Kuhl referred to babies as scientists in the crib.
Much of babies' scientific exploration is done through direct experience, learning by doing.
But Piaget also stressed another powerful learning mechanism, learning by watching.
Imitation is one of the most powerful tools that humans have for learning about the world.
And even though Piaget thought that imitation was a late developing mechanism, he didn't think we were born with it.
More recent research suggests that it's present much earlier than believed.
At this point, it's important to emphasize something, something important.
When developmental psychologists talk about innate learning mechanisms, they're almost always talking about domain general skills.
For example, the basic tools that babies use to learn something visual are not totally different from the tools that they use to learn about something tactile or auditory.
Sure, each of these senses is unique in a particular way, but what children learn from them is driven by the same basic mechanisms.
This brings us to the biological level of analysis.
The grandmother of all mechanisms that unites all learning and development is the neural process of plasticity.
I always tell my students in Intro Psychology, if you're going to remember three things about the brain, plasticity should be number one on that list.
In the next section, I'll tell you about the other two.
We'll have an entire lecture on the brain in the next section, but for now, let me give you a little primer on plasticity.
We've already talked about neural connectivity.
Remember, there are hundreds of times more neural connections in the brain than stars in the galaxy.
The brain cells that are connected are called neurons, and the connectors are called synapses.
A synapse is the way that neurons communicate with one another through chemical and electrical signals.
Everything we do is controlled by this complex neural network, and it's constantly in flux.
The neural connections you had as a newborn are radically different from the ones you have now.
How did that happen?
The answer is plasticity.
Plasticity is the property of the brain that enables changes to its neural connectivity.
These changes can involve creating new connections, or they can involve strengthening, weakening, or eliminating old ones.
These changes are called Hebbian learning in honor of the Canadian psychologist Donald Hebb,
who wrote about the process in his 1949 book, The Organization of Behavior.
The idea is pretty simple.
If a particular neural connection produces useful behavior, that connection is strengthened.
And if it's very useful, it might even sprout new connections to strengthen it further.
But if a connection no longer serves a useful function, it is weakened or even eliminated.
You can remember these two processes with the following mantras.
For strengthening or creating connections, think, cells that fire together wire together.
And for weakening or eliminating connections, think, use it or lose it.
The reason plasticity is so important is that it underlies everything.
Without plasticity, there's no learning and there's no development.
It's the ultimate innate domain general mechanism.
By the way, if it's easier to think about plasticity as an innate process rather than a tool, that's fine.
Whatever works for you.
Here's another key aspect of plasticity.
Our brains are much more plastic early in life versus later.
Why might this be?
Well, plasticity functions to help us specialize during development.
Humans come into the world with a pretty empty survival kit packed into our DNA.
We have to learn to survive.
This is in contrast to many other species who enter the world ready to go.
Have you ever seen a nature documentary showing baby ducks being born?
It's remarkable.
Within a few days, they waddle out of their nest, hop into the water, and paddle around with their mother looking for food.
Species like ducks are called precocial species because they enter the world in a pretty advanced state, which they need for their survival.
In contrast, dogs, birds, and humans are an altricial species, which means that we have an extended period of immaturity.
If we were forced out of the crib a few days after birth, we'd be utterly helpless.
So what goes on during this vulnerable time of our lives?
We use plasticity to learn what is important for our survival.
Because humans inhabit such a complex physical and social world, it's not possible to genetically build in everything we need to know to survive.
We have to learn all that stuff.
And yes, evolution has given us some helpful nudges, but some specific and some general.
But experience with the world is absolutely necessary to mold our brains into something useful.
So let's take this idea and apply it to our example of face processing.
Recall that four-month-old babies don't have the same specialized brain region dedicated to faces as adults do.
And this is at four months of age.
The neural organization is likely to even be more undifferentiated at birth.
The fact that adults have such a clear neural architecture for processing faces, and infants don't, suggests that plasticity has sculpted our brains during development to make it this way.
And this reorganization comes with some real benefits.
Because faces convey such important social information, having a fully dedicated brain region to quickly and accurately process them would serve a real survival function.
So here you can see a trade-off between being plastic early in life and being less plastic later in life.
Being open to change early on helps the brain learn and commit to what's important.
And locking in later allows it to process that information much more efficiently.
But this raises a big question.
What causes the brain to lose its plasticity and become more rigid and specialized?
One possibility is that it's just an innate mechanism.
Like a ticking genetic clock that gradually shuts down plasticity with each passing moment.
As you'll see in the next section, this is true to some extent.
But scientists believe that a more powerful force is responsible.
This is Gopnik-Meltoff and Kuhl's third and final mechanism of development.
Unconscious tuition from others.
Before I get into this mechanism specifically, let me just say that the larger mechanism at play is simply experience with the outside world.
This includes social interactions with others, but it also includes exposure to everything in the physical environment.
For convenience, I'll lump both of these big mechanisms into the social level of the 3D framework.
All of this social input interacts with the brain's inherent plasticity.
And this combination is the major driver of learning and development.
Both are necessary, but neither is sufficient alone.
Without plasticity, social input cannot shape the brain.
And without social input, plasticity has no guide.
The two mechanisms must work together.
With this in mind, let's focus on the more specific mechanism of unconscious tuition from others.
What do Gopnik and company mean by this?
As the term implies, it has to do with the sort of guidance, but not in the traditional sense.
We all know that explicit guidance can powerfully shape the mind.
That's why we have schools.
For that matter, that's why you're listening to these lectures.
But unlike its formal counterpart, unconscious tuition is done spontaneously, naturally, and inadvertently by parents and older adults, not to mention older siblings and peers.
Children are prolific learners, and they start their informal education from the day they're born.
And we, as fellow humans, are their teachers, whether we know it or not.
In addition to surrounding babies with physical artifacts of culture, like shelter, clothing, toys, food, we bombard them with social aspects of culture.
Music, facial expressions, games, physical contact, and the big one, language.
Human babies are awash in words from the moment they're born.
For the first three years of life, most children hear on average 10,000 words a day, and some who are raised in highly verbal environments hear over 30,000 words a day.
The interesting thing is that most of these words are not even directed at the child.
They're just a natural part of the environment, like oxygen.
Actually, oxygen is a pretty good comparison.
Some children absorb more words per day than they inhale breaths of air.
Let's apply this unconscious tuition mechanism to our example of face processing.
Informal face training for humans starts on day one.
It begins when parents hold newborn babies about a foot from their own face, seeming to instinctively know a neonate sweet spot for seeing objects about a foot away.
And it just continues nonstop from there.
Although we don't see as many faces in a day as we hear words, we see a whole lot of them.
Estimates suggest that by the end of our lives, we will have encountered several million distinct faces.
And not only do we see so many faces, but they have a special meaning for us.
Recognizing and remembering faces is highly useful for successful social interactions.
And in some circumstances, it's crucial for our survival.
So if you think of all this casual exposure to faces as a type of informal schooling on an important piece of social information,
you shouldn't be surprised that our brains change to more efficiently process faces with every new exposure.
Capitalizing on the brain's plasticity, we dedicate a chunk of cortex specifically for faces.
Real estate is expensive in the brain.
So this is a big commitment.
OK, here's the final twist.
Even though the FFA becomes specialized for faces, does that necessarily mean that it's innately designed for faces specifically?
This was the question asked in the late 1990s by Isabel Gauthier, a cognitive neuroscientist at Vanderbilt University.
In one of my favorite neuroimaging studies, Gauthier used fMRI to investigate FFA activation in adults who were and were not bird experts.
She reasoned that bird experts have comparable expertise identifying birds as they do humans.
If the FFA is innately designed specifically for human faces, the bird expertise should not matter.
And the human faces should produce more FFA activation than faces of birds.
If, however, the FFA is driven by visual expertise more generally, bird experts should have a similar FFA activation to human faces and bird faces.
Well, if you've been keeping up, you probably know where this is going.
Whereas non-bird experts showed the signature FFA activation only for human faces, bird experts showed comparable activation for both bird and human faces.
And this activation was related to their behavior.
The more active the FFA was for birds, the better the experts remembered their faces in a later memory test.
This effect has been replicated many times, and it's even been generalized to other areas of expertise, such as images of cars and chest positions.
Finding such as these have caused most of the scientific community to stop using the term fusiform face area.
Many now call it the fusiform expertise area.
The idea is that humans are born with a part of the brain that has a domain general ability to dedicate itself to efficiently processing highly salient and important visual information.
Be it faces, birds, cars, or whatever is important.
If someone is exposed to enough of this visual input, it triggers the fusiform expertise area to undergo plasticity and become specialized.
In this way, nothing specific about human faces per se needs to be built into our DNA because evolution is counting on visual experience and neuroplasticity to do all the work.
So in this lecture, I've talked about three big mechanisms for development, innate knowledge, powerful learning tools, and unconscious tuition from others.
And I've shown you how these three mechanisms interact over development to create a dedicated face processing region in the brain.
In the next four lectures, we'll apply these same mechanisms and take a similar approach in understanding how language and other aspects of the mind emerge over development.
So into the next lecture, I will show you what it was doing and we'll be展示 to a brief video about feeding for the brakes.
The upcoming stresses of our theory stillolds have been ukidizada 옳 informação, which are charger based on visual effects, therefore has been used when the outside of the machinewave.
So this is surrounded by these dozens of senses that just want to be used in mind.
And especially things like that, we can still increase the chatter and the ecology.
So, look at the conclusion of how this is spoken out examples in the brain than what brain leader has been updated with是什麼анные systems for the Boh oakland.
