So far, we've talked about language as a tool, and language as a biological system.
For the next three lectures on evolution, I want to introduce a new analogy.
It turns out that thinking in analogies and metaphors is another unique aspect of the
human mind.
The analogy is language as an organism, a newly evolved organism.
This is actually the way Charles Darwin talked about language back in his 1871 book, The Descent
of Man.
But I'm going to use an example that's different from anything Darwin discussed.
The organism is bacteria.
Why bacteria?
Well, it's a good example for many reasons, but I'll focus on two in this lecture.
First, there are many types of bacteria that require a host to survive, and that is most
definitely true for language as well.
Second, bacteria range from general purpose to extremely specialized.
Many types of bacteria can survive in a wide range of environments, but there are also types
of bacteria that have evolved and adapted themselves to very particular niches.
In these specific environments, the bacteria thrive.
Outside of them, they die.
We can think of language in a similar way.
According to Morton Christensen and Nick Chater's theory of language evolution, language evolved
from a general form of communication that is shared across many different species.
But because the human mind is such a unique environment, this general communication adapted to
become highly specialized for us, resulting in what we now call language.
The end result is that because language is specialized and adapted for our minds and our minds
only, you can't just take it out of humans and expect it to survive in another species.
Language needs us as much as we need it.
In order to understand how language is uniquely sculpted to the human mind, we must use the
3D framework to explore the biological, psychological, and social prerequisites that make humans the
perfect fit for language.
In this lecture, we'll explore the psychological and social commonalities and differences in
communication and cognition between humans and nonhumans.
And then in the next lecture, we'll dive deeper to investigate the biological foundations of language.
The first place to look for commonalities and differences is in the natural communication
systems of nonhuman species in the wild.
Modern research and the study of animal behavior has greatly benefited from methodological advances in
audio, video, and computer technologies.
And we now know more about nonhuman communication than ever before.
Let's start with a species that is very far away from humans on the phylogenetic tree,
honey bees.
Bees have a very impressive communication system for letting other bees know about the location of
food sources, such as flower nectar.
When a worker bee finds a food source, it rushes back to the hive and performs an elaborate bee dance on
the surface of the honeycomb.
This dance communicates information about the direction, distance, and quality of the food source.
As Carl von Frisch demonstrated in 1965, each of these three components is captured in a different part of the dance.
The direction of the food source is indicated by the direction of the dance.
If the bee heads towards the top of the honeycomb, that indicates the source can be found by heading
straight towards the sun.
Any horizontal deviation from that vertical movement indicates the angle away from the sun that the
other bees should fly.
The distance to the source is captured by how long the bee dances in one particular direction.
The longer the bee moves in that direction, the farther the source.
And the quality of the source is communicated by the intensity of the dance.
As the bee moves along the path, it shakes its body.
The more vigorously it shakes, the better the quality of the food source.
This is really very impressive.
It shows that bees are capable of creating new utterances using a set of basic rules,
rather than just mimicking things they have seen before.
Moreover, it appears somewhat symbolic in that certain parts of the dance map onto specific things.
However, the dance of bees and the language of humans differ in some significant ways.
For one, the bee dance is an innately specified system that is not learned by observing others.
For example, bees are born with dialectical differences that vary according to
when they use their unique waggle dance to indicate distant food sources.
Interestingly, if a member of one bee species with a slightly different dialect of dance
is introduced to a new group, it will not learn the new dance, but instead will produce the one it was born with.
Two, the elements of the dance may not be truly symbolic in the same way as human language.
The direction, path, and intensity of the dance map onto the location and quality of the food source
in a non-arbitrary way.
There are many ways to say head for the sun in human languages or all around the world, but with the bee dance,
the only way to say it is to orient the body towards the sun.
And finally, bees dance only about food and water.
For example, they don't return to the hive and comment about other things like the location of predators.
This suggests that the function of their dance is fixed and narrow.
All right, maybe bees are just too far away from humans on the evolutionary tree.
What if we move to a branch closer to home?
What about primate communication?
One of the classic studies on primate vocal communication was done with vervet monkeys by
Sefarth, Chaney, and Marler in 1980.
Vervet monkeys are small, gray-haired monkeys that live in groups in woodland and mountain areas in East Africa.
They have three primary predators, leopards, eagles, and pythons.
These predators are so dangerous that vervet monkeys have developed
vocal alarms that let the rest of the group know their presence.
This by itself may not be too impressive.
After all, many species have general alarm calls.
But what makes vervet monkey calls so special is that they are specific to the three types of predator.
According to Sefarth, Chaney, and Marler,
leopard alarms are short, tonal calls typically produced in a series on both exhalation and inhalation.
Eagle alarms are a series of low-pitched staccato grunts.
And snake alarms are high-pitched chudders or shrieks.
To test if these calls had different semantic content, the researchers visited the natural habitat of vervets in Kenya and played audio recordings of the three calls when there were no predators around.
And then they observed the behavior of the monkeys in the group.
Their results were clear.
Leopard alarms caused monkeys to run for cover in the trees.
Eagle alarms caused them to run for cover in the rocks or low bushes.
And snake alarms caused them to search the ground all around them.
Moreover, follow-up studies showed that this skill was not entirely innate.
It had to be learned through practice.
Baby vervets learned how to make the appropriate calls by observing adult monkeys produce these calls.
Interestingly, baby vervets' initial calls were not very precise.
For example, they gave eagle alarms to other types of birds, then eagles, and python alarms to other types of snakes, too.
This should sound familiar.
Just like human language, there appears to be a semantic system of symbols, alarm calls, mapping onto reference, predators, or an escape strategy.
A close analysis of the acoustics of the sounds suggests that these mappings are quite arbitrary.
There doesn't seem to be anything in the alarms that captures the meaning of the referent.
This arbitrary mapping is a key linguistic universal.
Also note that the learning of the specific sounds is very similar to Hockett's traditional transmission feature of language.
Unlike bees that are born with a fully formed understanding of the bee dance,
vervets require extended practice to learn how to correctly use their calls.
Now, this behavior of vervets is pretty impressive, but you might be wondering how truly intentional it is.
After all, these calls could just be a sort of automatic alarm that never really has other monkeys in mind.
In other words, are these vocalizations a form of deliberate communication?
Shifting to a different primate species and a different form of communication provides some clues.
Chimpanzees in the wild communicate not only with vocalizations, but with hand gestures too.
The pioneering primatologist Jane Goodall was one of the first scientists to document
that chimps produce various types of bodily gestures when interacting with other chimps.
Some of the early gestures that Goodall identified were groom me and pick up gestures.
But in recent years, the repertoire has grown substantially.
In one of the largest scale studies done in the wild, Catherine Hobader and Richard Byrne recorded over
4,500 gestures produced by the Sanso community of chimpanzees from the Budongo forest in Uganda.
These gestures were produced by dozens of chimpanzees, both adults and children,
and there were over 60 distinct meanings recorded.
Some of the most common functions of the gestures were attracting sexual attention,
communication, communicating stop, directing attention, initiating play, and even making invitations to travel.
Many of these gestures were used in a similar way by the whole community.
For example, tearing leaves with the teeth or clipping was used as a sexual advance, but some gestures had multiple meanings.
Scratching the chest could mean come travel with me or groom me.
The most striking thing about these gestures compared to vervical gestures is that they appeared quite deliberate.
In most cases, eye contact was made between the sender and the recipient, and if a recipient looked away,
the sender would wait to get the recipient's attention before repeating the gesture.
Finally, I just want to say a few things about some recent discoveries in elephants.
Like vervet monkeys, elephants produce different vocalizations to warn fellow elephants of predators,
including one from the trunk that is a low and soft rumbling alarm specifically for human hunters.
Impressively, this alarm is more than just a reflexive call to run.
It's a signal to coordinate group actions to mount a defense against the hunters.
This suggests that the message is deliberate and intentional.
So it appears that other animals, such as chimps and elephants,
can use arbitrary symbols to deliberately communicate meanings with other members of the species.
However, it's worth pointing out an aspect of this sort of non-human communication that is different from language.
There's very little evidence that primates and elephants naturally string together more than one or two calls or gestures
in rule-governed ways to produce novel sentences.
Recall that rule-governedness and generativity are hallmarks of human language, so their absence is significant.
Is there any evidence that another species can handle this sort of thing?
The answer may come from a species that takes us to yet another branch of the phylogenetic tree, songbirds.
Songbirds.
Even though songbirds evolutionarily diverge from our ancient ancestors some 300 million years ago,
songbird communication shares an uncanny resemblance to many aspects of human language.
For one, as Darwin noted, songbirds are one of the few other species that learn their communication system
almost entirely through experience. In fact, even within the same species of songbird,
there are important dialects that must be mastered to communicate with members in the same geographical region.
Baby songbirds even go through a stage of babbling in practicing the songs they are exposed to by adults.
Another remarkable similarity is that birdsong, much more than primate communication,
is organized according to a hierarchical set of rules. Researchers have described the individual
notes of a song as syllables which combine to create systematic motifs, and these motifs build
and structured ways to create novel songs. Many birdsong experts have argued that this is analogous to
phonemes combining into words and words combining into novel sentences in human language.
Many people are surprised that birds generate novel structures based on rules,
but it still stops short of being generative in the same way language is. The key to true generativity
is that a communicator must be able to use the rules of a language to create different meanings.
Meaning is the key. With birdsong, it's possible to create infinite novel combinations,
but there's no evidence that those combinations actually mean anything in the way that different
sentences mean different things. So although there are some key elements shared between human
language and non-human communication in the wild, there's some big differences. What if we took a more
direct approach? What if humans tried to teach language to other animals? Might some of the differences disappear?
Let's start first with the countless natural experiments tried with human's best friend, dogs.
It's clear that dogs can learn some basic words. Sit, heel, and stay are standard vocabulary for dogs around the
world. But that's just the tip of the iceberg. There are many cases of dogs that have a vocabulary of
for dozens or even hundreds of words. The most famous and impressive example is Chaser, a border collie
trained by the Wolford College psychology professor John Pilley. Chaser was said to know over a thousand
words for commands, toys, and objects, which is comparable to a typical three-year-old, a human three-year-old.
Even more impressive, this learning took place over only three years. And there's also evidence that
Chaser could handle strings of words. For example, she could understand the difference between take ball
and take ball to frisbee. One key difference between a word learning dog and a typical three-year-old
is the inferences they make when learning new words. As we'll discuss in a few lectures, when a child learns a
word, they implicitly categorize those words based on certain features, most prominently the shape of an
object. But things are less clear with dogs. Emile van der Zee at the University of Lincoln in the UK did a
controlled, did a set of controlled experiments on a different border collie named Gable and found a different
type of categorization, size of object. And even that was not stable from one learning trial to the next. So compared to
dogs, humans seem to have very specific and consistent cognitive heuristics that guide their early word
learning, suggesting that they start with some quite distinct cognitive machinery. What about other
species? We've covered land and air, so let's go to the sea. Let's talk about dolphins, our underwater
mammal relatives. Dolphins naturally communicate by whistling, which some believe has symbolic properties.
For example, dolphins seem to have distinct whistles for a particular reference.
Building on this, there have even been attempts to teach dolphins an even more elaborate
language-like communication system. The most extensive investigation was done by Lewis Herman,
who conducted systematic tests of bottlenose dolphins at the University of Hawaii for over three decades.
Herman's two most famous dolphins were Phoenix and Ake. Phoenix was exposed to an artificial tonal
language that was transmitted by a computer through speakers broadcasting underwater. Not only was Phoenix
able to learn an impressive number of tonal words, she could also understand basic syntactic distinctions.
For example, she could differentiate between take the ball to the hoop and take the hoop to the ball.
Phoenix's comrade Ake was just as impressive. Unlike Phoenix, Ake was trained to respond to videos of hand
gesture commands with underwater button presses. In case you're wondering, dolphins press buttons with their noses.
Perhaps Ake's most striking linguistic feat was to correctly respond to questions about remembering objects
that were not physically present. In one experiment, when asked if a hoop was was or was not located in a
different tank that Ake could not currently see, she was able to answer correctly over 90% of the time.
This is one of the few examples of displacement in non-human communication.
Honeybees are one of the other examples. Most other communication among animals focuses on the here
and now and involves things that are directly relevant to the communicator, such as immediate threats,
sexual goals, location of food, or requests for actions. The fact that Ake could break free from
the current situation suggests a very sophisticated form of thinking. Dolphins are impressive, but the
biggest scientific bet for teaching language to animals comes from the work on primates. Primates are
humans' closest relatives, so it's natural for researchers to put their hopes on our hairy cousins.
Much of the modern work on teaching language to primates can be traced back to a paper written
in 1909 by the American psychologist Leitner Whitmer. Although Whitmer is best known for founding the
field of clinical psychology, he inspired a century of research on primate language with his paper entitled
A Monkey with a Mind. The paper focused on Peter, who despite the title, was actually a three-year-old
captive chimpanzee. Peter had been impressing audiences in the vaudeville circuit for his remarkable
human-like behaviors. Wearing clothes, eating with a fork and knife, smoking cigarettes, skating on roller
skates. I think you get the picture. Whitmer was so intrigued by Peter that he asked his trainer if he could do
some scientific tests on Peter's cognitive abilities. Peter passed many of the tests Whitmer threw at him, but
Peter's language skills were not quite as impressive. Granted, Peter could understand basic commands such as
give mama drink or hit data, and he could even utter the word mama. But as a clinical psychologist with
expertise in child development, Whitmer wondered whether Peter could have learned so much more had he been
exposed to language at a younger age. This simple question set the stage for language training studies
on primates for the next hundred years. Many of the early attempts to test this hypothesis took an extreme
approach. Researchers adopted baby chimps and tried to raise them as human children. One of the most famous
cases involved the psychologist couple of Luella and Winthrop Kellogg. In 1931, the Kellogg's adopted a seven
and a half month old female chimp, Gua, and raised her alongside their own biological child, Donald.
Although Gua was ahead of her brother at one year of age and producing words and understanding basic
commands, Donald quickly overtook his sister at 18 months and never looked back. It became clear to the
Kellogg's that Gua would never catch up and the experiment ended uncomfortably with Donald starting
to imitate Gua's vocalizations. This prompted the Kellogg's to return Gua to the research center where
she was originally adopted. These sorts of experiments went on for decades, including one with a chimp named
Nim Chimpsky, a not-so-subtle play on Noam Chomsky who famously argues that language is innate only to humans.
But in the late 1960s, researchers took a new approach to immersing primates in language.
Influenced by research showing that sign language shared all the basic universals of spoken language,
researchers moved away from vocal training to training of hand gestures or signs.
One of the most famous cases is Washoe. Washoe was studied by another husband-wife psychologist pair,
Alan and Beatrix Gardner. Adopted as a two-year-old, Washoe was taught American sign language as her
exclusive form of communication. Washoe eventually learned over 350 novel ASL signs. She could understand
and produce sign strings, and in some cases, she could communicate about things in the non-here and now.
And perhaps the most famous example, one of Washoe's trainers greeted Washoe after taking a long maternity
leave. Sadly, the trainer had experienced a miscarriage while away, and the account goes that the trainer
signed to Washoe that her baby had died. Washoe was said to have forlornly looked down at the trainer's
abdomen and then looking up, made the ASL sign for CRY. We'll come back to this. In addition to anecdotes,
there are many published accounts of Washoe's impressive use of signs. For example, one paper
reported that Washoe was taught to brush her teeth after meals and before bed, and at some point she
acquired the sign for toothbrush. Eventually, she got into the habit of making a toothbrush sign after she
finished dinner every night. This suggests that Washoe could communicate about things in the non-here
and now, and it's further support that humans are not the only ones to use displacement when communicating.
I should add that there are other well-known examples of language learning in primates,
such as Kanzi the bonobo and Koko the gorilla. I encourage you to read up on these, but in the interest
of time, it's necessary to point out some of the major challenges to this whole line of work.
I'll briefly address two of the biggest critiques. First, many scientists have argued that there is
a high degree of rich interpretation of the data. Language training studies require an immense amount of
time. Time, energy, resources is just a huge investment, and this makes it hard for the researchers
to see things objectively. Now, some studies are better than others in this regard. For example,
Washoe had a very strict definition of what actions were and were not actual signs. Still,
interpreting what a sign means in context is highly subjective. Take the baby example. When Washoe
glanced down at her trainer's abdomen and gestured cry, was Washoe really communicating her sadness
about her handler's baby? Or was she communicating that her handler looked sad? Or Washoe saying that
she was sad not to have seen her handler for so long? It's very hard to differentiate among these
possibilities, especially when one of the meanings is so touching. Examples like this are rife in language
training studies. A second related critique concerns the nature of what is actually learned by the animals
in these studies. Are primates, dogs, and dolphins really learning to communicate like humans? Or are
they just learning to produce complex behaviors in response to various cues? Much of human communication
is spontaneous and unsolicited. Think of all the advice you have never asked for. Plus, the topics of
language are totally unconstrained. Things feel very different with language-trained animals. The vast majority of
their utterances fall into two categories. They are either solicited by humans, such as responses to
questions or commands, or they are solicitations of a human, such as requests for food, objects, and or actions.
Relatively speaking, there are very few utterances that would qualify as basic chit-chatting.
This suggests that humans and non-humans have quite different social goals when communicating.
So putting it all together, let's first talk about the similarities between humans and non-humans.
Thinking back to our last lecture on linguistic universals, what are some of Hockett's basic design
features of language that we share with other animals? As we've seen, one of the most promising
similarities is the possible use of symbols. Although the level of sophistication is still debatable,
in the most basic sense, animals seem cognitively equipped to map meaning onto arbitrary symbols,
be it alarm calls, spoken words, or hand gestures. This suggests that humans are not the only ones with
the cognitive capacity to let one thing stand for another while communicating. A second major feature
is that some animals seem to produce basic rules to produce novel signals. This is evident in the,
this is evident in the birds and the bees. Songbirds use basic rules to embed individual notes into larger
musical phrases, and this creates entirely new songs. And honeybees use a set of precise parameters to
communicate about different locations of food. There is still debate about whether primate sign
systems are truly grammatical, but at the very least, our closest cousins are capable of producing
and understanding complex messages. This ability to combine signals in elaborate ways is a fundamental
building block for all languages, and it does not appear to be uniquely human. And a third major overlap is
that, like humans, not all species are born with a fully formed communication system. Social species,
such as songbirds, must be exposed to models of adult songs in order to communicate with birds of their
particular group. And vervet monkeys use adults as models to hone their alarm calls. This suggests a type
of social and maybe even cultural learning that is not so different from what humans do. Now, despite these
significant features that are shared across species, there are some notable points of divergence. And these may
make all the difference. Here are two big ones. Humans stand alone in how we generate meaning with language
and what we use language for. First, generating meaning. Although many species may be capable of symbolic
communication and even using rules to string signals together, no other species can creatively combine
rules and use symbols to produce so many different meanings. This is the essence of Hockett's generative
feature of language. In the last lecture, we learned that one powerful tool for generating meaning is what
Chomsky called recursion. Using recursion, we can increasingly add semantic complexity to our utterances
using basic syntactic rules. Consider these three sentences, I know, you know that I know, and I know that you know that I know.
Note that each new recursive embedding creates a truly distinct meaning. This is the beauty of Chomsky's generativity. In
principle, there is no end to the meanings we can generate with recursion. No other species can do this. Not even close.
This example highlights a second unique thing about human language. We talk about absolutely everything.
And you'll recall from the last lecture that some of these things are pretty distinctive.
We reminisce about the past. We speculate about the future. We comment on things just because we find
them interesting. And most distinctive of all, we even talk about talking, as I'm doing right now.
And I want to add one more biggie. Humans are obsessed with talking about mental states, our own and others.
Coming back to our you know that I know example, many species have the cognitive capacity to handle
the I know part. But once you start adding perspectives, that's when humans enter a league of their own.
This complex perspective taking and mind reading is part of what Michael Tomasello, now at Duke University, calls shared
intentionality. And in later lectures, you'll see that this mindset is a basic building block for all languages.
Okay, that's enough for now. Let me briefly wrap up by coming back to where we started.
If language is like an organism, and its only natural habitat is the human mind, it suggests that there is a
special and unique mesh between language and humans. In the next lecture, we'll go deeper than
cognitive and social levels and explore the biological fit between language and the mind.
