Have you ever heard of necrotizing fasciitis?
If that doesn't ring a bell, maybe you've heard of its more colloquial name,
the flesh-eating disease.
This is a nasty condition that first attacks and kills skin cells
and if untreated, can quickly cause a fatal blood infection.
The immediate cause of the disease is bacteria entering an open wound.
But that's not the whole story because not every host gets infected.
People's genes matter.
It's common knowledge that genes make people susceptible to all sorts of diseases
like cancer, diabetes, and depression.
But genes also make people vulnerable to bacterial infections like
tuberculosis, Lyme's disease, and meningitis.
So what's this got to do with language?
Here the 3D framework is useful.
We know that bacterial diseases have mechanisms operating on at least two time frames.
There's the moment-to-moment mechanism, which is the initial exposure to the bacteria,
and there's also the evolutionary mechanism,
which is the genetic susceptibility of the person exposed.
Unless you understand both mechanisms on both time frames,
you won't understand the disease.
And this explains differences across species as well.
There are some bacteria that infect only humans
because only humans have a suitable and receptive genetic environment.
Well, the same story applies to language.
As we learned in the last lecture,
being exposed to language is not enough to ensure its development.
In this lecture, we'll explore the genetic and biological landscape
that allows language to thrive in humans, but not other species.
First, some basics on genetics.
The latest estimates show that our bodies contain approximately 35 trillion human cells.
I say human because it's only part of the total number of cells in our body.
What about the other part?
Well, largely bacteria.
We'll come back to this in the next lecture.
Almost all human cells contain a long-coiled molecule of DNA
that's organized according to 23 pairs of chromosomes.
Each of these chromosomes contains hundreds or thousands of individual protein-making molecules called genes.
Altogether, we have about 20,000 genes.
These genes provide the basic instructions of what each of your cells is supposed to do.
One rough analogy for understanding this genetic organization is a cookbook.
DNA is the book, chromosomes are the chapters, and genes are the individual recipes.
Most humans have the same basic book with the same number of chapters and pages,
but some of our recipes are unique.
This variation is caused by novel combinations of your parents' recipes.
You inherit and combine most chromosomes from your mother and your father.
And some of the variation is due to copying errors, or genetic mutations.
Within the human species, there's a remarkable overlap of genetic material.
We share about 99.5% of DNA with one another.
And there are striking similarities across species, too.
You probably already know that we share much of our DNA with chimpanzees, about 98.5%.
But you might be surprised that we also share 90% with cats, 70% with zebrafish, and even 50% with bananas.
This highlights an important principle in evolution.
Although there are genetic differences across species,
there are many fundamental processes that are evolutionarily conserved.
Evolutionary conservation means that basic genetic mechanisms are reused within a large number of species.
Often, these are biological processes that serve basic survival functions,
ranging from the very small, like ion channels that modulate cell activity,
to the very large, like organs such as the eyes, heart, and lungs.
This shared equipment is worth highlighting because it suggests that the unique things we see in particular species need not require completely new genes.
This logic runs counter to most people's intuitions about language.
Because language is so complex and so novel, it seems logical that there must be a specialized set of genes dedicated to it.
This conclusion is understandable given that I've spent several lectures telling you how unique language is.
This beguiling uniqueness has tempted many a scientist to make bold genetic claims about it.
Perhaps the most famous in recent years is the claim made by the Harvard psychologist Steven Pinker in his popular 1994 book, The Language Instinct.
In the book, Pinker builds on Chomsky's view of the uniqueness of language by putting an evolutionary twist on the original argument.
In one well-known passage, Pinker draws an analogy to spiders.
I'll paraphrase.
Just like spiders spin spider webs because they have spider brains,
humans speak language because they have human brains.
Aside from being a bit circular, Pinker's logic assumes that because there is a radical species difference in a behavior or a phenotype,
the relevant genetic profile or genotype must also be radically different.
The Language Instinct produced a scientific backlash, and since its publication,
there's been mounting evidence for an alternative view of how language evolved.
To appreciate this alternative perspective, we need to go back to our second lecture and recall that language is not a single thing.
It's a system of things.
Evolution may have selected for the system, but there's no doubt that parts of the system were borrowed from genetic materials shared with other species.
This is the basic idea of evolutionary conservation.
Evolution often tinkers with old things to make new ones.
As it pertains to language, this view is best summed up by the late, great cognitive scientist, Elizabeth Bates.
Unlike Pinker and Chomsky, Bates did not see language as a new machine built out of new parts.
Based on the principle of evolutionary conservation, Bates viewed language as a new machine built out of old parts.
There are two main genetic arguments to support Bates' new machine, old parts view of language.
The first is that there are no single genes for any complex behavior.
Just like there will never be a gene for empathy, schizophrenia, or belief in God, there will never be a gene for language.
And two, there's growing evidence from molecular biology that genes involved in language are not unique to humans.
As with other cases of evolutionary conservation, the genes used in language are shared among many species.
Putting these two things together, I now want to focus on one particular gene that has received the most attention in the molecular study of language.
It's called the FOXP2 gene.
This gene was the first to get scientists truly excited about understanding genetic mechanisms for something as complex and as unique as language.
The story of the FOXP2 gene starts with a British family in the 1980s medically dubbed the KE family.
Members of this family were observed to have an unusually high preponderance of a particular disorder called developmental verbal dyspraxia.
One of the defining symptoms of this disorder is a difficulty combining phonemes while saying words.
For example, an extreme case would be someone trying to say the word brick, but regularly omitting the first few phonemes and just saying ick.
Importantly, the muscles of the tongue and jaw are perfectly fine, so the breakdown is in how the brain orchestrates the speech movements.
The disorder in the general population is quite rare, but across three generations of the KE family, about 50% of the members had some form of it.
This led to the hypothesis that there may be a genetic mechanism underlying the problem.
It took a while for the tools of molecular biology to advance enough to confirm this hypothesis.
But in 1998, neuroscientist Farina Varga-Kedem, geneticist Simon Fisher, and their colleagues published a paper locating the problem on a stretch of genes on chromosome 7.
Later, in 2001, using more powerful gene imaging techniques, the exact location of the mutation was identified on the FOXP2 gene.
Later still, it was discovered that the problem was caused by a modification to just a single letter of the FOXP2 DNA sequence,
which was traced back to a mutation passed down by the grandmother of the KE family.
Although the FOXP2 was initially celebrated by the press as a language gene, the scientific community was much more cautious, and with good reason.
It turns out that the FOXP2 is one of the most evolutionarily conserved genes in all of the animal species.
Not only do we have it, but so do chimps and birds and even bees and alligators.
Now, even though it's shared across many species, there are small but important differences.
To appreciate the differences, you need to understand how genes operate.
Genes churn out gene products such as RNA and proteins that act on other cells.
These gene products are the real heavy lifters in making us who we are.
The FOXP2 gene produces a protein creatively called the FOXP2 protein.
The human version of this protein differs by only two out of 175 amino acids from the chimp version,
and by only three from the mouse version.
This protein acts on various other cells during prenatal development to affect not just the brain,
but also other organs, such as the heart and the lungs.
Although the FOXP2 gene is implicated in many aspects of an organism's development,
which is another good reason not to call it a language gene,
its effects on the brain are what directly connect it to language.
In humans, the brain regions that are affected downstream by the FOXP2 mutation
are areas involved in motor control of the mouth and tongue,
which are clearly necessary for speaking.
One of the major lines of evidence to support this comes from research on non-human animals.
For example, Constance Scharf at the Free University of Berlin
found that disrupting the FOXP2 gene in songbirds
caused downstream problems in a region of the brain called Area X
that controls song production in birds.
Going a step further, researchers are using genetic engineering to test the role that human genes play in non-human animals.
Using state-of-the-art gene editing techniques, scientists now have the capability to extract segments of human genes
and insert them in the genome of other animals.
For example, Wolfgang Einhard at the Max Planck Institute for Evolutionary Anthropology in Germany
has done research that snips the human mutation of FOXP2
and places it in the appropriate segment of the genome of living mice.
The result is a significant disruption to motor brain regions involved in controlling high-pitched vocalizations,
which is how baby mice communicate with their mothers.
Einhard also describes the opposite technique,
inserting a fully functioning human FOXP2 gene into a mouse genome and testing what happens.
Remarkably, this resulted in a proliferation of neural connectivity in motor regions in the mouse's brain.
The research is ongoing, but if these changes correlate with enhanced vocal performance in the genetically altered mice,
it would suggest that the human variant of the FOXP2 gene may have indeed been an evolutionary springboard
for more simple communication to the complexities of language.
Another astonishing development in studying genetic mutations for language
comes from the field called molecular anthropology.
You may know this field from the popular 1993 film Jurassic Park.
The field has actually been around since the 1960s,
but recent advances in gene sequencing are turning science fiction into reality.
One of the leaders of the field is Fonte Pabo,
also at the Max Planck Institute of Evolutionary Anthropology.
He and his team are trying to trace the modern human genome to our ancient ancestors
and even closely related cousins that have become extinct.
Using DNA from 50,000-year-old bones discovered in caves in Eastern Europe,
they are reconstructing the genome of direct ancestors in our lineage,
in addition to independent hominin branches, including Neanderthals.
Remarkably, the exact same two FOXP2 proteins that differentiate modern humans and chimps are shared with our direct ancestors,
and surprisingly, also our Neanderthal cousins.
There's debate about whether Neanderthals possessed anything like human language,
but this shared genetic link will be informative once researchers nail down how long ago
humans and Neanderthals diverged in our evolutionary past.
The estimates are currently anywhere between 300,000 and 600,000 years ago,
and once scientists pin down the dates more definitively,
they'll have a much better estimate of the minimum number of years that we have carried the human form of the FOXP2 gene.
This is because humans and Neanderthals are not totally identical with respect to the FOXP2 gene.
There are some subtle differences in binding sites where the gene connects to other molecules,
and these differences may be key in understanding what makes human language unique.
In addition to looking to the past to better understand how FOXP2 relates to language,
researchers are also focusing on the present.
The Human Genome Project that began in 1990 was finally completed in 2003,
and it provided the world with the first ever full map of the human genome.
This incredible feat has opened the door to scientists and entrepreneurs alike
to figure out faster and cheaper ways to map the genome.
We're now in an age where for about the price of a transatlantic flight,
you can purchase a full genetic sequence of yourself.
And for a much smaller investment,
you can pay companies like 23andMe or Ancestry.com
to provide a report of your genes as they relate to common genetic variations.
With this sort of technology taking off,
researchers believe that in a few years,
we will have a new wealth of genetic data to map genes
onto normal variations of human language.
Researchers like Simon Fisher,
now at the Max Planck Institute for Psycholinguistics in the Netherlands,
they're hopeful that this new information
will reveal more subtle mappings between FOXP2 and language.
For example, perhaps there are mutations of the gene
that correlate with enhanced vocal phonological abilities,
as with auctioneers, singers, and polyglots,
like speakers of multiple languages.
This is more than just a mere novelty.
This sort of work could be invaluable for the future medical treatment of individuals
with speech production problems.
Beyond FOXP2, there's hope that we'll discover new gene variants
that connect to different aspects of language.
Remember, language is a complex system.
The FOXP2 gene links mostly to phonological and some syntactic aspects of language,
but other aspects of language are unrelated.
Might we also find genes that map onto these other parts of the system?
There are cases of other genetic disorders where some aspects of language are disrupted,
but others are spared.
For example, Williams Syndrome is a disorder caused by the deletion of 26 to 28 genes on the seventh chromosome.
And this causes a unique psychological and social profile.
Carolyn Mervis of the University of Louisville did some of the pioneering work on Williams Syndrome,
and she describes a disorder in which there are several distinct cognitive deficits in math and spatial abilities,
but a relative sparing of some language abilities.
In particular, phonological and semantic abilities are close to average in these individuals.
Contrasted against their other impairments, these skills really stand out.
In fact, if you met a child with Williams Syndrome,
you might be superficially struck by how articulate and well-spoken they are.
But this belies some deeper language problems.
Their syntactic abilities are lower than their phonological and semantic skills,
and their pragmatic abilities are extremely compromised.
This deficit in pragmatics comes as a surprise to anyone who's even briefly interacted with a person with Williams Syndrome.
On First Depression, they come across as quite gregarious and interested in others,
but a closer look reveals some significant social deficits.
For one, they have great difficulty following the thread of conversations.
In fact, they're known for making many non-sequiturs which are novel and interesting,
but demonstrate poor understanding of the usual social give-and-take of a conversation.
And two, formal tests of theory of mind, which assess perspective-taking ability,
reveal that their ability to shift the perspective of others is also quite poor.
This means that they have a very hard time knowing what other people know and don't know,
which is a key pragmatic skill.
These pragmatic deficits are reminiscent of problems also seen in individuals with Autism Spectrum Disorder, or ASD.
The National Institutes of Health describe children with ASD as
often socially withdrawn and having limited ability to successfully communicate and interact with others.
Often, these individuals have difficulty developing language skills and understanding what others say to them.
Many also have difficulty communicating non-verbally, such as through hand gestures, eye contact, and facial expressions.
In contrast, some people with ASD have incredibly rich vocabularies and very sophisticated syntactic skills.
This again suggests an interesting disconnection between semantic and syntactic abilities from pragmatic skills.
Here's a nice example of the dissociation in the words of Temple Grandin,
a scientist and author who has written extensively about her own experience with ASD.
Social relationships have been learned solely by intellect and use of my visualization skills.
All my thoughts are in pictures, like videotapes in my imagination.
When I encounter a new social situation, I can scan my databanks for a similar situation that I can use as a model to guide me in the new situation.
My databanks and social skills are also filled with news articles about diplomatic relationships between different countries and an archive of previous experiences.
I use these scenarios to guide me in different situations.
From this excerpt, you can see why Grandin has described herself as an anthropologist on Mars.
She's taking a very intellectual and objective approach to understanding social complexities and human interactions and language that comes so naturally for so many others.
Currently, researchers are searching for genetic clues or causes of autism.
We know from twin studies that ASD is highly heritable, but it's been hard to pin down the exact genetic mechanisms.
Part of the problem stems from the fact that unlike verbal dyspraxia and Williams syndrome, ASD is a much fuzzier disorder.
Because it spans a continuum, it's not all or nothing, it's hard to connect to a clear genetic cause.
Once we better understand this genetic link, we'll start to piece together the different genetic mechanisms that underlie all aspects of the language system,
from phonetics all the way up to pragmatics.
So, to sum this section up, there are two main take-home messages.
One, there are no single genes to explain all of language.
Because language is a complex system, we must recognize that different aspects of language are affected by different genes and different gene networks.
And two, it's likely that much of the machinery of language is built on genes that are shared with other species.
When we talk about evolutionary conservation of genetic material, we're talking about homologies.
A homology is a structure or a process that is shared among species due to a common evolutionary ancestor.
They can be at the gene level, as with FOXP2, and also at higher levels of organization, such as cell types or organs.
As we move higher up from the genetic level, it's clear that humans and many other animals share homologies related to language.
For example, the chimp brain and the human brain are anatomically very similar.
We both share the same basic hemisphere and lobe structure that I introduced in lecture three.
Even Broca's and Wernicke's areas have homologous structures in the left hemisphere of chimps.
And just as with humans, these regions are involved in the production and comprehension of vocalizations.
Interestingly, we also share a network of neurons in these regions that are part of what has been called the mirror neuron system.
Mirror neurons were first identified in the monkey prefrontal cortex by Giacomo Risolati back in the mid-1990s at the University of Parma.
These neurons have the interesting mirroring property of firing both when a monkey reaches for an object
and also when the same monkey observes another monkey or human reach for the same object.
One interpretation of these neurons is that they are basic cellular mechanisms for understanding the intentions of others.
Interestingly, two of the main neural hubs of the system in humans are the inferior frontal gyrus, where Broca's area is located,
and the medial temporal gyrus, just below Wernicke's area.
This means parts of the brain that are mechanisms for language are also involved in understanding the intentions of grasping actions.
This link between hand movements and language has led some researchers, like Michael Korbalis of the University of Auckland,
to theorize that spoken language systems emerge from gestured communication systems in our evolutionary past.
We'll talk more about gesture in a couple of lectures, but I bring it up now just to show you how language builds on structures that are shared across species.
Now, even though there are many homologies between humans and our closest primate cousins, there are also some major differences.
For example, the human brain is much bigger than a chimpanzee brain, even when adjusted for relative body weight.
Recent research by a leader of the Human Genome Project, David Hosler, suggests that these differences may be driven by a unique family of genes called NOTCH2NL.
These genes emerged after humans split from the ape lineage several million years ago.
This genetic difference may also be responsible for the number and complexity of neural connections in the human brain.
One recent estimate is 100 trillion connections. Trillion.
Just to get some perspective, that number is hundreds of times greater than the number of stars in our galaxy.
More than sheer number, the way that neurons are connected is crucial.
One of the novel aspects of the human brain is how many connections it has between new and old brain structures.
In all mammals, the newest part of the brain, called the neocortex, lies on the surface of the brain, and older parts, like the subcortex, lie deeper beneath the surface.
Both structures are very old. It's estimated that the neocortex was added on top of the subcortex when our distant mammal ancestors diverged from reptiles during the time of the dinosaurs.
The neocortex is where most high-level cognition occurs. Indeed, that's where Broca's and Wernicke's areas are located in humans.
It's also where the executive functions are housed, mostly in the frontal lobe.
These executive functions in the frontal lobe are involved in monitoring and regulating thoughts and actions.
In contrast, the much older subcortex is where many of the basic survival and emotional centers are located.
When you hear people refer to the lizard part of our brain, they're talking about the subcortex.
By the way, the reason people say this is that because many of the basic structures in the subcortex are homologous between lizards and humans.
One of the functions of having more neural connections between the frontal lobe and the subcortex is to have an increased ability to modulate and regulate basic impulses and drives.
In general, this executive processing function of the frontal cortex is one of the most important attributes of all mammal brains, and human brains in particular.
This is relevant to language when you consider differences in what species communicate about.
As we've discussed, most animal communication is pretty basic. Food, territory, protection, and sex.
These are all primal instincts that have direct links to survival, either immediately or in the long run.
The primary neural mechanism underlying these drives are located in the subcortical brain network called the limbic system, which contains structures such as the hypothalamus, amygdala, and cingulate.
Having weak connections from the frontal lobe to the limbic system allows these lower and older brain regions to drive and dominate communication.
When a vervet monkey sees an eagle, there's not much choice in whether the amygdala will trigger the appropriate alarm call.
Things are different in humans.
Because we develop much stronger connections between the frontal cortex and the limbic system, humans have much more control over what they communicate about.
Don't get me wrong, we still have plenty of the basic limbic system urges, but our frontal lobes have liberated us from constantly focusing on them.
In addition to freeing us up to talk about a wider range of things, the frontal lobe has helped us learn how to be more reflective about our behavior and the behavior of others.
The executive functions of the frontal lobe allow us to pause, stand back, and evaluate things at a distance.
If we see something we want, rather than just let our limbic system tell us how to immediately go out and get it, the frontal lobe can more carefully analyze the best course of action.
This is where the cognitively and socially advanced skills of perspective taking and cooperation come in.
For example, if I want something, and my friend wants the same thing, and we both know that we both want it, we can figure out how we can work together to get it.
Remember, perspective taking is central to pragmatics, and our beefy frontal lobe connections are a key to healthy pragmatic functioning.
Another unique aspect of the human brain is the extensive web of connections within the neocortex.
With regard to language, Broca's area and Wernicke's area are linked by a superhighway of white matter tracks.
These pathways are composed of long axons, which connect neurons to one another.
In case you're curious, it's called white matter because the axons are surrounded by a thick white coating, called myelin, which greatly increases the speed of electrical signaling between neurons.
In 2015, Noam Chomsky teamed up with a computer scientist at MIT, Robert Berwick, to publish a book entitled Why Only Us.
Arguing for the uniqueness of human language, the two claim that a strong connection between Broca's and Wernicke's area is necessary for complex syntactic processing.
One of the functions of Broca's area is to integrate different pieces of information, like words, and one of the functions of Wernicke's area is to attach meanings to things, again, like words.
Chomsky and Berwick argue that the tighter the connection between these two processes, the more the brain can compute novel and complex combinations of words and sentences.
Recall that this ability is the essence of the generative feature of language.
If this is true, the unique human ability to generate new and creative meanings with language is built with mechanisms that exist in our closest cousins, but are just used in more sophisticated ways.
Note that this does not require any new architecture in the brain, which is consistent with Elizabeth Bates' new machine, old parts view on the evolution of language.
We'll come back to this point when we discuss language development in later lectures, but for now, the main takeaway is that much of language is built on homologous brain structures that are shared with other species.
So this leaves us with some interesting questions. If language is a new machine built out of old parts, what does this say about how it originally became adapted to the human brain?
And once the link was formed, what did the relationship do to change the brain?
We'll tackle these big and important questions in our next and final lecture on evolution.
