your lecture is Spencer Kelly dr. Kelly is a professor of psychology and neuroscience as
well as a co-director of the Center for language and brain at Colgate University he is the president
of the International Society for gesture studies
imagine gazing up at the night sky with a clear view of the stars
all those flickering lights reach your eyes from trillions and trillions of miles away
and most of that light started its journey to earth long before you were even born
pause to let it sink in where did all those stars come from how did they get here what does it mean
it's hard to contemplate these questions genuinely and deeply without a growing sense of mystery and
awe now keep this picture in mind and consider this you are a member of the only species on the planet
and for all we know the only life form in the entire universe that can even contemplate such things
let that sink in think about it we may be the only ones to look up at the night sky and see a universe
of stars not just random flickers of light and if we really are alone and looking upward with this
profound sense of mystery and awe isn't that just as mysterious and just as awesome how can this universe
within us the human mind contemplate such things where did the mind come from how did that get here what does it mean
these are the big questions that drive this course and a key to answering them lies in what i'll argue is the mind's most
mysterious and awesome ability of all language language is the most powerful tool on the planet think of any product of human
civilization all of it was influenced by language it was the tool that makes all other tools it's the ultimate human invention and this innovation has done more than just build it
And this innovation has done more than just build telescopes
and computers and satellites, all very impressive.
It's possible that without language,
the human mind might have never imagined such things
in the first place.
In this lecture, I'll present a model of the mind
that we'll use in the rest of this course,
and then I'll talk about how language fits within that model.
But first, to set that up, I need to briefly introduce
some traditional philosophical views of the mind,
and then I'll explain how the study of the mind
entered the realm of science.
One of the classical models of the mind is dualism,
which can be traced back to the ancient Greeks.
Dualists saw the mind as two distinct entities.
There's a physical part, which includes the body and brain,
and there's the non-physical part.
For Plato, that was the non-material world of ideas.
Later, in traditional religious dualism,
the non-physical part was seen as the spiritual soul,
and that's how the human body connected to God.
By this religious account, when we look upward to the night sky,
our body sees the lights, but our soul senses the heavens.
You're probably already familiar with the most famous dualist of all,
Rene Descartes.
Descartes was a different kind of dualist.
He took dualism out of the religious realm and placed it more in the secular world.
This type of dualism was called mind-body dualism.
The body was a machine, and the mind was the home of thought, reason, and consciousness.
The two entities were completely separate, except for where they met in the brain
in a structure called the pineal gland.
Around the time Descartes was arguing for his mind-body dualism,
a rival model of the mind called materialism was gaining popularity.
Materialism is most associated with Baruch Spinoza, Thomas Hobbes, and John Locke,
and it blurs the distinction between the mind and the body.
For these philosophers, mind and body are one and the same.
This is a profoundly different view of the mind.
For one, materialism removed much of the mystery surrounding the mind by claiming that it could
be understood just as the body could be understood.
And second, materialists argued that the mind did not have any special properties.
It developed just as the body developed.
For example, Locke famously argued that the mind is a tabula rasa, or blank slate, at birth,
and it takes on meaning only through experience with the world and reflection on that experience.
This implies that if you understand the way someone experiences the world,
you can understand that person's mind.
This move had profound implications.
Once the floodgates of materialism were open, it was just a matter of time before the mind became an
object of inquiry for scientists, not just philosophers.
After all, materialism viewed the contents of the mind as an empirical matter,
and the methods of science were perfectly suited for such an investigation.
The first scientist to test aspects of the mind in a truly scientific fashion was the German
physiologist Wilhelm Wundt.
In 1879, Wundt founded the first official laboratory for psychological research at the
University of Leipzig, and the field of scientific psychology was born.
Wundt's approach to studying the mind became known as structuralism.
Briefly, structuralism viewed the conscious mind as composed of smaller building blocks of basic
sensations and perceptions. According to Wundt, all conscious experience could be broken down into
these smaller units. One way to think about structuralism is like it's like chemistry of the mind,
with the basic sensations and perceptions acting like the elements in the periodic table.
Although structuralism didn't last long as a field of scientific psychology,
it had a significant legacy. It brought the study of the mind out of the philosophical armchair
and into the scientific laboratory. And it introduced a conceptual approach for understanding
complexity at higher levels, such as conscious thought, by reducing it to much smaller units of
analysis, such as basic sensations and perceptions. The combination of these two things has had many consequences,
but the biggest for this course is that it led to a model of the mind called biological reductionism.
Biological reductionism, or just reductionism for short, is materialism on steroids.
It not only views aspects of the mind as grounded in the body, it dispenses with the idea of the mind
all together. There is no mind, only a body, only neurons firing, or genes expressing, or even further down
the reductionist ladder, only particles interacting. This view gained popularity in the 20th century with
the incredible advances made in biology, chemistry, and physics. Advances in these fields led many
scientists to speculate that human behavior can be totally understood if we describe and understand its basic
building blocks. In the 21st century, radical reductionism is still embraced by some scientists,
but it hit three major roadblocks in its attempt to understand the complexities of the human mind.
First, reductionists cannot agree on what the lowest level is. Should it be neurons, genes, molecules, or
quarks, or even mathematical equations? The second problem is that the meaning of something may be lost at
finer and finer grains of resolution. Take a painting by the famous pointillist George Surratt. Surratt's
masterpiece, A Sunday on La Grande Jatte, is housed in the Art Institute of Chicago,
and it takes up a whole wall. It's massive, about seven feet tall by about 10 feet wide. On it are
millions and millions of tiny dots of paint. If you zoom in to one of these dots, it's just a single
point of color. You get no sense of the overall painting. But when you pull back and view them
as a whole, that's where the meaning emerges. To explain a Surratt, it makes no sense to talk
only about the tiny parts and ignore the whole. The whole is where the action is. A related third
problem is that sometimes the whole goes beyond the sum of its parts. Perhaps you've heard of emergent
properties in biology. An emergent property is a characteristic that manifests only in a larger
structure or system, but not in its parts. In chemistry, the attribute of saltiness is an
emergent property that results from combining the elements of sodium and chlorine. The property of
saltiness is not contained in either sodium or chlorine individually. It exists only one level
up when the two elements combine. In biology, there are all sorts of examples of emergent properties.
Consider heart cells. By itself, each cell does not have the property of pumping blood.
The property emerges only at the next level up when the heart cells combined create an actual heart.
This works at higher levels too. Ant colonies operate as a cohesive group and this behavior goes
beyond the properties contained in any one individual ant. Here's a useful way to think of it. The whole of
an emergent property is greater than the sum of the parts. Basically, there's a synergy at play.
And now we've arrived at the model of the mind that we'll use in this course. The basic principles
behind emergent properties offer a new way to think about the mind. If you think of it as an emergent
phenomenon, you can see how this might result from a synergistic interaction between the brain,
the body, and the environment. The mind is not reducible to any one of these things alone.
It exists only through a combination of them. This definition of the mind has all the strengths of
the other three models I've presented while not being burdened by their weaknesses. First, drawing from
dualism, we can preserve the mind as a special entity without having to commit to a separation from the
body. Second, drawing from materialism, we can scientifically study the mind as we study
any other thing without committing ourselves to a blank slate. Perhaps aspects of the mind emerge from
combining innate attributes of the brain and the body with experience from the environment. Third,
drawing from reductionism, we can appreciate the biological and physical building blocks of the mind
without viewing them as the only important things. The other levels higher up may be just as significant.
Now let's turn to how language fits within this model of the mind. I'll be defining language in much more
detail in the next two lectures, but for now, I'll introduce it in a way that reveals the powerful
impact it has on the mind. Most people think of language as something that's in our heads, like
memories or thoughts or emotions. Of course, it is in our heads, but only up to a point. Language also lives
in the material world. And from this perspective, you can think of it as you would think of any other
physical tool for getting things done. Writing is a perfect example. Someone can have a thought and write
it down and now those words can be used to affect the world. The effects can range from helping you
remember to buy a loaf of bread at the store, all the way up to establishing a set of rights for a new
democracy. Think of all the ways that the written word has had a massive impact on the world. Religion,
law, literature, technology, medicine, the list goes on. Examples like these make it hard to draw a clear line
between where language ends in our head, starts in the world. If you're able to see how the written
word partly lives outside of us, it's not hard to make the jump to spoken language next. The easiest
way to appreciate this is to consider a prehistoric child learning a language before writing existed.
To become a fully functioning adult, the child would need to internalize the language of the group.
Where is the language that the child is supposed to learn? Is it just in the heads of the individuals
of the community? No, it can't be. Language is too complex to be 100% contained in every member of a
community. A better way to think of it is that language is distributed across the group, so it must
exist at least in part outside the heads of each member. If you can't get your head around this,
substitute the word culture for the word language. Can you see that culture does not exist fully
complete inside the heads of every member in a community? Language works the same way.
Now, does this sound familiar? This is how we talked about the mind. Just like the mind,
language may be an emergent property that is the result of a synergistic interaction between brains,
bodies, and the environment. One implication of viewing language as something that lives partly
outside our heads is that we can more clearly see how language can affect us. If language is similar to
other tools we use, it's easier to appreciate how it has transformed us and our environment. Consider
Archimedes' three simple machines. The lever, the pulley, and the screw. In the third century BC,
Archimedes explained that these human inventions were force multipliers, meaning that the mechanical
advantage they afforded could transform small physical forces into much larger ones. With regard
to the lever, Archimedes famously said, give me a place to stand on and I will move the earth. No doubt
these simple machines transformed not only how humans influenced our world, but also how we thought of it too.
Now, if you view language as the tool that makes all other tools, it's the ultimate force multiplier.
Just by vibrating our vocal cords or making marks on a page, humans can coordinate actions that help build
and use these simple machines. Not to mention that language is necessary for explaining how these machines work.
This explanatory function should not be minimized. Without the explanatory power of language, it's not
possible to keep building more and more sophisticated machines. You need language to go from levers, pulleys,
and screws to telescopes, computers, and satellites. And I'll go one step further in this course. I'll argue
that without language, the human mind cannot even conceive of creating other tools in the first place.
From this perspective, language actually transforms the mind to allow it to do things it couldn't do
without language. Even if you're not quite ready to go this far yet, I hope it's clear that language is an
extremely powerful tool of the mind.
In the spirit of viewing language as a tool, I'd like to introduce a conceptual framework. I'll call it
the 3D framework. This framework will organize and analyze the issues we'll discuss in this course.
The framework has three dimensions, and each one is necessary to understand something as complex as
language and the mind. The three dimensions are causation, levels of analysis, and time frame.
To flesh out the framework, I'll return to an example from earlier. Let's suppose we want to
understand the relationship between writing and the mind. The first dimension of the framework is
causation, and it concerns two things. What causes a thing, and what does the thing cause?
This distinction is inspired by Aristotle's efficient cause and final cause. In more modern times,
the Nobel Prize-winning biologist Nicholas Thunbergen referred to these two types of causes as
mechanisms and functions. With writing, a mechanism would be the anteceding conditions that produce the
behavior of writing. For example, these might include activation of brain regions dedicated to your
native language, a desire to express yourself, or a social injustice that compels you to put pen to
paper. In contrast, the function is the consequence of writing. For example, these might include clearing
up confusion, convincing people of an argument, or making your feelings public. So for every behavior,
there are things that produce it, mechanisms, and things that produces, functions. Okay, so far so good.
Let's add the second dimension, levels of analysis. This distinction comes back to the concept of
reductionism and emergent properties. Recall that emergentism rejects the idea that all behaviors can be
reduced to the lowest levels of analysis, like neurons, genes, or particles. Instead, it embraces the idea that all
levels of analysis may be useful in explaining a behavior. That's the approach we'll adopt here.
In the 3D framework, there are three levels of analysis, biological, psychological, and social.
The biological level focuses on small things like neurons firing and genes expressing, but also
larger-scale biological activity, like brain regions communicating and turning thoughts into actions.
And the psychological level concerns subjective experiences, like feeling, thinking, and perceiving.
And the social level concerns how an organism interacts with things that are outside of the body,
which includes not just humans, but objects too.
Let's take our writing example, and then let's focus on identifying mechanisms for writing
on our three levels of analysis. We'll ignore function for now.
Each one of the mechanisms I mentioned earlier operates on a different level of analysis.
The biological level concerns brain regions that are dedicated to your native language.
The psychological level concerns your desire to express yourself.
And the social level concerns the societal conditions that compel you to write.
Can you appreciate how each of those mechanisms is useful for understanding what causes someone to write?
Of course, it all depends on what you're trying to explain.
If you want to understand what caused Karl Marx and Friedrich Engels to write the communist manifesto,
it would be odd, very odd, to focus only on how the motor cortex allowed them to put letters on a piece of paper.
In contrast, if you were a doctor treating a patient who hit his head and suddenly lost the ability to write,
it would be a poor use of time to consider the political motivations or events that inspire that patient to write.
But as a rule of thumb, it's best to take all levels seriously when trying to understand highly complex behaviors.
You may be surprised to learn that the prolific novelist Stephen King occasionally suffers from writer's block.
It's true. In his book entitled On Writing, King describes a bad case of writer's block he had back in college.
Now, if we wanted to fully understand what caused this particular episode,
we'd want to use our full arsenal of levels of analysis to uncover the mechanism.
Biologically, maybe King wasn't sleeping well and that made it hard for his frontal cortex to concentrate.
Psychologically, maybe he was feeling insecure at this early stage of his career.
And maybe he didn't think his work was worth anything, it wasn't any good.
And socially, perhaps he just broke up with his girlfriend and lost his muse.
And who knows, maybe it was a combination of all three of these things.
The point is that the only way to thoroughly understand what causes a behavior is to consider potential mechanisms
on all levels of analysis and how they interact.
The final dimension of the 3D framework is time frame, or the scale on which you want to understand the cause and effect of something.
It may help to think of this as a timeline from short to long.
It spans from the very, very brief one millisecond to the next, to quite a bit longer, one day, week, or year to the next,
to longer still, one generation to the next.
You can even go much bigger than that, one century, millennium, or evolutionary eon to the next.
We'll refer to these different points on the timeline as the moment-to-moment, developmental, historical, and evolutionary time frames.
As you'll see, approaching a subject from these different time frames fundamentally changes how you think about it.
Let's return to our example of writing and explore how different mechanisms for writing operate on different time frames.
Starting with the smallest time frame, the moment-to-moment, we can describe the immediate antecedents to putting pen to paper,
neurons firing to link ideas into words, a flash of inspiration that bubbles up from your unconscious,
or maybe you just saw something that gave you an idea.
These can all contribute to that wonderful aha moment in writing.
Now let's pull back a bit.
Let's pull back to the developmental time frame.
Things are different on this scale.
Here we talk about much slower mechanisms, such as how a lifetime of using language has wired your brain to think in words,
or a personality trait that compels you to write,
or years of reading books that have allowed you to hone your writing skills.
These things do not happen overnight.
They are an accumulated context that provides a foundation for the moment-to-moment mechanisms.
Let's pull back further still.
On the historical time frame, you need to consider the larger context in which a behavior occurs.
This context involves really big things like cultural institutions, national identity, and technological innovations.
Imagine what the Library of Alexandria did for writing in ancient Egypt.
Or consider how the free speech laws of a country influence what's safe and unsafe to write.
What about inventions like the printing press, or typewriters, or Twitter?
These major historical developments serve as a broader context for the smaller time frames.
In order to fully understand what causes someone to write, you must consider this historical time frame.
Take the historical context of the mid-19th century.
At the time, capitalism dominated political ideology in the West.
It was also a time of intense class struggles between the wealthy and the poor.
It's only within that historical context that you can understand what inspired Marx and Engels to write the Communist Manifesto.
Finally, we can pull back even further to the evolutionary time frame.
This is the big one.
Here we can talk about a time scale of millions of years.
A scale that differentiates one species from the next.
It's on this time scale where we talk about the unique genetic baggage that different species carry around with them.
The mechanisms for writing take on a very different meaning on this time scale.
Humans are the only species on the planet that write books, or poems, or even shopping lists.
They're the only species on the planet that write books, or books, or books, or books, or books, or books, or books.
Why are we the only ones able to do this?
Well, one key is our unique biological makeup.
As you'll soon see, humans have a set of genes and some basic learning abilities
that endow us with the capacity to write.
In this way, you can say that the ability to write is an innate property of all humans.
Now, let's put it all together.
As I hope you're starting to see the three dimensions of the framework interact with one another.
For example, a mechanism can have three levels, and each level can span four different time frames.
Do you see how this helps you organize complex behaviors in a structured way?
Thinking in three dimensions also clears up apparent contradictions that might be caused by
focusing only on one level or one time frame.
To illustrate, let's return to where we left off.
I just said that the ability to write was innate to humans.
Let's include reading as innate, too.
So, hearing this, you might assume that evolution has created a specialized brain module in humans
that is dedicated to reading and writing.
Not unlike how evolution has endowed us with a specialized organ for pumping blood, called the heart,
or a specialized brain region for regulating our temperature, called the hypothalamus.
Isn't it the same for reading and writing?
The answer is no, not quite.
But isn't that a contradiction?
If reading and writing are innate, how can we not be born with a specialized brain mechanism
dedicated to them?
What's going on here?
The 3D framework offers a way out.
The only way to solve this puzzle is to consider mechanisms for reading and writing
on different time frames and on multiple levels of analysis.
We'll talk about this much more in later lectures, but here's a short story that combines
the evolutionary and developmental time frames with the biological and social levels.
On an evolutionary time scale and biological level, humans are genetically equipped with
brain regions that are designed to do very general things like seeing objects, hearing sounds,
controlling motor movements, and making associations.
Humans are also evolutionarily endowed with a brain that is highly plastic.
Neuroplasticity means that the brain can change itself in response to the environment.
On a developmental time scale and a social level, human children are massively exposed
to spoken and written language throughout their formative years.
Before children begin to read and write, most have heard, used, or seen tens of millions of words.
Now here's where the two time frames and two levels meet.
The massive social exposure of words over development combines with the brain's innate potential
to change itself, and this transforms brain regions that were evolutionarily designed for more general
things like vision, hearing, motor movements, and making associations.
It transforms these regions into a specialized reading and writing device.
In this way, reading and writing are emergent properties of the mind.
Part of this is innate and controlled by genes, but another part is the result of
prolonged experience with the environment. It's not possible to explain reading and writing by
focusing only on one time frame or one single level of analysis. The key is to understand how these
dimensions interact. This is just one example of how applying the 3D framework is necessary for
understanding the mysteries of language in the mind. In the rest of this course, you'll see how this
approach helps you understand all the big questions we ask. How did language evolve? What aspects of
language are innate versus learned? What happens in the brain when we use language? And do different
languages cause people to see the world differently? Now, before we can dig into these really juicy
questions, we'll need to define a few basic terms and build up some linguistic background. So in the next two
lectures, we'll explore what human language is and what it's not. One more thing. Thinking in three dimensions takes
practice and I encourage you to play with the framework before you watch the next lecture. Pick an aspect of
language in the mind that's particularly interesting to you and then break it down the same way we did for writing.
I think you'll find this exercise very useful for organizing your thoughts and even resolving apparent
contradiction. I bet it even gives you some new insights that you didn't have before. And if any of
that happens, take a moment to appreciate that you couldn't have done it without the mysterious and awesome
power of language.
