Now that you have an appreciation of language as a complex system, we need to explore its
nature in more depth.
One fundamental question to ask is, how unique is our language system?
On one hand, it might not be anything too special.
Just like our digestive system is pretty similar to many vertebrate species.
On the other hand, it could be much more exotic, just as there are some pretty unusual ways
to digest food, like the owl, which consumes its food whole without chewing, or the cow,
which has four stomach chambers, or the platypus, which doesn't have a stomach at all.
In fact, as you'll see, it's a bit of both.
There are some aspects of human language that are shared with communication systems of other
species, but other parts are quite different.
And when you put them all together, they combine to create something that is distinctly human.
In this lecture, I'll present a list of linguistic universals that are true of all human languages.
And in homage to the brilliant film Spinal Tap, our list will go to 11.
Many of these 11 universals are drawn from what the American linguist Charles Hockett called
basic design features of language.
Back in the 1960s, Hockett originally articulated 16 design features of language, but the list
exclusively focused on spoken language, and has since been trimmed to incorporate sign languages, too.
That leaves us with nine solid features, and I've also added two additional ones in keeping
with recent advances in developmental psychology and cognitive neuroscience.
Together, these 11 characteristics form a good starting point for understanding what language
is and what it's not.
We've already thoroughly discussed one basic feature in the last lecture, duality of patterning.
This refers to language having a double structure.
Smaller units, like phonemes, possess no inherent meaning, but these combine to create meaning at
higher levels, like morphings or words or sentences.
It's worth noting that although this seems to be true for all spoken languages, there is some
debate about this design feature in newly emerging sign languages.
More on those sign systems in a later lecture.
So let's explore the remaining 10 characteristics in more detail.
We'll start with the big three, which deserve more attention than the rest.
These are features that most linguists have traditionally considered to be at the core of language, and it
should be clear how they relate to different components of language from our last lecture.
The three features are symbolic, rule-governed, and generative.
I want to start with a feature that's received the most attention by linguists, philosophers,
and scientists, arbitrary symbols.
I'll need to spend a big chunk of time on this because we'll come back to it many times
in this course.
To introduce this feature, let me start with a question.
Across languages, why do you think there are so many different words for the sun?
After all, the sun played a very similar and important role for our ancient ancestors.
Given that all cultures have this shared historic experience, why wouldn't all languages have
the same way to refer to the sun?
Think about it.
If everyone was asked to pantomime the idea of the sun, it's likely that we'd get highly
similar gestures from people all across the globe.
Maybe holding a closed fist above the head and then opening it while moving it towards
your eyes.
That'd get the job done.
In fact, most actual sign languages around the world have signs for the sun that look
like this.
But keeping this in mind, you may be wondering why things are so different in spoken languages.
There are literally thousands of different words for the sun across languages.
And as a whole, they have more differences than similarities.
Why is that?
In spoken language, the relationship between a word, or more technically a symbol, and its
meaning, or its referent, is for the most part arbitrary and based on the quirky conventions
of a particular language.
This was a central point of Ferdinand de Saussure, the grandfather of linguistics.
For example, Saussure asked what relationship the Latin word equus has with the concept of
a horse.
The word equus, which he called the signifier, is only arbitrarily related to the concept
of a horse, which he called the signified.
Consider our sun example.
In what way does the word sun in English map on to the concept of a glowing star in the sky?
But if you got creative and argued that the S sound evokes something like sizzling in the
heat, you'd be hard-pressed to explain why the word sun in Filipino is ara, or in Gaelic
is grion.
There's no sizzle there.
Now, it's worth noting that many words for sun do have an S sound.
Sol in Spanish, sole in French, surah in Sanskrit, and surinan in Tamil, and so on.
There's many other examples.
One theory for why there are so many S sounds in words for sun across languages is that it
was one of the first words created when language emerged in our evolutionary past.
From that common starting point, it may have been passed on in slightly different forms
over tens of thousands of generations through different language groups.
This brings up an interesting aspect of language.
On one hand, the symbols of language are largely arbitrary.
But on the other hand, many words possess a feature that cognitive linguists call iconicity.
Saussure pointed out that iconicity is the opposite of arbitrariness.
And it's when form and meaning, symbol and referent, share some similar features.
As you'll see, all words are arbitrary to some extent, but some of them also possess a
degree of iconicity.
For example, onomatopoeias are classic examples of iconicity.
The word buzz and the word bang, they sound like what they mean to some extent.
Iconicity can also map sounds onto images.
Here's a classic example used by V.S. Ramachandran, a neuroscientist at the University of California, San Diego.
Imagine that I presented you two objects.
One soft and rounded, like a cotton ball, and the other hard and sharp-edged, like a sea urchin.
Suppose you were told that in an alien language, one object was called kiki, but the other object was called booba.
If you had to guess which word would go with which object, what would you guess?
Guess for yourself.
If you're like most people, you probably said that kiki goes with the sharp object and booba goes with the rounded one.
This is a nice example of how language is not 100% arbitrary.
If it were, it'd be a coin toss which word you picked for which object.
Instead, you went beyond the arbitrary symbol and used information that was contained in the iconicity of the sounds.
Here's one way to appreciate this.
If you say both words aloud, you find that kiki produces a tightness in your vocal cords and a narrowing of your lips,
booba produces an openness in your vocal cords and a roundness in your lips.
Can you see how these bodily sensations map onto sounds in a direct way?
Now, you might be wondering this.
Given this nifty phenomenon of iconicity, why aren't all words iconic?
After all, wouldn't it be easier to learn words that they all have this property?
In fact, there's research showing that iconic words are actually some of the earliest words learned in language acquisition,
and they're learned more quickly in a foreign language.
Well, there's one obvious reason why iconicity isn't more pervasive.
There are only so many ways sounds can directly map onto meanings.
Or put another way, there's way more meanings than icons.
Think of all the words in a language that refer to things that are difficult to capture iconically.
For example, prepositions, articles, negations, numbers, pronouns, abstract concepts, proper names, and so on.
There are other advantages of arbitrariness.
It offers incredible flexibility.
Any referent can be assigned any symbol based simply on arbitrary agreement among speakers of a language.
And once those conventions are learned, these arbitrary links are as strong as steel.
Saussure recognized the implications of this.
Once bound together, concepts and words, or signified and signifier, are two sides of the same coin in the human mind.
For this reason, arbitrary symbols often win the day because they simply become an effortless part of our normal thought process.
Still, iconicity manages to stick around in one form or another.
For example, as we'll see in a few lectures, the spontaneous gestures that naturally accompany speech often capture iconicity in a very powerful way.
In fact, it's the inherent iconicity of gesture that accounts for some of the similarities of sign languages around the world.
More on that later.
I hope it's clear how this feature of arbitrariness is relevant to the semantic component of language.
This next feature, rule-governedness, is related to phonetics, morphology, and syntax.
For example, recall that there are rules about how two different phonemes can be ordered in a particular language.
In English, you can't add a Z sound to the TH sound, even though it may be permitted by the phonological rules of another language.
Same with morphology.
You can't pluralize a word in English by putting an S at the front of a noun.
It must go at the end.
And syntactically, you can't switch word order at will.
Diver traps octopus and octopus traps diver mean two very different things.
Not only are all languages rule-governed, but the rules are hierarchical in nature,
which means that the rules of the larger units of a language are built up from the smaller units.
And each of these smaller units have their own set of rules.
This refers back to Hockett's duality of patterning.
The idea is this.
The syntax of a language works only if the rules of semantics are in place,
and the semantics rely on rules of morphology,
and these morphemes require that the rules governing phonemes must be followed.
It's rules all the way down.
At this point, you might be asking yourself whether arbitrariness and rule-governedness
are unique to human language.
After all, you may know that there have been successful attempts to teach non-human primates
arbitrary sign languages.
Or you might have heard that song learning in birds is governed by hierarchical rules.
Both of these things are true.
But this next feature of language is what allows these first two features to really shine in humans.
In the late 1950s, an up-and-coming MIT linguist known Chomsky developed a theory that children learn language
because they are born with an innate set of rules that allow them to create novel linguistic utterances.
Chomsky called this the generativity of language.
And this feature is what Hockett later called productivity.
The idea is that people can generate or produce an infinite number of new things that they've never heard
just by using words in a rule-governed way.
You can demonstrate this yourself.
All you need to do is think of a sentence that follows the rules of grammar
but has never been said before.
Here's a sample or an example from Chomsky's 1957 book, Syntactic Structures.
Colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
Even though the semantics of this sentence are confusing, the syntax is perfectly fine.
By the way, if Chomsky were wrong and the sentence actually had been said once before,
he'd have an easy fix using a trick called recursion.
Recursion is a powerful rule that allows phrases to be embedded into other phrases
like a musical score or mathematical formula.
Using recursion, Chomsky could simply say,
It's worth repeating that colorless green ideas sleep furiously.
It's remarkably easy to create something new with language.
And you don't have to be a linguist to pull it off.
You don't even have to be a full-grown language user.
Children are some of the most generative and creative of all language users.
Indeed, at the morphological level, children are so creative that they often make up words
that don't even exist in their native language, like pluralizing fish, fishes,
or using regular past tense rules for irregular verbs, saying edid instead of ate.
Or they may make up new words from scratch by combining existing ones in novel ways,
like saying laster day instead of yesterday, or elbow leg for knee.
Even when children stick to the rules of a language, they still come up with the tarnedest things.
For example, just a casual look at parenting blogs yields all sorts of creative gems.
One seven-year-old asked,
Are there more leaves in the world or blades of grass?
And then followed up with this doozy.
Are there more bricks in the world or bird feathers?
Or this by a six-year-old.
What is the name of the space between the bits that stick out on a comb?
Where in the world are these questions coming from?
All you need are rules, creativity, and a healthy sense of curiosity.
As we'll see in the next lecture, this ability seems to be uniquely human,
and perhaps even genetically endowed within us.
No other species on the planet comes close to this sort of linguistic creativity.
The next three design features are displacement, cultural transmission, and reflexiveness.
These three are pretty unique by themselves.
When you package them together, they highlight the true specialness of human language.
The first of the trio, displacement, refers to the fact that language can be used to communicate about things not in the here and now.
Think about it.
How much of what we say is about things that are far away and not occurring in the present moment?
We have entire fields of study that involve things out of plain sight, like physics and astronomy and chemistry.
And in the past, archaeology, history, and geology.
Or in the future, economics, climatology, architecture.
Or consider some of the things that children typically say.
Not only do they talk about things that are right around them, but they also talk about things that are quite displaced.
How many days until my birthday?
I fell off my bike yesterday.
When are we going to grandmother's house?
This sort of communication is quite rare in the animal kingdom.
Most communication in every other species is trapped in the here and now.
Locating the presence of predators or prey.
Making or blocking sexual advances.
Marking one's territory.
Announcing one's arrival.
And calling for help.
Now, there are some well known exceptions of animals communicating outside the here and now.
For example, bees communicate about the precise location of food sources in far off distances.
And vervet monkeys give alarm calls that tell fellow monkeys where to hide when a leopard or an eagle approaches.
We'll talk more about these specific examples in the next lecture.
Even if non-human communication occasionally breaks free from the here and now,
the sorts of things that animals communicate about is much, much more limited than humans.
This is illustrated nicely by our next design feature.
Cultural transmission means that human language is not directly and completely passed down through our genes.
Nobody is born with a brain designed to speak Portuguese, Bantu, or Hawaiian.
To speak these languages, we need to learn them first.
This should not be taken for granted.
Because most other species are different.
They are born with an innate and fixed set of communication signals.
So there's no learning required at all for them.
This is not true of all animals.
For example, songbirds are a notable exception.
But it's true for most animals.
Even birds are innately constrained by what they communicate about.
When birds sing, they share a very limited amount of information.
Like marking their territory, showing their dominance, and trying to attract potential mates.
That's about it.
When you hear two birds tweeting outside your window in the morning,
they're not talking about how well they slept last night or where they planned to fly that day.
These things are unique to humans.
We tweet all sorts of things.
I need to emphasize this point because it's so important.
Humans are the only species that can and do communicate about everything.
We take this for granted, but anything can be a topic of talk.
So the next time you find yourself in a tedious conversation about politics or the good old days or the rainy weather,
pause for a moment to appreciate that humans are the only ones on the planet chatting about such things.
Perhaps the most interesting and unusual thing that humans talk about is talk itself.
This feature is called reflexiveness.
Human language can be used to describe or refer to itself.
This occurs in all sorts of ways.
It can range from the very simple, such as,
I didn't hear you or how many times do I have to tell you this?
Or I don't believe a word you said, but it can be much more sophisticated too.
For example, the legal profession is built on the interpretation of words.
Or consider that almost at every level of education,
there are curricula dedicated to teaching people how to read, write, or speak better.
In fact, there is an entire literary cottage industry about it.
I still recall William Strunk and E.B. White's advice in their classic book,
The Elements of Style,
Imploring writers to omit needless words or use the active voice.
Communicating about communication is what cognitive psychologists call metacognition.
And it goes hand in hand with another unique aspect of the human mind.
Humans can think about thinking.
This is one of the crown jewels of human cognition.
And later in the course, we'll explore the neural mechanisms that make it possible.
This trio of features, displacement, cultural transmission, and reflexiveness,
illustrates the remarkable range of human communication.
Absolutely nothing is off limits for us.
In fact, language is so open that over historical time,
it's forced humans to create social norms and laws that regulate what can and cannot be said.
This next pair of features, specialization and prevarication, are two sides of the same coin.
They both have to do with the pragmatics of language.
A unique feature of all language, spoken and signed, is the eighth design feature.
Language is specialized for one purpose, to deliberately communicate.
This may seem self-evident, but consider other behaviors that communicate,
but are not specifically designed for it.
When a newborn baby cries, is it intentionally making sounds to communicate discomfort?
Or are the cries themselves just an unintentional manifestation of the discomfort?
What about facial expressions?
When a baby smiles, is she trying to communicate that she's feeling good?
Or is that just what feeling good looks like?
What about adults' nonverbal expressions?
Think back to the last time that you tasted something truly disgusting.
Was the face you made intended to communicate?
Or is it just a byproduct of the feeling?
Or what about cursing out in pain after stubbing a toe?
Were you trying to communicate something?
Or is that just a reflex?
On here is a juicy one.
What about flirting?
When you laugh, make eye contact, and lean in, that may signal flirtation.
But is it always intentional?
These examples fall into murky areas.
But language is crystal clear.
When you say a word or produce a sign, you have one purpose in mind.
To communicate.
Not only that, you know that other people know that you're trying to communicate.
This sort of mutual understanding of intentions is at the heart of language.
And for that matter, human cognition more generally.
This is even true when you use language with no one else around.
When you make a list of things to remember, your intention is to communicate with your future self so you don't forget something.
And you expect your future self to understand that intention.
Have you ever talked to yourself?
To my knowledge, no other species communicates with itself to solve problems or consider different perspectives.
This specialized communicative function of language is also evident when you accidentally miscommunicate something.
If you've ever said, that's not what I meant.
You're implicitly acknowledging that words have intentions even if they are misunderstood.
That's why we're so suspicious when someone says something offensive and then quickly announces, I didn't mean anything by that.
Even if that's not an outright lie, it reflects the serious naivete of the speaker.
Of course they meant something.
This example takes us to the flip side of specialization.
The ninth design feature is provarication, which means that human language allows us to lie and lie well.
If you think about it, it's quite strange that humans would deliberately say one thing while knowing another thing to be true.
And yet we do this, we learn to do this at a pretty young age.
Certainly by the age of four, children have learned the trick of using language to concoct untrue stories.
I don't know what happened to the cookies.
I did not pull my sister's hair.
It wasn't me.
The fact that humans lie seems bizarre if you think about the semantic property of language.
We've put all this effort into creating precise words for things.
So why would we not accurately describe those things with the right words?
The answer comes when we move up to the pragmatic component of language.
Pragmatics tells us that words are driven by intentions.
And if lying with language helps us actualize those goals, then truth be damned.
We often rely on things other than language to seek the truth.
We pay attention to the way people say things and not to just what they say in order to judge someone's true intentions.
Think back to a time when you didn't trust what someone was saying, even though you had no proof the person was lying.
What gave you that impression?
Maybe the person had a bad reputation for lying.
Or maybe there was something in the eyes or face or hands that set off alarm bells for you.
Can other species lie?
Clearly they can deceive.
You can see that easily with the camouflage of a chameleon or the feigned death of a possum.
But whether those animals intend to deceive is a different matter.
Some birds will feign injury to distract predators from their nests, but that's not quite the same thing as lying.
It's more like distracting.
But even if humans don't have a lock on the lying market, we do it more, we do it bigger, and we do it better than any other species on the planet.
Specialization and prevarication nicely illustrate the uniquely social nature of language.
This social component has not gotten nearly the attention it deserves in traditional approaches to linguistics.
But times are changing, and it'll be a point of emphasis in this course.
The final two universals are add-ons to Hockett's original list of design features.
Rather than being features of language per se, these are universal patterns of how language is organized in the brain and how it unfolds during development.
Focusing first on the standard brain network, there is remarkable similarity in the neural machinery for all language users on the planet.
To explain this, here's some very basic neuroanatomy.
The brain is divided up into two hemispheres, the left and the right, and four lobes, frontal, temporal, occipital, and parietal.
For most people, the left hemisphere contains brain regions that are specialized for language.
For example, there's a region in the posterior part of the frontal lobe that's called Broca's area, and that's traditionally associated with language production.
Further back in the superior temporal lobe is Wernicke's area, which is traditionally associated with language comprehension.
As we'll learn in later lectures, the roles of these two areas are much more nuanced, but for now, this will do.
The interesting thing about this neural organization is that it's uniform across brains.
Although a small percentage of people have their Broca's and Wernicke's area in the right hemisphere,
and some even have it distributed across the left and right hemispheres,
there's never been a case, to my knowledge, in which the two areas are entirely absent in someone who uses language.
And although the exact locations within a hemisphere vary across all people,
you'd never find a case in which the location of Broca's and Wernicke's areas are switched.
That just doesn't happen.
In these basic ways, we can talk about structural universals regarding how the human brain is organized for language.
And just as a teaser for the section later in the course on the brain,
this organization takes time to develop and is not fully present at birth.
The final universal has to do with language acquisition.
Across all languages, there's a shared developmental trajectory,
especially within the first few years of life.
The first shared aspect of language development is that all newborns possess an innate ability to perceive phoneme contrasts in all languages.
We know this based on the classic work done by Janet Worker from the University of British Columbia in the 1970s.
And we'll talk much more about this at length in a later lecture.
Over the first six months of life, babies focus their attention on the phonemes that are most relevant to their native language.
Following this perceptual focusing, five to six month olds start to practice producing these phonemes in the form of babbling.
These babbles are not restricted to speech sounds.
Deaf babies who are exposed to sign language as their primary language babble with their hands.
As with spoken babbles, these hand movements, they're not random, but they contain rudimentary forms of the language that they are seeing.
Just as children are starting to babble, the next stage is that they start to understand first words around six to seven months of age.
Things like baby, the baby's own name or bye-bye and no, these are some of the first words that all infants seem to understand.
Shortly after this, babies start to point at things in their environment.
Researchers believe that this is an attempt to communicate one's attention towards objects, towards intentions about objects in the world.
Finally, by roughly their first birthdays, and there's variability here, most babies start to say their first recognizable words.
And the first thing that almost all babies talk about?
Now you guessed it, mother.
Incidentally, Roman Jakobsen, one of the founders of modern linguistics, has pointed out that the vast majority of languages have a word for mother that involves a ma sound.
According to Jakobsen, this is no accident, because the mm and ah sounds are the easiest sounds for babies to make.
And they're just as easy to make together.
By the way, he also noted that it's the sound babies most naturally make during breastfeeding.
To see how easy it is yourself, vibrate your vocal cords and then quickly open your mouth.
Follow along with me.
See? Simple, right?
So there they are. Eleven universals of all languages.
In the next lecture, we'll take an evolutionary approach and dive deeper into these universals by comparing human and non-human communication systems.
The similarities will show us where humans and non-humans share evolutionarily ancient mechanisms for communication and thinking.
And the differences will be useful for starting to understand how changes to the human brain and human culture have carved out an entirely new niche of existence on this planet.
and peaks.
So that they are rigged a little bit too differently, having additional taught to the human 건강.
So it might be useful in prison many kinds of dudes that are more advanced than that the human body.
So this is for a world where we're in our Ал mass system is a little bittershando.
So there we go.
So then we'll see more of this, and we will see this one.
Have some researchina Tenemos�isk1nd perspective the researchGuys
