To support our discussions with the world's leading thinkers, please see the video description
or visit eism.eu forward slash support. Thank you.
Hello and welcome to a theory of everything. I'm Luis Rosso, the director of ASIM and host
of this channel. Today we're talking to Dr. Judith Curry, an American climatologist and
former chair of the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at the Georgia Institute of Technology.
You'll have to forgive me for the clickbaity title, but there's actually a good reason for it.
On the surface, today's discussion is about climate change, and one of the fruits is the
challenge issued by Dr. Curry, a so-called climate denier, to climate alarmists in general,
and to Lawrence Krauss specifically. For those who don't know, Krauss is a prominent
theoretical physicist and a public intellectual. He's also a previous guest on the channel who
wrote a recent book on climate science. I think you'll be struck, as I was, by the combination
of Dr. Curry's impressive academic credentials and the confidence with which she issues her
challenge. In my view, her claims merit a response, and I hope we can eventually get a taker,
whether Lawrence Krauss or somebody else. However, the most important takeaway here is not on
disagreement, but rather on the agreement. Curry is abundantly clear, as is Krauss, that ultimately
what we're dealing with here is a political question. How are humans going to resolve our
different takes on science without eventually destroying ourselves? That ultimately is the
heart of the issue, and it's one on which the long-term survival of humanity depends. It's one
thing to have an opinion, and it's an entirely different thing to propose a better way to resolve
our differences of opinion. These two things, having an opinion and proposing a better way to
resolve differences of opinion, belong on completely different levels of abstraction,
and the second question is much, much more important. It's the difference between a group of people
not being able to decide what to have for lunch and the same group debating on whether to vote
or draw straws or play rock, paper, scissors to settle the differences. This second question
of how to make collective decisions is studied formally in a branch of economics
known as social choice theory. You'd be surprised how many otherwise very intelligent people don't
pay even the slightest attention to this critical science. I hope you'll reflect on this because
ultimately this is why this channel exists, and this is why we have these discussions. We're not
just another YouTube channel, and we're not here to entertain. Today's lesson is an important one,
but it's not primarily about climate change. Don't get it wrong. The most important lesson
here involves science plus social and political will, or science and management, and that's
where ASEM is a global pioneer. We've started with fundamental physics, and we're working our way
through all of the branches of knowledge. Our mission is to change the way the world
makes decisions before it's too late. So I hope you enjoy my exchange with Dr. Curry,
but I also hope you don't lose focus. As always, you'll find a timestamp and relevant
links in the video description. Thanks for sharing your thoughts in the comments, and thanks for your
continued interest and support. Hello, and welcome to A Theory of Everything. I'm Luis
Rosso, the director of ASEM and host of this channel. Today we're talking to Dr. Judith Curry,
an American climatologist and former chair of the School of Earth and Atmospheric Sciences at Georgia
Institute of Technology. Dr. Curry, thank you so much for taking the time to talk today.
Well, my pleasure. I look forward to our conversation.
Well, Dr, if it's okay, I'd like to start by telling listeners about your professional background.
So Dr. Curry graduated cum laude from Northern Illinois University with a Bachelor of Science
degree in Geography. She then earned a PhD in Geophysical Sciences from the University of Chicago.
Her research interests include hurricanes, remote sensing, atmospheric modeling,
polar climates, air-sea interactions, climate models, and the use of unmanned aerial vehicles
for atmospheric research. She was a member of the National Research Council's Climate Research
Committee and has published over 100 scientific papers and co-edited several major works in
climate science. Dr. Curry served on the NASA Advisory Council Earth Science Subcommittee,
whose mission was to provide advice and recommendations to NASA on issues of
program priorities and policy. She was also a member of the National Oceanic and Atmospheric
Administration Climate Working Group from 2004 to 2009. A member of the National Academies
of Space Studies Board from 2004 to 2007 and a member of the National Academies
Climate Research Group from 2003 to 2006. As you can see from this description that Dr. Curry is
obviously a very accomplished climate scientist. She retired from her university position in 2007
partly because of what she described as anti-skeptic bias, which she attributed
at the time to the political nature of climate science. And that's part of what we're going
to talk about today, the very tricky relationship between science and politics.
In fact, Dr. Curry, the primary focus of this channel, or one of the primary focuses of this
channel, is on the science of effective management, which is tricky. In your case,
you often talk about something that the vast majority of people will agree with and I'd like
to place that at the center of our discussion. And that's the idea of human flourishing.
Most people at any point on any political or ideological spectrum seem to agree that human
flourishing is the ultimate goal. And you've stated, if I've understood correctly, that human
flourishing is ultimately what drives your work. Can you say a little bit more about that and maybe
about why you think that something that everybody agrees on can become so complicated?
Well, I'm not sure everybody agrees on that. Some people want, you know, think that the answer is
fewer people and more poverty. So we use less resources and don't impact the environment. So
that that's sort of an environment first kind of approach. Can I take the people first approach?
You know, I want to see prosperity and human development for all the world's countries and
all the world's peoples. Now, there are a lot of things that get in the way of that.
You know, the environment is just one relatively small factor. And the wealthier a country is,
the smaller the factor of the environment is because you have enough money to figure out
how to cope with it. But in less developed countries, they're very vulnerable to the
environment. Their development is often hampered by poor governance and corrupt leaders. So it's
difficult to make headway. But when we're talking about the climate change problem,
to me, there is no way that a solution of not allowing Africa to develop its fossil fuel
resources can be regarded as ethical or just. I mean, that that's just something that makes no
sense. And you know, it's just two fundamentally different outlooks. So I'm not sure everybody
agrees that human thriving is really the goal. There are a lot of people that say, well, there
should be fewer people. And if people didn't use so many resources and whatever the world would be
a better place. So it's the, you know, just two different views of humans relations with their
environments. You know, one is that we that we rely on the higher environment for our sustenance,
and we have to take care of our environment. And the other one is that, you know,
we can survive, you know, that we can engineer our environment to make it work for us. You know,
we don't want to trash it. But the, you know, the earth is a vast place with many resources.
Let's figure out how to how we can best use this for human thriving.
Okay, well, to be honest, that's kind of news to me that there are a lot of people I suppose
we have to quantify a lot of people who think that less or that the environment is more important
than humans. My guess is that there's not the majority of people do not have this concern. Or
do you have different information than I've been able to? Well, there's very strong academic
heritage in philosophy and environmental science, you know, along those lines. The UN,
the UN policies from the environmental program. And even the Paris Agreement,
they do not put human development first. They're putting reducing carbon dioxide emissions first.
Okay, a lot of the programs that were UN, you know, World Bank and whatever to help
low income countries develop and reduce their vulnerability to climate change,
those resources are being redirected to help mitigate CO2 emissions. So I mean,
there are some big international worldwide policies that do not seem to be focused on
human thriving, at least in the near term. Okay, but if I understand these policy initiatives
correctly, the ultimate goal or the concern about CO2 levels is not the CO2 levels themselves,
but rather their impact on human flourishing. Have I gotten it wrong? Well, yeah, I mean,
this is the weakest part of the argument. Okay, is more CO2 in the atmosphere dangerous?
They haven't really made that case very well. It's tied to extreme weather events.
Which have always happened will always continue to happen. It's very difficult to disentangle
the role of natural weather and climate variability, land use, and the slow creep of
global warming to try to attribute any of the problems that we're having
to increase carbon dioxide in the atmosphere. The slope warming does produce a slow creep
of sea level rise, but it's slow. It's been, the sea level has been rising most recently
since the mid 19th century at relatively slow rates. Certain people predict that this could
rapidly accelerate, but it hasn't been happening. Anything catastrophic with sea level rise,
such as the collapse of the West Antarctic ice sheet, is more likely to be associated with
under ice volcanoes than it is to CO2 in the atmosphere. So this whole issue of danger
is the weakest part of the argument. And they try to get around that by blaming everything,
Pakistan floods, hurricane, and everything on climate change. Well, these severe weather events
would have happened independent of climate change. And if you look back to the early part
of the 20th century, you are always going to find worse extreme events than what we've seen in the
last 10 years. And if you go back even farther using paleo climate records, you see some really
awful extreme events. In the US, the worst weather by any standard, heat waves, fires, floods,
hurricanes, everything occurred in the 1930s. Nothing comparable to what happened in the 1930s
have we seen in the 21st century. Did the US weather in the 1930s, did that relate to
fossil fuel emissions? No. So that there's a very weak argument in trying to present all this is
dangerous. Okay, well, we recently talked to Jeffrey Sachs, a professor at Columbia University,
and a widely respected global authority on sustainable development, who's twice named
by Time Magazine as one of the top 100 most influential global leaders. So if I'm to understand,
if I'm to appreciate your argument today, his work and the work of his team and the people behind him
are ill-advised, or they're incorrect, or they're wrong, or something else that's driving them
and their work. Is that what you're asking us to accept? I'm not familiar in any way. I know who
Jeffrey Sachs is. I'm not familiar with what he's doing or his recent research. The point is, I'm
very familiar with the UN reports and the Paris Agreement and the conference of the parties
and the UN sustainability goals. Okay, the UN climate stuff is at odds with its own sustainability
goals. In 2015, the world's governments and all the leaders got together and they agreed on 17
global sustainability goals. The first one is to eliminate global poverty. The second one is to
eliminate global food, global hunger. And then somewhere number seven is clean, abundant energy
for all. And number 13 is climate action. Okay, somehow climate action has been elevated as the
most important thing in the world. Forget eliminating poverty, forget food security. The most important
thing is climate action. Farmers can't get enough fertilizer to grow their crops because
it produces CO2 emissions. Does this make sense? No. So there's a lot of stuff going on in the name
of sustainability and climate change policy that has nothing to do with sustainability or human
well-being or economic development. It's in fact acting counter to reduction of poverty and food
security. Interesting argument. What are the forces that are driving this phenomenon from your
perspective? Well, you have to go back to the 1980s to understand this. And again, the UN
environmental program, they long have had a goal and an interest in world government,
anti-capitalism, disdain and dislike for fossil fuels. Okay. And once the global warming argument
was put forward, the CO2 emissions, they latched onto this as the vehicle for pushing those policy
goals forward. Okay. And this was like in the 80s when they latched onto this. And in 1992,
the UN Framework Convention on Climate Change had their big treaty. We must prevent dangerous
anthropogenic climate change. And this was before there was even any hint of warming. There had
been decades of cooling. Okay. So there wasn't even any warming yet. It was just all theoretical
and driven by a political agenda. So the policy cart was way out in front of the scientific course
on this. Okay. Then the IPCC came along and the first IPCC assessment said, well, we don't see
anything beyond natural climate variability. Okay. Well, the UN Framework Convention did not
like that. And the existence of the IPCC itself was on the line. So for the second assessment report,
the report looked just like the first one. Okay. We're not really seeing anything yet.
And tremendous pressure was put on the scientists in the summary for policymakers meeting where the
scientists meet with the policymakers. And that was when the scientists came up with,
we have seen a discernible impact of emissions on warming of the climate. So this discernible.
And then they, this was after the report had all been written. And then they went back and changed
the report to be consistent with this. And this was an enormous scandal in scientific circles.
But politically, it served a purpose. And the IPCC was able to remain its relevance and its
viability. So in these very early days, you can see how politics influenced the science.
The whole scientific problem was framed very narrow. Let's look only
at CO2 emissions and other greenhouse gas emissions, forget natural climate variability,
and let's focus only on what might be dangerous. We don't need to concern ourselves with any
benefits of a warmer climate. So all of climate science began to be framed in this very narrow way.
That's where the funding was for research from natural governments to support the efforts of
the IPCC. And the IPCC, third and fourth assessments, they were both the absolute
worst. It was just pure political advocacy. Then after that climate gate struck, and the IPCC was
put under a lot of scrutiny, and they cleaned up their act to some extent for the fifth and
sixth assessment report. The fifth assessment report, the working group two on impacts and
working group three on mitigation, they were relatively good. The IPCC six assessment report,
the working group one on the science and the physical basis was quite good. Working group two
and working group three were not. So it's a very mixed bag. It depends on who gets selected
to be authors and lead authors. And these authors are selected with
a political agenda in mind. It's not necessary. Someone like me, I was actually a reviewer for
the third, a minor contributor and a viewer for the third assessment report. So I did my thing.
But when I read the report, I was just disgusted. And so at that point, I didn't have anything
more to do with the IPCC. But the whole thing is very politicized. But that said, the IPCC reports
are a relative voice of reason compared to what the activists are saying, extinction and code read
and all this kind of emergency. Well, I'm sorry, that's just not on. The climate crisis
isn't what it used to be even two years ago. The large emissions scenario. Apologies for the
lingo RCP 8.5 if that's familiar to any of you. That one is now off the table. The conference of
the parties 26 and 27 are no longer considering that extreme emissions scenario. Two or three years
ago, a warming of three or four degrees since the pre industrial period would have been regarded as
policy success. Because everybody was worried about this really extreme emissions scenario and all
the extreme weather that might be associated with. Well, now everybody's back down to the reference
which is RCP 4.5, which is a much more modest increase and has much more modest impacts.
Okay, we're in reach of two degrees. I don't think we're going to have a problem staying within
two degrees centigrade by the end of the 21st century. No, we've already warmed by 1.1 degrees.
I don't think we're going to have a problem staying within another nine tenths of a degree
centigrade. Now that it's in sight, they've moved the goalpost down to 1.5 degrees to amp up the
urgency to do this to do that. So these targets have nothing to do about with science. They have
to do with politics and efforts to achieve the maximum action to get rid of fossil fuels.
And it's not just about getting rid of fossil fuels. It's all about renewable energy. They
don't want nuclear either. So it's a it's a very specific worldview that is being put forward here
that has very little basis in actual science and sensible energy policy.
Very interesting. There's a lot to unpack there. I suppose I'd like to ask about the alternatives
because what you're saying here is a political issue. It's a political argument. So what are
the some of the alternatives? What do you think can be done about this? And I should say that to a
non-expert outside observer, I suppose you are aware that a person who is
in the minority in this argument is also difficult to sort through the complexity here.
And there's only a few people, right? Because the overwhelming majority of climate experts
do not agree with this take. Is that correct? Not at all. There's a lot of very vocal people out
there. Some of them even have press agents, publicity agents, scientists. To me, that's
completely antithetical to being a science. So there's a lot of people with big voices and big
mouths out there. But if you look at the rank and file, scientists, people realize most people who
really understand the processes of how the climate works. Geologists, meteorologists, oceanographers
do not disagree with what I'm saying. They understand that we've oversimplified
the climate problem. And people in the policy world,
many of them agree that we've oversimplified the solution. You can't unring this bell,
even if we were to somehow get rid of CO2 emissions. There's a lot of inertia in the climate. It would
be 100 years, 50 years before we saw any change in the weather. Sea levels would continue to rise.
The ice sheets would be doing what they're doing. There's very long time scales. So this urgency
to cut emissions isn't really going to help the weather at all. Now, once you take the urgency
out of the equation for reducing emissions, then you're in a very different place in terms of
thinking about policy. I am a strong component of a new vision, better vision for 21st century
energy infrastructure with new ideas, new technologies, whatever, cleaner, cheaper,
more secure, more reliable, etc. I am absolutely all in favor of that. There are many reasons
not to continue relying on fossil fuels. By the end of the 21st century, it's going to be very
expensive to extract anyways. But there's all sorts of geopolitical instability associated
with fossil fuels, as we're seeing play out with the Russian, Ukraine, and Western Europe situation.
So there's lots of reasons not to like fossil fuels. But there is no way on earth that wind
and solar is the answer. Wind and solar is very low power density. It requires a lot of land,
not just for the power plants themselves, but also for the transmission lines that are required.
It's very materials intensive, enormous amount of copper, cement, steel, and on and on it goes.
Renewable energy is very vulnerable to the vagaries of weather and climate variability.
If we're worried about CO2 impacts on the weather, okay, why on earth would we pick
an energy system that is exceptionally vulnerable to weather variability, wind droughts, floods,
hail, lightning, the whole works? I mean, why would we subject our energy supply to that?
Okay, so what should we be doing? Well, the U.S. is making tremendous advances in small nuclear
reactors, small modular nuclear reactors with all sorts of advanced technologies. These are just
starting to come online. There's a learning curve, but within 10 years, these are going to be
really a wonderful solution. Advanced geothermal is also a very promising solution. It doesn't work
everywhere, but in locations where they have the right resources, it can be a very good source.
To me, those are the two solutions that I would hang my hat on for the 21st century infrastructure.
Yeah, we will probably need fossil fuels for a while, but the thing about the energy transition
is we need to understand that we're going to need a lot more energy in the 21st century,
not just to bring countries like in Africa up to snuff in terms of having access to grid electricity,
but we're trying to electrify everything with heat pumps and electric vehicles and all this
kind of thing. But more fundamentally, electricity provides a source of all our societal innovations,
robotics, artificial intelligence, quantum computing, new materials, etc. So we're just
going to need a lot more electricity. And there is no way, even if you could work out the technology,
relevant technologies for wind and solar to keep it reliable and whatever, there's no way we have
the land use that would support an awful lot of wind and solar power. So that's the fact of it.
I mean, so much of this is driven by the desire for a particular political solution.
Necap, the fossil fuel companies, you know, just kill the fossil fuels, that's a top priority.
Okay. And then bring in wind and solar. I mean, that's a solution. That's not going to help anybody.
It's going to give us less reliable electricity, which is going to reduce
our economic development, which means we have less money to actually
protect ourselves from extreme weather events. If we have a lot of electricity, we can run
desalination plants, indoor vertical agriculture, we can build all the infrastructure to protect
our cities or whatever, we can manage floodplains, we can smart grids to
increase the reliability of electricity. So, I mean, electricity is so central. And here we are
destroying the infrastructure that has built the prosperity of the 20th century and the first two
decades of the 21st century. And we're destroying it without having a viable replacement. This makes
absolutely no sense. This is not the way to support human thriving and flourishing.
Can I ask you, how receptive have your critics been to engaging in dialogue with you?
Oh, they won't debate me because I'll clobber them. They won't debate me. No one will debate me.
Well, we've had on the channel, we've had on the channel in the past,
he's not a climate scientist, but he's written a book about climate science,
and that's Lawrence Krause, a theoretical physicist. Yeah, I know who he is. Yeah.
Would you be interested in talking to him, discussing these issues?
I'm game to debate and discuss with anybody.
Oh, fantastic. That's good news. That's good news. Absolutely. No, this is one of the...
Yeah, I'm done. Well, that's good news. Okay, but you have to tell him who he would be talking to
because I've had debates scheduled and then people, my opponent who might have been invited first,
they then canceled when they saw that they were going to be going up against me.
So if you don't invite anybody to debate me, get a signed agreement. I'm serious.
That's very good. Well, I love the confidence. That's fantastic. Okay, for this final part,
can we transition to some of your professional activity now that you are no longer in academia
and where people can learn more about what you're doing these days?
Okay, I founded a company, Climate Forecast Applications Network,
cfanclimate.com, and this is basically about helping our clients understand and manage their
weather and climate related risks. We make weather type forecasts, temperature, wind power related
to the wetter energy sector. Hurricane forecast, a lot of our income comes from extended range
hurricane forecast, particularly insurance companies and also electricity utility
companies that live in coastal... that serve coastal regions. Also do a lot of
more climate related consulting. We make projections out to 2050, give them a range of
scenarios of what could happen out to 2050 in terms of extreme weather events. And this is a much
broader range of scenarios than you would get from the IPCC. We also include natural climate
variability. I've recently completed a book titled Climate Uncertainty and Risk. It's in press.
The publisher is Anthem Press. It's probably another seven or eight months before it will be
published. And this is a holistic look at the whole problem, you know, the pernicious issue of
how this has become politicized, how and why. Philosophy of science comes in and then the
middle section is really about just looking at what could happen in the 21st century and what we
don't know about what could happen. And then the third part is related to risk science decision
making under deep uncertainty, adaptation, and energy, you know, a vision for the 21st century
energy system. So a lot of territory covered in the book. I'm pretty excited about it. It would be
interesting when it comes out, but you know, a lot of what I'm talking about here kind of things
are covered in, but it's an academic book. It's not like a rant. Like some climate books are that
this has like several thousand academic references. You know, it's a scholarly book
and it's published by an academic press. So it's not a political rant like so many climate books
to me. That sounds very interesting. I look forward to the possibility of having you back
if you're interested when the book comes out. We'll take a deep dive. We'll take a deep dive into that.
And I'd like to also continue on two fronts. One is get somebody who's willing to talk to you,
who's a critic of these points of view. Hopefully it'll be Lawrence Krause. I think it would be
very interesting. And the next front, which we ran out of time today, I think it's probably more
important, is how we resolve these differences of interpretation and differences in scientific
outlooks, how we resolve these issues politically, which is a separate issue. But I think it's
equally or more important than the actual science because ultimately we have to decide how to proceed
and how the plan is going to evolve. And it's just so critical, these questions.
I agree absolutely. At this point, the science is almost irrelevant at this point. It's really
more about the decisions we need to make. And this is what this last third of my book is about,
decision making under deep uncertainty. What do you do when you've got different perspectives?
Well, you search for no regret solutions. You do lots of experimenting and bring in a lot of
stakeholders and decision makers and try to come to some sort of an agreement. It's a wicked problem.
And the ways with dealing with a wicked problem are not top down UN mandated kind of solutions.
So there are better ways to approach binding solutions to this.
Very, very super interesting, super interesting. I think we can probably go on for at least a
couple more hours just on that topic. However, we'll put it on hold for the moment.
I've really enjoyed this talk. To be honest, I'm actually surprised at how much I've enjoyed the
talk and the potential for some really valuable exchanges down the line. So I look forward to
that, Dr. Thank you once so much for taking the time. Okay, well, thank you. I look forward to a
continuing dialogue. To support our discussions with the world's leading thinkers, please see
the video description or visit eism.eu forward slash support. Thank you.
