Last time, we discussed Fritz Haber's quest to find a way to turn essentially unreactive
nitrogen from the air into ammonia.
But because our discussion was limited only to compounds of nitrogen, carbon, and hydrogen,
I stopped sort of explaining exactly what it was that Haber intended to do with this
ammonia.
You see, it wasn't simply ammonia that Haber was ultimately after.
He was trying to fuel a war machine, and a war machine needs artillery.
Now, you've probably heard of gun-cotton, nitroglycerin, dynamite, and TNT.
But what you may not have been aware of is that they all contain very similar organic
motifs, which combine both nitrogen and oxygen with organics to form compounds of extremely
high reactivity.
Today, we will take a look at these and other materials which contain both nitrogen and
oxygen.
Now, long before Haber's Day, it was known that a material commonly called saltpeter,
known by chemists as potassium nitrate, was a naturally occurring mineral resource and
a crucial ingredient in the manufacture of gunpowder.
As early as the first century AD, the Chinese had discovered that saltpeter had medicinal
properties, and that it could be used to treat heart and circulatory ailments.
It was much later discovered that saltpeter decomposes in the body to form a substance
known as nitric oxide, which is the source of this therapeutic value.
Evidence from the 8th century AD indicates that by then, far eastern cultures had repurposed
saltpeter, using it in combination with sulfur and charcoal to create what is known today
as gunpowder.
Other civilizations independently made this discovery at different times in history,
and the exact year of its introduction to Europe is unclear.
But what is clear, however, is that by the 17th century, saltpeter was so valued for
this application that in England there existed a government post known as saltpeter.
Those charged with this post were given carte blanche authority to dig anywhere in the kingdom,
even through the floors of homes in search of this commodity.
All they needed was a shovel and a hunch.
By the 20th century, the ridiculous degree of authority given to these pedermen had long
faded in England, but usable nitrogen was still being dug up elsewhere by ambitious
European and American entrepreneurs.
Saltpeter from as far away as the Atacama Desert of South America was being mined and
shipped back to Europe and the Americas as a source of fixed nitrogen.
But in the early 1900s, Haver's process made ammonia abundant, low cost, and best of all,
prepared onsite in a factory from readily available materials and catalysts.
All that needed to be done was to convert the ammonia into its oxidized form, like that
found in saltpeter.
All we had to do to do this was burn it in oxygen.
So the nitrogen oxides produced from this can be hydrated to form nitric acid, the crucial
ingredient in the formation of many modern explosives.
So today we'll discuss a few functional groups which contain both nitrogen and oxygen.
We'll see how different combinations of these elements lead to some of the most reactive
substances known to man, and also to some of the motifs essential to the function of
life as we know it.
So let's get started.
So Haver's contribution was the starting material for the synthesis of, among other
things, nitric acid.
This is accomplished with relative ease.
Oxidation of the ammonia to nitrogen oxides like NO2 is carried out, and after this, bubbling
the nitric oxide gases through water produces nitric acid.
The importance of nitric acid in the field of explosives was realized much earlier than
Haver's time.
One day in 1846, according to legend, German Swiss chemist Christian Friedrich Schoenbein
spilled a bit of nitric acid on a table where he was working.
After wiping up the spill with a cotton apron, he hung the apron on a stove door to dry.
After drying, the apron suddenly and vigorously burst into flames.
One can only imagine what went through Schoenbein's head at that exact moment.
But after extinguishing the fire and carefully considering what had happened, Schoenbein
realized that it was the combination of nitric acid and the carbohydrate fibers in his apron
which had led to the formation of the explosive material.
We'll closely look at the structure of carbohydrates in a few lectures, but for now I want you
to focus on this.
These very interesting functional groups decorating this long polymer, it's the colorful nitrogen
and oxygen containing groups there.
They're quite different than anything we've seen so far, aren't they?
Now, these functional groups are called nitrate esters, and they aren't present in the naturally
occurring plant fibers.
You may notice that the arrangement of nitrogen and oxygen atoms in the nitrate ester groups
makes it impossible to draw a resonance contributor in which all atoms have zero charge.
This makes these groups very unstable.
Add the fact that all the oxygen needed for combustion is already present in the nitrate
ester group, and you have one very explosive substance.
Now, this is a very exciting time for me in the course.
We've already discussed the accomplishments and stories of about a half dozen Nobel laureates,
and before we're done we're going to meet many more.
In this lecture, however, the nitrate ester gives me the perfect segue into the story
of the man who founded the prize himself, Alfred Nobel.
You see, Nobel's story is one of a very explosive compound called nitroglycerin.
It can be made from glycerin, which is easily obtained from the soap making process.
Now, it was originally synthesized by a man named Ascanio Sobrero, and Sobrero realized
that he could take glycerin and react it with nitric acid, three equivalents to be exact,
and that when he did this, the OH groups of the glycerin would be replaced by a new functional group,
these nitrate esters.
So our nitrates come in, displacing water, and creating nitroglycerin.
Now, Sobrero realized immediately how dangerous nitroglycerin could be,
and in fact, even after he created it and had published about it,
he continued to lobby against its use in mining and war applications.
And Sobrero's unwillingness to advance this particular compound in those applications
left an opening for another very opportunistic individual, Alfred Nobel.
Nobel was a contemporary of Sobrero who took up the mantle of finding a way to stabilize nitroglycerin enough
to use it as an explosive for those applications.
He discovered that by adding a little bit of sawdust that he could stabilize the nitroglycerin long enough
and well enough to form it into sticks, he could then develop blasting caps
and other methods of detonating these sticks of dynamite.
And of course, this made him a great deal of money.
See, Nobel realized the addition of that adsorbent like sawdust had a stabilizing effect,
and the adsorbent nitroglycerin could be wrapped in paper,
formed into sticks, and triggered with some of Nobel's other inventions.
So his invention made the packaging and transport of this high explosive simple and safer,
leading to its rapid adoption worldwide in mining and military applications.
So the invention of dynamite seemed to be Nobel's inevitable legacy.
Having secured the U.S. patent for his dynamite invention,
Nobel had become extremely wealthy as a result of this product.
And in 1895, Nobel officially changed his will for the last time,
designating nearly all of his massive estate to establish a prize
to be conferred upon those who, as Nobel himself put it,
during the preceding year shall have conferred the greatest benefit to mankind.
Nobel's endowment hasn't only survived but thrived for over the past century.
This come to represent the pinnacle of human achievement in not only the sciences,
but in medicine, literature, and economics as well.
A somewhat more stable functional group containing both nitrogen and oxygen
is the nitrate functional group.
Compounds containing this group are collectively referred to as nitro compounds.
Probably the most famous nitro compound is TNT, or Trinitrotoluene.
And we will take a look at this and how its compounds like it are made
in our electrophilic aromatic substitution lecture.
But for today, we'll concern ourselves with some simpler aliphatic nitrates
and how they react.
Most commercially relevant nitro compounds are synthesized
by reacting small hydrocarbons with nitric acid at very high temperatures.
This reaction is complex, proceeding through radicals
and usually producing mixtures of nitrated compounds.
But these compounds are of such great value
that we frequently overlook this inefficiency.
One particularly useful application of the nitro group in synthesis
is that it can be used as a sort of non-nucleophilic placeholder
for the nucleophilic amine functional group.
This can significantly uncomplicate a synthesis.
Now, at the end of a synthesis, the nitro group can be converted into an amine
simply using familiar hydrogen and metal catalyst chemistry
that was developed by Sabatier.
A classic example of this technique is in the synthesis of Novocaine.
So let's start with the molecule Novocaine
and apply a retro-synthetic analysis to it
and see if we can design a technique for synthesizing it.
I can make Novocaine using a compound called aminobenzoyl chloride
and the appropriate nucleophile.
Now, the aminobenzoyl chloride I've shown here
can be prepared from a compound called aminobenzoyl acid,
which is readily available commercially
and is probably on the shelf in the laboratory right now.
So my retro-synthetic analysis looks pretty good so far.
But let's run our analysis forward
and see if it really gives us what we think we're going to get.
The first step of my proposed synthesis
involves the nucleophilic attack of the OH from aminobenzoyl acid
on final chloride.
This reaction should lead to my intermediate,
which I can then expose to another nucleophile
to diethyl-aminoethanol, which will give me my product, right?
Well, not quite.
There's an unfortunate caveat here,
and that is that the amine that I'm hoping will tag along
is actually, potentially, reactive as well.
Remember, NH2 can be a nucleophile.
It has a lone pair of electrons.
So this step of my synthetic analysis was faulty,
but I have the tool I need to get around this problem now.
I can take my proposed synthesis
and modify it in one very simple way.
Instead of using the NH2,
or amine group, I'm going to use an O2, or nitrate,
which is completely non-nucleophilic.
So having replaced those with my nitrates,
I can now rest assured that that promiscuous reaction will not occur.
And at the end of my synthesis,
I can simply use rainy nickel to conduct a reduction,
thereby changing that nitrate into the amine group I originally wanted.
So it's acted as a placeholder through the entire synthesis.
At the end of which, I finally make my modification,
giving me the desired product.
So this would be a successful synthesis of NOVA King.
Now, so far today, we've looked at nitrate esters and nitrates,
both of which contain nitrogen-oxygen bonds,
and not so coincidentally, both of which can be used
to make high-explosive reactions.
But there are other organics which contain both of these elements joined,
not directly to one another, but through one or more carbons.
And when we make this very subtle structural change,
we find ourselves making molecules which have a very different,
but equally versatile chemistry,
and can be used safely and reliably in organic synthesis.
When a carboxylic acid motif is connected to an amine group
via at least one intervening carbon,
we call the resulting molecule an amino acid.
Amino acids will be the star of the show in our lecture on proteins,
where we will consider their biological role.
But since they meet the criterion for this lecture as well,
having both oxygen and nitrogen,
I thought we would give them a little bit of attention here.
Amino acids combine an acidic carboxylic acid group
with a basic amine group.
And so they're often found in a state in which the acid is deprotonated,
but the amine is protonated.
And we call species like this,
ones with a positive and negative charge and separate regions,
zwitter ions.
The most famous group of amino acids are, of course,
the 20 amino acids used by your body and all other living systems
to produce proteins and enzymes which moderate our biochemistry.
Notice that all of them share a combination
Notice that all of them share a common amino acid motif,
one in which the two groups are separated by one carbon,
and we call these alpha-amino acids.
But amino acids can have more than one carbon
separating their acid-base groups.
Two carbons in between produces a beta-amino acid,
and three carbons leads to a gamma-amino acid,
the simplest of which is gamma-aminobutyric acid.
This is a powerful neurotransmitter
and an integral part of your central nervous system.
Gamma-aminobutyric acid, often abbreviated GABA,
plays a role in neurotransmission
by activating a very large protein complex
which allows chloride ions to cross neuronal cell walls.
So when GABA binds to this protein complex,
it allows the flow of chloride ions
which reduces the chance of neurons firing,
and so it has a sedative effect.
This natural biological effect is also part of the mechanism
of action of a number of sedatives and hallucinogens,
like the muscimol found in certain types of wild mushrooms.
See, muscimol imitates GABA in the brain,
over-activating the GABA receptor proteins,
causing an exaggerated state of sedation.
So in this case, the extract of your mushroom
is acting just like the neurotransmitter
that you naturally produce.
Yet another pervasive motif in organic chemistry
containing oxygen and nitrogen is the amide functional group.
And you may think of an amide as a carboxylic acid or ester
with an sp3 nitrogen rather than an sp3 oxygen.
The lower electronegativity of the amide nitrogen
means that there's significantly less acidic than organic acids
having a pKa somewhere around 25 compared to 5
for a typical organic acid.
Primary amides have an NH2 group
and can be synthesized from carboxylic acids
by reaction with ammonia gas.
In this case, a favorable proton transfer forms carboxylate
and ammonium, which are heated to drive off water
as a byproduct of the amide bond formation.
It's this condensation reaction which forms our primary amide.
Primary amides are named using the R group prefix
followed by an amide suffix.
For example, this two-carbon primary amide is called ethanamide.
Just as carboxylic acids are similar to esters,
varying only by replacement of the acidic hydrogen with an R group.
So primary amides can be changed into secondary and tertiary amides
in which one or both hydrogens are substituted with an R group as well.
When there are R groups present,
we name them as substituents of the parent primary amide.
For example, this is N-methylethanamide
and this is NN-dimethylethanamide.
You may see these names shortened by dropping the N designation
and simply calling them methylethanamide and dimethylethanamide.
Amides are a very interesting motif in and of themselves.
As we'll see when we cover proteins and peptides in a few lectures.
But for now let's take a look at a few reactions
in which amides can be converted into some other familiar functional groups.
In addition to being a biologically relevant structural motif,
amides give us a useful alternative to the direct amination route to create amines.
You'll recall that amines can be synthesized easily
when the R groups of alkyl chloride substrate are primary or secondary.
But an SN2 reaction is essentially impossible
when the alkyl halide substrate is tertiary.
So we're left wondering how we might create something like t-butylamine
in which the amine nitrogen is attached to a tertiary carbon.
If we were to try to do a direct amination of t-butyl bromide
or t-butyl chloride, we expect a preponderance of the elimination product
to form if anything forms at all.
One solution to this problem is the Hoffman rearrangement
named for German chemist August Wilhelm von Hoffman.
Now Hoffman discovered that primary amides could be converted into amines
by reaction with a molecular halogen like chlorine or bromine
and an aqueous base like sodium hydroxide solution.
This reaction works even if the adjacent carbon is tertiary.
So let's go through this reaction using t-butyl amide, molecular bromine
and aqueous sodium hydroxide.
Under these conditions, just a small amount of the amine is deprotonated,
forming a nucleophilic species which attacks the bromine molecule.
So you can already see the important difference here.
The R groups are already attached to the nucleophile,
not the substrate, in the initiating event of the reaction.
This process forms an N-bromo amide, which is deprotonated a second time.
Now this is where the magic happens.
The bromide group is displaced from the amide nitrogen in an alkyl shift.
This effectively reverses the carbon and nitrogen ordering in the chain,
creating what we call an isocyanate.
Hydroxide ion then catalyzes the conversion of isocyanate to a motif
known as a carbamic acid.
Carbamic acid is essentially just a carboxylic acid bonded directly to a nitrogen
rather than a carbon.
And carbamic acids have a strong tendency to decarboxylate under basic conditions,
leading to an amine.
So we've used the Hoffman rearrangement starting with t-butyl amide
to produce t-butyl amine.
Perhaps the most interesting chemistry involving amides
is they're used to link together dimers and short oligomers,
meaning a short chain of a few subunits, of amino acids
to form some consumer goods with which you might be very familiar.
Let's look at one right now.
This is a molecule of the artificial sweetener aspartame.
Aspartame consists of essentially three subunits linked by hydrolyzable bonds.
One of them is an amide bond indicated here.
The other linkage is actually an ester bond formed here.
So if we take a look at the aspartame molecule as a whole
and then break it down into these three subunits,
we see that we have essentially what is a condensed methanol,
a condensed amino acid phenylalanine,
and aspartic acid, another amino acid.
So what this means is that when you ingest or consume aspartame,
this is the molecule that gives you the sweet taste.
But what happens to it once it's passed your lips and tongue
and into your digestive system?
Well, when it reaches your digestive system,
particularly your bloodstream,
it's exposed to a great deal of water and enzymes from your liver which break it down.
Your body recognizes that this molecule isn't natural,
that it's a foreign compound that needs to be removed.
And it does this using water to hydrolyze the two connective bonds.
When it does this, we get three different species,
an aspartic acid, a phenylalanine, and a methanol.
Now, there's always some discussion about that methanol
because there's always a few folks who wonder,
does that methanol constitute a danger to my health?
After all, if I eat our drink aspartame,
and it hydrolyzes and becomes, at least in part, methanol,
am I not leaving myself open to potentially developing blindness?
Well, the answer lies in quantity.
So let's look at an aspartame molecule one more time.
Aspartame is about 200 times sweeter than sugar.
Now, that means that in order to make a soda,
that's a diet soda, about as sweet as its non-diet alternative,
we've got to use only about 200 milligrams of aspartame.
That's enough to make your soda as sweet as 40 grams of sugar.
That's about 10 teaspoons.
So let's take some water and hydrolyze 200 milligrams of aspartame
and see if the content of your diet soda
is enough to generate a worrisome amount of methanol.
All right, our hydrolysis reaction takes place.
And when we run our calculation,
what we find is that 200 milligrams of aspartame
is only enough to make about 90 milligrams of aspartic acid,
112 milligrams of phenylalanine, and 22 milligrams of methanol.
Now, if you're one of just a few percent of the population
who has a condition which allows you or doesn't allow you
to metabolize phenylalanine properly, you may have an issue.
We call this condition phenylketonuria.
But if you're like everyone else and can actually metabolize this,
then your only real health concern is the methanol,
and you get 22 milligrams per soda.
So to put that much methanol into perspective,
let's take a look at some other stuff that we might put into our bodies.
It turns out that your diet soda actually has less methanol,
or produces less methanol in your bloodstream,
than grape juice, wine, or tomato juice.
Depending on storage conditions, it can be considerably more.
And yet, those of us who love to eat tomatoes
don't seem to have any problems with our vision.
So the diet soda being bad for your vision is actually a myth.
It simply doesn't produce enough methanol to be toxic.
So let's review today's lecture.
Today we took a look at some slightly more complex functional groups,
involving both nitrogen and oxygen.
We started with nitrate esters,
a very unstable functional group
which can be produced by reacting nitric acid with alcohols.
We saw how materials from cotton fibers to glycerin,
collected during soap making,
can be turned into highly flammable
and even explosive material by this reaction.
We also explored nitro compounds,
most notably trinitrotoluene,
which is another widely used explosive material.
But nitro groups themselves are not nearly as unstable
as their nitroester counterparts.
And so many stable examples of these compounds
can be prepared and reduced to amines
using hydrogen gas and metal catalysts.
We took a quick look at amino acids,
in which amine and carboxyl functionalities
are on the same molecule,
but are isolated from one another,
producing molecules which can undergo
an intramolecular proton transfer
to form what's known as a zwitterion.
We saw how the amide functional group can be prepared
by heating a carboxylic acid in the presence of ammonia,
driving off water to push the reaction forward.
Starting from this structural motif,
Hoffman was able to devise a strategy
to form primary amines with substantial branching,
a feat which cannot be accomplished
by the direct amination of alkyl halides.
Finally, we saw how amino acids can be joined together
through an amide bond,
like that in the popular artificial sweetener Aspartame.
And how the acid hydrolysis of this amide bond
can spell trouble for phenylketonurics
who can't properly metabolize and remove
the resulting phenylalanine,
but is highly unlikely to cause vision problems
in the general population.
We've reached the end of our five lecture series
on functional groups containing nitrogen and oxygen.
But our study of molecular structure isn't yet over.
Over the next three lectures,
we're going to bring back an old friend, alkenes.
But this time, we'll be considering what happens
when entire systems of double bonds are linked together
to form some very special molecules.
I'll see you then.
