It's happened to us all at one time or another.
You sneak down to the kitchen in the dark in the middle of the night for a late-night
snack and just as you're about to reach for that last cupcake on the counter, the lights
flip on.
Through your dilated pupils flooded with light, struggle to make out the image of your wife.
Arms folded, foot tapping.
Of course, your pupils quickly constrict in an attempt to limit the amount of light reaching
the receptors in the back of your eye, but it's already too late.
The torrent of photons has done its damage, and you seem to suffer the ill effects of
the overexposure for the next 10 or 20 minutes.
Have you ever wondered what's going on inside your eyes in situations like this?
And aside from the conundrum of why your wife doesn't want you to enjoy that last delicious
morsel before bed, there's also the mystery of why it takes so long to recover your normal
vision after she springs her trap.
The answer to this riddle lies in the structure and behavior of pie bonds and the molecules
responsible for vision.
And it's alkenes and alkynes, hydrocarbons sharing the same structural feature as the
receptors in your eyes that are the topic of today's lecture.
Now you should recall from our lecture on bonding that the first bond between any two
atoms in organic chemistry is almost always a sigma bond.
The electrons in these bonds occupy an area along the internuclear axis, so they can rotate
like the axle of a car without any meaningful energetic input.
But pie bonds are very different.
During the formation of double and triple bonds, the second and third bonds have to find a
different region of space to inhabit, one which still screens the two nuclei from one
another, but doesn't occupy the space directly between them since the original sigma bond
electrons already have claimed to that space.
So pie bonds form as a consequence of side-on overlap of unhybridized atomic p orbitals.
The shape of the p orbitals allows them to overlap in a region above and below the internuclear
axis.
This leads to two distinct differences between pie bonds and sigma bonds.
And we've discussed both of these consequences in earlier lectures, but they bear repeating
here.
The first is that double and triple bonds can't rotate freely the way that single bonds can.
Rotation of the bond would require that the pie bond be broken completely, leaving only
the remaining sigma bond intact, restoring the rotation.
I can then stop the rotation and restore my pie bond.
Now the second is that pie bonds are weaker than sigma bonds.
Being located in a less centralized molecular orbital means that pie electrons tend to be
held less tightly in the resulting bonding orbital.
This means that less energy is required to break a pie bond.
And when we test the overall bonding energy, we see that a carbon-carbon single bond requires
about 348 kilojoules of energy to break one mole of those bonds.
When we look for a carbon-carbon double bond energy, we see that it requires about 614
kilojoules to break a mole of these bonds.
Assuming of course that the sigma bonds in both of these motifs are of similar energy,
we can easily calculate that it requires about 266 kilojoules to break a mole of pie bonds,
compared to 348 kilojoules for a similar number of sigma bonds.
This means that it's possible to break just a pie bond of a double bond while leaving
the sigma bond intact, if the proper energy is provided.
So the atoms can be kept connected even while free rotation is temporarily restored.
Pie bonds make up the second and third pair of electrons in double and triple bonds respectively.
Yet there's no such thing as a quadruple bond in introductory organic chemistry.
So why is this?
Well, the reason is rooted in the geometry of P orbitals.
Remember that pie bonds are formed by the side-on overlap of P atomic orbitals.
And this naturally requires that the orbitals be aligned parallel and adjacent to one another.
So let's take another look at that double bond.
In this case, double bonds are made from one sigma bond and one pie bond, having that pie
bond above and below the inter-nuclear axis.
So the bond angles around these atoms that are involved in the pie bond is about 120 degrees.
If I add a triple bond, I need a region of space to put a new P orbital overlap, so I
can put my two P orbitals which overlap, moving into and out of the plane of the screen here.
So I have yet another pie bond, and now bond angles of 180 degrees among all the atoms.
But a quadruple bond in this case is impossible, because that last P orbital is not aligned
in such a way that the end-on overlap can be achieved.
So it's physically, geometrically impossible to obtain the orbital alignments required
to form a carbon-carbon quadruple bond.
So as far as we're concerned in this course, a quadruple bond to a carbon is just as great
an offense as an expanded octet would be for a carbon atom with five bonds.
Now, hydrocarbons, like alkanes, consisting of only sigma bonded hydrogen and carbon atoms
are called saturated hydrocarbons.
Conversely, those hydrocarbons which contain pie bonds are sometimes collectively referred
to as unsaturated hydrocarbons.
This reference is born from the fact that each time I introduce a pie bond to a hydrocarbon,
I have to remove two substituents from the molecule to accommodate it.
Introduction of a double bond here requires that I remove two hydrogens, and a triple
bond requires that I remove four.
So alkanes are saturated with hydrogens, but there are hydrocarbons which are not.
So at the most basic level of organization, I have saturated hydrocarbons, which are also
called alkanes, and two classes of unsaturated hydrocarbons, those with the double bond,
which we call alkenes, and those with a triple bond, which we call alkynes.
So now we understand the geometries of multiple bonds and the classes of hydrocarbons they
create a little bit better.
Let's continue our discussion by considering the simplest possible hydrocarbon containing
a double bond, ethene, also known by its more common name, ethylene.
Ethylene is a naturally occurring alkene and a plant hormone which is critical to the
ripening process in a number of fruits and vegetables.
It's also the single most produced organic molecule in the world, valued for its use
as a synthetic starting material, as well as for its amazing power to ripen foodstuffs.
We take a look at the structure of ethylene.
We see that it has a single pi bond.
Propylene contains an extra carbon, but still a single pi bond.
And butylene would be one containing four carbons with one pi bond.
But when we reach butylene, we have to consider the fact that there are different isomers
which can form.
So here I have what I call alphabutylene, in which the double bond is at the end of
the molecule, but with four carbons introduced, it's now possible to make beta butylene.
In fact, beta butylene can exist in one of two stereoisomers, cis beta butylene or trans
beta butylene.
They all have the same empirical molecular formula.
So ethylene is C2H4, propylene is C3H6, and my butylenes are C4H8, or a generic formula
of CNH2N, where N is an integer number.
Now moving on to alkynes.
The simplest of all alkynes is acetylene.
Now this is a standalone alkyne.
There's only one kind like it itself, and that's because acetylene has hydrogens attached.
They're chain terminating hydrogens attached to both of the carbons involved in the triple
bond, whereas the next most complex would be methyl acetylene.
And this particular molecule would be called a terminal alkyne because one side of the
triple bond is continued by another R group or another bond to carbon, whereas one end
of it is terminated and capped off by that hydrogen.
The final example I'm going to show you here is dimethyl acetylene, in which we have what
we call an internal alkyne because both of the carbons involved in the triple bond are
bonded to other carbons themselves.
Now the formula for these compounds are C2H2, C3H4, and C4H6.
So though they don't have identical empirical formula, they do follow a mathematical formula
of CnH2n-2.
So far in this lecture we've discussed a few simple hydrocarbons which have pi bonds.
I've used common names to refer to a few simple alkenes and alkynes, but just like any other
class of compounds, there's an IUPAC system which can be used to name them as well.
The presence of weaker and therefore more reactive pi bonds gives alkenes and alkynes
a special place among motifs in nomenclature.
We call them functional groups rather than substituents, and as functional groups they
receive special attention in IUPAC nomenclature.
So these and all other functional groups are indicated not at the beginning of a molecule's
name like substituents are, but rather at the end.
Alright so let's begin by giving some simple IUPAC names to some of the simplest possible
alkenes and alkynes.
Let's start with ethene.
So named because it has two carbons, hence the eth prefix, and a double bond giving it
the ene suffix.
If I instead have a triple bond between two carbons, I call my molecule eth-ion.
In eth for two carbons, ion indicating that they're separated by a triple bond.
Now adding another carbon to this gives me propene and propine.
I can continue adding carbons to my unsaturated hydrocarbons to get butene, but when I get
to this point, again I have four atoms so I have to consider isomerism.
So in this case I use an IUPAC convention to designate the location of the double bond
by giving the number of the first carbon in the chain containing that double bond.
So since in this case my double bond is at the end of the chain, I'll call this one butene
or bute one ene as the IUPAC conventions have changed in the 1990s and you'll hear them
used both ways, both the old and the new.
Similarly we can look at an alkyne the same way.
With four carbons we need to designate the location of the triple bond.
In this example it's at the end so this is one butene or bute one ene.
And then moving on I have two butene which actually has multiplisomers and I can also
place my triple bond in the center giving myself two butene or bute two ene.
But as the size of alkenes and alkynes grows and the number and complexity of their substituents
increases using a common nomenclature system just isn't going to take care of the job anymore.
So we have to switch over to IUPAC.
So let's try a few IUPAC rules out on alkenes and alkynes keeping in mind that the pi bonds
are not substituents but functional groups so we're going to have to change our rules
a little bit to treat them specially.
Now here's an alkyne let's try to name this using our IUPAC rules considering the following
changes.
The true must have the lowest possible number regardless of other substituents and also
we're going to end our parent compound with ene or ene depending on whether it's a double
or triple bond.
So in our first example we have a carbon chain with one, two, three, four, five, six atoms
total.
It may not be readily apparent because remember the bond angles and alkynes are 180 degrees.
So our parent compound is highlighted in orange.
The alkyne is here between these two carbons.
So this is going to be a hexine molecule.
Now my hexine molecule has a methyl substituent because there's one carbon here methyl is
the name of that substituent and I can number my chain one of two ways either from left
to right which puts the methyl at two and my alkyne at four since we use the lowest
numbered carbon that contains that pi bond or we can number from right to left which
would give a two and a five.
Now even though it gives overall higher numbers I'm going to choose the numbering system that
gives the lowest number to the functional group because it gets priority.
So I'm going to name this compound five methyl, two hexine.
Let's try one more.
How about this alkyne?
Well step one is to find the longest chain.
Well the longest chain in the whole molecule is here but there's a problem with that.
It doesn't contain the functional group.
So I can't use this six carbon chain instead I'll have to use this six carbon chain or
excuse me this five carbon chain one, two, three, four, five.
And though it's smaller it contains the pi bond.
So this is going to be a pentene molecule.
My pentene molecule has an ethyl substituent with two carbons and again numbering my parent
hydrocarbon giving the pi bond the lowest possible number will give me this numbering
scheme where my lowest numbered carbon in the pi bond is one and the number of the carbon
bearing the ethyl group is two.
So this will be a two ethyl one pentene.
Now we've already looked at how both structural isomerism and stereoisomerism is possible in
alkenes meaning that a wide variety of alkyne structures is possible with just a few carbon
and hydrogen atoms.
These resulting isomers can and often do have differing chemical properties which are of
interest to us.
There no discussion on the topic of alkenes is complete without a mention of two of the
most influential chemists in the development of their understanding Vladimir Markovnikov
and Alexander Zetsiv.
Markovnikov and Zetsiv were contemporaries studying under another great chemist Alexander
Butlerov in the Russian system in the 1870s.
These two shared a striking number of commonalities.
Both had entered the Russian university system as students of economics.
Both were wooed to a career study in chemistry by the revered chemist Butlerov and both made
some of their greatest contributions to the field of chemistry by uncovering rules dictating
reactivity and stability involving alkenes.
Now final similarity one which may have had the greatest influence on their careers was
their unabashed mutual disdain and burning desire to one up one another.
The origins of their personal conflicts are lost to history but however strained their
personal relationship might have been the field of organic chemistry undoubtedly benefited
from it.
The resulting rivalry drove them to make discoveries about some of the most basic tenets governing
the chemistry of alkenes.
As our course progresses we will learn rules bearing the names of both of these great investigators.
With respect to stability of alkenes Markovnikov believed that less substituted alkenes like
this one butene were more stable.
While Zetsiv held the opposing view that the more substituted alkenes isomer like two butene
would be more stable.
This may seem like a minor point to quibble over but at the time the science of organic
chemistry was just beginning to blossom.
So both men knew that the answer to such a question would have a monumental bearing on
our understanding of the most fundamental tenets of organic chemistry.
Greatness was at stake and both men knew it.
In this crucial debate it was Zetsiv who proved victorious when he published a paper in 1875.
We already have the tools needed to make his prediction for ourselves.
You may remember that we discussed hyperconjugation previously, how adjacent alkyl groups can
interact favorably with p orbitals.
Well, just like radicals, alkenes have p orbitals and because of that if there are adjacent
r groups which have their bonding orbitals aligned with that pi system, the electrons
from the adjacent bond can participate with the pi electrons giving a larger system through
which they can move.
And we all know that when you extend the region through which electrons can move, you increase
the stability of the species.
Now Zetsiv used an alcohol dehydration reaction, which we're going to look at in a future lecture,
to demonstrate that alkenes of higher substitution are indeed more stable.
Zetsiv needed to use this system because frankly it was one of the very few understood reactions
in his day, but this part of the story is going to have to wait for another lecture.
Modern chemists can much more easily verify Zetsiv's conclusions.
Today we often compare the stability of unsaturated hydrocarbons using the technique of calorimetry.
Remember that in a calorimetry experiment, a reaction is allowed to run to completion
in a closed, well-insulated vessel.
And the temperature of the contents is then monitored.
On completion of the reaction, the amount of chemical potential energy gained or lost
by the reacting molecules is proportional to the temperature change of the surroundings
within the calorimeter.
Take our example of the two structural isomers of butene, the simplest alkene to have both
structural isomers and stereoisomers.
Now it's obvious that one butene is unique from two butene, and that one butene has only
a single stereoisomer because one of its alkene carbons has two hydrogen substituents.
Two butene, however, can exist in two different stereoisomeric states.
But which of these three isomers is most stable and how can we tell?
If we want to compare the relative stability of several related alkenes, we can simply convert
samples of each molecule into their saturated counterparts in a calorimeter using a reaction
known as hydrogenation.
Hydrogenation is a process which saturates alkenes and alkynes using hydrogen gas.
Essentially, we're trading two hydrogen atoms for each pi bond in the starting material.
We investigate the details of how and why this reaction happens during our lecture on
addition reactions, but for now let's just focus on the starting materials in the products.
Take a look at all three hydrogenation reactions.
They all start with one mole of alkene, one mole of hydrogen, and end with the exact same
product, butane.
Because the only difference among the reactions is the identity of the alkene, any difference
in the amount of heat released in the reaction must be a reflection of the differences in
the free energies of those alkenes.
In other words, hydrogenation of less stable alkenes releases more heat, causing a greater
temperature change in the calorimeter.
Conducting our simple calorimetry experiment gives us great insight into the factors affecting
alkene stability.
An equal quantity of one butene releases more heat when hydrogenated, which validates
Zetzev's rule.
We also see that not only is Zetzev's rule validated, but the geometric arrangement of
larger substituents also appears to affect stability somewhat, with E2 butene being more
stable than Z2 butene.
The difference in stability between the E and Z isomers is usually attributed to sterics,
that is, the physical proximity of substituent electron clouds in the molecule.
Placing two larger alkyl substituents closer to one another as in the Z isomer causes a
natural repulsion, which is not present when those substituents are at opposition in the
E isomer.
Not surprisingly, internal alkynes also prove more stable than their external counterparts.
So we see the same trend that Zetzev would predict for internal and terminal alkynes,
though the linear geometry of these compounds precludes any geometric isomerism.
So let's return now to our introductory story.
What goes on chemically when your eyes are overexposed to light?
But for that matter, when your eyes are exposed to normal levels of light.
The rods and cones in your eyes contain specific molecules which interact with light.
We call molecules like this chromophores.
The chromophore responsible for your vision is called retinol, and it looks like this.
Now retinol has a number of alkene groups, all of which we know from our earlier calorimetry
data, should be most stable when in the trans or E configuration.
But the retinol in your eyes has one double bond in the cis or Z conformation.
It's locked in this way because of the pi bond on the 11th carbon of the chain.
So this 11 cis retinol wants to be all trans retinol, but it can't get there without some
help.
The help comes in the form of photons, light.
When a photon of appropriate energy strikes the retinol molecule, breaking just the pi
bond on the 11th carbon, sterics cause the C11, C12 bond to rotate before reestablishing
the pi bond in the more stable trans configuration.
This change in the shape of retinol, promoted by absorption of light, induces a conformational
change in a protein to which it's bound.
And this starts a cascade of electrochemical signaling, which your brain ultimately interprets
as vision.
An enzyme known as retinol isomerase then resets the alkene bond in retinol to the higher
energy, 11 cis conformation, making it ready to detect light again.
This process takes a little bit of time, which explains why it becomes difficult to
see for several minutes after exposure to a very bright light.
So the light sensors in your eyes are really just an elegant application of the concepts
we've been discussing in this lecture.
So I hope we can all agree now that structural and stereoisomerism make alkenes very interesting
to us.
Now it's time for alkenes to take the spotlight.
We know from the geometry of a carbon-carbon triple bond that alkenes are not capable of
that kind of stereoisomerism that makes alkenes so fascinating.
But it doesn't make them uninteresting.
Alkenes have properties all their own, which make them interesting to organic chemists.
One very interesting property of alkenes is their acidity.
Now it should be evident that internal alkenes don't have a very acidic proton since all
of their hydrogens are on sp3 carbons, just like an alkane.
The pKa of a terminal alkyne however is about 26, which may seem like a very weak acid and
in fact it is.
But compared to the acidity of alkenes with the pKa of 44 and of alkenes whose pKa is
about 60, alkenes start to look like a pretty acidic compound.
So at a pKa of 26, terminal alkenes are weak acids in the overall scheme of things, but
they're rock stars of acidity among hydrocarbons.
In fact, there are just a few bases available to us in the laboratory, albeit very strong
ones, which are capable of deprotonating terminal alkenes.
Most notable of these is the amide ion, the conjugate acid of ammonia, which has a pKa
of about 35.
Easy to work with?
No.
But available?
Yes.
So what's the source of the acidity in compounds like acetylene or propyne?
The answer is that alkyne carbons are sp hybridized.
Now heterolytically breaking the CH bond means that both bonding electrons will go to the
carbon.
This means that the hybrid orbital into which the bonding electrons go has about 50% S character
as opposed to about 33% S character for an alkene and 25% S character for an alkane.
S orbitals hold their electrons tighter and closer to the nucleus than dupe orbitals of
the same principal energy level.
So more S character in a hybrid orbital means a more stable lone pair in that orbital.
And a more stable conjugate base means a more acidic conjugate acid.
These deprotonated alkynes are remarkably reactive compared to neutral hydrocarbons.
And we'll see in a few lectures how these deprotonated alkynes can prove very useful
reagents in the synthesis of other organic compounds.
So far we've concerned ourselves with relatively simple straight and branched alkynes and alkynes.
But just as alkenes can be cyclic, so can alkenes and alkynes.
In fact, we already saw an example of this during our discussion of chirality when we
analyzed the stereochemistry of limony.
Cyclic alkenes and cyclic alkynes follow many of the same rules as cyclic alkenes, but with
two important considerations.
First, just like with linear and branched hydrocarbons, the presence of the pi system
usually makes them much more reactive than similar alkane counterparts.
Second, the inclusion of a double bond with sp2 carbons and angles of about 120 degrees
or a triple bond with sp carbons and a bond angle of about 180 degrees can significantly
affect the ring strain of a cyclic hydrocarbon.
Just take the example of cyclohexane.
If we had a pi bond making cyclohexane, we create a molecule with bond angle strains
forced upon it by the presence of four coplanar atoms from the alkene motif.
Nonetheless, there are many examples of this motif in nature, including our familiar limony
from the rinds of citrus fruits.
Cyclization of small alkenes also has the important effect of stabilizing the cis isomer.
All that when we looked at linear alkenes, we saw how heats of combustion demonstrate
the trans isomer is more stable than the cis isomer, but in the case of cyclohexane,
the trans isomer is impossible to make.
So I've built a model here, including six atoms, and within these six atoms I placed
a single double bond here, one double bond.
Now if I cyclize this with a cis double bond, I have a pretty good, pretty stable looking
model here.
Maybe not quite as good as cyclohexane, but pretty close.
But what happens if I try to convert this double bond from a cis into a trans?
Well in the case of a six-membered ring, I'm going to break my model kit.
Notice how badly distorted this double bond is just to accommodate what I've attempted.
It's essentially impossible to create the structure.
In fact, in order to be able to create such a structure, a cyclic alkene that is in the
trans confirmation requires at least seven atoms.
Now here I have eight so that I don't break two model kits on one day.
Again, very, very easy to create a cis alkene that looks fairly stable.
But if I try to make the trans alkene, although I can, definitely doesn't look like a very
happy molecule.
Clearly there's additional ring strain.
Many of my bonds are in poor bond angles, and I've had to develop some new clashes from
eclipsing interactions as well.
So in the case of seven, eight, nine, or ten atoms, we can make the trans but not very stable.
In fact, we have to get all the way to eleven atoms before we reach the point where a trans
isomer is actually more stable once again.
When we reach eleven atoms, we have enough conformational flexibility that my double
bond in the trans configuration is tolerated very well.
I can find lots of good stable conformations, which give it lots of room, and I don't break
the double bond, and I can reuse it later.
Now take your model kit.
Try to make cyclohexane.
The 180 degree bond angle in the alkyne part of that system makes it almost geometrically
impossible for this molecule to exist.
I say almost because the carbon-carbon triple bond of an alkyne is about 20 percent shorter
than a typical carbon-carbon single bond.
This means that cyclohexane can theoretically exist, and it probably does form as a high
energy intermediate in certain reactions, but it can't be isolated and bottled like
it's cyclohexane and cyclohexane cousins.
Of course, larger cyclic alkynes do exist.
Cyclooctane, for example, is the smallest cyclic alkyne which is stable enough to be
prepared and collected.
So in this lecture, we investigated how pi bonds change the chemistry of hydrocarbons.
We took a look at how the geometry of the orbitals involved results in a weaker bond
than their sigma-conner parts, but which restricts rotation about carbon-carbon bonds and also
carbon-carbon triple bonds.
We discussed alkenes, hydrocarbons containing double bonds, as well as alkynes, hydrocarbons
containing triple bonds.
We saw how these double and triple bonds are reactive, and therefore treated with higher
priority in nomenclature than the simple alkyl substituents.
We call these higher priority reactive motifs functional groups.
We took a look at one of the great chemistry rivalries of all time, that between Markovnikov
and Zetzev, over trends in the stability of alkenes.
We investigated how their work led to our understanding of trends in stability among
various regio and stereoisomers of the same molecular formula.
We took a look at how the function of a biologically relevant molecule, retinol, is tied to these
trends in stability.
That the spontaneous conversion of retinol from 11 cis to all trans confirmations takes
place when a photon temporarily breaks the associated pi bond.
Next we covered the unusual acidity of terminal alkynes, and how the presence of a hydrogen
on an SP hybridized carbon is a rare structural feature, which makes alkynes much more acidic
than ordinary hydrocarbons.
Finally we investigated the effect of pi bonds on cyclic structures, and how their presence
can not only introduce cis trans isomerization, but also chirality.
We also saw how a clash of personalities in 1870s Russia led to a race to understanding
alkyne chemistry, which in turn helps us to arrive at a better understanding of the molecular
mechanism of vision employed in modern medicine.
We've had quite a journey this lecture.
Next time we will introduce a new class of atoms to the structural mix, when we expand
our inventory of compounds to include the halogens, fluorine, fluorine, bromine and iodine,
in a class of compounds called alkyl halides.
I'll see you then.
