In 1957, the German pharmaceutical firm Grünenthal was enjoying sizable profits from its postwar
sales of the antibiotic penicillin.
And as the company sought to reinvest those profits and continue growing its product line,
it developed a compound called 2-2-6-dioxo-piperidine-3-ill-1-H-isoindole-1-3-2-H-dione.
That's a mouthful, isn't it?
Now this compound was touted as a miracle cure for a variety of ailments,
all the way from insomnia to colds to headaches.
Now a global public made trusting by the miraculous benefits of drugs like penicillin
welcomed this new product into their medicine cabinets with open arms.
In the early 1960s, the indications for this new wonder drug were expanded to include
morning sickness in pregnant women.
Now within months of its introduction to world markets for this particular use,
thousands of reports of birth defects began rolling into government offices in countries
which had approved its use.
And within a year or two it became clear that this new indication for the drug was linked somehow
to this growing catastrophe.
And its use for this purpose was quickly stopped, though not before tens of thousands of lives
were tragically and directly affected.
The drug that I'm talking about is of course the now infamous thalidomide.
Most of us are at least familiar with the story of this drug's remarkable efficacy,
but also its remarkable ability to cause birth defects in growing fetuses.
Now what you might not realize however is that these two biological effects
are actually the result of two different forms of the molecule sold under that trade name.
Today we're going to investigate the phenomenon of stereoisomerism,
the key to understanding what a tragedy the thalidomide accident truly was.
Hi.
Start today with an easy question, shall we?
Did I just wave to you with my left hand or my right hand?
I'm guessing anyone watching this lecture can easily conclude that was my right hand.
But how did you know that it was my right hand?
Well you know that it was my right hand,
because even though I have a thumb, four fingers and a palm on both hands,
what makes them different is the position and orientation of those substituents on the hands.
The direction of the palm, the fingers and the thumb are unique on the right hand as compared to the left.
If I try to superimpose them, I can't make it work.
If I line the palms, my thumbs are on the wrong sides.
Yet if I line my thumbs, now the palms don't match.
So in spite of the identical connectivity, I can't superimpose my hands with one another.
Clearly they are distinct objects which can interact with the world differently.
You don't believe me, just try to put a right handed glove on your left hand.
It's a completely different experience than trying to put it on the right hand.
Now so far we've concerned ourselves with macro scale objects,
and we're not done with that yet,
but let's take a few minutes and turn our attention to a geometry more relevant to organic chemistry, the tetrahedron.
See, carbon atoms can have up to four sigma bonds,
meaning four different bonded substituents arranged tetrahedrally about a central atom.
Now when these four substituents are all distinct from one another,
they actually create two different possible arrangements which hold the same connectivity.
Okay so let's take a look at this tetrahedral center here.
It's got four distinct substituents,
and for now we're just going to use these colors red, blue, yellow and green
to indicate that they're all different from one another.
Now if I were to make an exact copy of this,
but interchange two of the four substituents,
look at what happens here.
I've created two structures with exactly the same connectivity,
but no matter how I translate and rotate them,
there's no way to make them superimposed with one another.
Now these two hypothetical molecules have handedness,
just like my hands did in our previous example.
And when we interchange two substituents on a central atom,
just like we did here, we produce a new molecule.
And when this happens we call the central atom a chiral center.
In our current example, this is a tetrahedral center with four distinct substituents.
Now the result of course was that we had non superimposable objects with identical connectivity.
And when this happens we call these two entities stereo isomers of one another.
Now pairs of stereo isomers fall into several distinct categories,
and understanding each of them is critical
to understanding the physical and chemical properties of some of the organic compounds that contain them.
So before we begin investigating these relationships,
let me stress to you that they are just that, relationships.
Just as you can be a brother to one person and an uncle to another,
so can a given molecule have various stereo isomer relationships to other similar molecules.
Now the first class of stereo isomers that I'd like to look at are called enantiomers.
In most chemistry books you'll find them defined as non superimposable mirror images.
I prefer to think of them as a pair of compounds in which all of the atom connectivity is the same,
but all of the stereo centers are inverted.
So the simplest example of our tetrahedral center with just one stereo center,
this is really the only possible relationship we could develop.
You can't invert a fraction of a stereo center.
Now this is in fact a part of the thalidomide story.
See, thalidomide, like many drugs, contains a chiral center.
One of these stereo isomers of thalidomide has the desirable pharmacological properties,
but the other stereo isomer, which was thought to be completely innocuous at the time,
was in fact a powerful angiogenesis inhibitor,
which is a fancy way of saying that it inhibits the development of blood vessels critical to proper fetal growth.
And what's worse is that this angiogenesis inhibitor crosses the placental barrier with startling efficiency
and doomed many fetuses to abnormal development.
Now you'll notice that interchanging two of the four substituents produced a mirror image of the original,
and of course that I couldn't superimpose them.
So we call them enantiomers of one another.
But when more than one chiral center, or center of handedness, is present in a molecule,
the picture becomes a little bit more complicated.
So let's take the example of a hypothetical compound with two non-identical stereocenters.
In my example I have one stereocenter with red, yellow, and green substituents,
and another with purple, orange, and gray substituents.
Now inversion of both stereocenters produces that mirror image which can't be superimposed.
So here I've made a set of enantiomers which you'll recall I defined as compounds in which all centers are inverted.
But now that I have multiple stereocenters it's possible to invert only one while leaving the other one in its original state.
When I do this the result is a compound with identical connectivity which is neither superimposable nor a mirror image.
When these pairs of compounds have a different name, their relationship is called diastereomers.
Sets of diastereomers are distinct from sets of enantiomers in that they can, and very often do,
have different physical properties like boiling points, melting points.
A third and somewhat unusual situation arises when a compound contains two stereocenters
which each have the same force of substituents attached.
In this instance it's possible to have a situation in which a complete inversion of stereochemistry leads to a mirror image,
but that mirror image is exactly the same molecule.
When this happens we don't actually have two different stereoisomers,
but we have a compound that still has stereocenters or chiral centers.
So we give them a special name, mesocompounds.
Now not all stereoisomers contain chiral centers.
Recall our definition of stereocenters is that interchanging two groups on that center changes the identity of a molecule.
You also may recall that in lecture two we learned that pi bonds have restricted rotation,
owing to the side-to-side overlap of p-atomic orbitals, which can't be interrupted unless we break the pi bond.
So this can lead to another kind of stereoisomerism.
Here's a molecule of what we would call beta-butylene.
Now since we can't rotate pi bonds, it's possible to have a compound like this with two substituents,
a methyl and a hydrogen on this, a methyl and a hydrogen on this carbon.
And I can create a second form of this beta-butylene molecule
in which my two CH3 groups are on the same side of the molecule instead of the opposing sides of the molecule.
And any effort I make to convert this molecule to this is forwarded by the presence of the pi bond.
So two different isomers exist even though these are not tetrahedral centers.
Now the presence of the pi bond makes these two isomers distinct from one another
since breaking the pi bond between the two carbons is necessary to achieve the kind of rotation it would take to make them superimposable.
And since this sort of thing doesn't tend to happen on its own, we'll see later that it takes a special set of circumstances to encourage that change.
Now since multiple isomers of compounds with stereocenters are possible,
naturally we need to come up with a labeling system to distinguish them from one another.
And several systems exist, but the most commonly employed is the Kahn-Ingold-Prelog convention.
In 1950, as the phenomenon and significance of chirality was just becoming understood,
two English chemists, Robert Kahn and Christopher Ingold,
began cooking up a methodology for quickly and unambiguously distinguishing one stereoisomer from another by name.
A third chemist named Vladimir Prelog entered the discussion during a social event thrown by the British chemical company Imperial Chemical Industries.
And this is one of those great moments in history in which the wallflowers among us can really be proud,
because as Prelog himself put it, everybody danced except for Ingold, Kahn and myself.
Not being proficient dancers, we drank beer and discussed chemistry.
Now I love this story, not only because it combines two of my favorite things, chemistry and beer,
but because the product of the discussion was a two-year collaboration,
leading to what is today the most used method of communicating stereochemistry in naming organic compounds, the Kahn-Ingold-Prelog convention.
Kahn-Ingold-Prelog convention gives us a way to assign a rank to all the substituents around a particular stereocenter.
And we can then use these ranks to describe the geometric arrangement of a compound quickly and easily.
So since the first step is ranking the substituents, let's concern ourselves with that for the moment.
The system that Kahn-Ingold and Prelog suggested was one of a sequential comparison of atoms within the competing substituents around that central atom.
And the rules take a bit of getting used to, but in fact once you do get used to it, they're quite simple.
In short, we start from the chiral center and move out one bond at a time, comparing all atoms encountered,
and the substituent with the first instance of the heavier atom wins priority.
Anytime a double or triple bond is encountered, the doubly or triply bonded atom is counted twice or three times, respectively.
Now let's take a look at this rule in action.
And we're going to consider just the ranking of substituents for the moment, and we'll add those spatial arrangements later.
Let's begin with a molecule we've all heard of. This is freon 151.
It's also called chlorofluoroethane, and it contains a chiral center right there.
This carbon has four distinct substituents, chlorine, fluorine, CH3, and a hydrogen.
So to rank each of these substituents using the con-angled pre-lawed convention, I simply move one bond out from the carbon
and make a note of the atom I encounter. In this case, a chlorine, a fluorine, a carbon, and a hydrogen.
Now the atomic numbers of these are 17, 9, 6, and 1, respectively.
So I can distinguish each of my substituents here based upon the first atom that I've encountered.
So I'll rank chlorine as 1, fluorine as 2, my CH3 group as 3, and my hydrogen as 4.
I've completed my ranking using con-angled pre-law. But not all molecules are as simple as freon.
Let's take the example of a naturally occurring compound called limonene.
You'll find limonene in the peels of citrus fruits.
I've drawn for you here the line angle formula, but to do our con-angled pre-log analysis I'm going to convert this into a more expanded formula.
Now take a look at this structure. Can you find the chiral carbon?
Remember, it's a tetrahedral center with four unique substituents.
It's right there. Hydrogen, here's our second substituent, and the other two substituents actually are parts of this loop,
one and the other, and they're distinct from one another, which means this is genuinely a chiral center.
So let's start our analysis. One bond out gives me three carbons and a hydrogen, so I can assign my lowest priority substituent,
but I still have three other competing substituents.
So let's go another bond out. When I do that, I have a situation where I have a double bonded carbon, which means I count it twice,
whereas here I have carbons and hydrogens. So when I take my inventory of all the bonded atoms that I've encountered,
I have C-C-C for this one, C-H-H for my substituent on the left side, and C-H-H for my substituent on the right side.
So as I take a quick scan here, I see a tie, and then I see a win.
So this substituent is going to be my top ranked substituent, but I'm not done yet because I still have a tie for the second and third position,
which means I've got to go another bond length away. When I do this, on the left hand side of the molecule, I get C-H-H,
and on the right side, I encounter another double bond to a carbon, meaning it's counted twice, or C-C-H.
So the substituent on the right side would be ranked number two, and the substituent on the left number three.
Now there's another gotcha to this system that I'd like to point out. This is a favorite when I write an exam question, actually,
and that is that the tendency becomes to look for that heavy atom and say, that must be the top ranked substituent.
And a great example of this is a fluoxetine molecule, also marketed under the trade name Prozac.
Fluoxetine contains a chiral center right here.
And if we looked at this and gave it a quick glance, we might notice there's a nitrogen up here.
This is all carbon and hydrogen, since the heavy atom is on the upward pointing substituent, that must be a higher rank.
But the truth is, it's not, because con-ingled pre-log requires that I move sequentially one bond at a time and make my comparison.
Once I have a win, I stop counting.
So my first bond out lets me assign the one and four to the oxygen and the hydrogen respectively.
And to break the tie between my carbons, I go one more bond to get CHH on my top and CCC off to the left here.
So this substituent has one, and I never even encounter the heavy atom.
So it's crucial when doing this ranking that you go bond by bond and stop as soon as you found a difference.
This is how the con-ingled pre-log works.
So the ranking system proposed by con-ingled and pre-log gives us the basis for assigning a universal stereochemistry designation to particular chiral centers.
But we have yet to define exactly how we use these rankings to define the geometry around those stereocenters.
The most common use of these rankings is what's called the RS system of nomenclature.
In this system, each chiral center is given a designation of R or S, depending upon the arrangement of rank substituents around the center, and it's done in the following way.
After we've ranked all four substituents, we place the fourth ranked substituent at the back of the molecule.
And next we draw a curved arrow passing through the first, second, and third ranked substituents.
If that arrow traces out a clockwise rotation, we call this the R enantiomer from the Latin for rectus or right.
If instead it traces out a counterclockwise path, we call it the S enantiomer from the Latin for sinister or left.
So let's try this system out on the two enantiomers of 1-chloro, 1-fluoroethane, remember, freon 151.
Again, we'll identify the chiral center and rank the four substituents with chlorine as 1, fluorine as 2, carbon as 3, and hydrogen as 4.
Since, in this case, the lowest ranked substituent is already pointed to the back, I can simply draw my arrows and assign my stereochemistry.
So the molecule on the left is S 1-chloro, 1-fluoroethane, and the molecule on the right is R 1-chloro, 1-fluoroethane.
Let's try that same exercise with limonene, the compound responsible for that strong aroma of citrus fruits.
And you'll recall limonene has a single chiral center and it's located here.
Now, I've drawn the limonene structure with the hydrogen in the back of the molecule as well.
So I'm ready to determine its RS designation without having to rotate the molecule any further.
Counting for my substituents 1 through 3, I draw a circle which is clockwise.
So this enantiomer of limonene has an R stereocenter.
Of course, we can draw a limonene with the S stereocenter simply by reflecting this molecule.
And the enantiomer of limonene actually doesn't smell like citrus at all, but more like pintar or turpentine.
So one very useful aspect of the RS system is actually how simple it is to tell when you're dealing with enantiomers
or mesocompounds in cases with two similar chiral centers.
So let's have another look at 2,4-dichloropentane as an example.
Here I have two chiral centers in the molecule, but is this molecule chiral overall?
And the answer is no.
If I assign chirality to each stereocenter in this example, I find that I have 2R4S2,4-dichloropentane.
Now the mirror image of this molecule is 2S4R2,4-dichloropentane, which is exactly the same molecule.
A simple translation and rotation allows me to overlay the two molecules.
But the other two possibilities here are the RR and SS enantiomers.
And these are in fact chiral because they are not superimposable with their mirror images.
So these two are a set of enantiomers.
Now con-angle pre-law convention is not only used in tetrahedral chiral centers,
but also in designating the stereoisomers which contain double bonds, which are not chiral, like our beta-butylene.
So here are my two different stereoisomers of beta-butylene.
And we've already heard cis and trans mentioned a few times as a means of conveying the relationships between the substituents
along this double bond which has restricted rotation.
So there are two different isomers here which cannot interconvert easily because of the pi bond.
In one of them, the larger groups are at opposition.
And in the other one, the larger groups are next to one another.
And because the second substituent in this case is hydrogen,
it's very easy to tell when I say trans or cis exactly what I'm talking about.
Clearly I'm talking about the non-hydrogen-based substituents.
So we would call this a cis-trans nomenclature system.
But what happens when we get to a more complex molecule
that doesn't necessarily have hydrogens bonded to all of its stereocenter carbons?
Let's take this example here.
At this point, I've got a molecule which actually has one of its sp2 carbons bearing two different substituents.
In this case, a ch3-ch2 group and a chlorine group.
So, looking at each of the two carbons in the sp2 system,
the first one is very easy to determine.
My higher priority substituent, which I'll use in my naming, is clearly the ch3.
But how do I determine the other two?
Well, this is the problem that Conningall-Prelog solves.
If I turn my attention to that carbon and its substituents, I reach a carbon and a chlorine.
So clearly the chlorine has higher priority.
So these two higher priority substituents are as far apart as possible.
They're on opposite sides of the molecule.
And so we use the letter E to designate this isomer.
Had they been on the same side, we would have designated it as a Z isomer.
And these names come from the German, meaning same and opposite.
So let's apply this to a different type of molecule, one that you might find in nature.
Geranial is a compound produced by flowers, as is the compound Nierall.
But they produce different floral smells, distinctly different.
And yet, when we take a look at these two molecules, we see that the bond connectivity is identical.
So what's the source of the difference here?
Well, the source of the difference is that they are stereoisomers of one another.
If I take a look at the line angle formula for geranial,
and I choose my two highest Conningall-Prelog substituents compared to that of Nierall,
in geranial they're at opposition to one another, meaning this would be an E stereoisomer.
Whereas in Nierall, they're on the same side of the molecule, meaning that they would be Z stereoisomer.
So in this case, just as in the case of limonene, inverting a stereocenter causes a completely different smell to form in the molecule.
They clearly react differently with U.
So the difference between smelling like a lemon or a pine tree, or different kinds of flowers,
all comes down to something as simple as the inversion of a stereocenter.
That's remarkable.
So let's wrap up our discussion today by taking one last look at thalidomide from a stereochemistry perspective.
We know now that it's the R-antimer of thalidomide, which has the desirable sedative properties,
but the S-antimer causes the defects in developing fetuses.
So if I wanted to draw the stereoisomer of this molecule with the desirable pharmacological properties,
I'd have to first rank all four substituents using conical pre-law.
I have one group attached by a nitrogen, one by a hydrogen, and two groups attached by carbons.
Of those two groups attached by carbon, one has a C-H-H set of bonds, and the other O-O-N.
So I now have all the information I need to rank my substituents.
And now I just need to place the lowest in the back and draw the remaining three in a clockwise fashion to complete the structure.
I've drawn the sedative version of thalidomide.
So the logical question one might ask here is if we know that the R-antimer of thalidomide has favorable properties
and the S-antimer is terribly, terribly toxic, can we simply remove the S-antimer from the product?
Well, in the case of thalidomide, this is unfortunately not possible.
And the reason why goes back to our last lecture on acid-base chemistry.
See, because the hydrogen on the chiral center is weakly acidic, it can be removed by the weak bases in your bloodstream.
And it's then replaced to the molecule from both sides, meaning that it can actually reform the S-antimer in your bloodstream.
So any attempt to get pure arthalidomide into the bloodstream would only result in its conversion back to what we call a racemic mixture
or an equal mixture of the two enantiomers within a matter of minutes.
But everything we learn today is not in vain.
There are many pharmaceutical products in use today.
Things as simple as anti-inflammatories like ibuprofen, opiates like methadone, and even our antidepressant fluoxetine,
all of which contain sets of stereoisomers.
In some cases, only one of which has the desired pharmacological property.
But because we are aware of the phenomenon of chirality, we know that we need to test both of those for toxicity before we put our drugs on the market.
A lesson learned from thalidomide.
So let's review what we've learned today.
We've explored the idea of handedness and how chemists have given this phenomenon a different name, chirality.
We saw how tetrahedral centers and molecules can be chiral if they contain four distinct bonded substituents.
And we saw how handedness can be inverted by interchanging two of those substituents on such a chiral center, creating sets of stereoisomers.
We took a look at some examples of stereoisomers, including enantiomers, in which all the chiral centers have been inverted.
We looked at diastereomers, in which some but not all of the chiral centers have been inverted.
And we also saw a special case in which equal and opposite chiral centers invert rendering a molecule A chiral, even though it has those chiral centers in it.
We've explored how it is possible for compounds to have stereoisomers, even when they don't have chiral centers.
Most notably, this happens when compounds have double bonds with distinct substituents on those sp2 hybridized carbons.
Now, next we met Robert Kahn, Chris Ingold, and Vladimir Prilog, who devised a system for ranking substituents around stereocenters,
so that we could have a simple convention for describing them to one another.
We saw how chiral centers are categorized by the direction in which the three highest priority substituents are seen when the lowest priority substituent is in the back of the molecule.
R for clockwise, S for counterclockwise.
Then we took a look at stereoisomers containing double bonds, and how they can be described using E and Z designations,
and how substituents ranked using the Kahn Ingold Prilog convention allow us to determine our priorities for that naming system as well.
And finally, we used the example of thalidomide to demonstrate the power of stereochemistry and the profound differences in properties,
which can result from a change as simple as reflecting just one chiral center.
Next time, we're going to begin a series of lectures in which we categorize, name, and explore the structures of various classes of organic compounds.
I'm looking forward to that, and I'll see you then.
Thank you.
