For all the preaching that chemistry professors do about lab safety, it's amazing how many
advances have been made by those who ignored or broke those rules.
As the powerful biological activity of certain small molecules has become more and more apparent,
one of the classic methods of analysis, tasting, has become an absolute taboo in the chemistry
lab.
Yet, some great discoveries have been made by those who broke this very simple rule.
Take the example of Ira Remsen, an American born researcher who had spent significant
time in Germany in the 1870s, studying some of the most advanced chemical techniques of
the day.
Now, we're talking about the late 1870s, the same time as the boom of Standard Oil and
petroleum processing.
So, when Remsen returned to America to found the chemistry department at Johns Hopkins
University, he chose to study products which could be extracted from coal tar, ostensibly
for use as fuels, building materials and other industrial applications.
But Remsen's fate and the taste buds of his collaborator, Konstantin Fahlberg, took him
down a different path.
One night, after a day in the lab, Fahlberg noticed that his hands were contaminated with
a sweet tasting substance.
It seemed that Remsen's laboratory had produced something remarkably sweet tasting.
A quick investigation revealed that the sweet substance is what we now call saccharin, the
age of the artificial sweetener had been born.
In the century and a half since Remsen's isolation of saccharin, artificial sweeteners
have proven to be a blessing and a curse to society.
They clearly offer benefits in the reduction of calories in sweet foods and drinks.
But at the same time, their overall effect on health is hotly debated and thoroughly
researched even today.
These health concerns, along with free market competition, have led to the discovery and
development of a broad range of such sweeteners over time.
And early versions of these products, like saccharin and aspartame, look downright foreign
next to a molecule of sucrose, the molecule which they're all meant to mimic.
But newer options are more closely structurally related to sugar itself, like the molecule
of sucralose.
Now we're all familiar with the molecule sucrose, or at least what it does, we use it as a sweetener.
Now the artificial sweetener sucralose is actually synthesized directly from sucrose
as a starting material.
In order to do this, I have to convert these three OH groups, or hydroxyl groups, into chloride
groups.
Once this is done, I've constructed my sucralose and I'm ready to take it to market.
Now sucralose costs a little bit more because it has to be synthesized in a lab from sucrose's
raw material.
So it's going to be about 10 times as expensive to make.
But in addition to being non-caloric, it's also 600 times as sweet as sugar.
Now I'm not John Rockefeller, but I think I sense a good business opportunity here.
So today we're going to cross a very palpable threshold in the study of organic chemistry.
Today we're going to begin considering the fundamental mechanisms by which one compound
can become another.
We'll take the first few steps in our journey to understand exactly how it is that some
of the simpler molecules we've seen so far, and even more complex molecules like sucrose,
can be altered in a meaningful, targeted fashion using the knowledge that we've acquired since
the days of Wolder's great accident.
Here's the one that produced urea from inorganic substances giving birth to the field of organic
chemistry.
Now as complex and detailed as our understanding of the science of chemistry has become, it's
sometimes easy to forget that the vast majority of our understanding of the science is rooted
in just over 200 years of intense study by just a handful of highly influential thinkers.
In the days of Lavoisier, Wolder, and even Markovnikov and Zetsev, organic chemistry
consisted of, mainly blindly, albeit very hopefully, mixing reagents in an empirical
search for order in the products that resulted.
As we settled into the 1900s however, things began to change.
That large body of observational knowledge accumulated over a century had reached a critical
tipping point.
The point at which the sum of all former observations started to lead us to predictive rules about
reactions.
In short, observation had led to understanding, which in turn was slowly manifesting an ability
to predict and design reactions.
As we begin our investigation into some reaction pathways, we're going to revisit an old friend,
Christopher Kelk Engeld, who did so much more for the science than just participating
in developing the now-familiar con Engeld-Prelog-Nomenclature Convention.
It's also Engeld who's often credited with first proposing some of the fundamental rules
governing organic reaction mechanisms, which are still in use today.
In 1933, Engeld and his collaborator, E.D. Hughes, wrote a letter to the vaunted scientific
journal Nature.
In this letter, they laid out their argument for a systematic and predictive approach to
understanding one of three basic reaction types in organic chemistry, called substitution.
Shortly thereafter, Engeld made this sense of change very clear when in 1934 he wrote
the following of his own research, quote, the new work made it inescapably clear that
the old order in organic chemistry was changing.
The art of the subject was diminishing, its science increasing.
No longer could one just mix things, sophistication in physical chemistry was the base from which
all chemists, including the organic chemists, must start, end quote.
Powerful words.
Over the next three lectures, we're going to investigate the three general reaction types
most often encountered in organic chemistry.
Those are substitution, in which one substituent or functional group is exchanged for another,
elimination, in which substituents or functional groups are lost in favor of pi bond formation,
and addition, in which pi bonds are sacrificed to form sigma bonds to new substituents or
functional groups.
So let's begin with substitution reactions and see if we can better understand how sucrose
is turned into sucralose.
Now, before we go quite that far, let's take a look at a simpler reaction than one might
use to convert sucrose to sucralose.
Here I have a hydroxide ion reacting with a methyl chloride molecule.
Now the product of this reaction is a chloride ion and methyl alcohol, also known as methanol.
The reaction, if I were to draw as line angle formula, would look something like this, in
which the chlorine substituent from my methyl chloride has been replaced by the hydroxyl
from the hydroxide reagent.
So this is a classic example of a very simple substitution reaction.
You'll notice that in my starting materials I have two different species, and in my products
I also have two different species.
So a substitution reaction is what we would call entropically neutral.
It's not really driven or fought against by randomness, it's sort of on the fence on that.
So what's going to determine whether these reactions occur or not is not the entropy,
the strength of the bonds that are breaking and forming.
Now any substitution reaction will have the same basic cast of characters.
A nucleophile, a substrate, an electrophile and a leaving group.
So let's define each of these individually before we proceed.
Nucleophiles are defined as species which easily donate an electron pair to form a new
chemical bond with another nucleus.
Their name in fact literally means nucleus loving.
In our example, the hydroxide ion with a complement of three electron pairs in a full
negative charge is clearly the nucleophile.
It's poised to donate one of those pairs to a new bond and in doing so to relieve that
formal charge.
An electrophile is a nucleus which, unlike the nucleophile, is deficient in electrons
and is capable of receiving electrons from the nucleophile.
In our example, the bond dipole created by the presence of the chlorine substituent makes
the carbon of methyl chloride electrophilic, or electron loving.
In contrast to nucleophiles, leaving groups are those groups which easily withdraw their
bonding electrons to become a separate stable species, like the chlorine from our methyl
chloride.
Recall from our lecture on alkyl halides that withdrawing its bonding electrons and becoming
a chloride ion is more acceptable to chlorine because its large electron cloud allows it
to distribute its charge over a larger volume.
Finally, we term the entire molecule undergoing substitution as the substrate.
In our case, methyl chloride would be the substrate for our substitution reaction.
So let's think for just a moment about how a substitution might take place.
With a nucleophile and a leaving group both in the mix, there are three possible permutations
of such a reaction.
One in which the nucleophile first attacks, establishing its bond, then the leaving group
departs, breaking its bond.
There's one in which the nucleophile attacks as a leaving group departs, and one in which
the nucleophile attacks only after the leaving group has departed.
The first of these three situations is impossible, since it would require that a transition state
form in which the electrophilic carbon has more than eight valence electrons.
Many organic professors will joke that to draw such a pentavalent carbon is to immediately
fail their exam.
And there is a modicum of truth in that statement, and I have a reputation to uphold, so we're
not going to go there today.
But the other two are equally valid possibilities.
There's one in which simultaneous attack and departure maintains a balance of eight
electrons around the carbon throughout the transition, and the other in which initial
departure of the leaving group produces a carbocation intermediate with only six valence
electrons.
Non-ideal, yes, but a blatant violation of the octet rule like our pentavalent carbon?
No.
Now, one of Engel's great contributions to the discipline of organic chemistry is his
1933 description of these two possible pathways by which a substitution can take place.
We call these reaction pathways SN1 and SN2.
This is for nucleophilic substitution, so SN2 stands for substitution, nucleophilic,
second order, and SN1 stands for substitution, nucleophilic, first order.
These names are based upon the reaction mechanism which Engel was able to infer from changes
that he made to reagent concentrations.
Now, any mechanism, no matter how complex, will have what's called a rate limiting step.
This is the slowest elementary step in the mechanism, and it defines the rate of the
reaction.
So just as the chain is only as strong as its weakest link, so a reaction is only as
fast as its slowest step.
So the rate limiting step and all steps before it are affected to some extent by the concentration
of the reagents involved in those steps.
In other words, the rate of a reaction is proportional to the concentration of reagents
in its rate limiting step, but it's unaffected by concentrations of reagents which participate
after that.
In chemistry, we use a rate proportionality constant, written as the lower case letter
K, to produce what's known as a rate law for a given reaction.
So let's take a moment and look at our two generic substitution reactions, and try to
get inside of Engel's head and see how he came up with his system.
One of the possibilities involved the nucleophile attacking the electrophilic carbon at the
same time that the leading group departs.
Now when this happens, the entire reaction takes place in a single concerted step.
Because there's only one step, clearly this must be the rate limiting step.
And that means that the rate law for this reaction is expected to contain both the concentration
of the nucleophile and the concentration of the substrate, meaning that altering the concentration
of either one should affect the reaction rate.
Because this rate order is 2, it's got two different concentrations in it, Engel called
this the SN2 reaction.
Now if instead we go through our other possible reaction, one in which first a leaving group
departs from the substrate creating a carbocation intermediate, which is then attacked by the
nucleophile leading to product, we have a situation in which the slow initial step takes
place before the nucleophile ever reacts.
So the rate law for this particular reaction will not contain a factor for nucleophile
concentration.
It will depend only on the concentration of the substrate, and because it depends on only
one reactant concentration, Engel dubbed this a first order reaction.
So Engel began the process of linking molecular structure with function and reactivity.
We observe that not only did two substitution pathways exist, but that the tendency of reactions
to proceed by one or the other was predictable based on correlated structural features in
the starting materials.
Engel sought to explain this in his famous 1933 letter to Nature, and this is what I'm
going to try to explain to you now.
The second order nucleophilic substitution pathway, SN2, is characterized by a bimolecular
reaction in which a nucleophile attacks and a leading group departs simultaneously.
Because it's the nucleophile's attack which initiates the leading group's departure, the
attack must take place from the opposite side of the substrate in order to break the associated
bond with the leading group.
We call this orientation a backside attack.
Now this type of reaction is expected to take place in a single concerted step with only
one elementary step in the reaction, so we expect the rate to be affected equally by
the concentration of both starting materials.
The key to a reaction running by the SN2 mechanism lies primarily in two factors, strong reactive
nucleophiles like hydroxide and less substituted electrophiles like methyl chloride.
So let's consider each of these factors individually.
A strong nucleophile like hydroxide, it's inherently unstable, its high density of negative
charge around the oxygen atom is the source of that instability, and hydroxide is going
to seek to relieve it at its earliest chance.
Now another crucial feature is the degree of substitution at the electrophile.
You see hydroxide might be poised to attack, but it can't attack what it can't get to.
So let's take a look at the substrate from our SN2 reaction.
This is a molecule of methyl chloride, drawn in the usual format so that you can see the
chlorine atom on one side and the methyl group on the other.
But my hydroxide nucleophile has to attack from the opposing side.
So what I'm going to do now is turn my ball and stick model into a space filling model,
and then I'm going to turn that model so that you have the perspective of a nucleophile
that's approaching.
So I'm going to turn my substrate this way, and you can see clearly the electrophilic
carbon is wide open.
We can fit almost anything in there to react with it.
But what if I were going to use an analogous substrate which was tertiary, like say T-butylchloride?
Let's bring that one up.
And again, I'll convert this into a space filling model, and I'm going to rotate it
in the same orientation.
So now you're the nucleophile looking at a T-butyl substrate and looking at a methyl
substrate.
I think it's very clear which one you're going to be able to get to easier.
So this is the reason why less substituted substrates find themselves in SN2 reactions.
They're simply more accessible to the nucleophile.
So we've seen what can happen when strong nucleophiles react with substrates of low
substitution in an SN2 reaction.
Now what if we reverse these conditions, and instead we attempt to react a weak nucleophile
with a highly substituted substrate?
Let's take a look at water reacting with T-butylchloride.
Now water is clearly a weaker nucleophile than hydroxide.
It has lone pairs of electrons on its oxygen, but it lacks the negative charge which made
the hydroxide attack with such urgency.
T-butylchloride has three methyl substituents on the electrophilic carbon, making attack
difficult even for a strong nucleophile.
So what's going to happen in this situation?
Well a patient nucleophile like water with nowhere to attack is going to simply wait,
biding its time until something more accessible and reactive presents itself.
In the case of T-butylchloride, this happens when the chloride ion departs on its own,
leaving behind a carbocation.
Now T-butylchloride is a distinctively more attractive substrate for two reasons.
First, the electrophilic carbon now has only six valence electrons and a full positive charge.
Second, its new planar arrangement of substituents means that it's much more accessible to nucleophiles.
So this cation is practically begging to be attacked by even the weakest of nucleophiles.
Water will oblige in short order, attacking the carbocation and completing the reaction,
producing a protonated alcohol which quickly deprotonates to form a neutral molecule.
So in this case, it's the formation of a carbocation which is the first and rate limiting
of two steps in the reaction process.
Because the nucleophilic attack happens after the slow formation of the carbocation, the
nucleophiles concentration no longer affects the rate of this reaction.
Now remember that SN2 reactions take place in one concerted step, requiring that the
nucleophile attack the carbon bearing the leaving group and only that specific carbon.
But if we've arrived at our first example of carbocation intermediates, so we have to
consider the possibility that rearrangements, like those we discussed in our alkyl halide
lecture, might occur.
Take the example of 2-chloro-3-methylbutane reacting with water.
Just as before, a chloride ion will depart from the molecule, creating a secondary carbocation.
But in this example, the resulting carbocation will have that special recipe of a secondary
carbocation adjacent to a tertiary carbon.
So before a nucleophile attacks, the carbocation can rearrange by hydride shift to form a tertiary
alcohol ultimate.
Instead of that secondary alcohol that we may have initially predicted, the analogous
reaction with 3-chloro-2-2-dimethylbutane would proceed with a secondary methyl shift,
also producing a tertiary alcohol, but this time with a different connectivity of carbon
atoms all together.
Alkyl shifts can also affect the product in cyclic substrates, such as 1-1-chloroethyl-2-methylbutane
I know that's a mouthful, but it's a very simple structure.
But remember that the Bayer ring strain theory tells us that these 3 and 4-membered rings
in particular are less stable than 5 and 6.
So in this case, the carbocation can form adjacent to the strange ring, and the ring
can then expand in a sort of alkyl shift, which leads to a product with 5-membered ring instead
of 4.
Now you've no doubt noticed that our reaction examples today all involve conversion of one
tetrahedral carbon center into a different one.
So this leads us to our final set of reactions for the day, substitution reactions involving
chiral substrates.
Now you'll recall that SN2 reactions have to take place via the backside attack, but
SN1 reactions produce a planar carbocation intermediate which can be attacked from either
side with equal efficiency.
This leads to a difference in product composition from a stereochemical standpoint.
Now if we were to react a chiral substrate by SN2, for example, enantiopur R2-chlorobutane,
we can expect an enantiopur product to form.
The identity of the substrate has not only changed, but the stereochemistry has been
inverted as a consequence of backside attack.
So this reaction would produce S2-butanol.
In contrast, let's consider the SN1 reaction between water and R2-chlorobutane.
In this case, our substrate must first convert to a carbocation, which can then be attacked
by the nucleophile from either side.
This leads to what we call a racemic mixture of two butanol, in other words, a 50-50 composition
of both R and S enantiomers.
So we've broken our two substitution mechanisms down to their elementary steps.
Of course, for SN2 this means a bimolecular reaction and a single concerted step, but
for SN1 there's a unimolecular rate-limiting dissociation of the substrate at the beginning
of a two-step mechanism.
And Engel proved long ago that the concentration of the nucleophile affects the rate of SN2,
but not of SN1.
This is a consequence of its absence in the rate-limiting step of the SN1 pathway.
But reagent concentration is not the only way to alter the rate of an SN1 or SN2 reaction
to our benefit.
See, because the SN1 and SN2 mechanisms differ in the chemistry of their rate-limiting steps,
it stands to reason their rates can be affected differently by changes in the surrounding chemical
environment.
Usually, this environment is a liquid solvent in which they're dissolved.
So let's take a look at a few substitution reactions and ask ourselves how choosing a
different solvent might change the rate of that reaction.
We'll start with an SN2, a nice concerted mechanism taking place in a single step.
Recall that SN2 reactions are characterized by the presence of strong nucleophiles, which
tend to have high negative charge density, species like hydroxide.
Now let's consider the effect of running an SN2 reaction between methyl chloride and
hydroxide starting materials.
The starting material includes the hydroxide with a full, localized negative charge.
The reaction then proceeds through a transition state in which that negative charge is spread
out across the nucleophile and the leaving group.
So the transition state has less charge density.
Of course, there are other factors making it less stable in the starting materials like
the two bonds that are in the process of breaking and forming.
But the fact remains that the activation energy of the reaction is simply the difference between
the starting and final states.
So anything we can do to close that energy gap will speed up the reaction.
Anything we can do to destabilize that starting material more than the intermediate is going
to result in acceleration.
One of the easiest ways to accomplish this is to choose the right solvent.
As you might imagine, solvents of low polarity like the hydrocarbon hexane don't interact
well with charged nucleophiles, leaving them highly reactive.
And therefore, these nucleophiles are more likely to attack.
And the problem which sometimes arises in this situation is that charged nucleophiles
simply aren't soluble at all in nonpolar solvents.
So we have to choose very carefully.
We sometimes classify solvents based not only on their polarity, but also on their acidity.
We call solvents like acetone, dimethyl sulfoxide, and acetonitrile, polar A-protic solvents,
because they lack any real acidic hydrogens.
Conversely, solvents like isopropanol, ethanol, and water are called polar protic.
See all of these solvents have a strong molecular dipole, but the real difference is the orientation
of that dipole.
You'll notice that all the A-protic solvents have a dipole oriented with the negative end
near the surface of the molecule, while all the protic solvents have a dipole oriented
just the opposite.
With the positive charge density at the periphery of the solvent molecule and the negative end
buried deep within.
So the interaction between solvent dipoles and the nucleophile in our example reaction
is greater in magnitude than that in the transition state, owing to the stronger charge of that
starting material.
If we use a polar protic solvent like isopropanol, the positive end of its dipole is readily
available to stabilize that charged nucleophile.
This lowers the energy of the starting material and increases the activation energy barrier
slowing the reaction down.
But if we use a polar A-protic solvent like acetone for this reaction, the positive end
of the dipole is buried within the molecule of solvent and can't interact as well with
the nucleophile.
Instead, the nucleophile sort of sees more negative charge density at the surface of
the solvent molecules.
And this is very destabilizing.
It raises the energy of the nucleophile and lowers the activation energy barrier, which
results in a faster reaction.
Now in the case of SN1 reactions, we tend to begin the rate limiting step with a neutral
substrate like t-butyl chloride.
And this neutral substrate dissociates into two ions in that rate limiting step.
So since this reaction involves the formation of both a cation and an anion, either protic
or A-protic solvents, that's usually not the big concern to us.
We could use either one.
But the overall polarity of the solvent is crucial, since stronger dipoles in the solvent
can produce more stabilizing interactions with the charged intermediates.
So while low polarity or polar A-protic solvents tend to accelerate SN2 reactions, polar solvents
in general tend to accelerate SN1 reactions.
This is a good general rule for prototypical substitution mechanisms I've shown you today.
But you should be aware that we'll see many exceptions to this rule as we continue our
course and the nature of these species becomes more complex.
I'll be pointing them out and explaining what makes these exceptions occur as we reach them.
So let's take a final look at the differences in the structures of sucrose and sucralose.
The question that we're going to ask today is, when we want to convert sucrose into sucralose,
do we need to use an SN1 reaction to complete the synthesis or an SN2 reaction to complete
the synthesis?
Now, the actual reagents that we'll need to complete the synthesis will come in a later
lecture, so we'll be revisiting this synthesis at least one more time.
But for today, let's just take a look at sucrose and sucralose and the changes that we want
to make.
There are three hydroxyl groups on our sucrose molecule which need to be altered into chlorine
groups.
But not only that, we have two of them on primary carbons and we have another one on
a secondary carbon.
So this one is attached to a primary, this one is attached to a primary, and this one
over here is attached to a secondary.
But another piece of interest here is that secondary carbon is chiral.
And if you look closely, you notice that here I have inverted the stereochemistry where
in this perspective formula my hydroxide is falling behind the plane of the monitor,
but in this depiction my new chloride group is coming out of the plane of the monitor.
So not only do I have to alter my two primary substrate locations and one secondary substrate
location, but I have to alter the secondary substrate location in such a way that it proceeds
with inversion.
Now all three of these are only congruent with an SN2 reaction.
So when the time comes we're going to have to select reagents to complete our synthesis
by an SN2.
So let's sum up the work of Ingold and his contemporaries that we've covered in this
lecture.
We've defined nucleophilic substitution reactions as the reaction between a nucleophile and
a substrate to form a product and a leaving group.
We discussed how these reactions are usually entropically neutral and tend to be driven
by the enthalpies of the reactants and products.
We discussed how nucleophilic substitution mechanisms are divided into two classes based
upon the rate laws for each pathway.
SN2 for bimolecular reactions taking place in a single concerted step and SN1 for reactions
taking place in a sequence of steps beginning with the slow departure of a leaving group
from the substrate.
We took a look at the two most important factors influencing a substitution pathway.
How strong nucleophiles and low substitution substrates favor SN2?
While weak nucleophiles and highly substituted substrates favor the SN1.
We also took a look at the effect each pathway has on the retention of chirality in substrates.
Finally, we considered solvent selection for substitution reactions.
We looked at how the high negative charge density in strong nucleophiles makes SN2 reactions
tend to run best in low polarity solvents or polar aprotic solvents like acetone.
We then considered SN1 reactions and how their charged intermediates make them tend to run
poorly in low polarity solvents, but usually run well in a very broad range of polar solvents.
We concerned ourselves today with some of the very ideal conditions of nucleophile strength
and substrate substitution to achieve an SN1 or SN2 reaction.
Next time we're going to consider what happens when the factors influencing these pathways
are in conflict with one another rather than conspiring to a specific substitution mechanism.
I'll see you then.
