So, we're now knee deep in what I like to call the alphabet soup segment of the course,
where every few lectures we introduce a new element to the train wreck of lines, letters,
and dots on the screen.
I make no mistake, there are many players in the organic chemistry game, but there are
just a few which make up the vast majority of the science, and with just two more lectures
to go, we're on the downslope of our short tour, so hang in there.
Now, nitrogen, it's been a player in the chemistry of life since day one, playing an
integral role in the makeup of our simplest organic compounds which came together to create
the spark of life on the early earth some three billion years ago.
The biological relevance of nitrogen is evident today, in the experience we get when we happen
on a piece of rotten flesh or spoiled meat.
See, some of the earliest discovered nitrogen-containing compounds received very unappetizing names like
cadaverine and putrescene.
This is a testament to the first source from which they were isolated, and of course to
the smell that they produced.
No discussion of nitrogen is ever complete without the mention of one name in particular,
it's Haber, and you may remember from our lecture on drawing chemical reactions that
Haber was a German chemist working in Germany during the first part of the 20th century.
As one of the more eccentric personalities in the history of organic chemistry, Haber's
famous, or infamous, for making some very dubious choices about how to pursue and apply the science
of chemistry.
But whatever you may think of his politics, there is one incontrovertible fact that we
can all agree on.
Haber may be responsible for the single, most influential chemical development of the 20th
century, and possibly of all human history, the Haber-Bosch process which allows us to
convert nitrogen and gas from the atmosphere into ammonia.
You might also remember that I mentioned in a previous lecture, Haber's process for
converting nitrogen to ammonia isn't technically an organic reaction at all, since it lacks
the involvement of carbon.
But by the end of today, I think you'll begin to see why organic chemists owe so much to
this inorganic reaction that we've adopted Haber as one of our own.
In short, the product of his reaction, ammonia, is one of the primary entry points for nitrogen
into the field of synthetic organic chemistry.
Just as certain plants use ammonia from this process as a nutrient to build the organic
molecules they need to live, so do organic chemists often use ammonia to introduce nitrogen
into organics in the laboratory.
Nitrogen is a key element in the structures of many critical commercial materials.
From explosives to fertilizers to polymers, nitrogen is frequently present and almost
just as frequently irreplaceable in the process of creating certain essential goods.
It can be found in a host of organic compounds with diverse applications.
Being a key player in compounds is different and versatile as the explosive nitroglycerin,
the powerful antibiotic vancomycin, and even the proteins making up 20% of the mass in
your own body.
Today we will begin our short survey of nitrogen-containing compounds with a look at amines, amines,
and nitriles, compounds containing only nitrogen, carbon, and hydrogen.
Next time we'll bring oxygen back to this dance, but for now let's just concentrate
on the simplest possible classes of nitrogen-containing molecules.
Now I hope I have convinced you that nitrogen is worth taking a look at if not a smell of,
but let's take a look at nitrogen-containing compounds now.
Nitrogen itself has an electron configuration of 1s2, 2s2, 2p3, so nitrogen's valence shell
will be filled when it shares three covalent bonds with other atoms.
This makes nitrogen quite an interesting structural twist, since unlike oxygen, in
its sp3 hybridization state, it can perpetuate chains and can also bear one additional functional
group or substituent.
So the library of nitrogen-containing motifs can get unwieldy pretty quickly, so let's
focus on just the simplest of all these groups to start, those consisting of only one nitrogen
atom bonded to one or more hydrocarbons.
Let's begin with an sp3 nitrogen.
As you can see from this structure, the sp3 nitrogen contains enough electrons to make
three different covalent bonds, but also keeps a lone pair for itself.
The presence of that lone pair means that the three bonds to other atoms are actually
about 109.5 degrees from one another, maybe ever so slightly closer because of the pushing
down from that lone pair of electrons, but in general we can think of them as being about
the same as any other tetrahedral center.
Now if we instead think about a nitrogen which contains a single bond and a double bond,
what we get is a nitrogen in which the lone pair is pushing down on those bonds as well,
and therefore, even though there are only two bonded substituents, the angle is closer
to 120 degrees than we might think, it's not 180.
So let's put that one away.
Now let's take a look at one of our nitrogen atoms, but in this case, one that is in the
sp hybridized state.
Now in this hybridized state, we can have only one bond, excuse me, to our nitrogen,
and that is a triple bond.
So in this case, the triple bond to our nitrogen leaves the lone pair dangling on the end and
leaves our substituent, whether it's an alkyl substituent or a nitrogen, pointing directly
in the other direction.
Now this means that the family of simple nitrogen-containing compounds is much larger and more complex
than oxygen.
So we now have to consider not just how our heteroatom can terminate or perpetuate a chain,
but also how it can potentially modify that chain, introducing branching in ways that
oxygen simply can't.
So let's start our survey of nitrogen-containing compounds by considering the simplest of all,
the amine functional group.
Now an amine functional group is defined as one containing a carbon-nitrogen single bond.
So three examples are here, methylamine, dimethylamine, and trimethylamine.
You notice that in each case, the nitrogen atom indicated in blue is singly bonded to
at least one other hydrocarbon, otherwise we would end up with an ammonia molecule.
Now when a single R group is attached, we call this a primary amine.
When there are two, a secondary amine, and three, a tertiary amine.
This is our basic method of classifying this kind of molecule.
But it's not enough to simply call them primary, secondary, and tertiary.
We need a nomenclature system which will allow us to identify specific amine molecules, and
we rely on IUPAC for this.
We'll be naming these amines in exactly the same way as we would most other molecules
with one very important change.
Not only will we be doing the usual of finding our longest continuous chain with the functional
group and giving the lowest possible number to the carbon varying the functional group,
but we're going to have a new address of n for the substituent that's bonded to the
actual amine functional group.
Let's take a look at an example.
Let's say we wanted to name this amine.
But we'd go through our usual IUPAC system in which we find the functional group and
the longest attached chain indicated here in orange.
So this would be a pentanamine.
It has a single methyl substituent, and we'll give it an address based upon the location
of the functional group, which is the NH2.
So we would number our parent hydrocarbon in this way, thereby giving the lowest number
to the functional group and giving us the name three methyl, one, and tannamine.
As another example, let's try a secondary amine and see how that affects the name.
In my secondary amine, I have, again, my hydrocarbon parent here in orange.
You'll notice that in this case, my functional group is not at the end of the chain, but
that's okay.
So I have a butanamine.
But my butanamine also has an ethyl group attached to its amine nitrogen.
So the ethyl group will get a special address indicated not by a number, but by the letter
n.
So in this case, after numbering my chain, I find that I have an n-ethyl-2 butanamine.
I've now unambiguously named this particular isomer of this particular secondary amine.
Now, what makes amines so different from other compounds is the types of properties that
their polarity and their hydrogen bonding gives them.
When we think about primary and secondary amines, we see that they have Cn dipoles,
but that they also have a very important NH bond, which gives them not only another dipole,
but also gives them the ability to be not only the H bond donor, but also an H bond
acceptor.
So just like carboxylic acids, these amines, when they're primary and secondary, have
the ability to hydrogen bond to other molecules of the same kind.
Now what we find in the case of tertiary amines, however, is that although they contain plenty
of dipoles, making them polar molecules, that they have no NH bonds, therefore they can
only act as hydrogen bond acceptors.
So if we place a trimethylamine molecule next to another trimethylamine molecule, they
can't interact in the same way as their primary and secondary counterparts.
And what this means is that they tend to have much lower boiling points than do primary
and secondary amines, as we can see here.
Now aside from their volatilities and their ability to hydrogen bond to one another, amines
are most well known in the organic lab as bases.
And the reason that we use them as bases is that the nitrogen of course has that special
lone pair right there, which is able to pick up an H plus forming its conjugate acid.
If we consider using methylamine first as an acid, we see that we have to make something
called an amide anion, which is extremely unstable.
So the amide anion not being so stable, the pKa of neutral methylamine is about 35.
And when we reach pKa this level, we tend to think of things as being not acidic at all.
But what methylamine can do instead is use the nitrogen as a base, picking up a proton
from elsewhere, and becoming a methyl ammonium ion.
Now the methyl ammonium ion is actually fairly stable, and that leads to a pKa of this conjugate
acid of about 11.
So when we mix methylamine into many different organic reactions and organic systems, they
have a strong tendency to accept protons and act as a base.
Okay, so let's talk a little bit about how amines are made.
And I have to admit this again.
When it comes to organic synthesis, the human race has been bested time and time again by
single-celled organisms.
Just as was the case in the synthesis of acetaldehyde, acetic acid, and other oxygen-containing
compounds, it would seem that an extra three billion years of practice afforded to microorganisms
has made them far more prolific at synthesizing nitrogen-containing compounds, too.
Our best natural resource for nitrogen-containing organics comes from the rhizobia bacterium,
which live in the root nodules of legumes.
So have you ever driven or walked past a cornfield one year, only to see a field of
soy plants in it the next, and maybe wondered why the farmer suddenly had a change of heart
over which crop to plant?
Well, there's actually far more to the change in crop selection than the whim of a farmer.
You see, corn is very taxing on soil, draining it of nutrients, including nitrogen, and
leaving even the best fertilized fields too depleted to support a following year's crop.
The solution to this problem is crop rotation, in which soybeans and their nitrogen-fixing
stowaways are given a season to grow before their root systems are tilled under to replenish
the nitrogen content of the soil.
So once again, we find ourselves depending on the synthesis skills of these micron-sized
chemists to help us better our quality of life.
But organic chemists aren't cyanobacteria, we're people, and we work in labs.
So let's take a look now at some of humanity's rather clumsy attempts to duplicate this amazing
feat.
Amines are the simplest starting point from which Haber-Bosch ammonia can be injected
into the organic chemistry realm.
And one very simple method used to accomplish this is the direct alkylation of ammonia using
a familiar compound, alkylchlorides.
You see, ammonia is a fairly good nucleophile, and it can be coarsed to react by an SN2 reaction
with a primary or methyl alkyl halide, like this ethyl chloride.
When mixed, a nucleophilic substitution reaction takes place, generating a primary amine and
one mole of hydrochloric acid.
So here we run into a potential problem.
Notice that the product amine is also nucleophilic, and in theory can react with yet another
alkyl halide to form a secondary amine, which could then again react to form a tertiary
amine.
So it's rather easy to make a tertiary alkyl amine by direct alkylation, just use a very
large excess of the alkyl halide.
And conversely, we can force the reaction system in the direction of primary alkyl amines
by using a large excess of ammonia, limiting the chances that an already formed primary
amine will productively collide with another alkyl halide before they're all consumed.
But this requires a very large excess of ammonia, and even though his process has helped to
make ammonia relatively abundant and inexpensive, I don't think Fritz Haber would be very happy
with us wasting his hard-earned fixed nitrogen like that.
And Rhizobia is probably already having a pretty good laugh at our expense anyway.
So the solution to this problem, not being mocked by bacteria, but the synthetic problem
at hand, was actually worked out well ahead of Haber's time by one of his countrymen,
Sigmund Gabriel.
Gabriel used what we commonly refer to as a protecting group, to temporarily render
two sites on ammonia unreactive, then restore them to their original state only after the
alkylation was complete.
Gabriel used a compound called thalamine, in place of ammonia, activating it with potassium
hydroxide to create a more nucleophilic thalamide ion.
This ion attacks the alkyl halide much like ammonia would, this time forming an N-alkyl
thalamide intermediate.
But notice that there are no more NH protons to lose, which is a requirement for the reaction
to proceed beyond the first alkylation.
Now after this step, a molecule known as hydrazine is used to remove that protecting group.
Notice that hydrazine contains two potentially nucleophilic nitrogens.
Gabriel also probably noticed that the thalamide motif has two electrophilic carbonyl carbons.
Now that's no coincidence.
The hydrazine first attacks one carbonyl, and then the next, forming a very stable by-product
thalamide hydrazide and our primary amine.
So we've seen that direct alkylation is an easy way to make tertiary amines, and that
primary amines can be made using thalamide.
Protecting groups like that are called the Gabriel synthesis.
But what about secondary amines?
They can't be favored by stoichiometric control, meaning adding lots of one reagent or the
other, nor can they be favored using the Gabriel synthesis because that would be a very difficult
modification.
So what do we do?
The simplest solution to this problem is a technique known as reductive amination.
In this reaction, a primary amine, formed by direct alkylation, the Gabriel synthesis
or some other means, is reacted with a ketone or an aldehyde under acidic conditions.
Now under these conditions, an N-substituted amine is formed.
Once this amine intermediate is formed, the product is reduced using a very familiar reagent
to us, lithium aluminum hydride.
This adds hydrogen across the double bond, producing a secondary amine.
In the case of ketones, a branched alkyl group is obtained, whereas with aldehydes, we get
a straight chain secondary amine.
Okay, so now that we've gotten to know amines a little bit, let's take a look at nitrogen
containing compounds with double bonds, or imines.
As I just mentioned, imines are defined as those compounds which contain CN double bonds.
So I've highlighted those for you here in yellow.
Notice that each of these compounds has a carbon double bonded to a nitrogen.
Now having this carbon double bonded to a nitrogen means that they'll behave somewhat
similarly to their carbonyl brethren, ketones, and aldehydes, meaning that we can have either
nothing bonded to the carbonyl or we can have one R-group bonded or two R-group bonded.
When we have no R-groups on the carbon of it, we call it a formamine.
When one R-group is present on the doubly bonded carbon, we call this compound an aldamine.
When we have two, we call this type of compound a ketamine, not to be confused with ketamine,
the horse tranquilizer, which is a completely different type of compound.
Now, amines are most easily synthesized by the reaction of ammonia or primary amine with
ketones and aldehydes using a strong non-nucleophilic mineral acid like sulfuric acid.
In this situation, the nitrogen acts as a nucleophile, attacking the carbonyl which causes
one of the amine protons to tautomerize into what we call a beta hydroxy amine.
Finally, a second tautomerism occurs, leading to departure of a water molecule and formation
of the amine.
Of course, having a double bond, amines can always be reduced to their analogous amines
using lithium aluminum hydride or palladium on carbon or similar chemistry.
And just as we previously did to create a secondary amine, so can a linear primary amine
be made by the reduction of a primary aldamine?
Branched primary amines can be prepared from reduction of primary ketamines.
Linear secondary amines can be prepared from secondary aldamines and branched secondary
amines from secondary ketamines.
But amines are so much more than just intermediates in the synthesis of amines.
They hold their own as a commercially useful class of materials.
You see, amines have the ability to do something that no other functional group we've yet
looked at can accomplish.
They can be used to connect two large pi systems together through resonance.
Let's take a look at a reaction that's actually quite famous.
I'm going to react two molecules of aniline with two different isomers of the molecule
toluidine.
Now, when I do this under oxidative conditions, I get a compound that looks like this called
mauveine.
Now, mauveine has two imine groups highlighted here, but what's really interesting about
these imine groups is that they're not isolated, they're in resonance.
They have pi systems on both sides.
So if I think about this mauveine molecule as more of its resonance hybrid, I notice
that there's a very large region of delocalized pi electrons.
And as we're going to see in some future lectures, when we have large regions of pi electrons
that can move like this in resonance, we tend to have compounds that can absorb visible light.
Now, mauveine was first synthesized in 1856 by a British student named William Henry Perkin.
Like so many other groundbreaking products, it wasn't designed synthesis, but it was actually
an accident.
See, Perkin was trying to oxidize aniline using an oxidizing agent called potassium dichromate.
Now, unfortunately, or fortunately, depending on how fond you are of the color purple, his
dichromate was contaminated with toluidine, and his synthesis resulted in a thick black
mess of material.
A disappointed Perkin set to cleaning the black sludge from his flask with alcohol only
to find that the resulting solution was a beautiful, brilliant shade of purple.
Perkin quickly sorted out the puzzle of the beautiful purple compound, developing a synthesis
which launched the synthetic dye industry.
His discovery proved so influential that the American branch of the society of chemical
industry has made him the namesake of their highest professional award, conferring the
first one to Perkin himself on the 50th anniversary of his discovery.
So, this is just one more anecdote proving that sometimes an accident and keen powers
of observation are all it takes to make it to the top in science.
Now, let's turn our attention to the simplest compounds containing an SP hybridized nitrogen,
known as nitrials.
So, nitrials contain an SP nitrogen, which means that it's likely to contain a triple bond.
Now, when we have CN triple bonds like these, there are really only two possible structural
approaches.
One is to have a hydrogen attached as the fourth bond to carbon.
The other is to have an R-group.
When the attached motif is a hydrogen, we call this molecule cyanic acid.
If, instead, the carbon that's triply bonded to the nitrogen contains some kind of R-group,
we call this class of compounds a nitrile.
Now, nitrials are weakly acidic.
But HCN, hydrocyanide, or hydrocyanic acid, rather, is actually much more acidic than
any other nitrile because its hydrogen is bonded directly to the carbon which bears the CN triple bond.
So, removal of this hydrogen creates what we call a cyanide ion, which I'm sure we're all familiar with hearing.
This is the ion that actually is generated in your bloodstream.
When you inhale hydrogen cyanide gas, as you might if you were in an execution chamber several decades ago,
the ion is actually resident stabilized and therefore gives HCN a pKa of around nine,
which means that at physiological pHs, it can actually give up a small amount of these protons,
leading to the lethal cyanide ion.
Now, acetanitrile and other nitriles, on the other hand, don't have a hydrogen bonded directly to the carbon
of the nitrile group.
And so, although they can lose these protons and form a resident stabilized conjugate base,
because it's not directly on the carbon bearing the electron withdrawing nitrogen,
the pKa of compounds like this is actually significantly reduced, about 25.
Now, hydrogen cyanide, of course, is special among nitriles because its pKa allows it to dissociate partially at physiological pH conditions.
This means in your bloodstream, if you were to ingest or in some other way take in hydrogen cyanide,
there would be a small amount of this ion.
Now, the ion cyanide is a powerful binder to certain proteins involved in the electron transport chain,
which our bodies use to process energy and stay alive.
But cyanide ion is not only very toxic, it's also very nucleophilic, and it interacts strongly with certain metals, too.
And this prompts many chemists to brave this potentially lethal compound in pursuit of their chemical goals.
For example, cyanide was, and in some cases still is, used as an agent to extract gold from low-grade ore.
Cyanide and gold form a strong complex known as orosionine.
And this complex is far more water soluble than gold itself, and the gold can be leached from rock using strong solutions of cyanide in water.
Naturally, this process has to be very carefully monitored, controlled, and, of course, its byproducts thoroughly treated before disposal.
So, it would seem that only the lure of something as precious as gold could convince a person to work with this deadly compound, right?
Well, maybe organic chemists live for danger, because we also use cyanide to produce a much larger nitrile compound from primary and secondary alkyl halides in a simple SN2 reaction.
Using cyanide as a nucleophile, carbon chains can be conveniently extended by one carbon, creating larger nitriles.
And these nitriles have many uses, including as an alternative to the Gabriel synthesis to manufacture primary amines without concern of oversubstituting the product.
For example, ethyl bromide plus a cyanide ion leads to a compound known as propane nitrile, which can be easily converted into propanamine with H2 and platinum catalyst.
Of course, having pi bonds to their heteroatoms means that nitriles can also be thought of as being similar to carbonyls, just like their immune cousins.
And they tend to have a very electrophilic nitrile carbon, and so they're susceptible to a nucleophilic attack at that location.
So, we can design synthesis in which the electrophilic nitrile carbon is attacked, leading to strategies to create many of the other functional groups that we've discussed so far.
Probably the most familiar use of the term nitrile is in reference to functional groups used in certain rubber products, the best example being nitrile examination gloves.
See, the polymer used to produce nitrile rubber is created from a reaction using a krilla nitrile as one of its starting materials, and we're going to take a closer look at this process later on in the course.
But the result of this process is a polymer, which is decorated with repeating nitrile groups, giving it greater resistance to oils than natural rubber latex.
Of course, another benefit of nitrile latex is that it's prepared completely synthetically, and therefore it contains no plant material like natural rubber latex does.
And this is why nitrile products don't fall prey to the same allergy-related issues as natural rubber latex.
So, today we injected a whole new element into our thinking about organic chemistry, the element nitrogen.
We discussed how crucial nitrogen is to many biological molecules, both small and large, and the length to which Fritz Haber and Karl Bosch were willing to go to get fixed nitrogen in the form of ammonia.
We talked about how nitrogen typically has three bonds, making it structurally diverse as an atom and giving it geometric complexity in the second row of the periodic table that's only exceeded by that of carbon.
We also talked about the simplest of nitrogen-containing compounds, amines, and how they're classified as primary, secondary, and tertiary.
We saw how primary amines can be made using the Gabriel synthesis.
Secondary amines can be made by the reduction of imines produced by amination of ketones and aldehydes.
And we also saw how tertiary amines can be easily made by the direct amination of alkyl halides.
We touched on the structure and classification of amines, in which the nitrogen contains a pi bond to an adjacent carbon.
We discussed how primary and secondary ketamines and aldamines can be formed from ketones and aldehydes using ammonia or primary amines.
And finally, we considered nitriles, in which two pi bonds are present.
We looked at the simplest and most well-known of these nitriles, hydrogen cyanide, which can be deprotonated to create a potent toxin.
That's also a good nucleophile in the form of cyanide ion.
We talked about how cyanide ion can be used to produce larger nitriles by us in two reactions, with primary and secondary alkyl halides.
And finally, we saw how, in a second step, these nitrile products can be converted into compounds with a host of other functional groups.
Next time, we're going to bring oxygen back to the discussion and look at some functional groups which contain both nitrogen and oxygen,
from biopolymers to artificial sweeteners to explosives. It should be a wild ride.
I'll see you then.
Thank you.
