You may recall from our discussion on alkanes that the discovery of petroleum took place
around 1860, drastically altering the methods used to recover and refine fuel oils.
To begin today's discussion, we'll have to move farther back in time, several decades
before Drake's discovery of petroleum, to a time when fuel oils were still sourced
from whale and fish oil.
Now Michael Faraday was an English researcher, and he's most well known for his work in
the field of electromagnetism.
But in 1820, he developed a keen interest in the chemistry of fuels.
So interested was Michael Faraday, that he all but abandoned his very successful line
of research in electromagnetism, so that he could begin deconstructing the composition
of what was then commonly known as illuminating gas, a processed form of fish or whale oil
commonly used in the lamps of the day.
A Faraday worked for nearly five years refining his techniques for isolation of certain components
from that material.
Most notable among them was a liquid, which he found he could produce by pressurizing
the gas to 30 atmospheres and isolating the condensate which formed.
Even in Faraday's time, it was known that hydrocarbons with suboptimal amounts of hydrogen
were susceptible to reactions with such reagents as chlorine gas or molecular bromine.
So Faraday dutifully determined the hydrogen to carbon ratio in his isole, finding that
it was extremely low.
Now in his day, scientists thought that carbon had an atomic mass only half that of what
it actually is.
So Faraday erroneously named his new discovery bicarboret of hydrogen.
In fact, carbohydrate of hydrogen or monocarboret of hydrogen would have been more appropriate.
But considering the circumstances, I think we can forgive this little miscalculation.
And this error notwithstanding, when comparing Faraday's bicarboret of hydrogen formula to
other hydrocarbons of the day, it was very clear that his new compound had a very low
hydrogen to carbon ratio.
So Faraday had already isolated his new compound bicarboret of hydrogen from his lamp oil.
But he wanted to go about doing some more analysis.
He had combusted this material already, measuring how much carbon dioxide and water formed in
the process, which gave him a rough idea of the formulas.
He was off by a factor of two because of the putative mass of carbon in that day, but I've
corrected that in my formulas here for my demonstration.
So what I have here, as soon as I protect myself properly from it, are some vials containing
molecular bromine.
These colorful solutions here are Br2 contained in an inert solvent, methylene chloride.
I also have samples of some of the hydrocarbons that have been isolated in Faraday's time.
And those include C6H14, C6H12, C6H10, C6H8, and C6H6.
Again, I've corrected these formula for the actual mass of carbon.
Now I'm going to cover my hands with something a little bit to make sure that they're safe
as well.
And I'm going to recreate the experiment that Faraday would have done in his day, which
generated such a buzz about his new bicarboret of hydrogen.
What I'm going to do here first is I'm going to uncap my bromine solutions, and I'm going
to add them to the various hydrocarbons that I have placed here as well.
And when I do that, if a reaction takes place between the bromine and the hydrocarbon, naturally
we would expect that the bromine would be something other than bromine, and the color
will change.
So let's start with the first hydrocarbon, C6H14.
So I add my bromine, make sure that we're well agitated, you may notice that no reaction
is taking place.
Now this was well known to Faraday.
Now he also knew that if he took this other compound here, C6H12, which had a slightly
lower hydrogen to carbon ratio, and added, again, molecular bromine, that a reaction
took place.
Clearly, no pun intended, a reaction has happened here.
Move my bromine vial to the back.
Now he could continue this experiment going along all the various isolates from all the
various sources available to him, including C6H10.
We have our reaction gone clear.
One more.
Let's uncap our C6H8, again, an unsaturated hydrocarbon, and a reaction takes place.
Now Faraday knew all of this was happening.
All these experiments had been done previously.
So when he isolated a new compound and determined that its formula had even less hydrogen, he
clearly predicted, and everyone thought he'd be right, that this new bicarburet of hydrogen
would also react with molecular bromine.
So just as any good scientist would, he validated that by adding molecular bromine.
Give it a swirl to be sure that we're well mixed.
We have a problem, don't we?
The trend is bucked here.
The C6H6 doesn't react the same way as all of the other hydrocarbons with suboptimal hydrogen
to carbon ratios.
So Faraday found this fascinating, and he needed to figure out what was going on.
Alas, Faraday never completed his characterization of this new compound.
And sadly for us chemists, Faraday's first love of electromagnetism took hold again and
distracted him from his curious hydrocarbon.
So Faraday had to settle for inventing electromagnetic induction, which essentially heralded the arrival
of the age of widely useful electricity.
Not a bad consolation prize, I suppose.
Instead the world would have to wait until the 1860s, when August Kekule, a German-born
scientist working in Belgium, took up the mantle of explaining the low hydrogen content
and unusual stability of this compound, which had since been renamed benzene.
Now this guy's a real looker, isn't he?
This is how I know I would never make it as an Eastern European chemist in the 1800s.
I can't pull off a beard that good.
So it's known for quite some time that a compound of unusual stability and a very low hydrogen
to carbon ratio could be isolated from torch fuel.
Although the compound was clearly a hydrocarbon, its unusual chemical stability and reduced
hydrogen content defied explanation.
At least until Kekule had what he claimed in later years was a genuine revelatory dream.
In an 1890 interview, near the end of his career, Kekule claimed that he had this famous
vision while dozing on the upper deck of a horse-drawn bus in 1850s London.
As he tells it, he dreamt of a snake biting its own tail and woke to the revelation that
benzene's formula and properties could be explained if the molecule were in fact cyclic.
Now there are many who wondered to this day why Kekule would wait nearly four decades
to tell such a fantastic tale.
In fact, most doubt the story's validity, but the story is so colorful and inspirational
that it lives on in text to this day.
So whether it came by divine revelation or educated guess, we may never know.
But we do know today Kekule was right.
What Kekule proposed was this, that we have a molecule which is cyclic containing space
double bonds around that molecule.
And this would explain why it would have different chemistry than all of the other conjugated
alkenes or hydrocarbons as they would call them in his day.
Now if you take a look at this structure, we want you to notice something important.
Kekule's theory about cyclization of a hexatriene is not beyond reproach because benzene itself
would have three double bonds if they were isolated, leading to the potential for two
different isomers.
See, once scientists were able to figure out how to attach halogens, there are actually
two potential arrangements for the addition of a halogen to a benzene ring, or more accurately
a substitution.
We can put two halogens at the top here where the double bond is located, meaning that our
halogens will be across a double bond.
But if I wanted to, I could place those halogens on opposite sides of a single bond instead.
So if Kekule's theory was right that this was simply a cyclic hexatriene, then there
should be two isolatable isomers of, say, dichlorocyclohexatriene.
And yet there were not.
An interesting conundrum, isn't it?
Now Kekule attempted to explain this observation as a fast interconversion between the two
putative isomers.
But there was no revelatory dream to save him this time.
He was actually wrong about that.
The story of benzene was completed in 1925 when Sir Robert Robinson published a paper
in the Journal of the Chemical Society postulating that what he called an aromatic sextet of
electrons stabilized the ring by moving unrestricted about the entire circular pie system.
This would create a ring of identical carbons joined by bonds of one and a half order and
would solve the problem of why there aren't two different isomers.
This theory leads us to more accurately draw benzene molecules using a circle or a dashed
interior hexagon to represent the aromatic sextet of electrons.
But it isn't the early 1900s, it's the 21st century and we have much more sophisticated
techniques than Faraday, Kekule and even Robinson had.
So let's bring those to bear on the issue of benzene stability.
Far from just qualitatively observing the stability of benzene, we can use our familiar
technique of calorimetry to determine its heat of hydrogenation.
This is the amount of heat released when the unsaturated compound is completely saturated
with hydrogen.
If we conduct this experiment using cyclohexene, 13-cyclohexadiene also as controls, we can
determine with relative ease that the double bonds in these systems are nearly equivalent
to one another.
But when we add that magical third pair of pi electrons, the heat of hydrogenation is
far less than we would have expected, about 150 kilojoules per mole less.
We call this discrepancy the resonance energy for benzene.
To put the size of that resonance energy into perspective, it's just less than half the
bond enthalpy of a covalent carbon-carbon bond.
So about a century passed between Faraday's first isolation and characterization of benzene
and Robinson's final description of the aromaticity that it possesses.
This opened the floodgates and it wasn't long after this that the molecular orbital energetics
of benzene and other cyclic molecules with alternating double bonds, which we collectively
call anulines, were worked out by a German chemist named Erich Huckel.
You see, just as we produced mathematical combinations of piatomic orbitals to model
pi systems in linear conjugated compounds last time, we can use the same technique for
cyclic alkenes with overlapping pi bonds.
Let's start by sticking with the familiar aromatic compound benzene.
Benzene consists of six sp2 carbon atoms joined in a ring.
Now this ring is perfectly flat in the case of benzene, which allows all of its piatomic
orbitals to combine to form one large pi system with density both above and below the ring.
But remember our rules for the formation of molecular orbitals.
Six atomic orbitals in means six molecular orbitals out.
These orbitals all correspond to the linear addition of piatomic orbitals with varying
combinations of phase.
For example, when all six p orbitals are in phase, the lowest possible energy molecular
orbital is obtained.
We call this the pi1.
But it's also possible to form five other permutations of molecular orbitals.
Two possibilities exist with a single nodal plane.
Let's call them the pi2 and the pi3.
Two possibilities with two node planes also exist.
So let's call those the pi4 and pi5.
Finally, there's one possibility in which all six p orbitals are aligned anti-parallel,
creating three nodal planes and a sixth possible molecular orbital, pi6.
So let's take a look now at aromaticity and our famous popular benzene molecule as well
as a different cyclic compound with alternating pi bonds.
And what we're going to do now is analyze the energetics of those pi molecular orbitals
that we just looked at, not only for benzene, but also for a different cyclic compound with
multiple pi bonds.
Let's use 1,3 cyclobutadiene and benzene as our subjects.
So here I've drawn 1,3 cyclobutadiene with two isolated pi bonds.
And yet I've drawn benzene with three delocalized pi bonds, denoted by the dashes moving all
the way around the ring.
And that's not an accident.
So if we think about the energetics of those six molecular orbitals from benzene to start,
there's a little mnemonic trick we can use to determine the relative energies of those
orbitals.
What we do is we draw a circle on an energy axis.
And we inscribe within that circle, point down a polygon with a number of sides equal
to that of the cyclic compound we'd like to analyze.
For example, benzene having six atoms in the ring is going to have six corners in its polygon
with one corner pointed straight down.
When I do this, the corners of the polygon where they touch the circle indicate the relative
energies of the six pi molecular orbitals of this particular compound.
So if I draw my non-bonding energy line through the center and populate it, what I discover
is that the bonding region gets all of the electrons from the pi system, all six of them.
So clearly, benzene's perspective on this molecular orbital system is that it would
like to have it.
If I were to populate this, this is great because all of my electrons get to go down
in energy.
But what if we do a similar analysis for 1, 3 cyclobutadiene, which is another angeline
which looks for all intents and purposes like it should be aromatic?
Well, if we do the exact same exercise, inscribing our polygon and forming our molecular orbital
energies, we find something quite different.
We find that when we populate it with the four pi electrons from cyclobutadiene, that
two of them go into non-bonding molecular orbitals.
In other words, there's little or in this case really no energetic benefit to this particular
molecule being planar and forming these new molecular orbitals.
But the trend actually continues.
It's a predictable trend in the stability of annulings.
So we've already seen 1, 3 cyclobutadiene and benzene treated in this way.
So let's go on through those, create their polygons and populate them.
Cyclobutadiene, rather, we know is anti-aromatic.
If we do the same exercise for benzene as we did previously, we see that benzene is aromatic
because of the extra stability.
Cyclo-octotetraene, on the other hand, will actually populate non-bonding orbitals if
it's planar, whereas cyclo-decapentaene will not, making it aromatic.
So you're probably beginning to notice a trend here.
Well, you're not the first.
Huckel was the first.
That's why he was the one who got to name it, sorry.
But what it turns out is happening here is that every time we add two pi electrons, we
switch from anti-aromatic to aromatic, anti-aromatic to aromatic.
And therefore, we can model this as a simple mathematical equation.
Four n pi electrons leads to an anti-aromatic system, while four n plus two electrons leads
to an aromatic system.
This is the origin of Huckel's rule.
But the utility of Huckel's rule extends well beyond just hydrocarbons like benzene.
It can be used to explain the behavior of other cyclic systems with aligned p-orbitals
as well.
For example, the tropillium ion, which is a carbocation consisting of a seven-membered
ring with six pi electrons and a positive charge.
Polygon analysis of this species shows us that it's also aromatic.
In fact, the effect of resonance on the stability of tropillium is so powerful that it's one
of the few carbocation which can be purchased as a stable salt and stored on a shelf in
the laboratory.
That's right, those pesky intermediates from first-order reactions have become a starting
material owing to the stabilization provided by this very special type of resonance.
So cyclopentadienyl anion also contains six pi electrons, and this time a system of five
molecular orbitals.
And you can clearly see that in both instances all six pi electrons find homes in bonding
orbitals lending extra stability to the ions.
But we don't need to stop at hydrocarbons in their ions.
Huckel's rule can be extended even farther to systems containing heteroatoms as well.
Take the example of perol C4H5N.
Now when I draw this molecule in class I usually have more than a few hands go up, and that's
because as I've drawn it the lone pair of nitrogen seemed to be in an sp3 orbital, isolated
on the nitrogen atom.
And you could argue this molecule can't be aromatic as drawn because the pi system is
in cyclic, and you'd be right.
To properly depict the perol I have to move that lone pair into a p-atomic orbital, allowing
it to join that pi system of the ring.
And in doing so I produce an aromatic system in which the amine nitrogen and hydrogen are
both coplanar with the rest of the molecule.
The energetic benefit of aromaticity exceeds that of orbital hybridization in this situation.
The effects of aromaticity on the basicity of perol are also dramatic.
Note that accepting a proton for perol means sacrificing that stabilizing aromaticity.
While the same process for its close chemical cousin, pyridine, does not.
So it should come as no surprise that perol is literally millions of times less basic
than pyridine.
Perol a powerful testament to the influence of aromaticity, and also a very obvious application
of Huckel's rule in action.
There are many other examples of aromatics which contain heteroatoms, like the malving
that we encountered in our nitrogen lecture.
But for today we're going to turn our attention back to hydrocarbons to keep our discussion
focused.
Now just as with all other molecules, if we want to have meaningful discussions about
benzene and its derivatives, then we need to agree on a nomenclature standard.
The revelation that all carbons of benzene are equivalent simplifies the process of naming
them when they're substituted.
Since all six carbons are identical, and the pi-bonding electron density is the same,
using the name 135 cyclohexatriene per the IUPAC standard is a bit misleading.
So we usually default to describing this ring motif as benzene.
Now just as any other hydrocarbon scaffold can be modified by replacing its hydrogen
atoms with more complex substituents in functional groups, so can benzene.
We'll take a look at some techniques used to accomplish these modifications next time,
but for now let's focus on the nomenclature of the modified compounds.
When a single substituent is attached to a benzene ring, we simply start the name with
that substituent's prefix.
For example, chlorobenzene, hydroxybenzene, or methylbenzene.
Since all six carbons of benzene are equivalent, the position of that first modification is
of no consequence.
We get chlorobenzene no matter which carbon I attach my chlorine to.
Attaching a single functional group to the ring prompts us to place a modifier at the
end of the name.
For example, benzaldehyde, or benzoic acid.
Now, if this distinction between substituents and functional groups isn't confusing enough,
sometimes the groups and the parent get turned on their head, and we describe the benzene
ring as a substituent.
So we would use the identifier phenyl or aryl in situations like this.
For example, chlorobenzene is also often called arylchloride, and hydroxybenzene, sometimes
called phenol.
But what really spices up the nomenclature of benzene rings is when we have two or more
attached substituents and functional groups.
Since the attachment of a single substituent renders the remaining unmodified carbons different
from one another.
Let's take a look at methylbenzene.
There are now three chemically distinct locations on the ring.
One of them is just a bond away, another two bonds away, and a final position three bonds
away on the opposite side.
So where we place the second group makes a profound difference in the identity and chemistry
of the new compound.
For example, dimethylbenzene, commonly called xylene, can form three different isomers.
One two dimethylbenzene, one three dimethylbenzene, and one four dimethylbenzene.
Now often we use a more common method of nomenclature to indicate which regioisomer of the compound
we're discussing using prefixes ortho, meta, and para in place of the numbered locations
on the groups.
The prefixes are often shortened to a single italicized letter.
So here we would describe these three isomers as o-zylene, m-zylene, and p-zylene.
This nomenclature system is the source of the para in the popular pain reliever, paracetamol,
also known as acetaminophen.
Now notice that the two groups in this compound are attached to the benzene ring in the para
arrangement.
It's only when they're at that specific position relative to one another that the drug works.
In fact, during the industrial scale synthesis of acetaminophen, a portion of the phenol
starting material is converted to ortho-nitrofenol, which would lead to the ortho-isomer of acetaminophen
in a completed synthesis.
But this ortho-nitrofenol is removed before continuing because it leads to an inactive
isomer of the compound.
It's worth mentioning that aromatics don't have to exist as isolated rings, though most
if not all of the compounds we'll be investigating will have isolated benzene motifs.
A newer class of compounds has gathered considerable interest more recently.
Picture two benzene rings, fused along one edge, essentially sharing a carbon-carbon bond.
Now we call this compound nathaly.
Notice that by fusing the rings we create an aromatic system in which two rings share
a common pair of p orbitals.
So it should come as no surprise that naphthalene's resonance energy is about 252 kJ per mole,
slightly less than two separate benzene rings, but substantial nonetheless.
Now for planar compounds, this trend continues through tricyclics like anthracene and phenanthrene,
all the way up to graphite, which is essentially a never-ending sheet of fully fused benzene
rings.
Now this allotrope of carbon benefits from such significant resonance stabilization
that at standard temperatures and pressures it's even more stable than diamond.
In the 1980s chemists began devising ways to impart curvature to these so-called graphene
sheets by changing which edges each ring shares with others, creating new allotropes of carbon
in the form of spheres, the most famous of which is hands down, the truncated icosahedron
C60 molecule buckminster fillering, affectionately referred to as buckyballs and named for the
famous architect, inventor and futurist buckminster fuller.
Now one can envision how the buckyball motif could act as an end cap, connecting a graphene
sheet which is rolled up on itself.
Now this structure is commonly called a carbon nanotube and these materials show some promise
in some very exciting applications such as gas storage media and building materials to
electronics, engineering and medicine.
But much of that potential is yet to be realized.
Even if we never find a good use for them, I think we can all agree they are just beautiful
to look at aren't they?
Now yet another useful material created from graphene sheets is what's commonly known as
carbon fiber.
Most of us are probably familiar with this material which was first created in the 1980s
and has since found its way into a host of applications.
Many of these applications exploit carbon fibers enormous tensile strength which rivals
that of steel but in a material four times less dense.
Now graphite consists of flat planar sheets of graphene which can easily slide along one
another's pi electron clouds making it soft and slippery to the touch and this is why
we see it used commonly in writing instruments and lubricants.
But carbon fiber as opposed to graphite can be thought of as a series of graphene sheets
which are bunched and tangled with one another and this bunching and tangling prevents the
graphene sheets from sliding along one another creating material with great tensile strength
rather than soft lubricating properties.
So today we focused on characterizing and naming a class of compounds known as aromatics.
We discussed how cyclic pi systems of 4n plus 2 pi electrons have a remarkable stability
which was recognized very early in the history of organic chemistry.
We covered Huckel's rule which predicts that this trend continues on to larger systems
as well.
We examined what's commonly called the polygon rule an extension of the mnemonic we use for
linear conjugated alkenes which is used to construct energy diagrams for cyclic pi systems.
We also used this tool to demonstrate the principles on which Huckel's rule is founded.
We took a look at how aromaticity can profoundly influence the acid based properties of organics
by stabilizing conjugate acids and bases particularly we looked at the example of parole in comparison
to pyridine.
Next we tried our hand at naming some of these compounds placing substituents ahead of benzene
and functional groups after benzene in the names and how we use the prefixes ortho,
meta and para to describe disubstituted benzene regioisomers.
We then concluded by considering situations in which aromatic rings fuse together to create
a new class called polynuclear aromatic hydrocarbons and how this naturally extends to buckminster
fullerines and carbon nanotubes and carbon fibers which are the focus of current research
in many labs around the world.
Next time we'll take a look at some of the techniques that organic chemists use to create
these modified benzene rings and I'll see you then.
