Welcome back! I hope that our first few lectures on bonding and molecular structure have piqued
your interest in the relationship between those structures and the physical and chemical
properties that they lead to in organic compounds. Of course, observation of these properties
takes time, so we can't just rely on a static snapshot of a structure to tell the whole
story. Let me show you an example. Here I have a molecule called acrolein. Acrolein is a
potent toxin found in cigarette smoke. It's also used in commercial biocides, and its
reactivity is similar to that of formaldehyde, so it finds use as a fixative agent, preserving
biological samples. Now, in textbooks and in papers, acrolein is commonly drawn in this
configuration. And yet, something about this configuration doesn't make sense to us. There's
a carbon-carbon double bond, a carbon-carbon single bond, and a carbon-oxygen double bond
in this molecule, which means the central bond should rotate freely. Yet, when we use
a static structure like this one and try to model its behavior, we see that this kind
of rotation doesn't happen. And so the chemical properties of acrolein, like its boiling point,
its acid-base properties, are all different than the prediction based upon this model.
So we find the carbon-oxygen bond dipole here is actually larger than the structure predicts,
and that electron density around these carbons is not the same. So clearly there's something
going on here that this static model just can't explain. Now, so far we've concerned
ourselves primarily with the drawing of molecular structures, these stationary, unchanging representations
of molecules in their most ideal states. They'll have median bond lengths and angles and dihedral
just the way that we want them. Now, as useful as it is to have these representations, showing
compounds in their most stable, ideal states, as chemists we're ultimately concerned with
materials physical and chemical properties in the real world, where bonds vibrate, electrons
move through clouds, and those bonds change. So the physical and chemical changes would
be best communicated not by a single ideal representation, but by how the molecule truly
behaves as time passes. So we need to develop a method for communicating how substances
behave and change through time, instead of just a single instantaneous ideal snapshot.
We naturally benefit from a method which is generally accepted by all chemists so that
we can give one another all the information we need to reach a common understanding of
chemical processes as well as physical processes. In this lecture I'll show you how to create
drawings which depict the transfer of electrons from one location to another in order to form
and break chemical bonds. Some of these motions will be intramolecular, meaning they take
place within a single molecule, and others will be intermolecular, meaning that they
take place between two or more molecules. In all cases the relocation of electrons will
result in the formation, alteration, or breaking of connections between atoms. Get ready, chemistry
is about to come alive. So let's begin with an intramolecular process called resonance.
Electrons within an electron cloud are always in motion, and we've already seen in one
of our previous lectures that pi bonds have a unique ability to form and break without
altering the connectivity of atoms, and since the stronger sigma bonds can remain intact
while the weaker pi bonds are broken. So electron pairs which are not involved in
bonding at all, sometimes called lone pair electrons, and pi bonding electrons, can be
made more mobile within a molecule's overall electron cloud. Now these electrons can sometimes
occupy a region much larger than just that defined by a hybrid orbital or an isolated
pi bond. They can traverse great distances across molecules using p orbitals without
disrupting the connectivity of the atoms. These long interconnected systems of p orbitals,
sometimes called pi systems. So as electrons move through the pi systems, no reaction is
really taking place, but our method of drawing an individual structure begins to fail. We're
already familiar with today's acroline molecule, and I drew it like this just the way that
I had represented it in the model that I showed you previously. What the problem is that the
pi electrons in acroline want more space. They want to run throughout the molecule,
and if given a chance to do so, that's exactly what they'll do. Now if you look at the acroline
structure, you'll see many, many sp2 carbons and even an sp2 oxygen all arranged in a row.
Now if I show you the molecule on its side, it'll probably make a little bit more sense
what's happening here. I'm going to take the hydrogens away so it's easier to see, and
I'm going to turn my acroline molecule. Now these are the p orbitals participating in
pi bonding. So even though I've drawn it here with an isolated pi bond on alternating carbons,
the truth of the matter is that pi system is completely interconnected. So when the
bonds are arranged appropriately so that all p orbitals are aligned, the electrons can
run throughout the molecule. So I need a way to represent acroline, which is a little bit
more realistic. And we do this by breaking the structure down and drawing every conceivable
extreme. For example, here I have three duplicates of my acroline structure, but I'm going to
alter them, remembering my rule. Sigma bonds can't break. Only pi bonds can move. So let's
take a look at what happens when I do this to my first structure on the left. I'm going
to move one pi bond up to the oxygen, creating a charge separation. In my other one here,
I'm going to relocate both of those pi bonds, one to the oxygen, and one to the central
carbon-carbon bond, creating a different kind of charge separation. And my third, I'm going
to leave exactly as it was. So these extremes of electron motion that we draw in this type
of way are called resonance contributors. And you'll see this drawn in the chemical
literature and in your textbooks. But what happens when you see that, or at least when
a train chemist does, is this. They mentally combine all of those resonance contributors
into a single resonance hybrid, which is essentially the weighted average of these three structures.
In my resonance hybrid, I can understand why there is no rotation or limited rotation
about that central bond, because it has a little bit of pi character, which my static
structure that I drew originally would not predict. So this is the utility of thinking
more about the motion of electrons through time than about a single instantaneous snapshot
of my molecule. So in that drawing, I had brackets and straight double-headed arrows
giving me my cue to create the best possible approximation of acrylene structure. And I
did this by mentally combining them all into that new weighted average called the resonance
hybrid. And it will help me to predict the reactivity and properties of acrylene much
better. But it's important to remember that hybrid is a weighted average, meaning that
the contributors with less charge separation and more ideal electron positions tend to
be a closer representation of the hybrid than their charge-containing counterparts.
Now, creating a static depiction of a system changing through time can be a challenging
undertaking. But one which humanity has deemed worthy since prehistory. Just ask cave painters
of Paleolithic Europe and Africa. They tried to document their hunts with just a few simple
markings on a cave wall. Or if you don't have a time machine, ask any modern-day comic
strip author. The comic strip artists try to tell a story using a storyboard of static
images, depicting different moments within the narrative. And it's up to us as readers
to combine these images in our minds to create a seamless running story. For example, here's
Garfield holding a piece of pie. And then suddenly, in the next frame, pie's gone. But
where did it go? Well, as the readers, we have to rely on our experience and our intuition
to tell us how that transition occurred. I'm pretty sure I know where the pie went.
Now, organic chemistry is no different than that comic strip. I might show you the chemical
structures, for example, of ammonium cyanate and urea. But unless I give it greater detail,
it's up to you to decide how you think the transition took place, using your understanding
of how organic chemistry works. Of course, technologies progress to the point at which
we don't often have to perform this exercise anymore. Computer animation fills in all the
gaps and gives us maximum detail about how a process takes place. But even with the advantages
of modern technology, fully animating a story is not always the best choice. It certainly
leaves out most ambiguities, but it requires a great deal of effort to create and also special
devices to view. So for the purposes of day to day communication, chemists prefer to use
a faster, shorthand style of depicting reactions that's developed over the centuries.
The last time we took a detailed look at methods chemists use to unambiguously convey molecular
structures to one another. And in this lecture, we'll be taking a detailed look at how organic
chemists convey changes in those structures through time. Specifically, how the chemical
energy of a system changes and how the bonding between and among atoms changes when that
chemistry takes place. So let's begin with the simplest possible illustration of a chemical
change, a reaction scheme. Now chemists often don't know or feel the need to convey minute
mechanistic details of a chemical reaction as it takes place. And sometimes their arguments
simply depends on what was present at the beginning of the reaction and what was present
at the end. For example, we just want to give the basic details of a reaction. We rely
on something called a reaction scheme. The reaction scheme consists of reagents on the
left side, products on the right side, an arrow which indicates whether the reaction
is reversible or not. We'll get to that in a moment. And also any special conditions
which are required for the reaction to take place. A great example of this is the reaction
scheme used by Friedrich Wohler to synthesize urea. Remember, his reagent was ammonium cyanane.
His products ultimately were urea. The reaction runs irreversibly, meaning that it completely
and quantitatively converts all of the reagents into products. And the conditions that he
used were simply heating. We represent heat sometimes with the capital Greek letter delta.
So this is how Wohler's synthesis would appear if I were to write it as a reaction scheme.
I have the synthesis of urea formed from ammonium cyanate and an irreversible process driven
by heat. Now it's that last element of the scheme that requires a little bit more explanation.
See, chemists distinguish between reactions which can be reversed from those and those
which cannot. So in a reaction like Wohler's synthesis, the product formed is so stable
that once it forms, it can never go back to the original starting materials through the
reverse pathway. Of course, this means that if we wait long enough, the reaction will
eventually result in the complete conversion of reactants to products. And as the course
progresses, we'll eventually see why this is so important to make a distinction like
this when plotting out a synthesis. So now that we have our completed scheme for Wohler's
irreversible synthesis of urea, let's take a look at a scheme for another famous reaction,
which this time is reversible. Another classic example of a reaction scheme
is a Haber-Bosch process, which one might argue is not truly organic since carbon is
not involved, but it's probably the single most influential chemical reaction of all
time. And it's a critical entry point for nitrogen into the biosphere. So I'm going
to exercise the professor's privilege here and step outside the bounds of my own discipline
for just a moment.
During World War I, with Germany facing dwindling natural resources to fuel their war efforts,
famous German chemists Fritz Haber and Karl Bosch were engaged in a project to provide
Germany with all the fixed nitrogen it could ever need for explosives and crop fertilization.
The scheme that Haber used looks like this. As reagents, he used nitrogen gas and hydrogen
gas. For products, he was hoping to get ammonia. And what Haber realized was that in order
to accomplish this, he was going to have some trouble because he had a reversible process.
But he could get it to go if he ran it at 400 degrees centigrade and 200 atmospheres of pressure
in the presence of an iron catalyst, which speeds the reaction but doesn't really participate
in it overall. That's why we place the iron here in the conditions rather than as a reagent.
So Haber's scheme was, again, to try to get nitrogen and hydrogen to combine in a reversible
process at 400 degrees and 200 atmospheres of pressure with an iron catalyst, all to
make ammonia. So you'll notice in this case that I've placed some numbers in front of
my reagents here. And those numbers indicate a quantity. So you'll hear me from time to
time refer to three moles of hydrogen or two moles of ammonia. This is because chemists
usually count molecules using a very large quantity. It's no different than a dozen
or a gross. So if I need a dozen eggs to make two dozen cookies, you now know the ratio
needed. So if I need three moles of hydrogen to make two moles of ammonia, again, you know
the ratio that's needed. So the only difference here is that in chemistry, we're counting
atoms and molecules. So a mole is tremendous in quantity by comparison. 6.02 times 10
to the 23rd to be exact. So my reaction here involves one mole of nitrogen gas reacting
with three molar equivalents of hydrogen to produce two moles of ammonia. And it would
be a great way to make ammonia from the air. If we could convert it into this much-needed
ammonia, the only problem here is the reaction is reversible. So once it's formed, the ammonia
can convert back to hydrogen and nitrogen gases, thereby completely undoing the reaction.
So as the concentration of ammonia builds, the reverse reaction accelerates until it
matches out of the forward reaction, establishing what chemists call an equilibrium. The problem
that Haber and Bosch faced is that ammonia decomposes to nitrogen and hydrogen very rapidly
under common laboratory conditions. So only a small fraction of material in the reactor
will be ammonia at any given time. So equilibrium is defined as a dynamic process in which
the forward and reverse reaction rates are equal. And it's a common misconception actually
that equilibrium means equal amounts of both products and reactants. But this is really
not the case at all, much to the chagrin of Haber and Bosch. So let me show you what
I mean by that. We model equilibria as chemists using something called an equilibrium constant,
which is written as the capital letter K. Now, in the equilibrium constant we place
a function of the products in the numerator, a function of the reagents in the denominator,
and we raise those functions to a power equal to their coefficients in the reaction. So
here I've created a sort of generic reaction, one mole of reagent A plus three moles of
reagent B forms two moles of product C. So to construct the equilibrium constant K,
I simply place my products concentration, which we indicate by brackets, raised to the
power of two for its coefficient. I place my first reagent in the denominator raised
to a power of one, and my second reagent also in the denominator raised to a power of three.
So this is my general equilibrium constant for this type of reaction. So Haber and Bosch
were attempting to use nitrogen, hydrogen, and ammonia in an equilibrium process, meaning
that its equilibrium constant expression will look like this. Concentration of ammonia squared
over concentration of nitrogen over concentration of hydrogen cubed equals 10 to the minus sixth.
This is a highly disfavored equilibrium. So this reaction is capable of producing only
a small amount of ammonia once equilibrium is reached. So the scheme that Haber and Bosch
were hoping to use to create ammonia from nitrogen and hydrogen, unfortunately, at equilibrium
didn't look much like this. Instead, it looked a little bit like this. So the genius of what
Haber and Bosch did was not in this reaction that they used. In fact, it's a pretty simple
reaction. The genius of what Haber and Bosch accomplished was in their reactor design, which
altered the conditions of pressure and temperature, increasing both of these factors to speed the
rate of ammonia formation relative to the rate of its decomposition. So they influenced
the equilibrium in a manner which suited their needs. But even that strategy didn't produce
large quantities of ammonia at equilibrium. So in a final manipulation, they devised a
way to remove ammonia from the reactor as it formed, thereby causing the equilibrium
to shift continuously in favor of their desired products. This tendency of reversible systems
to shift in ways which relieve stresses like removal of product is known as Le Chatelier's
principle. Now at this early stage, reversible reactions may seem like a nuisance. After
all, wouldn't it be great if we could just mix some ingredients, wait for a little while,
and ultimately have the maximum possible amount of product? Sure, many times it would. But
later in the course, we're going to see some examples of reactions whose reversibility makes
them even more useful in synthetic design. So far our drawing examples have been limited
in the sense that they convey a great deal about what we start and end with, but relatively
little about what goes on in the interim. And since reaction schemes only show a list
of starting materials and products, we're often left to wonder exactly how those materials
go about changing. One might make the analogy that it's like having a pile of boards, screws
and other pieces, and then a picture of a finished table when assembled, but our step
by step manual is missing. So when organic chemists want to convey a process in a little
more detail, they turn to a style of drawing known as a mechanism. And a mechanism, just
like that manual for assembling their table, is a series of elementary steps showing not
only the starting material, reversibility, conditions and products, but also explicitly
showing how electrons from each species are exchanged to make and break bonds. So let's
take a look at Wohler's synthesis one more time as an example, knowing that chemists
now understand what happened during that happy accident. So our scheme only showed the starting
material and products, but let's see if we can fill in some of the gaps now. So once
again, here is Wohler's synthesis, ammonium cyanate and forming urea. But if I break this
reaction down to elementary steps, I see that there are different compounds which form as
intermediates, specifically ammonia and cyanic acid, and ultimately a charge-separated intermediate
before it finally becomes urea. So Wohler's synthesis, as I showed you before, left out
a lot of information. There's actually quite a few additional species involved in the transition.
But that's still not enough information. If you look at this now, it's sort of like
reading that comic strip. We might have multiple pains in the comic, but we still haven't really
clearly defined how one transition occurs and forms the next. Now to do this, we use a mechanism.
And a mechanism consists of not only the structures of all of these species, but arrows indicating
how and when electrons move. For example, here's a representation of ammonium and of
cyanate. And I've colored the nitrogens just a little bit different shades of blue so they're
easier to follow through the process. So I could skip ahead and draw the new structures
for ammonia and cyanic acid, but that would leave you wondering how the transition happened.
So to fill in that gap, I'm going to use some arrows. When I use an arrow like this, I'm
trying to show you that a pair of electrons is moving from this nitrogen to this hydrogen,
abstracting it, forming a new chemical bond to it. As that happens, the original chemical
bond breaks and that pair of electrons moves back to the nitrogen of the ammonium ion.
Now I can draw the next intermediate in my process and it's absolutely clear how it
got that way. In a second fundamental step, I have my ammonia reacting with the cyanic
acid which was produced, forming a new bond between the nitrogen and carbon, and breaking
a pi bond between the carbon and the original nitrogen of the cyanic acid. This produces
a charged intermediate in which there's a rearrangement where one of the hydrogens
moves from my nitrogen here to my nitrogen down below, breaking that bond. Now I can
complete my mechanism and it becomes clear exactly how we got from this point to this
point, including each individual bond forming and breaking. And this is the value of a mechanism.
It gives us the maximum level of detail. So we're now acquainted with the techniques
used not only to draw molecular structures, but the elements of drawings used to convey
elementary steps, and the electron transitions which take place in each one. But there's
one more piece of information which is crucial to understanding how these transitions occur,
and that is the chemical energetics of the process. You see, just like in classical physics,
chemists think in terms of potential energy. And just like a physical object, like a ball,
is expected to roll down a hill, thereby decreasing its potential physical energy and reaching
a more stable state, so will a molecular system react in a way which decreases its overall
potential chemical energy, also making it more stable. The difference is that chemical
energy is a bit less intuitive to determine. Still, to fully understand the process of
a chemical reaction, we need a quick and convenient method for demonstrating whether a particular
transition increases or decreases the overall chemical free energy of the system, and by
how much. And to better understand this concept, we should consider a simple example like that
ball perched on a hilltop. Classical physics tells us that the potential energy of that
ball at its current position is higher than that of the same ball at the bottom of the
hill. So we can see from the diagram that when we give it a small push to overcome
the barrier, which would be friction or a small hill preventing it from rolling in the
first place, the ball will spontaneously roll downward, presumably coming to rest at the
bottom of the hill in the lowest energy state available. Chemical systems are a perfect analogy
for this physical system that I just described. Just as that ball has an associated physical
potential energy, which it would like to release, so does a collection of molecules have an
associated chemical free energy that it would like to release. When a small energetic barrier
is overcome by the addition of heat, catalyst, or some other perturbation, the system can
then convert spontaneously to its lower energy state. Chemists often convey this energetic
landscape for a chemical reaction using this hill analogy, and we call it a reaction coordinate
diagram. The only difference here is that the hill is one of chemical potential energy
rather than one of physical potential energy. So the diagrams are essentially a plot of
system free energy as a function of reaction progress. So let's finish our discussion today
by applying this diagram to Wohler's urea synthesis. And recall that the mechanism for
this process involves starting materials, products, and two different intermediate states,
which are meta stable, and they can exist for a little while. So we begin by defining
the original energy of the system as the y-intercept of our plot. And the first step of our reaction
begins with a new bond forming to hydrogen while its original bond breaks. So this process
actually increases the energy of the system until we reach a maximum energy for the step.
The structure at that local energy maximum is called the transition state.
Now at first it might seem strange to suggest that the system is going to move energetically
uphill. After all, balls aren't known to roll suddenly uphill without a little outside help.
And the same is actually true of chemical systems, but often the help is already there.
It's all around us permeating every object in this room.
Of course I'm talking about heat. At all temperatures but absolute zero, there will be some molecular
motion, bond vibration, molecular collisions, and other kinds of motions. And so long as
there's sufficient thermal energy in a system to get it over that initial barrier from starting
materials to the transition state, the reaction will take place.
Now we call that barrier activation energy as you already know. And just as you might
expect, often the addition of heat to a reaction mixture is all it needs to traverse that barrier
thereby speeding the reaction up. Now as that first step winds down, we see that the energy of the
system begins to decrease to a local minimum. But in this case, it has a second energetic
hill to climb on its way to the final product. So we call this local minimum an intermediate.
And it's distinct from transition states because it has a small energy well there which makes it
metastable so it can exist in measurable amounts while the reaction is running.
In the next step, ammonia forms its bond to the newly formed cyanic acid. Again this increases
the energy of the system initially to a point representing the transition state for that process.
After that, new bond formation completes and the system reaches another metastable state.
We finally conclude the reaction with the reorganization of the product by an intramolecular
exchange of a hydrogen. So we've created an energy diagram here for the entire process of
converting ammonium cyanate into urea in three steps. Now let's review the relevance of all the features
of this diagram. Our starting materials must pass through a transition state to become the first
intermediates, ammonia and cyanic acid. The diagram tells me two important things. First, that the
reaction will happen quickly because the energetic barrier is relatively low. And second, that a large
amount of this intermediate will exist in equilibrium with the starting material because the
intermediate is lower in energy. The second step of the mechanism reaches a considerably higher
transition state energy which tells me that this is a rate limiting step of the reaction since this
step is expected to proceed much more slowly than the others by virtue of the energy change taking place.
Finally, the intramolecular proton relocation or hydrogen relocation takes place quickly and
irreversibly once that last intermediate has formed. This creates a product of greater stability than the
original starting materials and my reaction is complete. So today we've taken a look at how
chemists communicate chemical transitions to one another. We do this in much the same way that a
cartoonist tells a story with pains showing punctuated depictions of a system as it undergoes changes.
We started with the phenomenon of resonance or delocalization of electrons and we talked about how
multiple resonance contributors contained in brackets and separated by straight two headed arrows can be
mentally combined in a mathematical average to produce the resonance hybrid.
We looked at how to write a reaction scheme which communicates the four crucial details of a reaction.
The starting materials, the products, the conditions and the reversibility and we discussed how the
choice of arrows separating the starting materials and products give us a little bit of information about
that reversibility. Then we explored the art of depicting mechanisms in which schemes are expanded
into their elementary steps and the motion of electrons is indicated by curved arrows pointing from
the original location to their final destination in a given step.
And finally we took a look at a reaction coordinate diagram and how it shows us the energetic landscape of a
chemical change making such details as the transition state and intermediate energies and rate limiting
steps all evident to us.
As we progress through the remainder of this course we're going to rely heavily on what we've learned
regarding chemical drawing. And next time we'll put some of these drawing skills into practice
as we investigate the acid based properties of organic compounds. I'll see you then.
