Ben Franklin is purported to have once penned that beer is the best evidence we have that
there is a God that he loves us and wants us to be happy.
The accuracy of this quote is disputed by historians, but its sentiment is one which
most of us probably share during a night of celebration with friends.
So we've already taken a brief look at the structure, properties, and reactivities of
ethanol.
This is one of the key components of that delightful concoction.
Then, the next morning arrives, and those of us who took the most extreme advantage
of old Ben's good-hearted observation might wake to a headache, sensitivity to light,
fatigue, and a general sense that maybe Dr. Franklin led us a bit astray.
Of course, I'm talking about hangovers, the general sense of awfulness that comes along
with the buildup of metabolites of the very compound we enjoyed so much the night before.
We're now familiar with the structure of ethanol, also known as beverage alcohol.
And we're aware of the presence of an sp3 hybridized oxygen that it bears in the form
of a hydroxyl group.
But enzymes in the liver convert ethanol into a new organic compound, actually several
of them, which are easier to remove from the human body, but some of which have a significantly
less pleasant effect on your mood.
Today we're going to be taking a closer look at at least one of the chemicals which participate
in this rite of passage for beer enthusiasts and wine lovers alike.
We will not concern ourselves so much with the biological pathways to these products
which occur in vivo, meaning in living organisms.
But rather we're going to take more of a look at how organic chemists imitate this chemistry
in a beaker, an environment which we commonly refer to as in vitro, meaning in glass.
But before we can discuss the details of their synthesis and reactivity, we must first familiarize
ourselves with their structure.
Last time we investigated the structure, synthesis and reactivity of alcohols and ethers, which
have an sp3 hybridized oxygen, which is single bonded to a carbon and one other atom, either
hydrogen to form an alcohol or carbon to form an ether.
Today we will look at a different class of oxygen containing compounds known as aldehydes
and ketones, those in which we still have only one oxygen atom, but it's sp2 hybridized,
meaning that it's double bonded to just one carbon atom.
So let's have a look at just the sp2 part of this type of motif here.
So right now what's connected to this carbon is really not of consequence, what's important
is to look at the oxygen and carbon and how they've been connected to one another.
Remember that in our alcohols and ethers, the oxygen had two single bonds, but here
there's a double bond between the oxygen and the carbon.
This means that both the oxygen and carbon must have an sp2 hybridization state, and
even more importantly that there's a pi bond.
So if I rotate this molecule so that we can see the bond end on, you can clearly see the
sigma bond containing electron density in between the two atoms, but also the presence
of a pi bond, which gives electron density above and below that bond.
And that's going to be crucial to not only the physical, but also the chemical properties
of this type of compound.
So let's have a look at some very simple carbonyl containing compounds.
Let's start with formaldehyde.
This is the simplest possible carbonyl containing compound with a carbon oxygen double bond
and bond angles of 120 degrees all the way around this carbon, right?
That's what we would expect for an sp2 hybridized atom.
The next most complex is acetaldehyde, in which we've added a methyl group to the carbon,
which is attached to our sp2 oxygen.
This has a formula C2H4O.
We can get even larger by adding a methyl group to the other side and create something
called acetone, compound with which we're all very familiar.
And I can continue extending these alkyl chains if I'd like, creating, for example, methylethylketone,
which is a common solvent used in adhesives.
Now all of these share one structural feature in common.
That is the carbonyl group, an sp2 carbon double bonded to an sp2 oxygen.
I've highlighted those here so you can see them well.
Some of them have hydrogens attached to those sp2 carbons.
When they have these, we call those hydrogens aldehyde hydrogens.
But there are others which don't contain this particular type of hydrogen.
They contain carbons that are bonded directly to the sp2 carbon only.
This location is called an alpha carbon.
So you can already see where we're going to draw a distinction here.
Those carbonyls which have aldehyde hydrogens tend to get the name aldehyde, and those
which have only alpha carbons attached to the carbonyl carbon tend to get names that
end in own.
These are ketones.
From an IUPAC nomenclature perspective, we treat both aldehydes and ketones as functional
groups because as we'll see soon they're very reactive.
So in this example, I have to choose a parent chain which contains the carbon which is double
bonded to the oxygen making up the carbonyl group.
So this is a butanal molecule.
The AL suffix lets me know that I'm dealing with an aldehyde.
In other words, a carbonyl which has at least one hydrogen attached to its carbon.
My butan now has a methyl substituent.
So now all I have to do is label my chain in such a way that the functional group,
which is highest priority, gets the lowest possible number.
So clearly my best choice is to label it in this way.
If I label the other way, my butanal functional group ends up with a number 4 instead of 1.
So I'm going to choose the top numbering scheme.
This would make the name of my compound 3-methyl 1-butanal, except that we often don't see
the 1.
And the reason for that of course is that aldehydes by definition have to end the carbon chain
because one of their bonded partners must be a hydrogen.
So to say 1-butanal is a little bit redundant.
In the case of ketones, I'm going to follow the same protocol.
Let's name this ketone.
I'll choose my parent hydrocarbon, the longest possible one which contains the carbon which
is part of my group.
So there's my functional group at the second carbon in making this a pentanone.
So I'll look at my prefixes.
I'll have a chloro because I've got a chlorine which is also attached to the parent hydrocarbon.
Now I give my addresses to these in such a way that the ketone functional group gets
the lowest possible number, meaning that when I construct my name, I'll have a 4-chloro
to pentanone.
So now that we know a little bit about naming and identifying these ketones and aldehydes,
let's take a look at their physical properties and what the introduction of this carbonyl
bond really does for them.
We'll start with an aldehyde.
A very simple one like this propanol molecule.
The propanol molecule has a carbon-oxygen double bond which creates a dipole, the positive
end of the dipole at the carbonyl carbon, the negative end of the dipole at the carbonyl
oxygen.
This means that it's going to have an electronegative oxygen with freelone pairs which can act as
a hydrogen bond acceptor.
In other words, it can hydrogen bond with other compounds which have OH, NH, and FH motifs
in their functional group.
But the propanol itself doesn't have such a bond, which means that it can't hydrogen
bond to other propanol molecules.
So this is not an H bond donor, only an H bond acceptor.
We turn our attention to ketones we see, for example, in propanone, the exact same issue.
We have a carbon-oxygen double bond with the positive dipole at the carbon, the negative
dipole at the oxygen, and again, we have lone pairs which can participate in H bonding with
other types of molecules, but they can't hydrogen bond to themselves because they don't have
the requisite OH, NH, or FH bond.
So when we look at the boiling points of these compounds, we see something very different
than we saw with the alcohols and ethers because neither of them can hydrogen bond well.
Their boiling points are actually quite similar to one another.
Recall that in the case of ethanol and dimethyl ether, that the boiling points differed by
about 100 degrees centigrade.
So in this case, we can see a very clear manifestation of the fact that neither of these two can
hydrogen bond to themselves.
In addition to being polar, these compounds are also amphoteric.
We can see this by looking at a molecule of, this is acid aldehyde.
If we take a look at its conjugate acid, we can protonate that oxygen from the carbonyl
and create a resonance-stabilized conjugate acid.
Now it's not terribly stable, as you can see, the pKa is negative 7, so it's very acidic,
but it can form, and it does have the effect of increasing the positive charge density
around the carbonyl carbon.
This will be very important when we get to reactivity.
Similarly, carbonyl compounds can act as acids, but they don't lose the proton that
you might think they do.
Even in the case of aldehydes, the hydrogen attached to the sp2 carbon is not the most
acidic carbon.
In fact, the one that's removed most frequently is the adjacent alpha carbon, and the explanation
for this is that it forms not only what we call a carbanion, which puts some negative
charge density down here at the site of its removal, but it also creates a new resonance
contributor called an enolate, where that negative charge is up on what was the carbonyl
oxygen, and this provides a lot of stabilization to the conjugate base, and results in a pKa
of about 20 for compounds like these.
Okay, so carbonyl compounds are named differently, they have different hydrogen bonding behavior,
and they're amphoteric with slightly different pKa values than alcohols.
But what really distinguishes the carbonyl motif from alcohols and ethers, and gives
them such different reactivity, is the presence of that pi bond.
So I'm going to take this motif and show it to you one more time on its side, and we're
going to see exactly why and how these bonds react the way they do.
Let's try formaldehyde, the simplest possible carbonyl-containing compound.
We're all familiar with formaldehyde, and especially its primary application, which
is a biological preservative, or we call it a fixative.
But this is not the form of the molecule that actually performs that fixation.
Formaldehyde, as I've drawn it here, does not react with proteins, it does not fix them
in place, and it does not preserve animal tissue in that way.
So what's going on here?
Let's turn it on its side.
So again, here are the regions of space where I expect the electrons involved in my pi bond
to be.
But there's another region of space that I'm concerned with.
It's the area that new incoming electrons have to reach in order to create a new bond
to the carbonyl carbon and break the pi bond to the carbonyl oxygen.
That region of space looks like this, and it's called an antibonding orbital.
So in order to populate that antibonding orbital, an incoming nucleophile doesn't come from
the backside directly, as we would expect in a traditional nucleophilic substitution.
Instead, it comes in from above and below and slightly behind.
So let's try to represent the reaction of formaldehyde with water and a little bit of
hydroxide, which is naturally present in the water, and see if we can make its actual functional
form that serves as a biological fixative.
Again, here's my molecule of formaldehyde, but now I'm going to put it in water, which
naturally contains a small amount of hydroxide.
Now that hydroxide can act as a nucleophile, and it's going to attack my carbonyl carbon
like so.
Now I've highlighted my two different oxygens so we can keep track of them, but they're
actually still just ordinary run-of-the-mill oxygen atoms.
So as that attack takes place, not only do I form a new sigma bond, but I also break
the original pi bond from the carbonyl.
So I've created this negatively charged species in the presence of water.
This looks awfully basic, doesn't it?
And water, as we all know, is a weak acid.
So the water will very quickly transfer a proton and give me a new kind of molecule.
This is called methylene glycol.
It's methylene glycol that reacts with the tissues in animal samples to preserve them.
Interesting, isn't it?
We say formaldehyde is a great preservative, but in truth, the equilibrium constant for
this interconversion is about 40, meaning that in any given aqueous solution of formaldehyde,
somewhere around 98% of it is in this state as methylene glycol.
So a solution of formaldehyde in water really isn't a solution of formaldehyde at all.
It's actually a solution primarily of methylene glycol.
This is a good thing because it's the solution of methylene glycol called formalin, which
has the desired preservative properties.
In the crucial reaction, it's the hydroxyls of methylene glycol, which are removed to produce
two molecules of water, and a new link to nitrogen atoms found in proteins that make
up the tissues of biological samples.
Two hydroxyls means two links, and this crosslinking of proteins, which blocks them in place, preserving
the tissue in all the fats, carbohydrates, and other biologic molecules entombed inside
the matrix of the protein.
No hydroxyl groups, no crosslinks, but it all starts with the addition of formaldehyde
to a preservative solution.
In light of this, it's clear why formaldehyde is the go-to carbonyl compound for this purpose.
First, it's the smallest possible molecule with a desired chemistry, helping it find
its way into those interstitial spaces within and between proteins in a biological sample.
But before we head any further into reactions involving ketones and aldehydes, let's first
take a look at a few ways to make them.
Aldehydes and ketones can be produced by a number of synthetic routes, some of which
we're ready to investigate, and others of which are going to require a little more foundation.
Now, for today, let's concentrate on emulating the chemistry that goes on in your body as
you sleep off that night of fun.
In your body, ethanol is recognized by your liver as a toxin.
Whether or not your brain agrees, as soon as the ethanol hits your bloodstream, enzymes
in your liver go to work preparing to eliminate it from your system.
Now, in order to attenuate the neurotoxic effects of the ethanol and prepare it for removal,
an enzyme known as alcohol dehydrogenase converts the offending intoxicant into a more oxidized
state that of acid aldehyde.
The process of enzymatic oxidation is complex and involves the assistance of large, complicated
biomolecules, but it essentially consists of the removal of the hydroxyl proton and one
of its neighbors, thereby producing a double bond between the carbon and oxygen.
Essentially, this is an oxidative elimination reaction.
We call it oxidation because the central carbon is gaining additional attachment to
oxygen atoms, in this case, trading a single bond to oxygen for a double bond.
The product aldehyde is eventually metabolized further as the process continues, but in the
meantime, it interferes with mitochondrial activity, liver function, and a host of other
biological mechanisms contributing to the condition which we colloquially refer to as
a hangover.
In the laboratory, ketones and aldehydes can be produced using various oxidizing agents,
which accomplish the very same task that the alcohol dehydrogenase does in your body.
A classic example of this technique is the oxidation of a secondary alcohol to a ketone
using chromic acid.
In this multi-step reaction, the secondary alcohol is substituted for one of the OH groups
on the chromic acid, creating a compound known as a chromate ester.
This mechanism depends on the presence of an alpha hydrogen on the starting material,
and a secondary alcohol has only one of these, so this oxidation can only take place once,
ending at the ketone stage in which the carbonyl carbon has no more hydrogens to give up.
In the case of primary alcohols, however, two oxidations can occur, leading not to the
desired aldehyde, but rather to a more oxidized compound called carboxylic acid.
So how do we stop the oxidation at that desired point if that's what we want to do?
Well the key to stopping oxidation selectively at the aldehyde stage is in remembering that
aldehydes and aqueous solution tend to form reactive hydrates, those geminal dials like
we saw in the case of formaldehyde.
So to achieve our goal, we have to substitute a different oxidizing agent which is soluble
in an organic solvent so we remove water from the process.
Pyridinium chlorochromate is one reagent which proves very useful in the oxidation of primary
alcohols to aldehydes in particular because of its solubility in solvents like methylene
chloride, which are anhydrous.
So, this reaction with PCC, Pyridinium chlorochromate, is actually the organic chemistry equivalent
of the biological effects of this.
This is the drug dysulfiram, more commonly known by its trade name, Antibuse.
Now, Antibuse is often prescribed to discourage alcohol abuse in alcoholic patients, and it
does so by inhibiting the enzyme aldehyde dehydrogenase, that enzyme which continues
the process of oxidatively breaking down the alcohol metabolite, acid aldehyde, into
more manageable and far less toxic acetic acid.
So, this would be our small molecule version of shutting down that system.
Now, Antibuse binds to and shuts down enzymes in the liver which further oxidize acid aldehyde
and move it along that natural process of removal.
So, stopping the oxidation process for ethanol at the aldehyde step like this causes an unusually
high level of acid aldehyde to build up in a patient's bloodstream, which in turn causes
what could best be described as a super hangover.
PCC simply accomplishes the same effect on the lab bench.
The difference is that it does so by preventing aldehyde hydrate formation instead of enzyme
inhibition.
It can be done not only for ethanol, but for practically any primary alcohol starting material
that we can imagine.
It's important for a chemist to always be cognizant of reversibility in chemical reactions,
which is to say that today's starting materials may be tomorrow's products in vice versa.
Today it might be our goal to produce an aldehyde from a primary alcohol or a ketone from a
secondary alcohol by oxidation.
But if I can do that, then there's almost certainly a way to somehow produce the alcohols
from the associated carbonyl compounds.
So let's begin our discussion on the reactivity of these compounds in that spirit.
Since we oxidized alcohol to form acid aldehyde previously today, we should be able to find
a way to reduce the acid aldehyde back.
That's right, catalytic hydrogenation of carbonyls leads to an addition product which
hydrogen gas is added across the carbonyl double bond.
So the mechanism is completely analogous to hydrogenation of alkenes.
This method is often chosen in industrial settings where gas handling equipment is available
and inexpensive hydrogen gas offsets the cost of the equipment.
But in the laboratory, where we usually want to perform reactions on smaller scale, we
often turn to the use of hydride reagents.
Both sodium borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride can accomplish this modification when
added to a ketone or aldehyde in produce solvent.
You see, the boron or aluminum in these reagents are both extremely electropositive and they
make bonded hydrogens act more like hydride ions.
These hydride ions are very nucleophilic and will attack the carbonyl very efficiently.
The resulting alkoxide simply removes a proton from the solvent to become the neutral alcohol
product.
Just as with alcohols, aldehydes and ketones are amphiprodic or amphoteric.
So we have to consider the possibility that ketones and aldehydes might act as nucleophiles
or electrophiles depending on their pH environment.
Again, just like alcohols, compounds containing carbonyl groups are prone to reactions under
conditions of extreme pH, either high or low.
When placed in a basic environment, deprotonation of an alpha carbon can form a resonance stabilized
enolate nucleophile.
The removal of the alpha proton produces a carbanion, but one which can easily be drawn
with its charge delocalized onto the oxygen atom of the neighboring carbonyl.
So in this state, the conjugate base of an aldehyde or ketone can act as a good nucleophile,
attacking electrophiles and forming new carbon-carbon bonds.
Now, neutral ketones and aldehydes can be considered to be weakly nucleophilic based
on the formation of an enol-taudomer, which forms when a proton from its alpha carbon
is relocated to the carbonyl oxygen.
But neutral ketones can also act as weak electrophiles, owing to the dipole between the carbonyl-carbon
and oxygen atoms.
Now, what's particularly interesting about carbonyls is the role and the ability of these
compounds to undergo nucleophilic attack without the loss of a leaving group.
Instead, those antibonding orbitals of the carbonyl, which reach out above and below
the plane of the group itself, can be attacked, breaking only the pi bond and preserving the
connection between carbon and oxygen.
Now, that process is even more favorable in acidic conditions, when the carbonyl compound
is protonated at its oxygen.
Protonation at that site increases the electrophilic character of the carbonyl-carbon by creating
a resonance contributor with a positive formal charge at that atom.
So, basifying and acidifying are both viable strategies for activating ketones and aldehydes,
inducing them to react.
And no reaction is a better example of this property than the aldol condensation, a reaction
between two carbonyl compounds, which can be conducted under either basic or acidic
conditions with similar efficiency.
The first report of an aldol condensation was given by French chemist Charles Adolf
Wertz in 1872.
Now, Wertz discovered that addition of a strong mineral acid to ethanol led to a strange new
product which shared properties with both ketones and alcohols.
The reaction of one ethanol with another takes place when a portion of the sample becomes
protonated at the carbonyl oxygen.
So, a mixture of both neutral aldehyde and protonated aldehyde needs to be present.
Now, the protonated aldehyde has a resonance contributor with positive charge density at
the carbonyl carbon, and the neutral aldehyde can tautomerize to form a species known as
an enol, for alkene and alcohol motifs which combine to make it up.
So, in this system that I've just set up, we have an electrophilic protonated aldehyde
and a nucleophilic enol tautomer.
All the ingredients necessary for an addition reaction to take place.
As the enol attacks the protonated carbonyl, a new alcohol group forms.
The enol then quickly deprotonates to reform a carbonyl group.
Our aldol condensation is complete, and a beta-hydroxy ketone has formed.
So, where it first accomplished this reaction by increasing the electrophilicity of a portion
of aldehyde using acid?
It wasn't long, however, before it was realized that the same result could be accomplished
by instead increasing the nucleophilicity of a portion of aldehyde by addition of a
suitable base.
So, the addition of a base like hydroxide or methoxide can cause a portion of ethanol
to become deprotonated at its alpha carbon, which can participate in resonance and form
that resonance stabilized enolate.
So, the enolate nucleophile attacks a neutral but electrophilic carbonyl carbon, breaking
its pi bond and promoting a series of steps which lead to the same exact product as in
Wurz's acidic reaction.
Reactions like the aldol reaction are a shining example of how carbonyl chemistry is a very
versatile tool in organic synthesis, often leading us to consider making the same products
under either acidic or basic conditions.
It gives us a choice of reaction conditions, which is a very nice thing to have in a complex
synthesis.
But carbonyl-containing compounds don't just react with themselves.
They make great nucleophiles and electrophiles to react with a large library of other compounds.
Another commonly used reaction employing ketones and aldehydes as electrophiles is the reactions
with alcohols.
When we do this, we get compounds reminiscent of hydrates like methylene glycol, but one
or both of the OH hydrogens has been replaced with an alkyl group.
In the case of an aldehyde, like formaldehyde, replacement of one OH leads to what we call
a hemiacetal, while the replacement of both gives us an acetal.
When the carbon bearing of the two groups is instead derived from a ketone, meaning
it has two R groups attached to the carbonyl carbon, we call the resulting compounds hemi-ketals
and ketals.
So let's take a look at how these two motifs can be created using formaldehyde as an example.
Now the formation of hemiacetals and hemi-ketals from aldehydes and ketones are accomplished
in exactly the same way that their hydrates are made.
We simply substitute an alkoxide in place of the hydroxide nucleophile.
After one nucleophilic attack has taken place, there's no good leaving group to depart and
make room for a second attack.
Therefore, the reaction stops at the hemiacetal or hemi-ketal stage.
We can instead create acetals and ketals by mixing aldehydes and ketones with an alcohol
under acidic conditions.
Under these conditions, the carbonyl group can be protonated, making it a good electrophile.
It's then attacked by the weakly nucleophilic alcohol through an SN1 reaction.
This forms a protonated ether, which we know will quickly lose its proton dissolvent because
of its very low pKa.
But under acidic conditions, a second attack is possible, because the hemiacetal or hemi-ketal
formed can be protonated to create an oxonium ion in which a water-leading group can be
displaced by yet another alcohol nucleophile.
Now this leads to the acetal or ketal, depending on whether the starting material was now the
aldehyde or a ketone, respectively.
Both acetals and ketals are very stable to strong bases in nucleophiles, but they can
be easily converted back into their ketone or aldehyde counterparts using acidic hydrolysis,
essentially just reversing the reaction by adding water.
Now, these characteristics make acetals and ketals very useful as protecting groups in
synthesis, masking reactive carbonyl sites, which can later be unmasked after doing other
chemical modifications to other regions of the molecule.
So today we explored the properties and the reactivity of some simple carbonyl compounds.
We discussed how the carbon-oxygen double bond necessitates an sp2 hybridization state
for both atoms, leading to a trigonal planar geometry about the carbonyl carbon, leaving
two available substrates.
When one or both of those substrates is a hydrogen, we have an aldehyde.
When neither are a hydrogen, we have a ketone.
We reviewed nomenclature of these compounds, how the carbonyl is treated as a functional
group and the suffixes al and own are used to designate aldehydes and ketones, respectively.
We explored how these compounds can be produced by oxidation of alcohols, using either aqueous
chromic acid in the case of secondary alcohols to ketones, or peridinium chlorochromate in
an organic solvent in the case of primary alcohols to aldehydes.
We then turned the tables and considered the reduction of aldehydes and ketones, using
a familiar reaction, catalytic hydrogenation, which essentially reverses the oxidation process
producing the alcohol.
We also met sodium borohydride and lithium aluminum hydride, reagents which act as a
source of hydride nucleophiles, turning ketones and aldehydes into alkoxides, which quickly
convert to alcohols in product solvent.
We discussed how carbonyl compounds react in substitution reactions, including their
nucleophilic enolates which form under basic conditions, and their electrophilic characteristics
when protonated.
We surveyed how these characteristics affect reactivity in the aldol condensation between
two carbonyl compounds, and how they can take place under basic or acidic conditions leading
to essentially the same products.
Finally, we considered how aldehydes and ketones can be reacted with alcohols under basic conditions
to form hemiacetals and hemiketals, or under acidic conditions to prepare acetals and ketals.
And of course, along the way we compared how some of these reactions are merely a clumsy
attempt by chemists to duplicate feats of synthesis which go on in your own body with
remarkably greater efficiency, even if they do come with a little headache.
And that's all for this lesson.
Next time, we'll continue our tour of oxygen-containing compounds by considering those which contain
multiple oxygen atoms with differing hybridization states.
See you then.
