Your physician screens you to determine risk factors for genetic diseases.
A criminal forensics lab links a sample of blood, skin or hair from a crime scene to a suspected criminal.
A zoologist or botanist confirms that his or her latest discovery is in fact a new species.
Pharmaceutical company manufactures human insulin used to treat diabetics using a bacterium as a microscopic production plant.
All of these remarkable accomplishments have one thing in common, DNA.
Elegantly simple in its library of just four letters, but stunningly complex in the size and organization of those four letters,
DNA and its chemical cousin RNA stand alone among biomolecules in their ability to help us carry out these kinds of tasks.
That's right, just four letters. That's all it takes to sum up your entire chemical essence.
Using just four simple letters, modern scientists can document, store and even reproduce a code which contains all the basic information
which makes you who you are, at least in a physiological sense.
It might sound too simple to be true. Why such small alphabet of letters to make up a code as complex as the one that makes you, you in a chemical sense?
Well Nature makes up for the small library of letters with scale.
A single strand of your DNA contains over three billion of these letters.
Now, three billion positions with four possibilities for each makes for more possibilities than one can realistically imagine.
To get the same number of possible permutations with 26 letters, like our alphabet,
would require a literary work equivalent to about 430 copies of Tolstoy's classic War and Peace.
Most of us are familiar with these four letters, A, G, C and T.
There are a shorthand notation used by geneticists and molecular biologists to represent adenine, guanine, cytosine and thymine.
Now these are the four subunits of a compound which is very familiar to us, DNA.
But remember that Voler helped to demonstrate that the chemistry of life is not off limits to the organic chemists.
So awesomely complex those cellular biochemistry may be, it is still rooted in the same foundations as the rest of organic chemistry.
The power of understanding and manipulating DNA has been demonstrated time and again since its structure was solved in 1953 by James Watson and Francis Crick.
After decades of study, the United States National Institutes of Health and private entrepreneur Craig Venter jointly announced that the human genome had been completely mapped.
Now mapping genes and sequencing DNA has given us a tool which can be used not only to scan for particular health risks in a person,
but also to use as a forensic identification tool, a guide for targeted gene therapy, and a way to understand the chemical basis on which life evolves and changes in response to environmental stimuli.
Our understanding of DNA and the biochemical processes surrounding it has altered our perception of what it is to be a living thing.
As scientists, we endeavor to study it, understand it, and ultimately manipulate it in ways which improve our lives.
Of course, none of this understanding is possible without tearing this beautiful complex down into its most basic constituent parts.
This is what we will do in this lecture. Starting from the individual molecules and motifs, we will work our way up to a full model for the structure of nucleic acid-containing compounds.
So let's begin with RNA, or ribonucleic acid.
RNA serves several critical roles in converting your genetic code, or genome, into the proteins essential to life, also called a proteome.
In addition to other roles, one of RNA's most important jobs is to transport the information in the DNA of your cells to areas in those cells where proteins are made.
Now, this is a gross underestimation of the versatility of RNA, but for this lecture we're going to focus on this particular role,
since it helps to explain some of the chemical differences between it and its very close chemical relative DNA.
The ribo part of that name refers to the carbohydrate ribose.
Now, the Fischer projection of D ribose looks like this.
It's an aldopentose, and like any aldopentose, ribose can undergo cyclization to form the associated ribofurinose with its anomeric carbon in one of two positions, alpha or beta.
It's the beta form of this ribofurinose, which is the central building block of RNA.
Now, ribose alone, however, is a fairly uninteresting molecule from a genetic coding perspective.
I mean, after all, there's only one beta ribofurinose molecule possible.
There's no variation among these structures yet.
To produce the building blocks of RNA, the anomeric hydroxyl in beta ribofurinose is replaced with an organic base to a nitrogen atom.
In the case of RNA, these four bases are cytosine, uracil, adenine, and guanine.
RNA uses uracil as opposed to the thymine of DNA, for reasons that we're going to discuss shortly.
Now, these units are further subdivided into the class of pyrimidine bases and purine bases based on their backbone structures.
So, using one of these four bases as the aglaicone in beta ribofurinose produces one of the four subunits of RNA, collectively called nucleosides.
And not surprisingly, these nucleosides have names similar to those of the bases which gave them their identity.
An aglaicone of cytosine forms the nucleoside cytodine. Uracil leads to uredine.
Adenine produces adenosine, and guanine produces guanosine.
So, we're slowly constructing the monomers of our miraculous biopolymer.
We've attached a pyrimidine or pyrimidine base to ribofurinose as an aglaicone to create four different letters in the coding alphabet of life.
But, a simple collection of letters is not a code.
Consider this random collection of letters from our alphabet, randomly distributed about the screen.
There's a little bit of information here in the quantity and identity of the letters.
But, I can communicate even more specific and detailed information if I order the letters in a certain way.
So, let's put the letters together and see if we can figure out what I'm trying to say here.
Teachers get sour. Hmm, maybe not.
Carugate sheets. Well, if this were an engineering course, that would probably be it, but it's not, so let's keep going.
The same letters can be put together to form saucers together, which maybe would be a cooking course.
I don't know. UFOs, possibly. Who knows?
Or maybe what I'm trying to say is, the great courses.
I can communicate very detailed information with the same letters by combining them in different orders.
DNA does the same thing.
See, the building blocks of each of these phrases were the same.
It's the arrangement of the building blocks, which enriches the code and allows me to encode far more information using far fewer subunits.
So, let's go back to RNA.
We must now find a way to link those nucleoside subunits together into a chain so that there's a sequence to the collection of C's, U's, A's and G's,
which will make up the information in our RNA molecule.
We need a way to string them together, just like we string letters to make words and sentences.
The glue which holds our nucleosides together is a phosphate functional group.
Now, by attaching a phosphate group at the five prime position on the sugar of our nucleoside, we create a motif called a phosphoester.
This phosphoester group will be the linkage through which our nucleosides are connected to give our collection of building blocks order.
The collection of three crucial elements, information in the base, the backbone of the ribose, linking the glue of the phosphoester,
all together make up what is called a ribonucleotide.
A ribonucleotide is one complete subunit of RNA, ready to be linked to others to create a useful code.
So, let's put our simple code together, consisting of four ribonucleotides condensed into a chain.
We'll use our examples of cytidine monophosphate, uredine monophosphate, adenosine monophosphate, and guanidine monophosphate.
These will be our ribonucleotides.
Now, if we align them so that the five prime phosphoester of one can condense with the three prime hydroxyl of another,
we can form a phosphoester bridge between the two bases, producing three water molecules, in this case, as a byproduct.
So, here I put C, U, A, and G together in a very specific sequence.
Now, as a convention, we always read from the five prime end of the chain toward the three prime end of the chain.
Of course, this is a very small chain by biochemistry standards, as many RNA strands can be thousands of units long,
and they're all performing their functions in your body right now.
Among other functions, RNA is nature's messenger molecule.
Transports information from the genetic code stored in DNA, and it assists in the conversion of that information
into the vast library of proteins which our bodies use to regulate their biochemistry.
So, now we understand a bit about the structure of RNA, a complex biomolecule whose job is to act as the middleman,
getting information from your permanent genetic code to the site where that code is used to build other compounds.
Because the role of RNA is transmission of information, which is carried out on a fairly rapid timescale,
RNA itself doesn't need to endure for long periods of time to effectively perform its duties in living systems.
In fact, it's part of RNA's design that it can be broken down easily and its components recycled for use in creating more RNA as it's needed.
RNA already has a pretty stable backbone, but there's a chink in the armor, and it's right here at the 2' hydroxyl group.
This little nucleophile is hanging out right next to the phosphate ester group of the following nucleoside, which has an electrophilic phosphorous atom.
So, the connection may last for a while, but before long, a 2' hydroxyl of RNA just can't help but attack the phosphorous,
initiating a mechanism which ultimately cuts the chain that gives RNA its information-carrying ability.
So, RNA can carry huge amounts of information back and forth, being broken down and rebuilt as the organism needs it.
But there would be no information to transport or translate if there were no method of storing that information indefinitely until it's called upon.
This task of information storage falls to a close chemical cousin of RNA, the famous DNA.
The oxyribonucleic acid, or DNA for short, is another ribose-based biopolymer which serves a very different purpose.
DNA is very similar to RNA, consisting of a phosphate, sugar, and base to form what we call a deoxyribonucleotide.
But there are two key structural differences which make DNA more robust than RNA.
First, it's the lack of the 2' hydroxyl group of the beta ribofurinose sugar.
Instead, this group is replaced with a hydrogen, which is non-nucleophilic.
This removal of the one very specific oxygen from the ribose is the source of the deoxyribo portion of DNA's name.
With that promiscuous little nucleophile out of the picture, DNA hydrolyzes about 100 times slower than RNA.
And this makes DNA a much better choice, not for a short-lived messenger, but for the permanent storage of a genetic code which needs to last you the rest of your life.
A second feature of DNA, which makes it a more robust system, is the replacement of uracil with thymine, a methylated version of uracil.
Now, the reason for this difference is that cytosine itself can deaminate spontaneously to become uracil.
Now, obviously, when this happens to your DNA, this is bad news, your DNA just mutated.
But your body has a defense mechanism for this, a complex molecule called an enzyme,
which finds that uracil in your DNA and reaminates it to recover the original cytosine.
That's amazing, isn't it? Your body can actively repair this kind of damage to DNA.
Now, this incredible repair mechanism comes with a cost.
If DNA actually used uracil, how would the enzyme know which uracils to alter and which ones to leave alone?
Well, it wouldn't.
So, DNA instead uses thymine as the complementary base for cytosine.
The distinguishing methyl group is acting as a signal to the enzyme saying,
hey, I'm supposed to be here, please don't emanate me.
Of course, most of us are familiar with this form of DNA, the double helix.
This structure was first proposed by James Watson and Francis Crick,
two names which are often associated with it.
Of course, the truth is that the discovery of the DNA double helix was really the result of a concerted effort
on the part of many talented researchers over many decades.
In 1869, Friedrich Miescher first isolated DNA from the nuclei of cells.
It was this biological source which prompted him to name it nucleon,
a name which was later revised to DNA to better reflect its chemical composition.
Russian researcher Phoebus Levine was able to identify the individual components of DNA,
including sugars, phosphates and bases which comprised it.
But he lacked the necessary tools to properly explain exactly how each of these pieces came together to form a structure for DNA.
In the 1940s, Erwin Chargaff developed a method for isolating the bases from DNA samples,
and he found that the number of cytosine bases in any given sample very closely matched the number of guanine bases.
He also determined that the number of adenine bases closely tracked that of thymine.
In the 1950s, the X-ray crystallography lab of Maurice Wilkins and Rosalind Franklin at King's College
finally reached a milestone in genetics.
They were able to use a technique called X-ray diffraction to determine the spatial arrangement of atoms within the DNA molecule.
In the end, it was Watson and Crick, however, who made it to press first with their model of the double helix,
earning them their place in history.
What Watson and Crick proposed explained every observation to date.
The sugar, the phosphate and the base molecules found by Levine were all accounted for,
and equal amounts of purine and pyrimidine bases from Chargaff's experiments were also easily explained.
Even the crystallography data from Wilhelm and Franklin's labs, as well as their own,
all clearly showed that this helical structure held them all together.
The key to putting it all together was that the two bases, adenine and thymine,
when held in place by the proposed helix, form a network of hydrogen bonds, causing them to pair up.
Now, guanine and cytosine form a similar set, but this time with three hydrogen bonds, when placed on adjacent strands.
So these base pairs, and their noncovalent interactions, which we now call Watson-Crick pairs,
are what hold the two strands of DNA together in this anti-parallel alignment with one another.
That's right, the double helix in your DNA is held together by little more than a few hydrogen bonds.
Okay, in the human genome, it's about seven or eight billion hydrogen bonds for every strand of DNA.
But there's even more interaction going on within those base pairs.
The pi systems of neighbors stack with one another, creating a strong contributing dispersion force between their electron clouds,
which holds them together even more.
And this interaction has been successfully targeted as a site for anti-tumor drugs.
See, they can slip in between adjacent bases in rapidly growing cancer cells,
and this causes kinks in their DNA strands, inhibiting their ability to replicate and grow.
DNA is a very exciting structure to study in and of itself.
But in recent decades, research has gone well beyond simply characterizing this fascinating structure.
Ingenious molecular biologists and chemists have devised new applications
using the understanding of DNA given to us by all those who came before.
Probably the most well-known of these is the art of DNA profiling,
identifying an individual and linking them to even the smallest hair, skin, or fluid sample,
usually for the purpose of forensics.
Now there's a common misconception that the sheer size of the human genome makes DNA fingerprinting statistically irrefutable.
And this is because some believe that it involves characterizing the entire genome of an individual
and comparing it to yet another entire genome from a sample found elsewhere.
But this is not the case.
It can't be, since DNA testing was used long before Venter completed the human genome in 2000.
Now the truth is that a DNA fingerprint is a bit less reliable, but only slightly so.
See, some of the DNA which makes us human is very similar from one person to the next.
In particular, the portions of DNA which code for proteins, sometimes called coding DNA, is highly similar.
But not all DNA codes for proteins.
In fact, much of it is used as a structural support which holds the coding pieces of the sequence
in their proper place or performs other non-coding functions.
These structural support regions of DNA are sometimes called junk DNA.
This is an unfortunate choice of language because without the genes, without it, the genes which your body expresses
to keep you alive wouldn't function properly.
So this hardly sounds like junk to me.
Nonetheless, the exact sequence in size of these regions is not as crucial as those comprising coding regions.
And nature knows this, so she lets us get away with greater variability in these regions of our DNA.
Now there are several methods for what is commonly referred to as DNA fingerprinting,
and all of them focus on non-coding regions of DNA.
In all of the techniques, a special process called the polymerase chain reaction, or PCR,
is used to induce a DNA sample to replicate, creating a huge number of copies of DNA.
We call this process amplification, and this is why just a vanishingly small physical sample
is all that is needed for this kind of technique.
In early methods, a special enzyme known as a restriction enzyme was then added to the amplified mixture.
The restriction enzyme cuts the amplified DNA,
but only at very specific points defined by the DNA.
This hydrolysis creates a set of fragments whose sizes are unique to an individual.
The fragments are then analyzed using a technique known as gel electrophoresis,
which uses an electrostatic potential to drag pieces of DNA through a thick gel.
This sorts the fragments by size, producing a pattern that is not a single strand,
but a single strand.
More modern testing involves the selective amplification of non-coding regions of DNA
from specific sequence starts, allowing us to bypass the use of a restriction enzyme altogether.
But the essential concept remains the same.
The statistical likelihood of the number and size of the fragments created by your own DNA
is the same as the number and size of the fragments created by your own DNA.
The number of fragments created by your so-called junk DNA and mine is vanishingly small.
Another game-changing use found for DNA is in the production of proteins for chemical research and as medical therapies.
We'll be discussing proteins in detail in our next lecture,
but for now I want to focus on just one of them called human insulin.
Human insulin is a relatively small protein, but it is crucial to proper blood sugar management.
And adults with type 2 diabetes suffer from an inability to produce the insulin needed
to properly manage this critical solute in their blood.
For decades, sufferers had to inject themselves with solutions of insulin taken from the pancreas of pigs,
which is a great solution for most of the population,
but a small variation in the pig version of insulin elicited an allergic reaction in a small fraction of patients.
So it would be much better if we could offer perfect copies of human insulin for therapies like this.
Enter DNA in the world of microbiology.
For the past few decades, patients requiring insulin therapy get not the pig version of the protein,
but an exact copy of human insulin, and it doesn't come from the pancreas of a human either.
See, scientists take the DNA sequence, which codes for human insulin,
and they insert it into the DNA sequence of E. coli bacteria.
Now, don't panic, this is a non-pathogenic strain of the bacteria,
and it's dead long before the therapy is actually conducted on a person.
See, the bacterial DNA is modified in three important ways.
First, the native genes in the bacteria which code for enzymes that chew up foreign materials are removed.
Second, the gene coding for the desired protein is then inserted.
And third, a special trigger is placed right next to that gene that's been inserted.
And in the presence of the proper signaling molecule, this trigger will induce the bacteria to express a huge quantity of that inserted gene.
With no protective enzymes to clean up the huge quantity of protein being created,
the bacteria are utterly helpless.
They express and express and express until eventually they're not much more than microscopic bags of human insulin.
And these bags are then broken open and their contents collected for use in human insulin therapy.
Now, I'll bet you never thought you'd see the day when E. coli would be an asset to human health.
In truth, it already has been for decades.
The sensational impact that our understanding of DNA has on society makes it a central topic on any lecture covering nucleic acids.
But I don't want you to fall into the trap of thinking that DNA and RNA are the only way that these powerful little molecules drive biological processes.
A denizen, for example, is not only one of the four nucleotides used to produce RNA,
but it's also one of the body's energy storage vehicles.
When sugars are oxidized in cells, some of the energy produced is used to produce a denizen triphosphate,
which contains three phosphate ester groups attached to the five prime carbon of the nucleotide.
The phosphate ester bonds are somewhat unstable,
and that should be immediately evident from the concentration of all that negative charge in such a small space.
So breaking just one of them can release a considerable amount of energy,
not only as a result of hydrating a phosphate, but also relieving the clash of charges.
In the process, about 31 kilojoules per mole or about 7.3 kilocalories per mole is released.
Among other things, this ATP to ADP conversion serves as a quick source of stored energy for muscle contraction.
This is the process which many athletic supplements claim to target.
Most notably, the wildly successful supplement, creatine.
Now, creatine is used as a vehicle in the body to transport phosphate, which is transferred to ADP by an enzyme called creatine kinase.
It's this function that some believe gives creatine supplementation the ability to increase endurance during exercise.
Whether creatine supplementation improves physical performance significantly is still a matter of some debate.
But what is inarguable is that it generates hundreds of millions of dollars of annual sales in the U.S. alone,
and it's all based on its ability to phosphorylate ADP.
So let's summarize.
In this lecture, we dug deep into the structure of some familiar biopolymers, RNA and DNA.
We looked at the structure of ribose and its beta-D-pheronose form, which makes up part of the backbone of RNA.
We saw how four different aglaicones attached to this ring lead to the four RNA nucleosides,
which we call cytosine and ureidine, the pyrimidine-based ones, and adenine and guanine, the purine-based nucleosides.
Then we took a look at the phosphate ester linkage, which starts with the five-prime carbon of a nucleoside, making it a nucleotide.
When connected to another nucleotide through its three-prime hydroxyl, we have the makings of RNA,
the molecule responsible for translating the genetic code into proteins.
After that, we considered the source of that genetic code, DNA.
We saw how DNA is tailored to provide a long-lasting informational template by the removal of the two-prime hydroxyl group from ribose to slow hydrolysis,
and by replacement of uracil with thymine to provide a system which can be easily repaired when cytosine is damaged by deamination.
We saw how the double helix was discovered and how it explains so much about the previous 90 years of observations by geneticists and chemists.
Next, we looked at how DNA can be used as a substitute for fingerprinting, providing a much more easily left and much more accurately matched identifier for victims and perpetrators of crimes.
We also saw how genetics has given us a way to use DNA to manipulate the biochemistry of bacteria, exploiting their biochemistry to create therapeutic agents for humans.
And finally, we looked at how nucleotides themselves can serve as energy storage units in living systems.
Specifically, we saw how the conversion from ATP to ADP releases a large amount of energy, which the body can use for muscle contraction,
and how creatine and creatine phosphate can help to reload this reaction so it can be used again.
This prompts athletes around the world to munch down grams of this organic compound on a daily basis.
In our next lecture, we will concern ourselves with the downstream end of biology's central dogma, proteins.
We will learn about the structure of amino acids and how they come together, both in biological systems and in the lab,
to create the powerful enzyme catalysts that I've described to you in this lecture.
I'll see you then.
