Hello, can everyone hear me?
Good morning, everyone. Welcome to the morning session and our first speaker is Eli Azar from Macquarie University, who will tell us about stone type dualities from categorical first principle.
Thank you and thank you to all the organizers for allowing me to speak as well.
I will, first of all, say that this topic has been discussed yesterday, so the background. And so I'm sorry if it's boring for some.
I will also say that the first half of this talk is based on my master's work under the supervision of Richard Ghana, and the second half is is my current work also under Richard Ghana and Ross straight, and I'd like to thank them as well.
Okay, so let's get started.
First of all, classical stone duality and equivalence of categories between the opposite of Boolean algebras and the category of stone spaces also known as Boolean spaces, or totally disconnected compact household spaces.
So compact household spaces with an extra separation condition.
This was proved in the 1930s by stone and was one of the first equivalences of categories that was genuinely kind of non trivial.
And for that reason, it might be surprising that there hasn't really been a very nice clean kind of categorical proof of it.
It's just illuminating if you like. So, one of the one of the formulations that does exist is is using dualizing objects.
Here, the Boolean algebra be is sent to the it's home set in dad with operations.
And those are the pre image of the maps into two correspond to ultra filters on be.
And then the other direction, we home into the discrete space with with two of the two elements set as it's underlying set.
Now, we might wonder what, what can we do to try and formulate this in a nice way.
And something that might be, it might seem kind of related, but not necessarily, you know, expected to be totally related is the ultra filter monad, which is known.
Well known as the co density monad for the inclusion of finite sets into sets.
Now, first of all, I'm just going to give you, if you haven't seen ultra filters before really not really familiar with them, then I'm not going to give you a formal definition because it won't sink in in this short of time.
But basically, they're awkwardly closed.
So kind of maximal in the in in the Boolean algebra and a maximal proper subset and I've got my diagram there.
Okay, so, so the ultra filter monad can also be being given as the composition of this adjunction.
So, here, in one direction we have a set going to its set of subsets, i.e. the power set as a Boolean algebra.
And in the other direction, we have just the set of ultra filters on that Boolean algebra. And I've just written here the unit and co unit very straightforward.
Now, the monad itself, it sends a set to its set of ultra filters, just the composition of those two obviously.
And this, this can be regarded as, as sending a set regarded as a discrete space to to its own check compactification.
Now, in the late 60s, Manas proved the result that the the algebras for the ultra filter monad are in fact compact house door spaces.
So I'm making it clear that they are algebras in the universal sense, albeit with operations of infinite parity.
And this also might seem a little bit surprising, I feel like there's a few things that might seem a bit surprising in this talk, and I hope, I hope you as my listeners will find will find it interesting because of these little surprises.
I will give a very brief kind of overview of how this can be this result can be seen.
It requires two salient facts here.
One is that ultra filter convergence is a is is a description that can completely determine topological topological space as in you can you can give a topological space in terms of open sets or ultra filter convergence and and that is a perfectly reasonable description of a topological space.
The second.
Sorry, that shouldn't have been coming through.
The second fact is that compact house door spaces are particularly nice.
I'm going to go back to ultra filter convergence because compact spaces have at least one point of convergence and house door spaces have at most one point of convergence which means you have a function from the set of ultra filters to to a space.
So,
so then, as I let me come back to what I was saying about we might wonder how we can, how we can extract stone duality in some nice way from something that seems slightly unrelated as in the ultra filter monad.
Here I've depicted the comparison functor.
And this sends a Boolean algebra to to the algebra of cloak and subsets that is formed by using that Boolean algebra is the cloak and subsets. It's sorry, I should restate that you take the Boolean algebra and the elements of the the ultra filters.
Sorry, um,
haven't had a lot of sleep lately.
Um,
we take the algebra of cloak and subsets anyway.
Okay, so, so on the right we have the the free and forgetful functors and as I kind of alluded to earlier the free functor is the the stone check compactification
of the set regarded as a discrete space.
Now,
the books adjoint triangle theorem tells us that Kay has a left adjoint and
and in fact we have this result that the left adjoint is quite explicitly given as this equalizer in the category of Boolean algebras.
And this, this does send
needs
mixing things up mixing my words up. This does send a space to the algebra of its cloak and subsets.
Okay, so
so firstly we have that the the co unit for this KL adjunction is in is invertible.
And thus we can say that the comparison function is full and faithful.
Now it seems like it would be a little too nice.
If the essential image of the comparison function was the category of stone spaces.
But um,
that does indeed end up occurring.
So,
so it turns out that the unit for this junction is invertible precisely at the category, sorry, at objects which have stone spaces.
And this is a really clean and nice kind of categorical account of stone spaces.
And we can therefore say that the essential image of the comparison functor for the ultra filter monad
is therefore the category of stone spaces.
And so we have that this
this adjunction restricts to classical stone duality which is what we wanted.
We might ask how we can extend this result and use it.
You know, in other stone type dualities, there are many, many
generalizations of stone duality that have been done over the years.
And we saw one yesterday in Marco Abedini's talk with with priestly spaces.
And in fact, this is
this machinery does work in that case. And I showed this also in my in my master's work.
I'm not going to go into very much detail here because I'm not going to have time, but
but I can say that using the prime filter monad, we can extract priestly spaces in the same way and I will also note that
the category of algebras post it to the beta here, beta has is in fact the compact ordered spaces introduced by
Nathan that Marco Abedini discussed yesterday.
So, so what else could we do with this machinery?
As I said, there are many, many generalizations of stone duality.
And one, one thing that has been worked on more recently than than priestly in the 70s or stones original result is that of skewbully and algebras and
I imagine not many people are going to have any familiarity with those so I will give a bit of an overview and I will first tell you what what the result is.
So, this is this can be considered a non commutative stone duality, and this was shown by could drive Civa really hope I'm pronouncing that correctly in 2012.
And she showed that let's skewbully and algebras with the P refers to proper maps don't worry too much about that.
And the category of sheaves over locally compact stone spaces.
And the maps here the morphisms in the sheaves over locally compact stone spaces aren't what you might think, but I will get to that.
Okay, so I'm going to tell you a bit about skewbully and algebras as I said, so let's skewbully and algebras in particular here, we have non commutative binary operations meet and join.
And the binary operation zero which acts as a normal bottom element in a lattice.
And a binary operation called difference, and these might seem like not very illuminating, but I will give some examples, and hopefully they'll become a little bit more clear.
The first example I'm going to give is is in some sense, kind of the canonical example.
So take a set and be and take part a be to the set of all partial functions from a from a to be so given two partial functions in part a be F and G.
And we can define our operations as follows F meet G is given by the restriction of of the domain to to the intersection of the two functions and and then taking just the left one and this this is the left part of the skew the skew description.
So I've tried hopefully this is all clear from my pictures I think they basically tell everything here difference and and the empty function is zero.
So, so now I'm going to also introduce another another example.
So, I discussed earlier, the two elements set being this kind of special thing in stone duality and, or rather, it objects with an underlying set being the two elements set have kind of a special role in in classical stone duality.
This is also the case in increasingly duality I would note.
And this is, this is what I chose as an example for that reason.
So three L is is the bull is the skew bully in algebra that has two non zero elements here I've labeled them one a and one B, and they have operations that are given by the equations I've given on on the right.
And you can we can take what's called a D quotient this comes from semi group theory.
And we can take the ones which are in what's called a D class, and the zero is always in its own D class and we quotient.
And we get the two elements in algebra which of course is is a skew bully in algebra.
Just sort of degenerate case.
Okay.
So now I'm going to talk about something that seems really quite surprising, I suppose, seems completely unrelated to skew bully in algebras.
And that's the category of polynomial functions on set.
Now, I'm going to give you a script like you might be familiar with this category, but the presentation that I'm giving might not be that familiar.
So I will, I will go over it here.
So we can describe the objects as functions.
So p and q and then a morphism is a pair of functions f and g such that this diagram commutes.
And, and therefore, these morphisms aren't these sorry these morphisms are a pair of functions between any objects.
Okay.
So we now we have an adjunction from poly to let skew bully in algebras and here we can think of poly is taking the place of of set in the ultra filter monad.
And we have in one direction the left adjoint is is induced by homing into this one down to two, which, which just picks out true.
And an object is sent to the partial sections on on the power set of of the base.
And these can also be written as I've written them down the bottom.
Okay.
So, the ultra chief monad was introduced by Kenison in 1981.
And this takes this takes an polynomial funky here to at the bottom.
It's just the stone check classification that we saw before beta and the, the, the top element that's sorry the top is given by
the fibers are given by by the push forward of the unit of of the ultra filter monad.
And it, it turns out that the fiber over any over an ultra filter is actually is actually an ultra product, which is quite is really quite interesting and nice and
very unexpected in my opinion.
Okay, so, so here we can we have this theorem by Kenison that the algebras for the ultra chief monad sheaves over compact house of spaces.
And in fact, we can now say that the the morphisms that we saw in poly of what the morphisms look like here, rather than the ones that you might think.
Okay, so, so we can ask is the comparison front of full and faithful here as well.
And it seems like it's probably not, which is sad.
So, so coming back to could drive and see this result.
And we have sheaves over locally compact stone spaces, which is not really what you would want here for it to be truly what we want we would want sheaves over stone spaces, which is
a result that comes out of this, but only if you restrict on the category of rescue bully and algebras to to objects whose D quotient is actually a bully and algebra.
And that's not the case for all of them some of them are generalized bully and algebras if you're familiar with those but if not don't worry about it.
So, so currently, I'm working on what, what can we get like we need to restrict on both sides to get the duality with sheaves over stone spaces.
But what else can we do with this adjunction and
and that's basically my, my current project.
So, basically, this will restrict to in in the normal just image of the comparison, essential image of the comparison functor.
Don't know.
Don't really know yet.
So, thank you for listening. And sorry, I went a little bit over time.
So thank you for your talk. Now we have some time for two questions at most. So, in, first I asked in the room if there's anyone who would like to ask a question.
Hi.
Thanks for the talk. It was really interesting seeing stone duality from this new perspective.
I, I agree with you when you say that it's quite surprising that you get sheaves coming out at the end of it so my question is quite open ended I wanted to know whether you could give any intuition for why we might see she's
I think that one of the main things that you can think about is that just great sheaves are just, you know, index sets.
So, I think once you kind of think about that and then apply the stone check compactification kind of process and it becomes more obvious, but saying that this is very much yet work in progress so that's really all I can say at this point.
Does that help.
Thank you. There's another question from.
Hello.
So I just wanted to know whether this, this work has a connection with the PhD thesis of some bangol, which was on this topic if I remember correctly.
Absolutely. And so, so this is very much related to to send bangles pieces.
So from, I'm trying to remember.
I believe it was he also extended this to skew.
I believe he extended this to to skew lattices skew distributive lattices, and this is actually where where we'll be looking at next and therefore potentially sheaves.
So one of the local priestly spaces is the result. That's from a paper by my Gherka, Sam then cool Andre bow and and some other people.
Sorry, can't remember exactly who but yes, absolutely this is related. And in this case we'll be taking.
In that case we'll be taking
partially ordered sets in as our.
We'll be looking at some kind of category of polynomial functions on the category of partially ordered sets in a completely analogous way to have this is working for stone duality.
So we'll be the print. So extending it to bracelet reality and
bracelet type duality for skew lattices. Thank you.
Oh, thank you very much. I think we have to stop the discussion here to be on time. Thank you again for your talk.
Thank you.
We have two minutes break.
