Welcome, everybody. Thanks for coming to this session. So I'm Evan Trepliki. I'm the designer
of the Elm programming language. And I got started on it about seven years ago with a
paper called Elm Concurrent FRP for Functional Goose. And I was like, I really think I can
make this functional programming stuff easier. And I didn't nail it immediately with that
title. But I had this idea of this experience with type functional programming that was
really joyful. And what I wanted to get out with Elm was I wanted to take that part that
I felt was so fun and make it accessible to other people and share that joy that I had
felt. And so part of that is technical. You have to write a compiler and all this kind
of stuff. But another part is like practical stuff. Like getting set up should be easy.
And that was part of what was important to me having spent a whole day just trying to
learn something, trying to see if something was interesting and being really frustrated.
Another piece of that was if program is going to be fun, I want the community to be friendly.
I didn't want it to be a cool club for the cool kids. You know, oh, we're functional
programmers and you're not because you're dumb. Like, I didn't relate to that. I just
had a nice time programming and I wanted to share that nice time in the same way that
I like sushi. And I might say, hey, you should try it out. It's pretty nice. And so I might
say, no, thanks. Oh, okay. You know, that's the kind of interactions I wanted to have
because it was just about having this experience. So as I've talked to more open source developers,
people who design languages, people work on databases, people work on machine learning
or discussion platforms or environmental sensors, however much we disagree on design
or what our goals are, we all have stories in common about like having a friendly community
is really, really difficult. And that's one of the places in open source where, you know,
as good as you can be at the technical stuff, like you don't have a lot of, ultimately, you
can't control what's going to happen. And if someone's going to yell, it's like, I wish
that didn't happen. So I've been doing this for about seven years now and I've started
to notice some patterns of behavior that I think probably a lot of people who've worked
in open source with larger prize will relate to. So one is this, why don't you just? And
in Elm, it's like, why don't you just get the JS API directly or release an incremental
version instead of a bigger release or, hey, can we derive JSON decoders? And the short
answer in all these cases is that it's more complex than it sounds. Like if there's something
that you can think of in five minutes or an hour or a day, probably someone has thought
about that and considered it. And there might be implications that you don't see from your
perspective, but someone else in the community might have a problem with that that's not
obvious to you. So when you're doing design, why don't you just? It's like, well, there's
all these different parties that we have to sort of make things work for. And I can do
my best on my intuition, but ultimately, even after I spend like a week trying to design
something that way, I need to go out and show it to people and see what objections they
bring and then maybe do it with another design. So this why don't you just is like, it's quite
frustrating. And one thing that happens is there's a lot of people who are new to the
project. So maybe there's 10,000 people who might be curious, like, oh, why don't you
just try out this kind of thing? And the number of people who know the full context is pretty
small. So maybe there's like 10, 20 people. So if it takes five minutes to say, why don't
you just blah, blah, blah? And it takes two pages of writing. And you have to write it
very carefully because if you're an influential community member, people will refer back to
what you said four or five years ago and say like, man, there's such a jerk here. Here's
the evidence. They said this in 2013. And it's like, yeah, yeah, yeah, I said that in
2013. Yeah. So one thing that's common is like, well, if it's so much work, like, why don't
you just delegate the work, right? So this is a comment I got in real life and the italics
are from the person talking to me. They said there's another way to deal with this, like,
delegation. And then they go on to describe how delegation works and what benefits it might
have. I was like, oh, very interesting. Yes, I hadn't thought about that. And they describe
a person who can do all this work. And they say this somebody, again, that is their italics,
can also be a proxy who's gathering feedback. So like, you don't have to be in these discussions.
So I was initially very upset about this. So like the unfiltered in my own mind version was
like, oh, hello, is this the somebody store? Yes, we'd like someone to take unsolicited advice on
the internet. Oh, yeah, it's it's really mean. Yeah, it's it's going to be rough. And no, yeah,
no one's going to say thank you. Yeah, no, it's it's unpaid. Yeah, it's unpaid. It takes you
don't have any. I was told there would be somebody who would do this. And, you know, so this was
me in my own life, like walking around my room, just like, and that's, you know, that's not a
healthy place to be. That's not how I want to look to a community. That's not what I want the
community. I'm a part of to be either. And when I took some time and thought about it more, I
realized there's actually like a pretty reasonable assumption going on here, which is like free
rice means you can take as much as you want. The rest is free. Take a lot of rice. And so does
that imply that free labor means you can use as much as you want? Well, the labor's free. But in
fact, this isn't how labor works. If you don't pay for labor, you get less. And so I think that's
sort of the root thing. It's like, Oh, well, it should be unlimited. Anyone can help. Now, let's
assume it is unlimited that everybody in the world actually can help. In practice, you actually
have to work together, right? These are highly technical projects. Are you able to work well
together? Is your goals with the project aligned? How much time does it take to coordinate with
that person to get stuff done? So even if you can work with anybody you want, there's still
these limitations on like who is going to be really effective in doing the right stuff. So I
wrote about that a little bit in this post. I think, no, sorry, Richard wrote about that in this
post here of like, what actually does it take to get involved? And it's like, it's not just somebody
store. So, you know, some people may be thinking like, you know, Evan, you're doing a lot of telling
us what's the situation, but like, who are you to say that? And so this is another pattern that I
see a lot. It's like on who's authority. And this is actually the title of a post that was sent
to the closure community. And the post started out, F closure. There I said it, and God, it feels
good. I say it with much admiration and respect to all the community members. And then they go on
to say some criticisms and talk about the relationship with women. And it's quite a roller
coaster of a post. But what's interesting, besides sort of like it as a journal entry, is that it
gets a lot of engagement, right? So 320 comments on the Reddit thread. I'm sure people talked about
it in other contexts as well, where there would have been more comments. And, you know, as someone
who's been working on an open source project for a bunch of years now, enough people have told me
that Elm is going to die next month. That I'm like, I don't think they're right this time. You know,
like I have that fear doesn't speak to me anymore because I have the experience. But there are
other people in the community who don't have that same experience. And like this can be like a
scary thing of like, man, people like aren't liking this thing. Are we doing something wrong? They
feel like maybe it could be better. They might get defensive. So in one of these 320 comments, the
creator of closure says, I found out about this while sitting down to spend my weekend contributing
to the closure ecosystem. Time spent in lieu of spending time with my wife, having already spent
my work week on other closure related stuff. And I relate to this a lot. I've definitely written
like, hey, like we, I get there's different viewpoints, but like we can't yell our viewpoints at
each other. And that was my Saturday. And, you know, as you work over the course of the years,
like, there can only be so many Saturdays that are like that before it starts to hurt you in larger
ways. So Rich Chicky goes on to say, you know, every time I have to process a diatribe like this,
and it's aftermath, the effects on myself, my family and my coworkers, I have to struggle back
from why should I bother? And every time it gets harder to justify to myself and my family that
it's worth the time, energy and emotional burden. Now, I've talked to some people about this post
and they, they thought different things stood out to me. This last part is what stands out,
because I think a lot of people in open source feel this way and like would never say it out loud.
I was really surprised to see it that way. And it kind of gave me some confidence to talk about
that kind of stuff as well. So, you know, we have our posts like this in the Elm community
with a bunch of comments as well. And I see it not just as like, oh man, this is hard for me to
process, but the people I work with have a hard time processing it. And then if you just add up
all the time, let's say maybe 10 minutes is spent on each of these comments, which I think is low,
like a conservative estimate. We're talking about like 50 hours for this one, that's just like
dealing with someone's anger. And could that have been helping someone new or spending time with
some family members or like learning some hobby that could get you out of work and get you like
a more healthy attitude? So, one thing I hear a lot when I talk about this stuff is like, if it
makes you so mad, why don't you just not read it? Why don't you just not read it? So, another pattern
that's really common is that all discussion is constructive. You know, I'm just saying how I
feel. I feel like F you, and I respect you a lot. And you know, I think you're an idiot, but like,
I really learned a lot from you. And like, that's a difficult, like personal relations to have,
I don't know if people have people like that in their life, but that's a difficult thing to deal
with a lot. So, one discussion that was along these lines is like, should Elm have user definable
infix operators? This came up recently with our recent release. And if we just focus on this
question, like textually, someone might say, yeah, there are cases where it makes code shorter
and more convenient. And someone else might say, no, because it can make code harder to read,
especially in a large team. And you know, textually, like, this is an interesting argument. Like,
yeah, it can make coach. That's a good point. And it might hurt people in a large team. And then
onlookers will sort of say, oh, which one seems to make more sense to me? But when you take a step
back and stop thinking of it just as like a textual argument about who is right and who's wrong
and say, okay, all these people have different priorities. Some of them may value flexibility
a lot. And some people might value simplicity a lot. And all these people exist on this
with different priorities. So the person who's like, yeah, we should have this,
really might value flexibility. And the person who says no is saying, well,
if like all these benefits are telling me about flexibility or like how code can be shorter
and more convenient, it's like, that's not persuasive to me. Like, that's not a good
rational argument because it's not important. And likewise, you know, how does it work on
a large team? It's like, well, that doesn't, it doesn't matter. It's not about that. And all the
people exist on this spectrum is with different priorities as well. So they're evaluating it
not as which is the true objective argument, but given my priorities, which is the one that
makes the most sense to me. So I've come to see constructive discussion is about mutual understanding
rather than mutual agreement. And a lot of discussions online are like, we're going to get
to a point where you agree with me rather than saying like, huh, this person's seeing it different.
Why is that maybe they're seeing something I don't. So
when I take a step back and think about these different patterns, I just think like, why,
why is this happening? You know, I don't have problems like this in normal life. You know,
if I'm at an Elm conference or a meetup or like nothing ever is so emotionally difficult as these
interactions. So I found this documentary called All Watched Over by Machines of Loving Grace by
Adam Curtis. It's excellent as is all of his work. And that sort of taught me or I found through that
a book called From Counterculture to Cyberculture. So this revealed to me a sort of an intellectual
history going back to the 1950s that really helps explain what's going on in open source right now.
So it traces things from a book called The Human Use of Human Beings. So this came out of MIT in
like 1952 by a person who had created artillery that could automatically track planes and shoot them
down. And then the whole earth catalog, which was popular in the back to the land movement. So
a lot of people on communes might have bought this, but it was a much larger thing than that.
And then finally the Electronic Frontier Foundation, and it sort of ties these together in a very
interesting way. So we'll look at some of the things going on here. So in The Human Use of Human
Beings, Norbert Weiner introduces the idea of cybernetics. He defines it as the study of messages
as a means of controlling machinery and society. So it's a little weird. Okay, okay, fine. And as
you start to read it, it's like this way of like, let's not look at the person, but let's look at the
messages going around, and that's how we'll think about how the world works. And so you see things
like words such as life, purpose, and soul are grossly inadequate to precise scientific thinking,
which is it's like fair enough, but also like those things like life and purpose are like
pretty important to people as well to consider. But you know, a person's just a special sort of
machine, right? Like we can consider it as a thing that takes inputs and does stuff. Emotions are
just a useless epiphenomenon. That's real. He said that. Another thing he's like, we have
modified our environment so radically that we must now modify ourselves in order to exist in
this new environment. So it's sort of how can we take a person and simplify it down to a machine
or a system that we can understand well? And then once we're starting to think of people that way,
well, we can improve machines. We can add things to them and the machines get more
capabilities. Maybe that's how we move forward as people. And life and purpose is like that.
We can't go back to that. It's too different now. So the sort of connecting thread and whole
earth catalog besides Stuart Brand, the author of this knowing a bunch of the people in the
cybernetics group, is this idea of access to tools, right? So like we are now, our relationship
with our tools is going to be how we move forward. So this catalog starts with we are as gods and
we might as well get good at it. So far, remotely done power and glory as government, big business,
formal education, church has succeeded to the point where the gross defects obscure actual gains.
In response, personal power is developing. So he's focused on a bunch of different topics.
And so education, finding inspiration, shaping his environment, sharing the adventure. Now,
keep in mind this is written in 1969. So this is before the internet. And if you read these
points as like what an ideal view of the internet should be, it works really well. Like you can
find out all sorts of interesting stuff. You can be inspired by what's going on out there. You can
find a place where you really fit in, even if you don't fit in, in your local community that has
different values than you. And you can share that with whoever you want to. Like there's this place
for self-expression. And so he says tools that aid this process are sought and promoted by the
whole earth catalog. So some people have argued that this is sort of like the what preceded the
internet. It sort of foresaw what was going to happen there. And this publication and the
creator, Stuart Brand, had been really influential. So one of the positive quotes is when I was young,
there was an amazing publication called the whole earth catalog, which was one of the
Bibles of my generation. So that was Steve Jobs. There was a project that Stuart Brand created
called the 10,000 year clock, which Jeff Bezos helped fund with $42 million. So what is this,
like this book that was popular on back to the land communes, became very influential because of this
how tools and like a rejection of hierarchy, we're somehow in this new place where we're
going to choose our own future through our connection with tools. And finally, the electronic
frontier foundation. Interestingly, the founders of this met on the whole earth
electronic link, one of the earliest bullet or message boards. And so one of the founders
wrote the declaration of independence of cyberspace, governments of the industrial world,
you weary giants of flesh and steel, you have no sovereignty where we gather. I declare the global
space, social space we are building to be naturally independent of the tyrannies you seek to impose on
us. So again, you see this like distrust of hierarchy, big businesses failed, government has
failed. We are going to find a new way through this thing. So one of the early cases that the
electronic frontier foundation that inspired the creation of this foundation was there was a
programmer called Lloyd Blankenship. And Bell South found that some of their 911 alert system
documentation had been posted on a bulletin board. And so they got the secret service involved
and took some computers that might have sensitive information. So Lloyd was arrested and the
electronic frontier foundation like was created around that time to help protect people in the
situation. So after Lloyd was arrested, he wrote something called the hackers manifesto,
which I think gives a raw version of what's going on in this world. So he says,
I'm smarter than most of the other kids. This crap they teach us bores me.
I've listened to my teacher explain for the 15th time how to reduce a fraction.
I understand it. No, Miss Smith, I didn't show my work. I did it in my head.
And you can see, well, he says, I made a discovery today. I found a computer. It does what I
want it to do. If I make a mistake, it's because I screwed up, not because it doesn't like me,
or it feels threatened by me, or it thinks I'm a smart ass, or it doesn't like teaching and
shouldn't be here. So you're seeing this, this guy is 21 when he's writing this. He's somebody
sort of very disillusioned, not just with government or big business, but like just his
classroom, the social environment he's living in. And he goes on to say, this is our world now.
We explore, but you call us criminals. You build atomic bombs, wage wars.
You try to make us believe it's for our own good, yet we're the criminals.
So again, you see that explicit distrust of hierarchy. And then finally,
my crime is that of outsmarting you, something you will never forgive me for.
So I don't know how many people who work on open source will recognize aspects of this attitude
and interactions they have. But there's sort of such a strong rejection of the social things
going on. It's like, well, the teacher who's not teaching you well has a bunch of other students,
and it's difficult to balance all their needs. Maybe it's malicious, but maybe there's another
reason. But this worldview is kind of like, I outsmarted you. You don't see it how I see it.
So when I take a step back on this intellectual pathway, the things I sort of draw out from
reading these books and things is, one, we're gods. Two, hierarchy has failed us. There's
sort of a deep distrust of hierarchical structures. I think rightly, there's a lot of bad things that
come out of hierarchy. And finally, order will emerge from the new technology. So when we reconsider
the patterns we've seen open source, stuff makes a lot of sense. So it's like, why don't you just?
It's like, haven't you, we can just, through reason and rationality, figure out the answer.
Why don't you just do the obvious thing? Hierarchy has failed us. So again, on whose
authority is coming out of this tradition of hierarchical structures haven't served us well.
We need to find a way that isn't structured in that way. Your authority as the author
is not legitimate on those grounds. And all discussion is constructive. It's like, well,
this is the new technology. This is what the new technology is producing. So this must be
the way forward to this place that we want to go. So I found this pathway really interesting,
and it informed, like, it helped me understand a lot what was going on. But it's just one of
a couple of different ways of looking at how we got to this level of conflict in open source.
So I'm calling this sort of the intellectual issue of freedom. People are primarily prioritizing
freedom. But there are other ones, such as people who are primarily prioritizing engagement.
So I want to start with a quote, the enormous expansion of communications has entirely transformed
the conditions of trade and commerce. Everything is done in haste at fever pitch. The night is
used for travel, the day for business, even holiday trips put strain on the nervous system.
And do people relate to that? Holiday trips being stressful? I feel that. Or I struggle with that,
at least. I try to take a break or whatever. Great political, industrial, and financial crises
carry this segment into far wider areas of the population than ever before.
Interest in political life has become universal. Tempers are inflamed by political, religious,
and social struggles, party politics, electioneering. Sound familiar to anybody?
Finally, people are forced to engage in a constant mental activity and robbed of the
time needed for relaxation, sleep, and rest. So if you had to guess when this was written,
it's reasonable. It could be this year, it could be 2017, or maybe someone was really
prophetic and they wrote it in like 1980. It's like, I see where this is all going.
So this is actually from something Freud wrote in 1902.
The part I left out is due to the worldwide telegraph and telephone networks
and the immense growth of trade unionism. So I mean, I think it makes sense that he would
have seen these kinds of things. He seems like a smart dude, or at least someone who's very
sensitive to human behavior. And so this is kind of where this intellectual history starts.
So we have Freud, but we're going to look at two other books. One is called Propaganda
from 1928, and one is called Nudge, much more recent from 2008. So with Propaganda,
this is written by Edward Bernays. This is actually Freud's nephew. The connections between
all these works are crazy. And as you look into any parts of these, like everybody met,
everybody worked with someone's nephew or cousin or mom, or it's very strange.
So this book is essentially a bunch of stories about how Edward Bernays sort of created the
idea of public relations. So one of the stories he tells is about torches of freedom.
So this was an ad campaign to break the taboo against women smoking. At the time men would
smoke, and it was acceptable to some degree, and women couldn't. It was very looked down upon.
So the president of the American Tobacco Company said, if we can break this taboo,
it'll be like a gold mine opening right in our front yard. So he hires Edward Bernays.
And what Edward Bernays does is he hires women who are good looking, but not too modally. That's
the quote I found good looking, but not too modally. To walk in an Easter Sunday parade
and smoke, he also hired photographers to get really good photos of these women,
and then distributed those photos to newspaper, like through newspaper connections that he had
to make sure it got published all around the world. So this torches of freedom idea was saying,
we see this trend about women's liberation happening, and like this is aligned with that
movement, and that this is a way of punching up against those taboos. But it's very focused on
like, hey, we're going to sell a bunch, we're going to make a bunch of money here. And so one of the
ads that came out of this was an ancient precious has been removed. And what's interesting about
this ad is that visually it's clearly about women smoking, but texturally it's saying toasting did
it. It's because they toast the tobacco, it's less harsh on your throat, and that's what has
removed the prejudice. So texturally, they can say, look, we're not getting into politics. We're
just saying that toasting is cool, and that's a lady who smokes. It's like, I don't see the problem.
But meanwhile, you have hired Edward Bernays to actually run this campaign. So, oh yeah,
I want to read a little bit from his book. This is the book. He says, the old-fashioned
propagandist using almost exclusively the appeal to the printed word tried to persuade the individual
reader to buy a definite article immediately. So his example of this is like, you buy O'Leary's
rubber bands now. And he's like, okay, that's the old-fashioned way. The modern propagandist
therefore sets to work to create the circumstances that will modify the custom. It doesn't matter
what this ad says. It's about creating circumstances such that the custom will change in whatever
direction someone pays me to change it. So another example he gives is for Mozart pianos.
So I don't know exactly the finances of Mozart pianos, but let's say they had 30% of market share
and he gets hired to make it higher. Maybe it can go to 35 or 40. That'd be a huge for Mozart
pianos. So Bernays comes in and he says, okay, I could say to people, will you please buy a piano,
but I'm not going to do that. I know that pianos have this sort of elite cachet. And so what I'm
going to do is I want to make an architecture expo in New York City where we're going to showcase
music parlors and we're going to bring in famous people, influential artists and musicians to
be in the rooms. We're going to have expensive tapestries and really lean into this elite picture
and promote it in our connections with newspapers. He also invites architects from all over the
country. He wants influential architects and they'll bring designs for music parlors. So what this
expo does is it creates a music parlor as an aspirational goal and it brings in architects
who will then go back to wherever they're from with designs for music parlors and they'll start
building houses that have that. And ideally they'll influence other architects who are not as
influential to add music parlors as well. And so instead of saying, hey, will you please buy this
piano, people are now saying, hey, I have this piano shaped hole that I need to fill. Like,
do you have something piano shaped? So again, the modern propagandist sets to work to create
the circumstances that will modify the custom. So this got modernized and sort of made a bit
nicer in nudge. So here we see a nudge is any aspect of a choice architecture that will alter
people's behavior in a predictable way without forbidding any options or significantly changing
their economic incentives. So this book has been really influential in tech recently. So one thing
that we're probably all familiar that's an example of this is autoplay of videos. So you just finished
a show. It ends on a cliffhanger because they wrote it that way. And you're like, man, that was
cool. And then you're like, oh, my body. Is it hungry? Does it need a walk? Did it have plans
for today? Or for anything? And then the music starts again and you're like, no, no.
So this is a nudge, right? You're free to do some other behavior, but through the choice
architecture that was created, a predictable amount of people don't make that free choice.
So this ended up being popular at Google. So if anyone's visited Google cafeterias, you'll
probably have seen all the food is marked with colors. So green means eat anytime. Yellow means
once in a while. Red means not often, please. And it's all marked. It's actually very helpful.
You can be like, oh, I just had one red thing today. It's kind of nice. But this interest in
colors changing people's behavior was used to Google in other ways. So when you look at the
history of their ad labeling, you see something similar. So when ads started, they sort of just
start by playing around with colors. It's like, well, maybe green is fun. Or maybe this lavender,
purple thing is the way to go. So in a new phase of things, you start to see, okay, well, let's
do something more white. Can it be something more white? Yeah, maybe a little more white, you know?
Well, how about something like a little more white? Like, all this color is like,
let's just put it in one place. We'll take all the saturation, put it in one place.
And like, hey, it works fine. No problem. And then it's like, well, that yellow is pretty ugly.
We could just, you know, it's still labeled. It's no problem. And then it's like, I mean,
who wanted it to be yellow? And I mean, it wasn't really that important. And then it's like, you
know, the background, I mean, people get it. They get it. So when you search for Italy tour, for
example, everything above the fold is an ad and it's labeled in this very, you know, subtle and
nice way. So I found this very interesting quote from the head of text ads at Google. He says,
we want to make it easier for our users to adjust information on the page. So we're gradually trying
to reduce the number of variations of colors and patterns on the page and bring a little bit more
harmony to the page. Like, we just want harmony. And that's why we reduced one of the color
elements on the page. We could have reduced other color elements. Yeah, it's just one color element.
Like, what's the big deal? So some of you may be thinking, like, Evan, if you're so mad about this,
you know, why don't you just change your default search? Like, you typed it into Safari, so clearly
that's the default. Well, another thing I learned when I was looking into this is Google paid $1
billion to Apple to keep the search bar on iPhones. Furthermore, these sums called traffic
acquisition costs rose to $5.5 billion or 23% of ad revenue. So we're in a situation where
a choice architecture has been created, you know, the circumstances have been modified such that,
you know, well, I don't mind searching in this way, or I could scroll down below these ads,
but I don't really want to. So the circumstances have been created such that custom is modified.
And if we wanted to mess with this, like, it's going to cost a lot of money, right? The fact that I,
that DuckDuckDog exists doesn't mean that they can compete with these kinds of
numbers. So I think this whole intellectual lineage leads to something that we see in online
communities a lot, which is like this, things are viral by design. So when Bernays starts an
advertising campaign, all these stories he tells, he always starts with a psychological hook. So
you might observe that people process emotions by sharing them with others. So that might look like,
you know, someone's going about their day, it's fine. And someone shows up and they're like,
that work you did last week, it was terrible. Like, it's not going to work out. It was really not
carefully considered. And that person feels sad. And that person goes, the person yelling at them
goes away. So they might mope around for a day or however long. And hopefully they run into a friend
who hears this story and they're like, oh man, that sucks. But, you know, I don't think that was
really a fair assessment. And through talking it through, the person can sort of deal with that
and move through. Another interaction that might be possible is you're going about your day and
someone says, did you hear about that terrible thing that's happening over there? And you say,
whoa, that's terrible. And then you see a friend and you say, hey, did you hear about that? And
they're like, oh, that's terrible. And they see some of their friends and they're like, man, that
thing over there is really bad. Viral. So when we're choosing what kind of messages we want to
put into society to control it, as the cyberneticist might say, this one has a very interesting
pattern. So when you get something that has a viral reaction, that's something that has more
engagement. And a lot of people who are running Silicon Valley companies in an idealistic way,
you know, they want to make the world better through tools, they're put in this choice architecture
where it's like you have, you know, these investors and you don't want to disappoint them. There's
all these people who work at your company, you don't want to lay them off. So do you want hashtag
disappointing Q3? Or do you want the viral one? So once you have this psychological hook, you can
start designing ways to make it work better. So the ones I sort of noticed have been to mix
extremes. So if we come back to our priorities graph of different people, these people don't
necessarily congregate in the same place. But what we really want to happen is for the most
extreme people to yell at each other as aggressively as possible. And so one way to do that might be
to put all the different programming communities in one place.
So if you look at sort of different online discussion forums, I think the degree to which
different communities collide will predict the amount of conflict that you see there. So on
Hacker News, I find that the sort of most difficult and most combative place. And then on the R
programming, you'll see more of that. And on the subreddits for individual languages, you'll see
less on places that are just community places that don't have accounts that are shared between
you'll see less. So another approach is to decontextualize the person. So instead of two people
talking, you have Tango dango talking to Foxtrot. And what's interesting here is like when they
saw each other's faces, they might be able to say, oh, this person isn't trying to be malicious.
They feel this way. But when it's Tango dango, it could literally be Hitler. It could.
You don't know. He's just in Argentina being like, infix operators are stupid.
Unclean. So another way to decontextualize things is to limit the amount of characters
that are available to people. Another way is to limit the kind of feedback that's available.
So instead of saying, hey, that was pretty hurtful, you say down. Like a lot of nuance is lost in
that sort of thing. So when I take a step back on all this, I think there's a big conflict here
where there's very powerful incentives for our interactions to go really poorly. And I don't
think the intellectual issue of freedom really is well set up to protect against that. Like if
you are living in a choice architecture that predictably alters people's behavior, yeah, you
were given a free choice, but you happen to choose a different thing 30% of the time.
So this got me interested in a different pathway. So I ask a lot, why don't I have any of these
problems in person? So like at work or at conferences or at meetups or on the street,
all these places are for something. So when a place is for something, you can ask what's
inappropriate behavior. If I'm at work and a discussion keeps going and going, at some point
it's like we have to stop having the discussion and make a choice. We can't be in discussion forever.
It's clear because of work is for work. And at a conference, it's against the norms to jump
up on a stage and being like, that's wrong. The idea is like you carefully select speakers who
might have something interesting to say to folks and try to efficiently and in a nice way present
that. At a meetup, if someone's being really aggressive, they're always like, oh, I need to go
to the bathroom. There's ways out of those kinds of conflicts or and you're talking face to face
on the street, you know, someone's like standing outside Starbucks and being like, I had better
coffee one time. It's like that's weird. That's weird behavior. And then and the croissants could
be done better. I don't know how, but they could. This isn't it. So this idea of like a place being
for something I think is really important. And so I had this idea for intentional communication.
And so the idea is that instead of just having a blank box you write into, you first choose
some intent. My intent is to learn, let's say. And I'll get prompted to say, okay, what's your
background? Maybe they started using Elm and they've been doing Java for a long time. And the
question is, why do I have to explicitly cast between int and float when doing math? And then I
can submit the post. So when that shows up, this question might have been read in a combative way.
Like, why do I have to explicitly cast between int and float when doing math? Or like, why do I have
to explicitly cast between? Like, both of those are valid interpretations of this text. But when
you give some background, it's like, okay, I see where this person is coming from. I can see why
they'd be frustrated with that. And it's really harder to read it in a malicious way. So instead
of just having a reply button, maybe you can say, okay, I can either ask for clarification or I can
give an answer. And so if I say, I'm going to give an answer, again, we might have this structured way
of replying. Restate the question, answer it, and then we can say, hey, we value citations. We value
like people backing up with evidence or experience. So maybe they give a citation and they can post
it. And so again, you get the answer. And the person asking says, oh, that's not the question I was
asking, actually. So that can really help clarify and make this process more efficient. So again,
instead of reply, maybe you say, ask for clarification or thank the person. And so there's a couple
of things you can add to this I think that would help. So one is the idea of conversation flows.
So we saw someone wants to learn, you can clarify or answer. If you choose to answer,
they can ask a clarifying question or thank you. Now if they clarify, maybe you give another answer.
But in the other pathways, say, hey, maybe can you give me an example to clarify your question?
They can restate it and then you can answer. So the point here is just that yell angrily isn't one
of the states in the discussion flow. It's unreachable. So this isn't to say that all discussion
should be this way. Because there are places where you want self-expression. You say, hey,
I had a really nice time at the park. Here's a photo of it. And someone says, oh, that's great.
That reminds me of last week we were clicking something really nice. And so you can have these
cycles. But when someone's doing self-expression, you say, man, that's really like a terrible thing
to say. Maybe you could have a conversation flow that says, hey, I want to learn about that
perspective. I don't want to tell you it's wrong. I just want to know why you feel that way.
So what might be interesting here is the discussion flows will be different depending
on the goals of the community. If it's about learning, it might be one way. If it's about
self-expression, it might be another way. And maybe you want safety valves to jump around.
So another thing that I think is interesting is say discussion is happening and it's getting
really out of control. And it's like, hey, this is nice. And then by the end, they're like,
your mom is a bad person. And she threw a bicycle on the ground. I don't know.
So this is where you don't really want things to go. So one thing that might be interesting is
when you see someone about to reply, say, hey, what would be a successful conclusion to this
interaction? Or would it be easier to chat for five minutes? Is there somewhere to take this
that's going to be more constructive? Like, what do you want to get out of this? Another thing that
might be really valuable. So we talked about private feed or sorry, upvote, downvote stuff.
When someone gets downvoted, they say, they think to themselves, these people who just can't take
it, you know, I outsmarted them and they can't accept that. But the people might actually be
saying, man, that was pretty rude and uncalled for. And so that feedback is not reaching that person
and they feel increasingly alienated by these kinds of reactions. Furthermore, these buttons
sort of uniquely pick out like, ah, I'm mad. Oh, I like that. So what we might be able to do instead
is say, hey, for any post, here's a couple of things that you might notice about it. Is it off
topic? Is it helpful? And if the goal of the place is to help professionals, maybe these are the ones
you want to choose. But if the goal is helping beginners, maybe you want to choose scary versus
encouraging or confusing versus clear. And if the place is about self-expression, maybe you want
to choose funny and downer. So there's a bunch of extras. I'm running out of time, so I'm going to
skip. But there's a lot of cool things to do here. So some people may be looking at this and thinking,
if a planned culture necessarily meant uniform, like, hey, like, all this planning is going to ruin
these communities. So I found this book, it says, if planned culture necessarily meant uniformity
and regimentation, it might indeed work against further evolution. If men were very much alike,
they would be less likely to hit upon or design new practices. And a culture which made people as
much alike as possible might slip into a standard pattern from which there would be no escape.
That would be bad design. But if we are looking for a variety, we should not fall back on accident.
Many accidental cultures have been marked by uniformity and regimentation. So this is from a
book called Beyond Freedom and Dignity by B.F. Skinner. And I think this is one of the clearest
books that's sort of recognizing that there are these people who understand choice architectures
and that freedom doesn't help you escape from choice architectures. Like, design of other
choice architectures is a way to deal with that. So ultimately, I'm not here to say, like, here's
one way that's right or the others. It's like, people are going to have different priorities
depending on, you know, their life and their experiences. I think the point that's important
is that there's a lot of people in open source communities who are getting hurt, right? So like,
it's hard emotionally to work on these kinds of projects. You see people around you getting hurt.
And just saying, well, people are just expressing themselves isn't solving the question. And we
have these very influential people controlling billions of dollars who have particular goals
for what happens in these communities. So I hope that's an interesting way to think about
the hard parts of open source. And I have a bunch of references if you're interested in looking
back on things. And I hope people will explore through programming, like creating the communities
that we kind of talked about. Maybe exploring intentional communication. And maybe it will
be beautiful. Maybe people won't use it. Maybe people will use it. And then it will just become
another tool for engagement. It's likely. We'll see. But thank you very much for your attention
and consideration.
