Welcome to our, our course on teacher algebras and group boys.
So I am Karen strong.
And I will be lecturing the first part of the series.
Starting with the basics of teacher algebras theory so I think probably some of this if you were attending benza and Thomas Thomas seminar will be a bit of a repeat but it's kind of hard to find a useful starting point without doing some panic algebra stuff.
So, I will be following this book at the beginning for the most part.
I will put a link up available online for very cheap but probably you can find it for free if you try, but I didn't say that. Okay, so that's for, but you can also look at.
There's a book by Murphy.
Yeah, teacher algebras and operators theory I think it's called this has more or less the same stuff at the beginning as does Davidson.
I think it's called the teacher algebras by example.
Yeah, so if you want to further reading or further information on anything we talk about, I suggest looking at those.
Okay, so without further ado, let's start.
If you have questions and you're online, please just unmute yourself and ask the easiest way although somebody Kristen here as well, and you can probably tell me if there's a comment in the chat.
Okay, so chapter one.
So any course on teacher algebras actually starts with panic algebras because a lot of the things you can say at the very beginning.
You can stay in this more general context. So, this lecture and possibly a little bit of the next will have some panic algebras.
So,
a panic algebras.
So a panic algebra
is a C algebra.
So all the algebras in this course are going to be over the complex numbers.
Sub multiplicative norm.
Let's call this a
So by some multiplicative I mean
the norm of a times C is always less than or equal to the norm of a times the norm of B
and we want it to be complete with respect to the norm.
So, I didn't say anything about a panic algebra necessarily having a unit.
But if a has a unit
it doesn't really require
that the norm of the unit
is equal to one so we normalize when possible.
So, for example, what these things are
we can take a topological space X
and we can look at
which is going to be functions from X
that are continuous and bounded.
So we can just equip this with point wise addition point wise multiplication, and we need a norm and the norm is just the soup norm.
Okay, so this is a nice example of a panic algebra.
The next example is somewhat similar.
Do I have room on this? No, I better move up. Okay, so let's call this a, I guess.
Well, like B, so now we take X to be a panic space
and we can look at the
bounded linear operators or continuous linear operators.
So here, the addition will be again to point wise for multiplication, we'll take composition of operators, and the norm that we want is the operator norm, and this norm will be quite often, I suppose in this course.
So that is just going to be
the maximum of the X.
So this is the norm in the panic space.
And we want this to be over all those elements with norm at most one.
So this is another very nice example of a panic algebra. I'm sure you've seen them before. So here's one more example.
So one thing I guess maybe to note is that this example here is going to be commutative, whereas this one won't.
So here's another example of a commutative one. So if we now take a measure space,
then we can look at L infinity.
These are measurable functions from XT
that are almost everywhere bounded.
So we want this, they're greater than this K on just a set of measure zero.
Okay, and then we do the obvious point point wise operations and the norm will be
the inf of G equals F, almost everywhere mu of the soup.
X, X of GX.
Okay.
So there's no shortage of panic algebras out there.
So the next, can you see me if I'm over here.
Next up.
We're going to talk about spectrum of an element.
Okay, so a here will be a unit old panic algebra.
Never mind, we don't even need panic just right away. So let's just take a unit real algebra. Again, this is over the complex numbers and take an element a and a.
Let's say that a is invertible.
In other words, if some B and a, that's that a D equals the A equals the units.
That's not the surprising definition and B you can check is going to be unique.
So we denote it by a inverse.
Now, I will denote the set of all invertible elements in our unit ol algebra by in a
form. Okay, so again, a is just going to be a unit ol algebra for now.
You need it to be a panic algebra.
And take an element a and a.
So let's find the spectrum of a
is that
here. So it's going to be all those elements in the such that one a
lambda minus a is not invertible.
So you'll undoubtedly have seen such definitions before, for example, in your algebra.
And this is, I guess, just really a generalization.
Okay, now, here's just the observation.
I suppose that a and B are in a and a B is invertible.
And let's call it inverse.
Let me check that one a minus be a
also invertible
inverse is just, I always forget this so to be one a plus be a and I'll just leave you to check that yourself, not so difficult.
So that gives us the first thing we can say about the spectrum.
The spectrum of a be the same as zero.
Same as the spectrum of be a minus zero.
That's a useful fact. No.
And will be useful.
The following.
Okay, so now let's
see if Z be a polynomial in one variable.
I'll denote such a thing by
Z.
And, okay, I'm going to more talk board.
I'll make work hard.
If we have such a polynomial.
Then, if a is a unit or algebra, we can define
the polynomial of a, just to be P a equals lambda director with lambda zero get lambda zero times unit plus lambda one a
minus, makes sense, clearly, an element in our algebra.
And then we have the following nice actual mapping theorem.
Let a be a unit or algebra.
And a, an element of a with non empty spectrum.
Then for any
polynomial.
We have the following.
The spectrum of this element P of a
same as the polynomial of the spec of a.
So this of course I just mean that
this is P of lambda
where lambda is in
there's some things that's got
Ah, okay. Thank you.
Sorry.
So,
Well, if our polynomial is constant, then this is fairly clear so we can assume otherwise.
Okay, now let you be a complex number and consider the polynomial.
He minus you.
Okay, this is a polynomial over C, so it's blitz.
So there exists.
Okay, so if you
Okay, so if new
spectrum of TV
then this just means that this will be invertible.
And
not so easy. It's not so difficult to see that if this is invertible then actually all of these have to be invertible.
So that tells us that
this new is in the spectrum of a if and only if there's lambda eyes are in the spectrum.
So,
just within this last bit here this means that
this new is in
the spectrum of a
that's one direction.
Maybe I can get the rest in right here.
Okay, conversely, if we have lambda
of a
then we want to look at P a minus
lambda
one a
and we can write this as one a minus lambda of B
for some B
and we know that this is not invertible. So, neither is this.
So,
which gives us the result.
Thank you.
Okay.
We have another useful tool here.
We have a now we need it to be a panic Algebra so we're going to need
this.
So, we want to use a panic Algebra now
and take some elements a with Norma most most one
then
one a minus a this is invertible
and what is it inverse
okay so
obviously such a thing doesn't make sense in an arbitrary Algebra
but
it does in a panic Algebra and why is that well
we look at the norm
then of course by the triangle inequality we can bring the sum out and then by some multiplicity
multiplicity
multiplicity, well, yeah
we had this and then this is now just a regular geometric series in our so this converges
and hence this guy does because we're in a complete
so it can convert just to some be so there's a well defined element.
So we would like to see that this is indeed the inverse as claim
very hard early in the morning. Okay, so let's see that this is indeed the inverse well that's not so hard, we just need to show that this is equal to one.
And of course this is just
and so if we replace this by some big and
what do we get, we get one minus a to the end.
Plus one
Wait, sorry.
Okay, and we know that a has norm less than one. So as n goes to infinity this will go to one
and of course we need to check it on the other side, but that's similar calculation.
Okay, so indeed, by uniqueness of the norm, we get that
he is indeed the inverse.
Sorry, right.
This is definitely not true.
I meant to write this is the inverse.
And what we're kind of working towards here is, we had this nice theorem over here but note, I had to specify that the spectrum wasn't empty.
But in a panic algebra, it turns out that we don't have to worry about that, because that will never happen.
It will be non empty.
We need a few lemmas to get there.
So the first is the following in our panic algebra.
Just considering the unit of case.
Then the set of invertible elements is actually an open subset.
The map that takes an element to inverse is in fact differentiable.
Okay, so let's first show that it's open.
All right, so take some a
in that are invertible.
And we want to show that if B is an a and it's sufficiently close.
Then it's also invertible.
And that will be enough to show that it's open.
Okay, so how close do we need it. Well, let's take a minus B
less than one over a inverse
the norm of a inverse.
Then, let us look at
one a minus B a inverse.
And we're going to aim at using the last theorem.
So what is this well that we can take out this a inverse
multiplicity. I don't know why I can't say that word, but you know, there we go.
Yes, I am in fact a native English speaker even so very embarrassing.
Okay, so this is less than one.
So we know that B a inverse is invertible.
And a similar calculation shows us that
a inverse B is also invertible.
So, we get that B time a inverse B a inverse.
Now we need to be. No, we don't. This is enough. This is equal to one.
And you can also get one would be on the other side by doing B here.
This should be a inverse and then this should be a inverse B inverse.
Okay, so you might say to me Karen these are not the same elements.
Right. So it's, this is not actually the inverse B, but you can play around and figure out just how to write the inverse of B in terms of of these things. It's not so hard.
So B is invertible as well.
This is the first part so
indeed open.
Okay, so the second part of our lemma
is to show that this is differentiable map.
Okay, so what do we want here to show
that this map a to a inverse is differentiable.
What we need is a linear operator.
A linear map
such that for every a in the invertible which is where this is not defined.
The limit
which goes to zero of
that's what we mean here by differentiable.
So how will we define this well for
be an element of a
define
L of the
the conjugation by a and a inverse
with a minus sign.
So then let's take H to be small enough that we have
this is
one over to the norm of a inverse
and running out of space again.
Okay, so what do we have here we had the norm of H is at most one over to a inverse, which means that
a inverse H
which by the properties of the van
algebra norm
by this year, and that's both top
in particular it's less than one. So this means that one plus a inverse H is indeed invertible
again by
the theorem number I 1.2.4 I guess maybe just the one right before this.
And
now what we're trying to yeah so let's say one a
inverse H inverse
so this is the inverse of that we can sub that guy in
and what is this, this is just
okay and then we already know an estimate on on this guy. So we can just take out this thumb and we get geometric series so we have that a inverse H
and
this is then seem to be
at most twice in first H norm squared
and we can plug
our choice of linear map L.
Now we're going to plug it in here with respect to H and this last calculation will give us what we want so
this is all over H.
Okay, so I want to take out in a inverse
I should not go ahead to myself.
So what was this this was a inverse the inverse
inverse
and again, it's all over H.
I like to factor out an A inverse, so I need to sort of stick it in here and then take it back out, but then that gives us
an A inverse.
So by our previous calculation, we get that this is at most to a inverse squared H squared for H.
So it is at most. Well, it's actually equals I guess to to a inverse squared H and of course this goes to zero as H goes to zero.
So that completes the proof.
And see the board better.
Okay, just a bit of notation for a moment. So if x is a metric space.
Then I will denote by B x are to be the ball of radius are around x the open ball.
So literally the clothes ball, put the closure over there, and then it will be distance.
That center equal to our.
We have the following lemma.
Okay, so we're going to get a little bit more out of handle on just what kind of elements can be in the spectrum of an element in a bannock algebra.
So essentially it has to be contained in a ball around the element itself of radius the norm for zero and radius the norm of the element.
So for any in a the spectrum is a closed subset of the host
ball around zero radius a.
So, of course, in the complex numbers.
And again, we have a map.
We're going to find outside of the spectrum, which will be differentiable.
So this will go from complex numbers minus the spectrum of a.
A taking a complex number lambda to the inverse a minus lambda one.
And this makes sense of course because lambda is not in spectrum.
Okay, so.
If we show that the spectrum is closed, then you can see that this will follow from our previous lemma about the differentiability of the map a to a inverse.
Okay, so we just need to show that this is closed.
So, I won't go into the details, because I would like to get through a bit more but it's sort of reasonably easy exercise.
So the idea is show that
if lambda is strictly greater than the norm of a, then one might lambda minus a is a verbal.
This is reasonably easy exercise based on all the other things we've shown today.
And once you've done this of course it follows immediately that this is actually a closed subset.
And as I said, the different ability. Oh, I didn't actually write the statement.
The differentiability of this map, then follows from what we just saw.
Okay, so a little bit more notation before the next theorem which will show us that in a manic algebra, the spectrum is non empty.
I will denote by a star, a continuous linear dual of a so that's going to be a function from f from a and see that are continuously linear.
And then we can equip this with the weak star topology.
And if you aren't familiar with this. Basically it's just the topology of point wise convergence. So, we have that by and ghost by.
And only a by and a, a ghost by a.
And one thing that will need to know is that a star separate points of a.
So,
if we show that we have an element a on which two elements and the, and they're different on all elements of a star then is not going to be.
See if they're the same and a is equal to me.
So that will come in handy in.
Theorem.
Any element in the unit of an algebra has non empty spent spectrum.
And this is not true in an arbitrary algebra, so this is a special feature of our panic alters.
Okay, so first of all, if a happens to be zero.
Then the spectrum of a will contain zero.
So let's assume that a is non zero.
Okay, now for contradiction.
The spectrum is empty.
And you can check that the map is founded on the compact disk of radius to a.
Okay, and that implies then that the map from sea to sea, given by lambda.
A minus lambda one a and now we're going to apply some phi in our dual.
So, we also know that it is differentiable.
So, by the Louisville theorem, you will.
But previous theorem.
This is constant.
Okay, but these are linear functionals. So, and this is for every lambda and see, so we get the fact that a inverse is equal to five a lambda one a inverse, or every phi in our dual.
And, as I mentioned, the dual separate points.
So that means we get that a inverse and a minus lambda one a inverse are always the same.
In particular, I guess the lambda equal to one.
Anyway, that's impossible so there's our contradiction.
Okay, so.
There's a contradiction by assuming that the spectrum was empty, which proved the theorem.
Okay.
So I guess we could one right.
Okay, okay, okay, so then we have this nice little result that comes from this fact.
So, as we have a unital bannock algebra a
and every non zero element of a is invertible.
And then we must have that a is just the complex numbers.
Just a perfectly nice panic algebra with respect to its usual norm.
All right, so what is the proof take a and a minus zero.
Now we know that spectrum is non empty so there is this lambda spectrum of a
which means that a minus lambda one a is not invertible.
So we have that a minus lambda a is equal to zero. So, a is equal to lambda a wonky one a.
This is the map that takes one a one gives us our isomorphism.
Okay.
So we have a definition of radius of an element.
Yeah, unital bannock algebra.
Okay.
I find the
number by r of a, and this is just going to be the supreme of lambda absolute value of lambda for those lambdas in our spectrum.
Okay, so we already know that this has a supreme because we know that we're at least founded by the norm of a itself.
That makes sense.
But we can say a little bit more. And in fact, when we eventually get to see sterile diversity that we have an even nicer characterization of the spectral radius but for now what we can say is that, for any
we have that the spectral radius is equal to the beam of all n greater than one of a to the n one over n.
We can also think of it as then as n goes to infinity of a.
All right.
Okay, so if we take some lambda and spectrum of a.
And our polynomial mapping theorem that we had earlier tells us that lambda and spectrum of a and
we know that the spectrum of an element is always founded by the norm of that element so we get that lambda.
And hence, and hence,
lambda is that most
a to the n one over n. All right, so this gives us
one one direction so this is for every lambda
in the spectrum.
And every and rated in one
which tells us that
this radius is greater than or equal to sorry less than or equal to
it's infimum.
So we need to show the other direction.
So we're going to show that this is bigger than and then soup
of the norm of a to the n, the one over n.
Okay, so
we're going to define a subset of the complex numbers D to be the open ball of radius of radius inverse of a
this is non zero and just the whole complex plane if it is
then
lambda d
we have that one a lambda minus a or three one minus lambda a is invertible
by I have written down here theorem 1.24 so I'm sure that's long been erased but I hope that that is the correct theorem.
Okay, so this implies that for every
continuous linear functional
f from D to see
lambda to buy up
one a lambda a inverse
is analytic
Okay, so this means that it's there we can find complex numbers
such that
we can see the end lambda n
for every
lambda
d here.
Okay, so we have established this
and
we know that
or lambda
for the norm of a
smaller than the spectral radius here.
We have that
ever useful
identity here. This is going to be
the end of lambda and a
so
what is f of lambda
defined here
tells us that this is just lambda by a
and comparing this with what we know from it being analytic. This implies that
by a to the end
is the end
Okay, so this means that
this is well defined
we have that by a to the end
zero
as n goes to infinity
so this sequence is bounded
and of course we haven't actually
used anything special about
our linear functional so this is bounded for any
by
in a star
which in turn implies that
this is bounded
again using the fact that a star separates
points
so it's bounded
say by some
number we'll call m lambda
and we're nearly done with this group so
that tells us that
the n one over n
is less than this m lambda one over n
is lambda inverse
so
this is at most
lambda inverse
and that's for every lambda in
d
which implies the result for our spec for radius
which is what we wanted
All right, we're
pretty much finished this section on the spectrum
but one thing you may notice that was missing is that this was always
unital bannock algebras so what do we do if we just have a bannock algebras
but isn't unital
so what we need to do is unitize it to define the spectrum
my right numbering
we'll never know
okay so take a bannock algebras
it doesn't matter if it's unital or not
and we'll define a tilde
to be the direct sum of a with the complex numbers as a vector space
and with multiplication
so we have an element a lambda and we want to multiply it to b mu
and it should land in here
so you will take a b plus lambda b plus mu a
which is certainly an element a and lambda mu as our element in c
okay so this is now a nice algebra
which you'll note is a now a unital algebra
and we can also define a norm
so let's get into a bannock algebra
by studying the norm of a lambda to just be the norm of a
plus
the absolute value of lambda
okay so you can see that a fits in here nicely as a zero and we get the same
so it preserves the norm under this
and we call this the unitization of a
and this allows us to define the notion of spectrum in a non-unital
c-star algebra so if a is an a
a non-unital
then its spectrum
is going to be
all those complex numbers where now we consider
a as an element in its unitization so again this is really a zero and this is really zero
but that's clear so just write it like this
this is not invertible
as an element again in the unitization
so you can go back and check
which one of these theorems also holds for our non-unital bannock algebras
usually not a very difficult
thing to show that most of these things go through
and in the last 10 minutes I will try to plow through
a bit about ideals which actually is pretty short so hopefully
we can do that
okay
so if we have any algebra
then we can make sense of right and left ideals
and I'm going to call these algebraic ideals
so that we differentiate once we're in the
case of a bannock algebra
so we want
am I going to get this in the wrong direction
a b is in i for every a in i and
c in a should be multiplication on the right and then
to the left we just want it the other way around
and if I say an algebraic ideal
then I always mean an algebraic ideal that's
so it's both a right and a left ideal
so normally we'll want to consider
two-sided ideals
and you can see that when we have a two-sided ideal
just an algebraic ideal then
we can take a quotient
and get an algebra
so we would like the analogous thing in
a bannock algebra
so
and this is with respect to the usual obvious
multiplication and addition
so
now if we're in a bannock algebra
then when I say just an ideal
I will mean it to be
closed
so if it's a bannock algebra then we have
right left ideals and we can drop this
algebraic and again
just an ideal this will always
refer to the closure so you can talk about algebraic ideals in a bannock algebra
but if I just say ideal I mean the closed version
I will put an
algebraic ideal
and
both
same thing for left or right
ok so in this case
Okay, so in this case, you can equip AI with the quotient norm, make it into a bannock
Oliver. Excuse me. Yes. You meant close the idea. Yeah. Here. Yes.
And two-sided. So if I just say ideal, I'll always mean close two-sided ideal. And otherwise,
I will tell you what other information like it's algebraic and I don't want to close
or left, right. But if I just say ideal, I always mean close and two-sided. Okay, so this makes
into a bannock algebra.
And we might want to ask ourselves, when will this bannock algebra be unital?
And it will be unital when our ideal is something called a modular ideal.
What does that mean?
There exists some element u and a such that
a minus ua and a minus au are always in our ideal and that's for every a and a.
Okay, so it's easy to see that if a itself is unital, then every ideal is going to be modular
if you can just take u to be the unit here. And you can try to figure out just exactly what
the unit of ai will be. So that's a little exercise, I guess.
Okay. We have the usual notions in a bannock algebra
of things like the trivial ideals. That's just 0 or a itself, proper ideal
put in algebraic or left or right as you like. This is an ideal that's not equal to a itself.
So in particular, if I say proper, I mean it could be 0, but if I say trivial, I'm excluding 0.
We also have the notion of an ideal generated by a subset
and that will just be, of course, the smallest ideal containing this set.
And maximal if i is proper
and not contained in any proper ideal.
I guess this could be not properly contained because it's obviously contained itself.
Now the nice thing about modular ideals is that you can make sense of, okay,
maximal modular ideal is defined in the obvious way and by Zorn's lemma, every modular ideal
is contained in a maximal modular ideal and hence in a unital bannock algebra, every ideal
is contained in a maximal ideal.
Okay. I'll just end with quickly with a proposition
just so that this wasn't just ending with a bunch of definitions,
but I won't bother to prove it. So
just so we can see the difference between algebraic and algebraic ideals and regular ideals.
So a bannock algebra
and i and a is an algebraic ideal.
Then if i is proper,
so is its closure, I guess any modular.
And why is this useful? Because this will tell us that whenever we have a maximal modular ideal,
it has to be closed, which will come in handy later on. But for now I'll end there since I've
already run over by a couple of minutes. So thank you all very much for coming.
If you ever have questions or whatever, feel free to email me
and otherwise, see you next Tuesday.
You're just remember popping in lectures? I don't think we did. I think you just sort of
snoozed off and ran away.
