Okay, so in the past couple of videos,
I've talked about some life updates,
I've talked about some just general operations
and things like that,
but I haven't really done anything
that's been like super technical in a while.
So today I wanted to talk about topology.
And so the goal here is to go ahead
and talk about the separation axioms.
And so in order to do that,
I want to talk about some, you know,
connected topology things that people talk about often
and then talk about what actually is a topology
from a set theoretic point of view
and then actually get into some of the,
usually talked about separation axioms
and then also some other separation axioms that,
I don't see people mention on, well, YouTube
or on the internet elsewhere very often.
Also, since this video is a little bit longer
than I would like it to be,
I've gone ahead and split up the video
into these sections that are based primarily
on when I talk about certain definitions or certain things.
And those are linked in the description below as well.
So if you want to just click over
to a certain separation axiom or a certain example,
you can do that too.
So most of the time when people think about topology
or when they're first introduced to topology,
they might see something like this
where you've got a mug and then you, well,
I didn't have a donut.
So yeah, mug to donut thing.
Also, if you're not super sure how that works,
there is this nice little animation
that is on the Wikipedia page for a tourist.
So one of the reasons that we're talking about this
right out the gate is that one of the ways
you can formalize this idea of a tourist
is through looking at some mathematically rigorous way
of defining some connection in a space.
And so the reason I bring this up
is because we're gonna take a different approach
to start talking about topology.
Instead of thinking about connecting things
in a certain way or how connectivity plays in a space,
we're gonna look at how things and by things,
I mean points and sets can be separated
within a topological space.
So the usual separation axioms,
the things that I see talked about everywhere
here on YouTube and elsewhere are these five axioms.
It's okay if you don't understand
what those things are right now.
We'll get to defining them throughout this video.
But the one thing to say here
is that there's a lot of terminology
that comes into thinking about topology in this way.
And so it's going to be a little bit term heavy
and it can be really intimidating.
And so that's why for most of this video,
my focus is gonna be on some more accessible examples
and those intuitive pictures
for each different type of space.
In this list, we've only listed out T axioms,
but there are other, are axioms that correspond
to using a little bit less
than what is specified in each of the T cases.
But before we can talk about those,
I should probably start off
with the most basic thing you should start asking
when you start learning anything about topology,
what is a topology?
A topological space is a set of points together
with a set of subsets of those points.
And that set of subsets of points
is called the topology.
That topology has to satisfy the three topological axioms,
which the first one is that the empty set
and the whole set of points are in the topology.
The second is that for arbitrary collections of sets
in the topology, we can take the union
over that arbitrary collection
and get another set in the topology.
And lastly, for finite collections of sets in the topology,
we can intersect that finite collection
and get a resultant set that is in the topology.
We also say that if A is in the topology,
then A is an open set.
And then if we have a point
that is in some subset of our space,
we say that that subset is a neighborhood of X.
And when that neighborhood is in the topology,
we say that that neighborhood
is an open neighborhood of the point.
Now, there's generally two ways
that you can go about getting at topologies
when you're starting out with topology.
The first way is just to list out all of the sets
in your topology and leave no room
for any generation of new sets.
The second way is that instead of listing out everything,
we can establish what is called a basis for the topology.
And then we can use the three topological axioms
to generate the rest of the topology.
All right, so now that we have just a basic framework
for what a topology is and what that looks like
from a more set-theoretic point of view,
we can go ahead and start talking
about the different separation axioms.
So the basic idea for separation axioms
is that there are additional conditions
that we're going to add to the requirements of our topology.
And usually these are gonna be things
that either distinguish or split points
apart from each other spatially, not algebraically.
In both one and two, we have that A, B, and C
are all distinct points.
They're not equal to each other.
They don't occupy the same space.
But one and two have differences topologically.
So in the case of the first topology,
we're not going to be able to choose a neighborhood
of let's say A that does not contain C.
And the same can be said about any pair of points
in the space.
Whereas in the second topology,
no matter which pair of points that we choose,
we can always find one point in that pair
that has a neighborhood that is not a neighborhood
of the other one.
So when you take A and B, A has a neighborhood
that's not a neighborhood of B.
When you take B and C, B has a neighborhood
that's not a neighborhood of C.
And when you take A and C, A has a neighborhood
that's not a neighborhood of C.
When pairs of points operate in this way,
we say that they are topologically distinguished points
in the topological space.
And when all points in the space satisfy this condition,
we say that the space is a commodor of space
or a T zero space.
So in the split version of this
or the separated version of this,
we're going to again take two different examples.
Now in this setting, when we're looking at C in particular,
in our third example,
we can't choose a neighborhood of C
that doesn't contain A and B.
But then in our fourth example,
we can choose a neighborhood of C that excludes A and B.
And this is the notion of separation of points.
So given a topological space,
two points are separated if each has a neighborhood
that is not a neighborhood of the other.
And so if we have topologically distinguishable points
satisfying this property
that topologically distinguished points
are separated in this way,
we say that we have a R zero or symmetric space.
The thing to note here is that
because not all points have to be topologically distinguishable,
we can have things like our fourth example
where A and B are not equal to each other,
but they are also not topologically distinguishable
from one another.
Okay, so with these ideas of separated
and topologically distinguishable,
we can go ahead and start talking about those five
usually talked about separation axioms
that I see everywhere.
So they are T zero, T one, T two, T three, and T four.
T zero is a Komolgorov space.
We've already sort of talked about these a little bit
just a few minutes ago.
They are spaces where they're
topologically distinguishable everywhere,
which just means that pairs of points
in a Komolgorov space are always
topologically distinguishable from one another.
In this example that I've drawn here,
you can see that each point is
topologically distinguishable from the next.
And you just have to keep in mind
that there is an intersection here
that is in the topology that isn't explicitly drawn.
So just keep that in mind.
The next separation axiom that you can add on
to the topological axioms is T one,
which is an accessible space or a frichet topology.
What that boils down to is that this is a space
that is both topologically distinguishable everywhere.
So all points are topologically distinguishable
from each other, or it's a Komolgorov space,
but it's also a symmetric space where points
that are topologically distinguished
from one another are separated.
So in this intuitive picture,
the important thing to note here,
and what makes this a weaker separation axiom,
is that even though points can't share neighborhoods
with each other, those neighborhoods
can overlap elsewhere within the topology.
The example I'm gonna give here
for one such space that you can construct here
is what's called the co-finite topology.
So this is a topology that can be built on most spaces,
but we're gonna do it on the natural numbers,
and we're going to build our topology
by generating the topology from a basis of sets
whose complements are finite.
So for example, just to show how this sort of fits
into this mold of sets that can overlap
but also have separation between points,
we're gonna look at two sets.
The set that does not contain two,
and the set that does not contain three,
or at least I think that's what I wrote on the board,
so I'm gonna stick with that,
and I'm gonna talk about it like that,
but the board should also have a similar example.
So in the case of the set that does not contain two,
that's actually a neighborhood of three
because three is in that set,
and it's not a neighborhood of two
because two is excluded from that set.
Similarly, the set that does not include three
is not a neighborhood of three,
but it is a neighborhood of two because two is in the set.
So those two neighborhoods, they overlap elsewhere,
like one is in both of those neighborhoods,
but those neighborhoods also separate two and three
from each other in the topology.
We can use sets within the cofinite topology
to do this with any pair of numbers in the natural numbers,
which speaks to why this is also a Komolgorov space.
So T2 is the next separation axiom.
It corresponds to Haasdorf spaces or separated spaces,
which is confusing because now we're getting
into different notions of separated
and different contexts of which that term is defined.
So in a Haasdorf space, points are separated by neighborhoods
and not just separated plainly.
And so what that means is that the neighborhoods
that separate the points can't overlap,
which makes it different from the T1 axiom.
And the thing to note here is that a Haasdorf space
is actually the combination of two different properties.
The first property is preregularity,
which has this upgraded notion of splitness
or separateness of separated by neighborhoods
where topologically distinguishable points
are separated by neighborhoods.
So we could have something where we have like a few points
that are topologically distinguishable
from a few other points, but they're separated
by neighborhoods, which means that those neighborhoods
that contain all of them are disjoint
and don't intersect anywhere.
So it's a combination of that trait,
along with being a Komolgorov space
where all points are topologically distinguishable
from one another.
So to get an example of a Haasdorf space,
that is strictly a Haasdorf space.
So just T2 does not have any of the other properties
that we're gonna talk about in this video.
It's not something that I can do
in a timely fashion within this video
because I'd have to talk about a lot of other things,
like ordinals or infinite ordinals, for instance.
So with that in mind, as we move forward
through the next few examples,
I won't be giving any more than the intuitive example
because the actual examples that are strictly
within these buckets are a little bit harder
to explain and deal with.
So the next separation axiom is T3,
which is a regular Haasdorf space.
So in these spaces, points that are exterior from closets
and those corresponding closets
are separated by neighborhoods.
And these are also Komolgorov spaces.
This is another instance of we're adding
the Komolgorov property to this type of separation axiom.
And the thing that we're adding is the regular part
and regularity is the R axiom.
And so lastly, to fill out those first five
separation axioms that we're gonna talk about,
we're gonna talk about the T4 axiom,
which is a normal Haasdorf space,
which means it's a space where disjoint closed subsets
are separated by neighborhoods.
And it's also an accessible space.
And so now that we've got those out of the way,
we can start talking about some other different types
of separation axioms that I don't see people
talking about as much,
but you might find interesting anyway.
So let's go ahead and jump in with T sub two and a half
or T sub E, which is a Eurozone space.
And depending on what you're reading
or what source you're using,
this can also be a completely Haasdorf space.
Eurozone spaces will be spaces where points
are separated by closed neighborhoods.
So in this intuitive drawing,
we're gonna have points in our space
and they're gonna be separated by open sets
that have been joined with their limit points.
And those open sets that have been joined
with the limit points are going to be disjoint
from each other.
So the next one we're gonna talk about
is a completely T2 space or a completely Haasdorf space
or in some cases, a Eurozone space.
There's a lot of different ways this could have happened.
It's still unfortunate either way and I don't like it,
but there are two different types of axioms,
but they can have interchange names.
For the purposes of this video,
I'm just gonna keep them to TE and completely T2
as two separate things.
So in these completely T2 spaces,
points are separated by a function
and usually that function is continuous.
So given a topological space,
there exists some function between the space
and the real numbers such that for two points in the space,
A will be mapped to zero and B will be mapped to one.
So this one's a little bit weirder
than what we talked about so far,
but the main idea here is that we can use some tool
to split points away from each other,
even though they might not appear to be split
in the space itself.
And that's the intuitive idea you should get from this.
We can actually find an example of a space
that is both TE and completely T2
by taking the real numbers
with the usual notion of Euclidean distance
and using that to generate a topology
along with the sets that are co-countable
in the real numbers.
So sets whose compliments are countable.
And if you go ahead and combine those topologies
in such a way that we're still holding
to the three core topological axioms,
we actually end up with a topology
that is both TE and completely T2.
All right, so two more, almost there.
The next one we're gonna talk about is T5,
which is a completely normal Hasdorf space
or completely T4.
So completely normal means that separated sets
are separated by neighborhoods.
And then the Hasdorf part of that
just adds in the accessible condition
or the T1 condition to this.
So for two sets, A and B to be separated,
A and its limit points intersected with B
and its limit points would need to be the empty set.
So the intuitive picture here is that you have two sets,
A and B, that are conjoined with their limit points.
And then further, we have disjoint neighborhoods
around those sets that are separate and do not overlap.
And so then the last separation axiom
that I want to talk about in this video
is the T6 axiom, which is a perfectly normal Hasdorf space
or perfectly T4.
So perfectly normal corresponds to two disjoint closed sets
are precisely separated by a function,
which is yet another notion of separation
that we haven't talked about yet.
When you have precise separation by a function
instead of our tool sending points or sets to zero or one,
we're gonna have the inverse map of zero or one
splitting out into the sets that we're interested in.
So even though this precisely separated notion
is by far the weirdest one that we've talked about
in the context of this video,
in the context of wider point set topology,
this is not terrible.
There are several other mathematical objects
and mathematical devices that are defined with similar tools
and use this notion of the inverse image of a function
gives a certain property to define them.
So that aside, the other thing to note
is that a perfectly normal Hasdorf space
also requires the accessibility condition.
Even though we've added a ton to the space
in order to get this perfectly normal Hasdorf condition,
it's probably the most accessible separation axiom
that you can think about because it lines up
with our natural idea of the real numbers
with the Euclidean metric inducing the topology
and all that fun stuff.
It's not immediately clear why the real numbers
fit into this condition.
It's not immediately clear how you would prove it,
but I'm not gonna get into that
because we've already been over a ton
and this video is getting long.
So that is essentially all I wanted to talk about today.
I know there is a lot of terminology here.
Yeah, if you enjoyed this video,
you can give it a thumbs up
and you can subscribe for more mathematics stuff like this.
And quite honestly, if you made it this far,
you might as well, right?
This is something that I have always had an issue with
and decided to make a video on it
because it just helps me think about these things
a little bit better.
So yeah, I'm gonna go now.
I'm Nathan, this is Chalk,
and I will see you next time.
