Actress Marilyn Monroe, comedian Lenny Bruce, singer Elvis Presley, author Jack Kerouac,
Saturday Night Live comedians John Belushi and Chris Farley, pop icon Michael Jackson,
writer Truman Capote, singer and actress Judy Garland, big band leader Tommy Dorsey,
Senator Joe McCarthy, musician Kurt Cobain, entrepreneur Howard Hughes, Jim Morrison of
the Doors.
That list could go on and on, and sadly it does, and you probably recognize the commonality
there.
Like Jimi Hendrix and Janice Joplin mentioned in our last lecture, all these high-profile
people died either directly or indirectly from substance abuse.
Some cases were related to alcohol, others to prescription drugs, some died from illegal
drug use, and for many it was a combination of abuse substances.
Some died from acute toxicity, either through accident or suicide, while others from a lifetime
battle with drugs and or alcohol.
In the grip of the downward spiral associated with substance abuse, some chose to end their
lives by other means of suicide.
Now consider this.
That list only includes celebrities, so just imagine how many substance abuse related deaths
occur each day in the U.S., not to mention elsewhere.
In the year 2006, one source attributes 26,000 deaths in the United States to drug overdoses.
In fact, it's difficult to find accurate statistics for substance abuse deaths because
the problem is so insidious and so intertwined with deaths from other causes, like alcohol-related
traffic accidents and drug-related criminal acts, like drug deal murders and killings during
robberies that are intended to support a drug habit.
And deaths are just the tip of the iceberg in forensic substance abuse issues.
Reports from the early 2000s compiled by the U.S. Bureau of Justice indicate about one-fourth
of all prisoners landed in jail because of crimes committed to try to raise money to
support a drug habit.
In the U.K., it's estimated that over 50% of robberies, over 70% of burglaries, and 85%
of shoplifting crimes are committed to get money for drugs.
Criminal abuse has been implicated in about three-quarters of U.S. violent crimes, like
rape, domestic violence, child abuse, and other physical attacks.
And the trafficking of commonly abused drugs profoundly impacts both law enforcement and
forensic science.
Did you know that by far the largest part of the day-to-day operations in crime labs
is the chemical testing of contraband substances that are potentially illegal drugs?
In fact, of all the many types of evidence we've talked about — fingerprints, hair,
fibers, crime scene blood, and all the rest — drug evidence accounts for more than half
of all the evidence that winds up in forensic labs.
The chemistry section is usually the largest part of the lab in terms of personnel and
expenses, and it's been that way since the 1970s.
In fact, U.S. laws allow for the seizure of money and property involved in drug trade,
like boats, cars, and motorcycles.
And then that confiscated property is usually sold.
Why?
So the funds can go to the law enforcement agency that caught the criminals to help fund
their chemistry lab.
So let's take a closer look at the forensics of substance abuse, starting with drugs that
are either illegal or highly controlled in the United States.
In general, drugs of abuse can be classified into four major categories by their source.
First are those that come from naturally occurring plant and fungal origins, and are
smoked or ingested pretty much as is, like marijuana, peyote buttons, and some mushrooms.
Secondly, some drugs of abuse are extracted from plants, like cocaine, morphine, and codeine.
A third classification would be semi-synthetic drugs that are manufactured from a naturally
occurring substance, like heroin or LSD.
And the fourth category of abused drugs is synthetics, which are entirely man-made, like
barbiturates, amphetamines, and oxycodone.
Those are more commonly classified, though, by the effects they typically have on those
who take them.
Most of us are familiar with the terms depressant, stimulant, narcotic, hallucinogen, and could
probably name a couple of drugs in each of those classes.
The classification of alcohol in marijuana usually stumps my students, though.
Do you know which of those four classes alcohol fits into?
Most of my college-aged students believe that alcohol is a stimulant, probably because
they're stimulated to get stupid when they drink too much.
But alcohol is actually a depressant.
And do you know how marijuana currently is categorized by its effects?
It used to be considered a narcotic, but it's now considered a hallucinogen.
It really doesn't fit into that four-part scheme as well as most other drugs do.
Depressants, which in low doses are often called sedatives, are drugs that generally
decrease brain activity, they reduce muscle activity, lower respiration and heart rate,
induce sleep, and reduce anxiety, sometimes to the point of mild euphoria.
Overdoses of depressants kill people by paralyzing the respiratory center in their brain.
Street names include downers and barbs, short for barbiturates, the most common class of
depressants in the United States.
These include over 2,500 synthetic drugs that were developed as pharmaceuticals like sleep
aids, anti-epileptic drugs, and surgical anesthetics.
Phenobarbital is a barbituit you may have heard of.
Mixing alcohol and barbituits has serious consequences, often including death.
And when people are addicted to these types of depressants, a sudden withdrawal, also
called cold turkey, can be lethal too.
Benzodiazepines and related drugs make up a large family of synthetic depressants, especially
known for their anti-anxiety and sleep-inducing effects.
Many of these have familiar brand names like Xanax, Clonopin, and Ativan.
Two that are known for their amnesiac effects are versed, used during medical procedures
where the patient is awake like colonoscopies, and Rohypnol, which has unfortunately become
one of the date rape drugs, although my toxicologist friend tells me alcohol is still the most
common date rape drug.
Historically, other depressants were popular drugs of use and abuse.
Some have been discontinued or replaced, including methacwalone, which was better known in the
60s and 70s by the brand names Quailude and Soper, and another drug marketed as Librium
back in the 60s.
But ultimately, these were replaced by the more potent and still abused Valium.
We'll return to the depressant alcohol later in this lecture, because although it's regulated,
it's not a scheduled substance in the U.S., so it's not covered under drug laws.
Stimulants are drugs known to elevate mood, reduce depression, raise blood pressure, elevate
heart and respiration rates, and produce intense euphoria and energy.
Caffeine is a common and not regulated stimulant, but some illicit and very dangerous stimulants
have been manufactured from relatively benign substances in what are called clandestine
labs, like the meth labs of the past couple decades.
Methamphetamine can be made from lithium, which clandestine producers often get from
rechargeable batteries, ammonia, and pseudoephedrine, which is an over-the-counter allergy medication.
Meth labs are the reason that pseudoephedrine allergy meds are now only available at the
pharmacy window in U.S. retail stores.
The class of stimulants known as amphetamines was originally developed to relieve the symptoms
of asthma and hay fever, but they went on to be used to treat narcolepsy, hyperactivity,
and to suppress appetite.
Brand names you may have heard of include Adderall and Dexadrine.
Amphetamines grew in popularity as drugs of abuse during the 1960s, especially when users
began to take them by intravenous injections instead of oral doses.
The latest craze in stimulants of abuse are synthetic amphetamine-like drugs commonly
called bath salts that can be found for sale in gas stations, truck stops, and on the internet.
As their dangers have become known, they've begun to be outlawed.
Cocaine is another stimulant that resembles amphetamine in its potential for abuse and
in its pharmacology.
Cocaine's extracted from the coca leaf grown in the Andes Mountains.
It's extracted with hydrochloric acid to form the compound cocaine hydrochloride, also
known by the street name snow, flake, and blow.
When cocaine hydrochloride is treated with a base and extracted into an organic solvent,
it forms what's called freebase, or crack cocaine.
Crack and freebase have a lower boiling point, so it's possible to smoke them.
A smoking allows the large surface area within the lungs to rapidly absorb the drug, resulting
in a greater effect.
But these forms also increase the chances of death in the user.
Cocaine is still used legally in some medical procedures, and as many of you know, was the
original stimulant in Coca-Cola and some other soft drinks before being replaced with caffeine.
Now, we're not going to talk extensively about drug trafficking, but since cocaine is a huge
drug of abuse, let me give you some rough idea of the kind of money that can be involved
in its sale.
One source I consulted estimated that more than 110 million pounds of coca leaves, that's
about 50 million kilograms, are produced annually in South America.
A drug processor can purchase about 500 pounds of coca leaves for about $250, and from that
will net about one pound of pure cocaine.
So there's about a 500 to one ratio between the amount of coca leaves needed and the amount
of cocaine that results.
Now, a pound of pure cocaine can be sold for about $1,000, but a drug trafficker will dilute
that and put it into smaller packages of, say, five pounds.
That five-pound block of street-grade cocaine will sell for about $25,000 in the U.S.
All told, that's a 100-fold increase in value, from the original cost of the coca leaves
to the street price of the drug.
And in the pyramid scam that is drug dealing, a smaller dealer can adulterate or dilute.
They use the term cut.
They can cut that cocaine even more to make their own profit as long as they can find a
buyer.
Okay, let's get back to classifying drugs by their effects.
The term narcotic is really a catch-all for many drugs that are considered highly dangerous.
Narcotics are still used legally as painkillers and sleep aids.
The opium resin from the poppy plant has been used traditionally for over 5,000 years to
relieve pain and decreased diarrhea and as a recreational drug in many cultures.
Coding has long been used in cough suppressants and mixed with aspirin or, more recently,
acetaminophen, which is Tylenol, to boost their pain management capabilities.
Morphine also has a long history as an analgesic and is still used to control pain after surgery
in particular.
Heroin is derived from morphine, but it's about 10 times more potent.
It's used as a painkiller in some other countries, but not in the United States.
Now here's a side note related to heroin.
You've probably heard of the French connection, maybe from the movie starring Gene Hackman
and Roy Scheider that won the Academy Award in 1971.
In its heyday, the French connection supplied almost all white heroin being brought into
the United States.
This network started in the 1930s when farmers in Turkey had legitimate licenses to grow
opium poppies and sell them to legal drug companies.
When farmers grew more than the drug companies needed, some sold the extra poppies on the
black market.
The morphine was taken out of the poppies in Turkey, and the morphine paste was then
sent to Marseille, France, where it was converted into heroin.
The heroin, in turn, was then smuggled into the U.S., mainly through New York, by organized
crime gangs.
In the late 1940s, the battle between the heroin importers and law enforcement intensified,
especially at U.S. ports.
But still, by the 1960s, somewhere in the neighborhood of one and a half to two and
a half tons of heroin each year was coming into the U.S. from France.
Finally, in 1971, after years of negotiations with the Turkish government, opium farming
was banned in Turkey.
French and U.S. authorities also stepped up efforts to intercept heroin shipments, leading
to more heroin seizures and arrests.
Now, a notorious incident happened in the early 70s in the U.S., where a group of New
York police officers was arrested and charged with corruption.
Investigators discovered that some of the cops had allowed New York mobsters to steal
heroin from a police storage room and replace it with flour and cornstarch.
The switch was discovered after insects were found eating the flour.
Once all aspects of the French connection had been targeted, the whole heroin pipeline
from France fell apart, marking the end of the French connection.
But as we know, when one door closes, another one opens, and today, most heroin comes from
Central and South America and from Mexico.
Since it's processed differently than the heroin from France, it's sometimes called
Mexican mud for its off-white or light brown color.
Now, methadone is a synthetic-opiate substitute that's used in the U.S. to help get addicts
off of heroin under medical supervision.
And there are many other narcotics used as pain relievers today that are frequently abused
and illegally trafficked.
This includes a large group of synthetic and semi-synthetic compounds like dilaudid, Vicodin,
Lortab, and Demeral.
Oxycodone is another narcotic, which has been put in a time-release form called Oxycontin,
or combined with aspirin and Percodan, or with acetaminophen and Percocet.
Fetanil is another narcotic, about 100 times more potent than morphine, and these are all
very common drugs of abuse.
The fourth class of typically abused drugs is hallucinogens.
And unlike the others I mentioned, these have no accepted medical uses in the United States,
with the recent exception of some states allowing medicinal marijuana use.
Hallucinogens have perception-altering effects and include four subcategories, psychedelics,
delirians, disassociatives, and cannabinoids, each with slightly different mind-bending
properties.
Psychedelics, the classical hallucinogens, include semi-synthetics like LSD, and naturally
occurring mescaline and psilocybin mushrooms.
As you might imagine, a huge problem with psilocybin abuse is an extra risk of poisoning
because some people mistakenly ingest toxic, look-alike mushrooms and they die.
Mescaline is structurally similar to the stimulant amphetamine, but because of some slight chemical
differences, mescaline also has hallucinogenic effects.
It's found in the peyote cactus that grows in the southwestern U.S. and Mexico.
The cactus crown is sliced into wafers called buttons, which are softened in the mouth,
rolled into balls, and then swallowed, after which hallucinations can last for half a day.
Because the peyote cactus has been a part of Native American religious ceremonies for
hundreds of years, the U.S. government has granted special dispensation for certain
Native American groups to continue that practice, as part of what's called the American Indian
Religious Freedom Act of 1978.
D-licergic acid diethylamide, better known as LSD or simply acid, comes from a natural
substance derived from a fungus that grows on grain.
As an aside, if infected grain is used in bread, people get the disorder called St. Anthony's
Fire, which may have caused some symptoms of those accused in the Salem witch trials
of the late 1600s.
Very small doses of LSD, smaller than a period on a written page, which is about 50 micrograms,
can cause auditory and visual hallucinations that can last up to 12 hours.
LSD is not known to be addictive, but can cause psychosis and flashbacks, meaning residual
hallucinations that happen months or years after taking the drug.
LSD has been distributed in many forms, liquefied and put into paper, made into tablets, or dissolved
in small pieces of dry gelatin, which has led to some creative distribution, like being
put behind a postage stamp and mailed to another user.
As LSD can be absorbed through the skin, investigators need to be exceptionally careful
when they handle it.
The deliriant forms of hallucinogens are also called true hallucinogens, because people
taking them will actually have conversations with people who aren't there and things like
that.
Deliriants are a part of a group of compounds known as anticholinergics because of their
nervous system effects.
They include derivatives from mandrake plants like nightshade, as well as three-four-methylene
dioxymethamphetamine, abbreviated MDMA, but more commonly called ecstasy.
Ecstasy is derived from amphetamine, and was actually used in certain forms of psychotherapy
until the mid-1980s when Congress stepped in.
Among other effects, ecstasy induces euphoria and a sense of intimacy, which turned it into
the rave club drug that peaked around the world in the 80s and 90s.
Fencycladine, abbreviated as PCP, known as angel dust, is a powerful hallucinogen of
the disassociative variety.
The manic behavior and feelings of strength, power, and invulnerability seen in people on
PCP make them really formidable opponents for law enforcement officers.
Other disassociatives include ketamine, known in drug cultures as Special K, nitrous oxide
or laughing gas, and some derivatives of the salvia plant.
Canavinoids are the last class of hallucinogens, but as I mentioned earlier, they don't fit
neatly into any category.
Marijuana has mild energisic and sedative properties, but also causes perceptive alterations,
memory impairment, mood swings, euphoria, and hallucinations.
Heavy use can promote delusions and paranoia.
Marijuana comes from the cannabis sativa plant.
The psychoactive compounds in that plant are collectively known as cannabinoids, with the
major active ingredient, tetrahydrocanabinol, abbreviated THC.
The oily extract of the cannabis plant has a higher THC content and so a greater effect,
and it's called hashish.
Medicinal marijuana has an active ingredient that's structurally identical to THC, but
less potent.
I should also mention the type of substance abuse called huffing.
This is when kids inhale a variety of legal chemicals to get high.
For instance, some hydrocarbons found in petroleum and its distillates can cause erratic behavior
because of effects on the brain.
This high makes people do stupid things like engage in dangerous behavior and not notice
hazards around them, leading to serious injury or death.
The practice of huffing itself can also cause death due to oxygen deprivation.
Now let's talk a little bit about the history of drug regulation in the United States.
In the late 19th century, there really was no drug control in the U.S., but prompted by
an increase in patented medicines, cocaine use, and public reaction to opium smoking
by Chinese railroad workers, the Pure Food and Drug Act was passed in 1906.
This became part of a history of regulating the use of drugs of all sorts, including the
Harrison Act of 1914, which required the registration and taxation of individuals involved in the
opium drug trade in the U.S., and actually linked drug use to the Treasury Department
through taxes.
Alcohol prohibition happened at the federal level in 1920, with the 18th Amendment of
the U.S. Constitution, followed by the repeal of prohibition in 1933.
After World War II, by the late 1940s, it was estimated that half of all crime in cities
in the U.S. was related to illegal drug use.
So in 1956, the Narcotic Drug Control Act was created, which increased penalties for
illicit drug use, including that dealers who sold drugs to minors could face the death
penalty.
That with this came the responsibility for controlling any substance that had the potential
for abuse by the Food and Drug Administration, expanding the sphere of dangerous drugs beyond
only narcotics.
In 1970, the Comprehensive Controlled Substances Act updated or abolished previous dangerous
drug laws.
This also moved enforcement from the Treasury Department to the Justice Department, and
marked the beginning of the Drug Enforcement Administration, abbreviated DEA.
Tobacco and alcohol were excluded from the DEA's jurisdiction, and instead are regulated
by the Bureau of Alcohol, Tobacco, Firearms and Explosives.
When you actually put together a mini-history like this, you really begin to see the patchwork-quilt
nature of drug regulation in the U.S.
Ultimately, the U.S. Congress became responsible for what's known as scheduling, a schedule
potentially abused substances, by dividing them into five groups.
Drug scheduling is based on the potential for abuse, addiction, and any legitimate medical
value a drug has.
The lower the schedule number, the higher the potential for abuse and addiction.
Schedule one drugs have no currently accepted medical use in the United States, while schedules
two through five have recognized medical uses.
Related criminal penalties are linked to those schedules.
Schedule one drugs currently include heroin, LSD, marijuana, PCP, and methacolone, which
remember our quailudes.
Example of schedule two drugs are morphine, cocaine, methadone, and methamphetamine.
Into schedule three fall codeine, hydrocodone, some barbiturates, and the anabolic steroids
that have been abused by dirty athletes.
Valium and Xanax are schedule four drugs.
Example of schedule five controlled substances are things like cough medicines that have
codeine in them.
The Comprehensive Controlled Substances Act of 1970 is still in use today in the U.S.,
but individual states may legislate to modify scheduling, as well as the penalties for distribution
and possession of some of those controlled substances.
Okay, now let's relate all this back to the toxicology lab.
Remember that forensic toxicologists are responsible for trying to determine the identity and quantity
of drugs in the body, and maybe looking for drug metabolites.
They also have to sort out whether there are drug interactions, if more than one drug is
present.
And they have to relate all this, if they can, to the history and patterns of drug abuse
by the person involved, including whether dependency or tolerance issues played a role.
They have to figure out whether a drug was simply on board in a person's body, or whether
it contributed to or was the cause of death.
The most common drugs of abuse that toxicologists see in drug deaths are heroin, morphine and
the opiates, but not marijuana and hallucinogens because people don't die from those, not even
from what some could call overdose.
Whether toxicology is done after an injury or fatality where substance abuse could be
involved or during a pre-employment or workplace screening, the most common specimens used are
blood and urine.
Blood tests are typically used when looking for cannabinoids, or when alcohol use is suspected.
Urine tests are better for other suspected substances, especially those that tend to
hang around in the body.
For example, PCP stays in urine for about a week after it's been used.
One of the cocaine metabolites can be found in urine about three days after cocaine use,
and heavy marijuana users can show a THC metabolite in their urine for up to two months.
So as we talked about in the last lecture, toxicology labs are busy each day analyzing
blood, urine and sometimes other body tissues for evidence of drug use.
These include forensic labs investigating criminal matters or suspicious deaths, but
others are private labs selected by companies or athletic organizations for drug screening.
I also mentioned the other section of a forensic chemistry lab where seized substances are
analyzed.
They see a very different picture of substance abuse.
That side of the lab is dealing with bricks of cocaine and sometimes bales of marijuana,
not minute amounts in blood or urine samples.
The contraband drug section of the lab most commonly sees marijuana, heroin and cocaine
as the three biggest types of samples, at least according to my local crime lab in Cincinnati.
They're testing what's on the street and being sold while the toxicology section is looking
for what impairs or kills people.
Part of the reason forensic chemists have to analyze, quantify and identify seized substances
is because that's part of the basis for determining what charges will be brought against the suspects
involved.
And that isn't as straightforward as you might think.
In some jurisdictions, a larger amount of a drug will mean a harsher punishment, but
weight isn't the whole story.
Remember that many drugs, especially the closer they get to the street sale level, are usually
cut with something else.
For most states, the total weight of the drug plus the cutting agents counts toward the penalty.
For instance, there could be one gram of cocaine and 650 grams of sugar, but the penalty would
be based on the total 651 grams.
This works the other way too.
In some states, in the case of small amounts of a drug, there needs to be a usable quantity
to officially break the law, like there has to be more than a trace.
For example, even though the remnants of a marijuana joint or a bloody syringe suspected
in heroin use could be found by law enforcement, if there's not a usable quantity, there might
not be enough to prosecute somebody for possession.
One reason that is, is there might not be enough of a drug to analyze.
Some forms of the same drug will have a harsher penalty than another.
For instance, the U.S. federal government gives out worse punishments for crack cocaine
as compared with an equal amount of flake cocaine, so toxicologists have to determine
which aversion it is.
And at the state level, most states don't require impurities to be identified, but in
federal cases, cutting agents are identified for intelligence purposes because knowing
what a drug was cut with can make tracing its trafficking and distribution trail easier.
In the case of large quantities of a drug, sampling is an issue.
If a large brick of marijuana comes into the crime lab, analysts will take multiple samples
from multiple places on the brick to make sure as best as sampling will allow that the
whole package really is marijuana.
Or if a large shipping box is confiscated and in it are a thousand large Ziploc bags,
each with 50 small baggies of what looks like cocaine in them, sampling is needed.
That entire quantity just can't be analyzed.
A few small baggies from a random number of the larger Ziplocs will be sampled and tested,
and then the total weight of all the packages would be determined.
Many of the same analytical techniques mentioned in the toxicology lecture are also used to
identify potential substances of abuse in the crime lab, like gas chromatography, mass
spectroscopy, and radioimmunoassay.
For those of you that know a bit more about chemistry, high performance liquid chromatography
or HPLC is also used as a confirmatory test.
But there are preliminary screening tests available too, and some are even used by officers
in the field.
These can be as simple as consulting the physician's desk reference to look up the identity of
manufactured pills or quick chemical spot testing methods.
For example, something called a Marquiri agent turns purple in the presence of heroin.
These field tests are sometimes done to be able to get a search for it, but as we've
seen with other preliminary tests, they have to be backed up later by another method.
In terms of preliminary field analysis for substance abuse, though, one test is king.
Know what it is?
Hopefully, you don't have any first-hand experience, but by far the most common field
test for abused substances is, of course, the breathalyzer.
All U.S. states and many other parts of the world have laws intended to curb drunk driving,
and many use some form of sobriety field testing that includes a chemical analyzer to detect
alcohol levels using expired air.
Because alcohol is volatile, it comes out of the blood that flows through the lungs and
then mixes with air.
The machine itself is actually a form of a spectrophotometer that measures how ethanol,
which remember is drinking alcohol, participates in chemically induced color changes inside
the machine.
And in the case of a breathalyzer, science is really taking advantage of what's called
a surrogate mechanism to estimate or infer the actual effects of the drug.
After all, the alcohol coming off a person's breath isn't what's making them drive poorly,
but rather what's going on in the brain.
But since brain alcohol levels can't be tested, and actual blood alcohol levels can't be tested
in the field, when somebody tests over the legal limit, although they call the result
blood alcohol content, it's really a scientifically derived estimate for forensic purposes.
Alcohol is the most commonly abused substance in the world.
Later in this series, you'll get a chance to use a little math to figure out how much
a person can drink before going over the legal limit, including yourself if you're willing
to admit your body weight.
