The increasing sophistication of document production and computer equipment and the
tremendous array of digital devices available to us today, they illustrate just some of
the uses of engineering in developing new technologies.
But human design and manufacturing undoubtedly go back beyond even the first stone tools
our ancient ancestors created millions of years ago.
Even some of our closest living primate relatives are inventive.
Humans are uncanny engineers, able to figure out how to manipulate what's around us to
create the things we desire.
Along the route of design and implementation come both trials and errors.
We fashion prototypes and test them to see if they fit our needs.
And when we come up with things that seem to work for us and improve our quality of
life, they catch on.
What was once an idea turns into mass production.
We've created structures, clothing, ways to process food, weapons, machines, medicines,
vehicles, and all sorts of other products that fill our world.
Many of those things work pretty darn well, and those that don't are improved over time.
But good design is no accident, and ensuring that the things we need to work for us are
functional and safe can't be left to chance.
Around 1780 BCE, the Code of Hammurabi was created.
It's still the fundamental idea behind building codes around the world today.
It reads as follows.
If a builder makes a house and does not properly construct it, and the house falls down and
kills the owner, the builder shall be put to death.
If it kills the son of the owner, the son of the builder should be put to death.
If it kills the owner's slave, the builder shall pay for the slave.
If it ruins goods, the builder shall pay for all that was ruined.
Since he did not construct it properly, the builder shall rebuild the house at his own
expense.
If a builder makes a house and the walls are shaky, the builder must strengthen the walls
at his own expense.
Now today, the penalties are not as severe as to put a builder to death, but a civil
lawsuit prompted by shoddy construction might carry an even greater financial penalty than
only paying for all that was ruined.
Negligent construction or poor manufacturing that cause harm to others may result in a settlement
with damages paid out far in excess of what a structure or its contents might have cost
to replace.
It's difficult for a judge or jury to put a dollar amount on the loss of life, health,
productivity, or state of mind, but in civil cases around the world each day, decisions
like that are made.
That's because we have standards that govern the production of things we operate, purchase,
and utilize.
As consumers and users of things made by others, we need to be able to trust that those who
construct and produce the things in our environment do so carefully, ethically, and to the standards
that society has agreed on.
And when that trust is broken by negligence, carelessness, or maliciousness, or corners
are cut to save money, giving consumers less than what they have coming to them, we have
agreed as a society the manufacturers of those products are liable for the damage they cause.
There are also unforeseen issues of planning, implementation, and use that can arise.
Even rigorous testing might not have uncovered a design flaw in a product or a vehicle.
A bridge could have been built to specifications to hold a certain number of cars and trucks
each day, but increasing population density and the traffic that results from it could
push that bridge beyond its limits.
A perfectly functional and safe tool or vehicle could be used or operated in a manner not
intended or recommended by the manufacturer.
And of course accidents happen for all kinds of reasons that are unrelated to the products
or vehicles involved.
On that line, natural disasters like earthquakes, floods, tornadoes, snowstorms, they can all
cause buildings, bridges, dams, highways, and electrical and other energy systems to
fail.
Malicious acts like sabotage and terrorism have also destroyed both natural and man-made
things around us.
The science of figuring out the cause of material, product, and structural failures is known
as forensic engineering.
Forensic engineers use the principles of physics, chemistry, biology, design, and construction
among other things to analyze fault and mechanism when things go wrong.
This can include anything from a short and a faulty appliance to the metal fatigue that
might cause a bridge collapse and everything in between.
Have you ever heard of Gallup and Gertie?
That was the name given to the Tacoma Narrow Suspension Bridge, which was built beginning
in 1938 to cross part of Puget Sound in Washington State.
The construction workers called the bridge Gallup and Gertie because of the way the structure
would sway up and down any time there were strong winds.
At the time it was made, it was the third longest suspension bridge in the world.
The bridge was open to the public in July of 1940, but immediately engineers realized
the bridge was dangerous and moved to correct the design errors.
But just a few, a short four months after it opened, during a November morning full of
high winds, Gallup and Gertie collapsed into Puget Sound.
Surprisingly only one car went into the Tacoma Narrows and only the dog in it perished.
The reason for the significant lack of human and property loss was that the bridge took
literally hours of swaying before it finally gave way, and only a few foolhardy people
used it that morning, though it was open to the public.
Because of Gertie's slow death, her final hours and all the galloping she did in them
were captured on film.
Oh, and for you dog lovers, two people did try to save Tubby, the little cocker spaniel
who had been left on the bridge in his owner's car after the driver literally crawled to
his safety, but the dog was apparently so scared he bit one of the guys who tried to
rescue him.
And remember, I talked about civil lawsuits, the settlement in this case was $450 for the
man's vehicle, and $364.40 for its contents, including little Tubby.
The Tacoma Narrows bridge collapse is a classic case that's used in nearly every physics
or forensic engineering book.
Some theories attributed it to the phenomenon called mechanical resonance, where a structure
takes on more and more energy when it's moved at oscillations that match the frequency of
the vibrations inherent to its own material makeup, which are called its resonance frequencies.
According to this theory, when the wind drove Gertie at just the right frequency, the total
energy of the oscillations increased to a level she could not stand.
But other sources say the structural failure was due to what's called aerialastic flutter,
in which steady winds, coupled with the bridge's inherent resonance frequencies, were sufficient
to cause the fluttering waves of motion that ultimately tore the structure into pieces.
Now, I don't think the term forensic engineering was really in use back then, but engineering
principles have always been used to figure out how to build things, how to make things
better, how to gauge what happened when they don't work right, and how to fix things if
possible.
And to focus this discussion, let's just talk in general terms about one facet of engineering
called structural integrity.
That essentially means how soundly a structure is built for its purpose, and as a result,
how well it holds up to the variety of conditions to which it might be subjected.
When it comes to problems with a structure's integrity, the root causes usually boil down
to two types of support inadequacies, static load deficiencies and dynamic load deficiencies.
So let's talk a little bit about each in turn.
Static load has to do with the basic weight of a structure.
The structure has to be strong enough to withstand gravity and hold itself up without
causing problems for its occupants or other contents.
Static load is often broken down into two components of its own, called a building's
dead load and its live load.
The dead part of a static load is the actual weight of the materials that make up the entire
structure itself.
For a building like each of the World Trade Center towers, that means the weight of the
steel girders, the exterior and interior walls, the elevator housings, the floors, plumbing
and the roofing materials.
For a bridge like Gertie, it's the weight of the pylons that hold her in place, the bridge
supports and the driving deck.
Now the live part of a static load is the part of its weight that can change over time.
It includes factors of weather, like excessive rain or snow on the roof of a building or
the deck of a bridge.
Live load also includes occupancy, such as the weight of all the people in a building,
which might seem pretty negligible in the twin towers, but given 25,000 people worked
in each of the two towers, estimating 180 pounds per person, that's 4.5 million pounds
or about the weight of 1,125 cars, about 10 cars per floor.
Live load would also include the weight of all the vehicles on a bridge, which could
be a pretty massive amount of weight depending on traffic at any given time.
Live static load also relates to the weight of a building's furnishings and machinery
and how that weight is distributed throughout its space.
So that's static load.
Dynamic load in terms of structural integrity relates to forces that change over a short
period of time.
Factors that influence dynamic load are things like heavy construction machinery working
in or near the structure, or in the case of the bridge, an increased dynamic load could
be from lots of trucks that are over the weight limit repeatedly traveling over it.
Dynamic loads also include natural forces, like earthquakes, tornadoes, tsunamis, and
as happened to Gallup and Gurdy, high winds.
Like all of us, buildings, bridges, and other structures age and grow weary.
Over time, the ability of a structure to support its static and dynamic loads decreases
because of factors like corrosion and the inherent aging and weathering of the materials
used in it.
As this aging is expected, and owners want their constructions to last a long time, structures
are engineered to support static loads that are much heavier than the actual loads expected
in regular use, and they're regularly inspected as they age.
Designers and architects refer to this bonus engineering as the structure's margin of
safety.
A structure can collapse even under normal use and expected dynamic loads if the margin
of safety was miscalculated.
For instance, if architects underestimated the static or dynamic loads.
A building or bridge can founder too if there was an error in design or construction, or
the structure wasn't put together according to what were well-made plans.
But one of the issues with structural collapse is a phenomenon we're all too familiar with,
and that's the domino effect.
That's what ultimately happened with Gallup and Gurdy, and it's what happened to bring
down the World Trade Center in that pancaking effect we all witnessed.
In domino cases, the weight of part of the structure adds stress to another part, and
the net effect continues to collapse.
We all know that there are buildings and other structures in certain parts of the world
that have lasted many centuries or more.
And sure, there are periodic problems with aging constructions that have to be addressed.
But there are also materials and design styles that are just inherently better than others.
And then there are acts of nature or other attacks that can level even the most well-built
structures.
Let's look at a couple more structural integrity issues.
Starting with a historic case, sometimes referred to as the Great Molasses Flood.
In January of 1919, in Boston, Massachusetts, temperatures were higher than normal for winter.
Suddenly, witnesses heard a rumbling sound, an amazing wave of molasses, estimated to
be between 8 and 25 feet high, and traveling about 35 miles an hour, barreled down city
streets to a distance of several blocks.
It almost sounds comical until you realize that 21 people were drowned or crushed to
death, and over 150 were injured.
A newspaper man wrote, only an upheaval, a thrashing about in the sticky mass, showed
where any life was.
Horses died like so many flies on sticky flypaper.
The more they struggled, the deeper in the mass they were ensnared.
Even beings, men and women, suffered likewise.
So what happened?
A huge storage tank that towered 50 feet high and was 90 feet in diameter, containing 2,300,000
gallons of molasses, had suffered a complete structural failure.
The rumbling sounds heard were apparently all of the rivets popping out of the tank
nearly at once.
The structure's half-inch steel walls literally tore apart, and the flow of that sticky goo
was so powerful that pressures were estimated to be 2 tons per square foot.
It collapsed nearby buildings and knocked others off their foundations.
The wave even broke the uprights of the Boston's elevated railway, knocking a train off its
tracks, and it threw a truck into the Boston Harbor.
What caused the collapse is complicated, and the precise failure will never be known.
Some theorize that fermentation of the molasses, which could have been accelerated by a 38-degree
rise in air temperature over the course of the prior day, that that caused carbon dioxide
pressure to rapidly build within the tank.
The stress is greatest at the base of a filled tank like that, and one source suggests a
fatigue crack may have begun there and then propagated.
But there was no doubt in the minds of many that the true fault rested with the construction
of the tank, during and after which there was apparently no testing, like checking the
tank for leaks by filling it with water.
Because of its thick viscosity, molasses would be a slow leak, and it's alleged that
local residents would collect what oozed from the tank regularly for their home use.
In fact, some say the reason the tank was painted brown was to cover the molasses leaks
in it.
Regardless, in one of the first class action lawsuits in the state of Massachusetts, the
parent company paid $600,000 in an out-of-court settlement.
Because the quality of design and how structures function over time and temperature is something
that may not be understood until accidents happen, construction methods and standards
evolve.
Due to losses of life and fines incurred, once problems are discovered, no engineer
or builder wants to repeat them, unless they're negligent or trying to make a buck by cut
in corners.
Historically, as the knowledge of materials and an understanding of engineering has evolved,
numerous building and manufacturing codes have come into existence to protect the public
and consumers from danger by setting minimum construction standards.
Before we take a look at the entities responsible for building codes, let's take a quick look
at a more monitored example of a structural collapse, one that started with good plans
but still ended up with a design error that cost over 100 people their lives.
This was the 1981 collapse of the Hyatt Regency Hotel Skywalks that happened in Kansas City,
Missouri.
The atrium of this hotel had elevated walkways that hung from rods attached to the ceiling,
and they crossed in the air on the second, third and fourth floors.
On July 17th, during a party, people started dancing on the skywalks.
Suddenly, the fourth floor skywalk collapsed.
It took out the water pipes as it fell and landed on the second floor skywalk.
The collapse resulted in a heap of wet, twisted steel and other construction rubble, and killed
114 people and injured 200 others.
Claims against the hotel for the incident topped $140 million.
Forensic engineers started with two primary theories, both related to the dance party.
The first was that the rhythmic dancing caused the same type of harmonic resonances along
the decks of the skywalks that some say took down old Gallup and Gertie.
The second theory was that the vibrations from the dancing caused material fatigue within
the skywalks.
Investigators began to look deeper into the collapse, and they discovered that there was
an unexpected design change from the original plans that ended up being used in the final
construction of the elevated walkways.
The contractor that was hired to make the rods that suspended the skywalks, he asked
to change what was to be a one-piece rod into a two-part rod in order to make the suspension
rods easier to manufacture and easier to hang.
That change in fabrication shifted the way the static and dynamic loads were carried
by the skywalks.
The second factor was apparently related to the number of people dancing on the fourth
floor skywalk.
The race walkways were designed for a modest amount of foot traffic, not a large number
of people dancing.
Forensic engineers estimated that the total load at the time of the collapse was more
than double the weight that architects had designed them to hold, notwithstanding that
design flaw.
A tragic events like this have necessitated the continued testing of materials and design,
and made it essential that overarching entities are in charge of making sure standards are
in place and that they're adhered to.
Of course, in the case of the Hyatt Hotel disaster, it would have taken impossible foresight
to imagine all the potential circumstances to which those elevated walkways could possibly
be exposed.
And undoubtedly, if anybody saw it coming, whether the designers, the hotel management,
or certainly the dancers themselves, that catastrophe would never have happened.
There are many components to a disaster like this, and not all of them can be anticipated
or governed, but all of them can be analyzed.
In the United States, the National Bureau of Standards was developed in 1901, and it
became known as the National Institute of Standards and Technology in 1988.
Before 1901, the U.S. Department of Treasury's Office of Standard Weights and Measures was
essentially the precursor agency, but its sphere was a little more limited.
The current National Institute of Standards and Technology, through its engineers, scientists,
and other technology experts, has the charge of identifying and promoting appropriate measurements,
calibration standards, and quality control benchmarks for all kinds of manufacturing
and construction.
Among its subcommittees is the National Construction Safety Team Advisory Committee.
It was this group that was charged with the monumental task of analyzing the 2001 collapse
of the World Trade Center's Twin Towers.
The way the Twin Towers were designed, each floor was about three to three and a half
million pounds, and at its foundation, the total bearing load was about a billion pounds.
When designers conceived the towers, they actually did take airplane impacts into consideration,
because in 1945, a U.S. Army B-25 bomber had hit the Empire State Building, killing
14 people.
In the architectural vision, the most probable worst-case scenario for the World Trade Center
was the accidental impact of a Boeing 707, which was, at the time, the largest aircraft
in the world, and commonly flew out of the three surrounding airports, JFK, LaGuardia,
and Newark.
Engineers knew that a Boeing 707 has a maximum takeoff weight of 168 tons, a maximum cruising
speed of 607 miles an hour, and contains 230,000 gallons of fuel when its tanks are full.
Because of the proximity to the nearby airports, designers assumed that if there was an accident,
the impact velocity when an aircraft might hit would be close to a takeoff or landing
velocity, which is only around 180 miles an hour.
As you may know, most airline accidents typically take place during takeoff or landing.
So the buildings were constructed with the potential for plane crashes in mind, but who
would have imagined that on September 11th, 2001, not one but two even larger jets that
can carry even more fuel would be deliberately used as missiles to attack the World Trade
Center.
The planes that struck the towers in 2001 were Boeing 767s, each of which has a maximum
takeoff weight of 197 and a half tons.
That's almost 30 tons more than the Boeing 707s the building design engineers had used
in their worst case calculations.
Plus, a Boeing 767 carries 10,000 gallons more jet fuel than a 707.
Due to all that weight, the cruising speed of a Boeing 767 is only 530 miles an hour.
But remember, design calculations use takeoff and landing speeds of only 180 miles an hour.
In summary, a Boeing 767 is about 18% heavier than its smaller counterpart, and at its cruising
speed of 530 miles an hour would be traveling almost three times faster than the takeoff
and landing speed worst case impact projections.
At 846 a.m., when the first jet impacted the North Tower, seismometers 21 miles away in
Palisades, New York recorded a ground shock Richter scale equivalent of a 0.9 earthquake.
The initial horizontal impact severed about two-thirds of the steel supports on the North
Tower's north side.
Six floors were damaged by the impact directly, but they didn't collapse at that point.
The resulting fire burned 102 minutes before the North Tower collapsed, and when it fell,
which was actually after the collapse of the second tower hit, that North Tower generated
the equivalent of a 2.3 magnitude earthquake.
At the time the next Boeing 767 flew into the South Tower, which was at 9.03 a.m., the
same seismometer recorded a ground shock equivalent to a 0.7 earthquake.
This time nine floors were damaged during the impact.
That was because the plane came in nose down at about 10 degrees and at about a 45-degree
angle, so it cut a larger swath than the first plane had in the other tower.
The second jet was also at a lower altitude and impacted lower on the South Tower than
the first plane did on the North Tower.
That will be important in our failure analysis.
The impact caused similar structural damage to the steel supports in the South Tower, and
after only 56 minutes of burning, just about half the time the North Tower stood after it
was hit, the South Tower came down first at 9.59 a.m., sending with it a seismographic
wave equivalent to a 2.1 magnitude earthquake.
One source I've seen says that the impact energy of just one of those Boeing 767s would
be equivalent to the structure being hit by about 4,439 compact cars all traveling at
100 miles an hour.
Or for another comparison, the estimated force applied to each World Trade Center tower at
impact was about 23,850,000 pounds.
While a hurricane with winds of 126 miles an hour would have hit those structures with
11 million pounds, which is less than half the force of those aircraft.
Despite the tremendous damage to each building, structurally those towers were technically
able to withstand those impacts, even though the hits each took were much greater than
the worst case scenario engineers had used to design their construction.
But doomed the towers to collapse was the fire involved.
Forensic engineers and fire investigators determined in their analysis that if the full
amount of jet fuel in a Boeing 767 was spread evenly over nine floors using the case of
the South Tower, there would be nine ounces of jet fuel per square foot.
This was based on each floor having an area of 40,000 square feet times nine floors for
the 24,000 gallons of fuel on board.
Now take a minute to imagine that.
You know, here's a square foot of floor space and then picture a measuring cup.
There are eight ounces in a cup.
So we're talking about pouring more than one cup of highly flammable jet fuel on each
square foot of floor space.
We'll talk a lot more about fires in another lecture.
But it's important to say here, the maximum temperature jet fuel burns is about 3,140
degrees Fahrenheit.
Now flame temperatures don't reach this in real life, even in an uncontrolled interior
building fire.
But the temperatures from that jet fuel would only be several hundred degrees less than that.
The major effect these high temperatures had on the structural integrity of the World Trade
Center towers was on their steel supports and the concrete around that steel.
Steel reinforced concrete itself degrades and cracks at temperatures over 120 degrees
Fahrenheit.
And when a fire reaches 1,000 degrees, the structural steel supports themselves lose
about half their tensile strength.
Engineers know that when temperatures reach 1,300 degrees, steel is no longer even viable
in its support capabilities.
Now given the extreme amount of jet fuel per square foot in the areas where each plane
hit, the fire temperatures without a doubt would have easily far exceeded 1,300 degrees,
causing a full material failure in the steel.
Now we get to the domino effect that brought each of the 110 story towers down.
When the structural components of the steel and concrete failed, on the six floors in
the north tower and the nine floors in the south tower, they could no longer carry their
loads.
And if you remember, the south tower actually fell first, even though it was struck second.
This was because the second Boeing 767 hit lower on the south tower.
And as a result, there were 16 floors above the impact zone weighing down on the nine
damaged floors compared to the north tower, which had 11 floors bearing down on the six
floors that were destabilized by the fire from the first plane.
So what happened is that the badly damaged zones where the fires destabilized the structural
steel and concrete, they left no support for the undamaged floors above them.
And the undamaged part of each building came crashing down as one unit with all of its
weight into the area where the fire had already burned.
That took all the mass within that undamaged portion and turned it into a vertical impact
of dynamic load that fell on the burn zone.
When the upper floors hit as a unit, their mass was too much for those damaged floors
below to hold.
And then each floor gave way in turn, adding its weight to that domino effect, causing the
pancaking collapse we all witnessed until the entire tower was gone.
Forensic engineers concluded that the two different impact altitudes also affected how quickly
each building came down.
The north tower not only failed second, but also took a longer time to collapse.
The north tower's horizontal plane impact was on the 93rd floor, and although the floors
above it fell from a higher point, they fell for a longer period of time because there were
more floors to pancake below that point.
The south tower aircraft impact was on the 85th floor, so it took less time to fall because
there were fewer dominoes as it were below that level.
The higher collapse energy of the north tower is also why it wound up having a higher seismometer
reading of 2.3 in its collapse than the south tower's 2.1 magnitude.
Figuring out what went wrong in any type of catastrophe like this is the responsibility
of forensic engineering specialists.
Even in natural disasters like Hurricane Katrina, the expertise of forensic engineers is called
on, for example, to try to determine whether or not faulty construction was to blame for
the many levees that failed during the storm surge.
We can only hope that tragedies like this are once in a lifetime events, but there are
other uses of material science and physics that forensic scientists and law enforcement
investigators use day in and day out during vehicular accidents, and we'll take a look
at those next.
