Forensic artists really use a combination of art and science in their work.
And like odontologists, these artists commonly work with both the dead and the living.
Forensic artists surprisingly interdisciplinary because in addition to being skilled artists,
its practitioners need to understand some human biology too, like the anatomy and growth
of facial bones and other tissues of the face throughout a person's lifetime, including
their teeth.
But forensic artists also have to use some principles of psychology when they participate
in witness interviews and they need to understand the legal context of their work.
Forensic artists come from a variety of backgrounds in training and technology has significantly
changed the way they work over time.
But one thing has never changed, a good forensic artist has to be a keen observer of human
physical traits.
Historically police artists rose up through the ranks of law enforcement based on their
talent.
But over the past several decades, the increasing public interest in all things forensic has
led some people that are more formally trained as artists bring their skills into legal settings.
Some forensic artists have their own consulting practices while others work for law enforcement
agencies.
Most of us know that forensic art is often used to trigger recognition, for example when
police are searching for somebody.
This includes artists who make images to help the public lead authorities to suspects and
fugitives as well as one forensic artist reconstruct a face to help identify an unknown person
from skeletal or badly decomposed remains.
The age progression images we're familiar with, especially for missing children, are
also attempts to trigger recognition in somebody out in the public who might know where that
missing person is.
But did you know that artists can also clean up morgue photos and make them more presentable
so they can be released to the media?
This is sometimes necessary when decomposing remains are discovered in a condition that's
really too gruesome to be seen by most people, especially considering that the shock value
might preclude or outweigh the recognition value of the face depicted in the image, which
remember is the goal.
The same is true when really traumatic injuries disfigure a victim's face.
A forensic artist can sometimes reconfigure the features to try to reproduce the person's
anti-mortem appearance.
Forensic artists are sometimes called on to enhance images rather than actual faces,
like pictures from surveillance tapes that might be grainy or shadowed.
Because of their extensive knowledge of facial anatomy, forensic artists may be asked to
compare images, for example, between a surveillance recording and a photograph of a suspect or
even the suspect themselves.
I should also mention that sometimes anthropologists are asked to compare images like that too,
or compare the photographs of one or more living people to a skull of questioned identity.
Another less known responsibility taken on by some forensic artists is to prepare certain
types of evidence for presentation in the courtroom.
For example, an artist might create an aerial view of a larger crime scene or develop a
computer animation that shows something like a bullet's trajectory or the spread of a fire
or how an accident most likely happened.
As we'll see in another lecture, that's what's called demonstrative evidence in the courtroom.
Just the mention of those computer animations gives us some insight into how dramatically
forensic art has changed over time.
Those of you my age or older probably remember old black and white television shows like
Perry Mason, where the courtroom's sketch artists scribbled away in the corner depicting
the defendant, the lawyers, or the jury in a sketch that would appear in the evening newspaper.
You occasionally see those types of sketches today, especially if the judge doesn't allow
photography during trial.
One of the oldest uses of forensic artwork was in the historic wanted posters of suspects
or criminals, like those from the old Wild West days in the United States.
You may have also seen old crime scene sketches from infamous cases like Jack the Ripper,
some of which were drawn from actual photographs that were too gruesome to display to the general
public.
Two-dimensional drawings are still generated, but if a forensic artist is going to actually
sketch, then archival grid papers and other supplies need to be used that can stand the
test of time, as well as quality paper that can hold up to erasures as the image gets
tweaked.
After the facial part of the sketch is complete, things like glasses or a hat can be added
using overlays to speed things up.
Usually takes about one to three hours for a typical police sketch.
Over the years, there have been many changes in forensic art technology, and what began
as simple 2D images has now gone digital.
Today, flat images are often generated electronically using computer software technologies.
One commercial product called Identikit produces police sketches based on witness statements.
There's also one called Photofit that's used more in the UK, and another one called Faces
that we use in my forensic science class.
These are much faster than sketching, and also allow the artist to more easily swap
eye shapes, noses, hairstyles, mouth forms, and other features.
Facial facial reconstructions essentially create a sculpted bust of an unknown person
from his or her skull.
These are made by attaching tissue thickness markers to established places on the skull,
and then using clay to reproduce soft tissue anatomy.
They're really remarkable, but also really time consuming.
More recently, facial reconstructions from skulls are being done using computer technology,
where high quality images of the skull taken from several angles are put into the computer
and the soft tissue built up on the screen.
Like other computer generated images, they're not only faster, so they're less expensive,
but they can be easily tweaked to get things just right.
It's also much easier for an anthropologist like me to email images to a forensic artist
than it is to ship a skull, but I've done both.
Some labs can even scan and digitize skulls, and then use a virtual skull they create on
a computer in a reconstruction.
Now, speaking of skulls, let's take a look at how the anatomy and geometry of humans'
human heads vary to better understand the science behind forensic art.
Is your head more brachycephalic, dolicosophalic, or mesosophalic?
I guess I should ask it this way.
Do you have a head that's broader than most, longer than most, or somewhere in between?
We all know that some people have rounder heads, and some people have heads that are
more long and narrow.
The basic shape of our skulls largely determined by genetics, and because of that, there are
ancestral differences, some would say racial differences, among head shapes.
As one of my books about forensic art points out, it's not the job of the artist to label
people, but rather to interpret a likeness.
Now, anthropologists have studied human remains for centuries.
One focus has been to better understand the anatomy behind the diversity that's seen
in skull shape and facial geometry, and then classify the differences observed.
This research has been done using skulls of known ancestry that have been extensively
measured by anthropologists and then statistically analyzed.
Most human groups emanate from three basic ancestral stocks, each of which spent long
periods of genetic isolation in different parts of the world.
We wound up with three standard ancestral groups.
First, African derived, which are scientifically termed negroid, and sociologically often called
black, though nobody's skin color is truly black.
Secondly, European derived, so-called caucasoid, or more commonly called white, though that's
also a misnomer because people from India may have very dark skin, but are considered
Caucasian.
By the way, that name comes from the Caucasus regions where Russia, Turkey, and Iran more
or less surround a few smaller countries in Eurasia.
The third ancestral group consists of people who are Asian derived, which are scientifically
known as Mongoloid, a name based on the geographic area called Mongolia, which if you've forgotten
sits between Russia and China.
And then there are the aboriginal people, indigenous to Australia, who really don't fit into that
three-part scheme at all.
Statistically though, this ancestral group, the aborigines, is such a small fraction of
the world's population, including less than two and a half percent of the Australian population,
that the frequency of encountering an aborigine in forensic casework is pretty remote, even
in Australia.
Historists and forensic artists have also studied and subclassified these larger racial
groups to get a better understanding, for example, of how the skull and facial geometry
of Japanese people differs from Chinese, Vietnamese, or Korean.
So whether a forensic artist is working from a skull or constructing a sketch of a suspect
based on a witness account, they need to have a good working knowledge of the typical head
shapes and facial features that characterize people whose families trees grew in different
parts of the world.
If the facial reproduction is to be generated from a skull, an anthropologist first provides
the artist with the victim's biological profile, which remember includes age, sex, and ancestry
when possible.
When working from an eyewitness interview, the artist has to take into account the racial
identity the witness applies to the suspect, and then add or subtract from the typical
ancestral features based on additional details provided, especially since few of us, particularly
in America, have what could be called a narrow bloodline.
So how about the effects of age on head shape and facial features?
And by the way, a study I conducted and presented to the American Academy of Forensic Sciences
in 2003 suggested that the facial geometry associated with different racial or ethnic
groups is often pretty well established in a child's skull at a relatively early age,
and subsequent research by others has borne this out.
But how does age itself affect the size and shape of the skull?
There are actually two major areas of the skull, the brain case scientifically called
the cranium and the facial region, and these two subunits change their proportions pretty
drastically during childhood development.
Kids have big brain cases, and their facial features are concentrated near what we might
call the bottom of their face.
That's because they have such a larger brain-to-body ratio than an adult does.
Scientific studies have been done using actual skulls historically, but more recently using
X-rays, CT scans and MRIs to document the changes in cranial and facial proportions
in kids as their skulls develop.
There are few, if any, bony changes in the skull associated with aging once skeletal
growth is complete.
But if somebody loses all their teeth, which really could happen at any age, especially
in the case of an accident, the mandible can change its proportions in somewhat ultra-person's
facial geometry.
Likewise, when men lose their hairline, it can give them a different forehead appearance,
but that has nothing to do with their underlying skull.
A forensic artist does need to understand changes in soft tissue anatomy as a person ages, because
they'll have to generate a reconstruction or a sketch based on the subject's general
age category.
For example, if an anthropologist or a witness said that an adult was middle-aged or even
older, the artist would have to add things like wrinkles as appropriate, and we'll talk
more about that later.
There are also differences between male and female skulls, as we learned in our anthropology
lecture.
These can be pretty strong in some men and women, but other people have relatively ambiguous
traits and show little sexual dimorphism.
We've all seen examples of cross-dressers and some movie actors who can pretty convincingly
swap their appearance to the opposite sex.
The degree of sexual dimorphism also varies among ethnic groups.
For example, in general, American whites and blacks are genetically usually more sexually
dimorphic as a group than Hispanic and Asian populations are.
When considering any of these patterns in skulls, whether ancestry traits, growth and
development, or sexual dimorphism, the underlying bone structure plays a big role in a person's
facial appearance.
But so do their soft tissues.
To address the soft tissue part of the equation, cadavers of people of known race, age and
sex have been historically studied in order to quantify the average tissue thicknesses
of relying certain bony landmarks on the skull.
This research has also helped figure out typical dimensions of structures like the nose, ears
and other facial features.
More recently, CT scans and MRIs of living people have been used, instead of cadavers.
Because they not only allow more diverse population groups to be studied, including younger people
and children, but also aren't affected by any postmortem tissue changes.
Now, long before this kind of research, there were some well-established things known about
faces from art itself.
For instance, that faces are generally not perfectly symmetrical.
Some of you may have studied art and know a lot about things like this from drawing classes.
There are some general rules of thumb, or should I say face, that go all the way back to Greek
and Roman ideals about art.
Such as, the face is typically five times the width of an eye.
The width between the eyes is roughly equal to the width of one eye.
The eyes are about halfway down the face, and the ears and nose are roughly the same height.
These are still helpful guidelines for creating a good piece of art, but they don't always
apply to cases where the artist is attempting to reconstruct a face.
That's because the real job of a forensic artist is to capture the ways in which a face
is different from those idealized suggestions.
In fact, most experts don't recommend using any kind of templates in forensic art.
The proportions of the mid-face region are still recognized as being especially important
and distinctive, but some facial types are easier to describe than others.
Plus, the angle the witness views a subject from can alter their perception of the person's
facial proportions.
Now, with mention of altered perceptions, let's talk about forensic age progressions.
We all know that some things change and some things stay the same.
Have you ever been surprised at your ability to recognize people from your childhood years,
years later, maybe at a reunion, even though you hadn't seen them in 20 years?
We've watched ourselves and lots of our relatives and friends age over time.
And we all know that when you see somebody day in and day out, you don't notice the differences
as much as when there's a long period between visits.
That phenomenon is even more dramatic with children when compared to adults because of
how quickly children grow and change.
But still in all, there are enough consistencies to not only allow for recognition after years
of absence, but also to form the basis for age progressions.
The techniques for age progression developed out of the need to help find children who
are missing on a long-term basis, like children abducted by non-custodial parents or teenagers
who run away.
Although it's a parent's worst nightmare, stranger abduction is actually extremely rare,
but there have been cases of long-term stranger abduction, too.
The methods behind age progression were developed by two medical illustrators named Scott Barrows
and Louis Sadler, based on pediatric research about the development of skulls and faces
of children.
In fact, Barrows' experience came from his work on an atlas for reconstructive plastic
surgeons.
Their first success with age progression came from a TV documentary that aired in April
of 1985.
Based on old photos and their newly developed age progression technique, Barrows and Sadler
created age-progressed images of two sisters who were age five and seven when they were
abducted over seven and a half years earlier by their non-custodial father.
Within 10 minutes after the images were shown on television, police officers started getting
calls from Kettering, Ohio, just about an hour from where I live, because neighbors and
school teachers thought they recognized the two girls, now age 13 and 15, who were known
to them as Debbie and Kathy Russo.
The girls were actually, or should I say originally, Deborah and Kathleen Caruso, who were missing
from their mother, Janet Hicks, in Chicago.
Their father, Philip Caruso, had told them back in 1977 to pack for a long vacation and
then later told them that their mother and grandparents had died.
The morning after the television program aired, a police detective met the girls on their
school bus and the long separation from their mother finally ended.
Ironically, Philip Caruso was an active member of the school's parent teacher association
and regularly attended church.
Since that time, the forensic community has embraced age progressions.
We've seen them on everything from mailing inserts to product packaging.
They're also a valuable tool of the National Center for Missing and Explorited Children
headquartered just outside Washington, D.C.
Techniques have included both conventional sketching and computer technology.
The choice of which to use often depends on what kind of existing photos are available.
Some age progression experts tend to put a lot of emphasis on changes seen in other family
members over time.
So use parent and sibling images to help develop age progressions.
But other experts think scientific data on growth should outweigh family resemblances.
A couple of biological principles underlie age progression science.
Not only is a baby's cranium large to accommodate a big brain, but our eyes, because they're
really an extension of our brain, they develop earlier than other facial features.
That's why human infants and other newborn mammals have such big eyes.
Since it matures earlier, the eye area tends to be one of the most consistent features
in the age progressions done on children.
In fact, the whole upper face pattern is established earlier in life.
The faces of kids grow down and forward as they age, so it's really the lower face that
changes more over time.
Forensic artists have had to consider how teeth develop, too.
Now we know about the two sets of teeth we get in our lifetime, but once it comes in,
each set's really one size fits all in terms of the growth of our head.
Kids probably noticed how big baby teeth look when they come in for the first time in an
infant, and then how small those same teeth look when the child's about five years old.
Now tooth crowns don't grow in size once they develop, but the rest of our facial features
catch up to and then exceed the size of those baby teeth.
That's because head size grows in a linear pattern.
The same thing happens when permanent teeth come in.
Remember about age seven when those brand new choppers came in and you looked like bucky
beaver?
Your teeth were adult-sized, but your head wasn't yet.
Fortunately, most people grow into those teeth and those that don't can have orthodontic
work.
Age progression isn't just used for kids.
It can also be used to update the face of a long-term missing adult or a fugitive.
This is also done from photographs, either by hand or on a computer.
A famous incident where an adult age progression was used to capture a fugitive suspect was
the case of John List, who killed his wife, mother, and three children in 1971, but was
not captured until 18 years later after an age progression was shown on the TV show America's
Most Wanted.
There are some general principles that forensic artists use for aging adult images.
For instance, did you know that facial wrinkles develop perpendicular to the grain of the
muscle underneath them?
So for instance, people who raise their eyebrows in a vertical direction get forehead furrows
in a horizontal direction.
And because there's a circular muscle running around each eye, we get creases perpendicular
to that ring of muscle.
Some people call them crow's feet.
I like to call them smile lines.
Now because of the protective effects of melanin, people with lighter skin tend to show greater
age changes, especially wrinkles, than people with darker skin.
Because there are so many variables in the genetic, environmental, and physical stresses
that affect us all as we age, a good forensic artist will often produce a couple of different
age progressions of the same adult to capture the range of possible variations, especially
for things that are known to differ among people, like the potential for hair loss in
men, the possibility of weight gain or loss, and the addition of eyeglasses or gray hair.
Some artists will even consider different looks to reflect socioeconomic status, like
giving a blue collar or a white collar look to hairstyle and clothing.
Because the same principles of variation apply to facial reproductions from skulls, a forensic
artist should use his or her expertise in what's known about the victim to generate
the reconstruction, but either leave generic what might be totally unknown, like hair and
eye color or skin tone, or present multiple views as different possibilities.
Some artists like to do their reconstructions completely in shades of gray to stress the
features rather than the colors, where they may show a woman with undefined and swept
back hair so as not to be misleading about hair length or style.
Now remember I said that forensic artists deal with both the living and the dead?
Obviously when working from a skull, the forensic artist is part of a team who's attempting
to give an identity back to a person who's dead.
And when doing age progressions, especially on children, we all hope those kids turn up
alive and safe somewhere.
But when it comes to apprehending suspects after a crime, forensic artists have additional
challenges that take them far beyond their artwork.
In these situations, they not only have to create the face of a living fugitive, they
have to gather that information for the image from a living witness.
So let's talk more about police sketch artists and how they use eyewitness accounts to try
to help capture the bad guy or bad girl, at least in terms of capturing their facial likeness.
From the outset, the artist needs to realize that the image he or she is about to produce
is based on the fallible nature of human memory, which we'll talk about more in a future lecture.
Police sketches are more technically known as composite images.
That helps convey the fact that they're really collective images made up by individually
described parts, like noses, lips, and eyes.
These composite images are also a collection of visual memories from one or more people
who saw the suspect or perpetrator during what might have been a very tense and intense
event, the commission of a crime.
In order to gather these recollections, forensic artists who often do the interviews themselves,
by the way, need to have a good interviewing skills, including an understanding of memory
and the way trauma affects it.
Their goal is a quality likeness of the subject with an emphasis on forensics, not just a
pretty picture of somebody's face.
Scientific research using sensors has demonstrated the way our eyes scan a face.
We spend less time looking at the lower face than the upper face, and put slightly less
emphasis on the eyes than the rest of the upper face.
Overall, age, the shape of the face, the hairline, and hair have greater priority in our memory
than do eyes.
In fact, one book I read said that people trying to disguise themselves should pay more
attention to hats and wigs than sunglasses.
There I go, making smarter criminals again.
It's been a while since I last said that.
Psychological studies demonstrate people can recognize things easier than recall them,
meaning it's a lot easier for us to recognize somebody we know than to describe their face.
Some photo cues of specific features might be helpful, but the witness may get confused
if too much, did his eyes look like this or like that, is done repeatedly.
In other words, the images may blur the memory.
In general, most experts think the benefits of photographic references outweigh the bias
they might introduce.
The FBI even has a facial ID catalog that can be useful.
It's divided into sections like face shapes, eye types, noses, and things like that.
Here are some interesting specifics about the actual drawing process recommended by somebody
considered among the best in the business, Karen Taylor from Texas.
Taylor recommends that the artist sit off to the side so the witness doesn't get confused
by seeing the sketch artists face during the interview.
There also shouldn't be any face pictures like wanted posters around that the witness
could inadvertently pull facial features from as they're describing the suspect.
The artist should start with open-ended questions.
Like, tell me about her face, and then later focus in on things like, was her face widest
at the jaw, the cheekbones, or the forehead?
The witness shouldn't be allowed to guess about details.
A good artist will know how to use average features for the appropriate ancestry to cover
anything the witness doesn't feel confident about.
The artist also shouldn't sketch where the witness has full or direct view of the drawing.
Public studies have shown that we encode faces by the relationships between their features,
more than the individual components that make them up.
So the drawing should actually be as complete as possible before it's shown to the witness.
Really valuable information might include things like scars, marks, and tattoos, because
these said individuals apart from the crowd, head and facial hair can be added if details
of color, length, shape, texture are given.
For reproducing hats and glasses, the suspect might have worn.
It helps for the artist to have a photo book with examples that the witness can pick from.
Facial expressions can also be captured by the forensic artist if the witness makes any
mention of them.
After the initial sketch is completed, the witness should be asked to look at it, and
then more structured questions should be used to fine tune the drawing.
Like were his eyes larger or smaller than this?
Or is this the right distance from the nose to the mouth?
And then finishing touches can be put on and changed as needed, sometimes after letting
the witness take a break for a little while.
The artist should also never act shocked.
The witness shouldn't be praised, and it should be made clear that it's okay to say
I don't know.
The last thing the artist wants is to encourage fabrication because of pressure or praise.
This is especially true when interviewing children.
If a child's really scared, it can help to let the child whisper the information or cover
his or her eyes while describing the scary suspect.
Interviewing for forensic art isn't the same as police interview.
An artist's interview is really much more of a cognitive interview, not just a collection
of facts.
It relies on the witness's senses and experiences, and we all differ by nature in our visual
abilities, and I don't just mean our eyesight.
Many of us are more visual people than others.
We also vary in our powers of observation and attention to detail.
And as we'll see in our lecture on eyewitness testimony, a witness's experiences during
an event, like a crime, also have a lot to do with their ability to recall.
Finally, at the conclusion of the interview and the facial reproduction, the artist needs
to be sure to sign and date the work in case it winds up as evidence in court.
Oh, but before they do that, they need to check for one more thing.
They have to be careful that they didn't inadvertently incriminate themselves in the forensic art.
Research has shown that many artists can often subconsciously incorporate their own facial
features in their work.
Apparently, that's pretty much a part of human nature.
Now let's move on to talk about other facets of human nature, including more about interviews
and other psychological aspects of forensic science.
