We've talked about many aspects of a natural, physical and behavioral sciences that are
part of forensics.
The thing that really sets forensic science apart from other scientific endeavors, though,
is that the results of forensic analyses may end up in the courtroom.
Forensic evidence of any type, whether a physical artifact or what someone has to say, has to
be collected, prepared and analyzed with the mindset that it might wind up in court someday.
That's the reason behind the chain of custody for physical evidence and why interviews have
to be carried out within legal constraints.
Since the legal system sets forth rules that govern evidence and testimony about it, those
rules have to be understood by forensic scientists and considered not only through our analysis
of forensic evidence, but as we prepare our reports, too.
A forensic scientist has to realize that everything from the equipment we use or don't use, the
bench notes we might write for ourselves in the lab, and the formal report we may generate
about our results, all those may be subpoenaed, and then questioned in the court of law.
Talk about having somebody look over your shoulder while you work.
And then when you consider that a courtroom proceeding may occur years after the initial
analysis, the importance of documentation of our work is obvious.
The stakes are really high because we're dealing with people's lives.
Forensic labs need to be regularly inspected.
They have to have processes in place to assure that equipment is properly calibrated, personnel
fully trained, and quality control measures in place.
Attention to detail and high ethical standards are imperative for forensic scientists.
So are good communication skills in both report writing and delivering testimony.
Now I've mentioned criminal and civil types of litigation, especially in our last lecture,
but it's not just forensic psychologists or psychiatrists who may have a role in both
criminal and civil issues.
Any branch of forensic science could be used in both.
One that could be said for courts, Marshall, you know, there really is an NCIS, which stands
for Naval Criminal Investigative Service, as well as an Army Criminal Investigation Command
and an Air Force Office of Special Investigations, the last who don't have their own TV shows
yet.
Anyway, most of my testimony has been in criminal cases, but I've testified in civil
matters too.
One case that comes to mind is a really sad case where an infant's skull was fractured,
apparently by the use of forceps during a difficult delivery.
I was asked to examine the skull bones for trauma and relate what I saw to the growth
patterns in the neonate skull.
Now you might wonder why an anthropologist would be consulted on a case like that.
But remember, we have expertise in bone fracture patterns.
Plus, the newborn had actually been buried, but as the details unfolded, his remains,
which had skeletonized, were exhumed by the family in their pursuit of answers.
I determined that the baby's skull clearly had a significant skull fracture that occurred
before his tiny body decomposed.
Although I'm positive it was not a malicious act on the part of the obstetrician who took
a Hippocratic oath to do no harm, or the hospital where this happened, but the parents had a
right to pursue an investigation in a lawsuit for the death of their son.
This was a tragedy no matter whose side you looked at it from, and it illustrates that
forensic scientists may have the expertise to assist either side of a legal case, in
civil as well as criminal matters.
Now just in case the distinctions between criminal and civil issues aren't clear, criminal
cases are those where a person allegedly did something that's an offense to all of society
really.
That's why you hear criminal cases called things like state of Ohio versus Joe Blow.
Of course there can be a specific victim that Joe Blow robbed, raped, or otherwise harmed,
but Joe's also damaged the very fabric of our society because his actions broke the
rules we've created to manage human behavior.
As part of his journey to the courtroom, Joe will first be indicted for his crime by the
grand jury.
That means he'll be formally accused by the legal system.
Then some governmental entity will prosecute the case, like the U.S. Attorney General's
office if Joe broke a federal law, or the state where the crime occurred if Joe broke
state law.
The government party's called the plaintiff, and Joe's the defendant.
So Joe Blow's actual victim doesn't have to bring the case to court, and in some cases
might not even be alive to do so.
Besides, some crimes don't really have a victim, like speeding or driving while intoxicated.
In criminal cases, there may be a trial or not.
Joe may plead out at a pretrial hearing.
If Joe's found guilty, he'll be sentenced in one or more ways.
He could get a fine, or Joe may have to pay restitution to the victim he harmed.
He might get probation where he's supervised for a period of time, but still allowed to
be out in the community.
His probation might carry provisions, like maybe counseling or attending a substance
abuse program.
Joe may also be sent to jail or prison, which technically aren't the same thing.
Jail's a local facility that's a holding place for people awaiting trial, or those with
a relatively short sentence, maybe less than a year.
The prisons are run by the state or federal government and are long-term facilities.
On the other hand, civil cases are about disagreements between people and or institutions, like businesses
or the government.
To start a civil case, a person or some representative of an organization makes a claim against another
person or an institution.
Whoever makes that claim is the plaintiff, and whoever they allege harmed them or failed
to fulfill an obligation to them is called the defendant.
In some cases, people can bring a civil suit against a government entity for what they
perceive as a violation of their rights.
And likewise, the government can bring a civil suit, say, against a corporation for violating
a legal statute.
After a civil case is heard, a decision is made as to who's responsible or who owes
what to the other party.
If what's owed is financial, the penalty costs are called damages.
Claims can't be sent to jail for a civil case.
Small claims are heard at the local level, but generally cases that involve violations
of the U.S. Constitution or federal laws or cases where people in different states are
suing each other, those are filed in federal court.
The financial amount doesn't usually have much to do with it, although large product
liability cases that involve great sums of money, they'll have plaintiffs typically from
many different states.
Now whether a civil or criminal matter, if forensic science is used, it's employed in
the same way, to help the judge or jury reach a decision in the case.
Either a judge or jury can be what are called the triers of a case in different kinds of
trials.
It's called a bench trial when the case is heard before one or more judges only.
A jury trial has a judge, but also a group of six to twelve jurors selected to hear the
case, plus alternates who can fill in if necessary.
It's always the judge that determines admissibility of evidence in any case, and it's the triers
of fact, whether a judge or jury, that reach a decision of guilt or innocence, or fault
in the case of a civil trial.
They do that by applying the relevant law to the admissible evidence and the facts established
in a case.
The jury may play a role in setting punishment, but that's usually up to the judge.
The sentencing may even involve another hearing in what's called the penalty phase of a trial.
Now it's a job of the attorneys to present evidence to support the side of the case they
represent, you know, what each side says happened or didn't happen.
There are prosecuting and defense attorneys in criminal cases, and attorneys for the plaintiff
and the defendant in civil cases.
Legal jurisdictions have prosecutors that they employ, and then the defendant can either
hire an attorney or be represented by a public defender who's assigned to present their evidence.
Evidence can be tangible items or reports about them, like photos, documents, drugs,
bullets, fingerprints, all the things we've covered.
Evidence also consists of eyewitness testimony and law enforcement testimony and expert testimony.
Some evidence gathered in a forensic case winds up in court, but other times it doesn't.
And as I've said, we can never tell where an investigation will lead, so all evidence
has to be treated as if it will wind up in court someday.
In reality, most work forensic scientists and police officers do doesn't wind up presented
or testified to in court.
Remember, there's always the possibility that what we discover is that no crime was committed
or our work exonerates somebody, so no charges are ever brought.
And even if a defendant's charged or a civil case is initiated, the defendant may simply
plead guilty, which happens all the time, especially when they're shown the mounting
evidence against them, like Dahmer in his second trial.
Or there may be a plea bargain to a lesser charge, which happened in the case from our
first lecture where the prosecutor's office allowed the bad guy to lead us to where he
buried Shannon's body in his backyard.
They can ask for, they can exchange that for a lesser charge.
Now he still went to trial, but in these types of cases, any lesser charges might render
some of the forensic evidence that was gathered on necessary in court.
Or in some cases, when the trial seemed to be going in a particular direction or maybe
going nowhere, the charges can be dropped so evidence or testimony isn't needed.
Part of trial preparation is collecting information from witnesses and getting evidence ready.
This may include issuing subpoenas that compel people to come to court or taking pre-trial
depositions, a depositions when one or more attorneys question a potential witness under
oath but outside the courtroom.
Sometimes forensic reports will be used to substitute for a court appearance by a forensic
scientist, so attorneys may gather and review those reports.
You may have also heard of discovery, which has to do with the sharing of information
between parties involved in litigation.
There's been a shift to broaden discovery in criminal cases in the U.S. because in the
past the defendant was not entitled to see the prosecution's evidence.
Each side of the case prepares a discovery motion for the judge asking to see things
like witness lists and forensic reports so they know what kind of evidence may be coming
their way.
In some jurisdictions, there's an exception to discovery in murder cases.
The prosecution doesn't have to divulge the names of key witnesses until the morning
each is to take the stand, so that way they can't be tampered with, threatened or killed
before testifying.
Remember, class evidence just assigns an item to a general group of items, like a Nike
shoe or motor vehicle paint.
But there's also individuating evidence that would be much more damning, like fingerprints
or DNA.
So obviously attorneys for both sides want to know what evidence they're going to be
up against.
Physical evidence needs to be prepared for court, and it's called demonstrative evidence
when a scientist is going to use that evidence to demonstrate his or her findings.
Sometimes the actual evidence is used.
I've testified with a skull in my hands when explaining something like trauma analysis to
the jury.
But usually enlarged photographs are used in court.
Because a lot of evidence is either really tiny or transient.
Reconstruction evidence may include something like a computer animation, like an accident
reconstruction, or even physical demonstrations.
For example, an officer stands up and shows the jury exactly how he put the suspect into
a chokehold.
With regard to physical evidence, photographs and lab reports, once the judge admits an
item into evidence, the court reporter, that's the person who's responsible for all evidence
in court because he or she records testimony and marks all the admitted evidence.
Anyway, the court reporter will continue the chain of custody by maintaining an accurate
record in securing all evidence in a court lockup area for the whole duration of the
trial.
Then later, if there's an appeal, the tangible items can be signed out of lockup and transcripts
of the testimony can be gathered.
Now evidence is divided into two main categories, circumstantial and direct.
Circumstantial evidence includes things like blood, hair, fibers, fingerprints, and even
DNA.
Despite the fact that some physical evidence can be directly tied to a single individual,
it alone doesn't prove who done it.
It only shows that the evidence was at the scene, assuming a good chain of custody.
Direct evidence requires that an inference be made about it.
So then what's direct evidence?
You ready for this?
Direct evidence is eyewitness testimony.
I saw him do it, which as we've seen is notoriously unreliable.
But direct evidence supports an assertion without the need for any inference.
It's up to the judge or jury as tires a fact to evaluate all evidence, including the testimony
of eyewitnesses or experts, which we'll cover in the next lecture.
There are many rules that govern evidence, whether physical items or testimony.
We can only generalize here.
And there are many exceptions to these rules of evidence.
Plus, any court ruling is subject to challenge, and that's why matters are often taken to
a higher court for what's called an appeal.
In an appeal, things challenged in a trial can be further ruled upon and decisions either
upheld or overturned.
Anyway, the two standards that all evidence, scientific or otherwise, must meet in order
to be admissible in court are relevance and competence.
Let's start with relevance, which has two criteria of its own.
For evidence to be relevant, it has to be both material and probative.
Material means that the evidence has to pertain to the matter at hand.
It can't be evidence from a previous incident.
For example, if somebody's on trial for a murder and has previous charges or convictions,
those typically can't be considered as evidence in the current case, even if they were other
violent acts, like prior murders or assaults.
You might be thinking, well, once a violent criminal, always a violent criminal.
But the legal system, which is based on the premise innocent until proven guilty, doesn't
allow for that stream of thinking.
The defendant's record can be brought out if he testifies, because the prosecution
can test his truthfulness by asking about his prior convictions.
That's the reason many defendants don't testify.
Probative means the evidence has to relate to proving something in the case.
Basically, that means the evidence has to make something either more likely or less likely
than it would be without the support of that evidence.
For example, if somebody's on trial for carjacking and when he was arrested, he had some marijuana
in his pocket, well, that wouldn't be permissible at trial, because it doesn't help prove the
carjacking.
Now, again, you might be thinking, well, maybe the guy was high when he jacked the car.
But there's just not enough cause and effect logic there to prove anything.
To be admissible, evidence also has to have competence.
And that doesn't have the same connotation as an everyday language.
To be competent, evidence has to be free of prejudice.
It must meet all constitutional constraints.
It has to be allowable under the privileges set out by law, and it can't be hearsay.
Now, let's talk more about each one of those criteria.
Any evidence that has the potential to excessively prejudice the judge or jury, either for or
against the defendant, is not admissible.
Like the material relevance I mentioned, this covers previous criminal activity or other
indications of bad character.
It also includes any evidence that might seriously offend the sensibilities of the general public
or prejudice the jury against the defendant, like really gruesome pictures from the crime
scene or things like that.
Basically, anything that badly taints or takes away the objectivity of the triers of
fact is considered prejudicial.
The constitutional constraints I mentioned have to do with the Bill of Rights.
That's the collective name given to the first ten amendments of the U.S. Constitution, most
of which relate to the legal system.
For example, the Fourth Amendment has clauses pertaining to search and seizure.
And the Fifth Amendment concerns, among other things, double jeopardy and self-incrimination.
Some of the other amendments have to do with things like a speedy trial, the right to an
attorney, and cruel and unusual punishment.
Many of those are familiar to us from TV shows and movies about police work and courtroom
dramas.
But here's a specific example.
If evidence isn't collected by illegally sanctioned search, it's not admissible in court, regardless
of its relevance to the case.
That's the fruit of the poison tree phrase we often hear about on TV.
The Fourth Amendment requires that a judge or magistrate issue a warrant for a search
before it takes place, with paperwork that specifies things like the place and the people
being searched, as well as particular items being looked for.
If a search warrant is issued and police happen to find something else, like they're looking
for drugs but they find a bunch of stolen goods, the bad guys usually can't be prosecuted
for those thefts.
Something else we often hear about are different kinds of privileges or protected speech, like
attorney-client privileges, doctor-patient confidentiality, the protection of spouses
from having to or even being allowed to testify against each other, and protected conversations
with religious authorities, like priests and rabbis.
Privilege conversations are not admissible in court.
And we've all seen on TV or in televised trials where one side objects to some testimony
as being hearsay.
A hearsay is potential evidence that's said or written outside of court by a person not
under oath that attorneys try to set forth in court as truth.
But just because I hear you say something doesn't mean it's true.
In the courtroom, I may be allowed to state I heard you say it, but I can't answer questions
about whether or not it's true.
But if Susie says to you, I saw Jim kill Bill, you wouldn't be able to say that in court
if Susie isn't available to be cross-examined.
You can say what you saw, but usually not what you heard about, you heard somebody else
say, especially if they're not present to testify.
Anything judged hearsay is generally not admissible as evidence.
One interesting exception to the hearsay rule is directly related to forensic science.
Technically, any lab report prepared by a forensic scientist is a form of hearsay.
Here's an example.
A toxicologist's report contains data that was developed by a piece of lab equipment,
say a mass spectrometer that shows the presence of a drug.
The toxicologist can testify to the results, but really, he or she is reporting second-hand
information that they don't know to be true.
Even though all kinds of scientific controls and machine calibrations help ensure accuracy,
scientists can only vouch for the results we get.
Forensic results are usually admissible in court as exceptions to the hearsay rule, and
there are a lot of other kinds of exceptions as well.
So to summarize general rules of evidence for both testimony and physical evidence, that
evidence has to be both relevant and competent to be admissible in court.
And it's up to the trier of the facts, whether that's the judge or jury, to decide what's
true or not, and how much weight to give any evidence that comes before them.
There are more guidelines specifically about the admissibility of scientific evidence,
so we'll talk about those now.
I think many people confuse truth and science.
They're two different things.
Remember near the beginning of this series, I talked about what science is and isn't?
Science is a process, a way of looking at things using the scientific method.
Many people believe things about science just because they sound scientific.
Because of that, science has been used and abused throughout human history, giving it
magical qualities that are not always deserved.
I say that as a scientist who is completely enchanted with exploring the world around
me.
We're all human, and by human nature, many of the things we do are less than perfect.
To prevent abuse of science in the legal system, specific rules about scientific evidence
and scientific experts have evolved to make sure that what a judge or jury hears is reliable
and valid science.
The general rules of evidence, relevance and competency, still hold with scientific evidence.
But additional rules have emerged because of how complicated technical and scientific
evidence may be to a non-expert.
An interesting legal case in the early 1920s was the impetus behind our current standards
for scientific evidence.
A man by the name of James Frye stood accused of the murder of a wealthy Washington, D.C.
physician.
Frye had initially confessed to the killing, but later recanted his confession and invented
an alibi.
At trial in 1922, Frye and his attorney wanted the judge to admit as evidence the results
of a lie detector test that he had taken under the direction of a man named William Marston.
Marston was a psychologist, an inventor, a feminist, and he was also the creator of
the comic superhero Wonder Woman, no less.
Remember Wonder Woman carried a lasso of truth that required those who were bound by it to
render full honesty?
Well, that came out of Marston's work developing lie detection techniques, including methods
based on blood pressure and breathing.
Anyway, when Marston was called to the stand to testify about his novel new way of showing
that Frye was innocent, the judge objected to both a testimony and a demonstration of
the method before the court.
Ironically, this really backfired in a way because four days later, the jury came back
with a guilty verdict, but of a lesser charge.
Because during the admissibility argument about the method, which was held in open court,
the jury learned that the lie detector test would have shown Frye innocent.
So instead of being put to death, Frye got life in prison.
Former FBI agent and writer Jim Fisher brilliantly summed it up like this, and I quote,
A guilty man's life was saved by the erroneous results of a lie detector test that had been
ruled inadmissible because of its scientific unreliability.
On appeal in 1923, a higher court upheld the lower court judge's decision not to allow
the results of Marston's lie detector method to be admitted into evidence.
The opinion written by that appellate court set forth standards for the admissibility of
scientific evidence, which are still essentially in use today.
As you may know, polygraphs, which Marston's and other early methods were the predecessors
of, still have a lot of difficulty in court, particularly because they have such little
credibility among mainstream scientists.
In fact, the Frye decision evolved essentially into what's called general acceptance, which
means that novel or experimental scientific techniques are not admissible in court.
Only methods that are generally accepted by the scientific community can be admitted into
evidence.
Now, while hard to define, general acceptance more or less came to mean that the science
was published in a peer-reviewed journal.
Since the Frye standard, plenty of forensic scientific analyses have been subjected to
Frye challenges in different courts.
Not just polygraphs, but also voice print analyses, blood spatter evidence, and even
DNA technologies.
But Frye doesn't govern scientific evidence and testimony by itself.
In July of 1975, the U.S. Congress approved work that was started by the U.S. Supreme
Court in 1969, creating what are called the Federal Rules of Evidence.
Though some of this has since been amended, Article 7, Rule 702 of the Federal Rules of
Evidence specifically addresses expert testimony, including that of scientists, and requires
that expert witnesses demonstrate their qualifications in court and show that their opinions would
aid the triers of fact in a case.
In 1993, another case heavily influenced the admissibility of scientific evidence.
It was called Daubert vs. Meryl Dow.
This was one of those cases called a toxic tort, which is a civil case where one or
more people allege that a chemical of some sort has caused them harm.
Like in the 2000 movie, Erin Brockovich, which portrayed the true case of a power company
that polluted the water supply of Hinckley, California.
The Daubert case also arose in California and was ultimately heard in the Federal District
Court in San Diego.
The Daubert family and another family named Shuler brought a lawsuit against Meryl Dow
Pharmaceutical Company because their sons were born with birth defects.
After Mrs. Daubert and Shuler took the drug Bendectin, that's a medication that was used
to prevent nausea in pregnant women.
Now both sides had their science, their statistics, and their experts.
The plaintiff argued that Bendectin was a source of birth defects and the defendant,
Meryl Dow, claimed there was no statistically significant link.
Meryl Dow's attorneys also argued that the plaintiff's evidence did not meet the FRI standard
because the science they used to support, which among other things included in vitro
and in vivo studies using non-human animals, had in their opinion not yet reached general
acceptance in the scientific community.
The case eventually went to the Supreme Court, which concluded that FRI was no longer the
appropriate standard to use and that Federal Rule 702 should have been applied.
The Supreme Court said that the judge is what's called the gatekeeper and, as such, should
use rational assessments for the admissibility of scientific testimony.
The court even suggested some specific flexible tests by which scientific evidence should
be measured.
Based on that, the 1993 Daubert Standard holds that valid science has met the following criteria.
First, it needs to hold up to scientific testing designed to show any falsifiability.
Secondly, valid science uses the appropriate standards and scientific controls to assure
its accuracy.
Third, admissible science needs to present statistics on its known error rates, like
saying these results are statistically significant at the 0.05 level, though that may need to
be explained to the jury.
And fourth, worthy science must stand up to peer review and publication within the scientific
community.
All these things enhance and expand on what's called general acceptance.
In 2005, Congress authorized the National Academy of Science, or NAS, to examine the
use of forensic science in court proceedings.
And in 2009, the NAS put out a definite wake-up call in their report titled Strengthening Forensic
Science in the United States, A Path Forward.
As a fellow in the American Academy of Forensic Sciences, I can attest to how the NAS report
really shook up forensics.
In general, now some disciplines are affected more so than others.
The independent nature of the way forensic science has developed over time and is conducted
in the U.S. and elsewhere has resulted in inconsistencies in methods, the way they're
applied, and the qualifications for forensic scientists.
As a result, the NAS report recommended that a federal agency be created to oversee and
fund research, training, and the development of standards in forensics, as well as regulations
that will govern all crime labs.
Now it might surprise you that these things don't already exist, but in fact they don't.
The 2009 NAS report is changing and will continue to change the way forensic science works.
Some areas like DNA analysis are in much better shape than others.
But in general, the NAS's focus on forensic shortcomings and their recommended policy
changes will have a tremendous impact on scientific evidence and testimony in the future.
For example, the NAS recommendations on educational requirements of experts alone would prohibit
most law enforcement officers today from testifying in court, even though they currently testify
all the time on things like bloodstained pattern analysis, fingerprints, shoe prints, and
other evidence.
So next let's turn our attention to what currently constitutes expertise in forensics and take
a closer look at expert testimony.
