In the final bit of time we have to share together, I'd like to talk about a really
integrative part of forensic science that's really near and dear to my heart.
In my career as a forensic scientist, much of my work has been directed toward giving
names back to unknown persons.
Our identity, who we are, connects us to our family, our friends, our property, and
all parts of our personal history.
Without their identity, people who come into the morgue as a John, or Jane, or even Baby
Doe, are destined to either be buried without a name or sit in a storage area indefinitely.
We can all imagine the pain and grief of family members and friends who are left never knowing
what happened to their loved one.
Now I'm not sure how people define the term closure, but I never use that word.
I do feel, though, that the state of not knowing where your son, daughter, mother, father,
sibling, or close friend is for years on end would have to be sheer hell.
That's one of the reasons I can stand some of the awful things I have to see and do at
the coroner's office.
I know that my work can help provide important answers to people who are waiting in that
limbo of not knowing.
I also know that sometimes identifying a victim can lead to a perpetrator and possibly protect
society from a dangerous predator that's among us.
For about three years, along with several other forensic anthropologists, I served as
a consultant to the United States National Institute of Justice Project called the National
Missing and Unidentified Person System, also known as NAMIS.
NAMIS is a set of two databases.
One stores information about missing persons provided by people who are looking for them,
including family members and law enforcement officers.
And the second database holds the records of unidentified remains submitted by coroner
and medical examiners' offices throughout the U.S.
In January of 2009, these two databases were linked to each other, creating a technological
tool to help find missing persons and identify unknown persons.
NAMIS literally works our cases while we sleep because of the algorithms it uses to generate
potential matches.
Another really amazing thing about the NAMIS system is that it's publicly accessible,
unlike other databases that are available to professionals only.
At NAMIS, we use the phrase, harness the power of the public, because we recognize that while
many law enforcement and coroner's offices are overworked, the members of the public
who are searching for their loved ones typically only have a single case to pursue.
This public accessibility allows a mother to go to her computer at 2 a.m. when she can't
sleep and at least feel like there's something she can do about her missing child besides
worry.
Unfortunately, with NAMIS, there are really no happy endings, but there are answers.
The scope of the missing and unidentified persons issue in the United States might really astound
you.
Some estimates put the number of missing persons reports in the U.S. at about 2,300 a day.
That's over 800,000 a year.
Fortunately, many of these people are quickly returned to their families, but there are
currently over 100,000 active missing person cases in the United States, and just only
over 9,000 of them are currently in the NAMIS system.
I'd like to make a public service announcement here.
If you know people who are missing a loved one, please have them go to www.NAMIS.gov and
get their case into the system.
As for unidentified persons in the United States, original estimates based on data extrapolations
suggested that as many as 40,000 sets of unknown remains might be sitting in morgues, anthropology
labs, public cemeteries, or even cremated, leaving nothing but paper records of their
existence.
These estimates have now been refined because there were far more unresolved cases in the
past than there hopefully and probably will be in the future.
Unidentified remains, especially skeletal remains, were historically difficult to identify
before DNA technology was developed in the 80s.
And before the many national databases we've talked about, like IAFIS and CODIS, existed.
Currently there are about 8,500 unidentified persons cases already in the NAMIS system,
although there are many thousands more cold cases out there that we're trying to get into
the database.
But it takes time.
Newer estimates suggest that there will probably be about 500 to 700 new unidentified cases
each year in the future.
And I'm talking about what we call chronically unidentified cases, which are the ones where
local resources have not provided a positive ID within a few months after the victim is
discovered.
In terms of responsibilities, the problem of resolving missing persons cases largely
rests on law enforcement.
It requires pursuing leads using standard investigation techniques we've talked about
related to things like where the missing person was last seen, what they were wearing, transportation
modes and networks, pertinent financial records or social networking sites, or any secondary
parties the missing person might have been associated with.
Things like that.
We're all too familiar, unfortunately, with some of what's involved in the search for
missing persons because law enforcement and the media in our very own communities sometimes
elicit our help in trying to bring them home to their families.
But in this discussion I'd like to focus on the forensic science of human identification,
which brings together many topics we've talked about in this series.
What makes us who we are?
Our biological identity is not the same thing as the pieces of identification we might carry
in a wallet or purse.
And although a driver's license, a unique piece of jewelry, or any other personal effect
might be a huge clue in the effort to establish identity, those things can only provide a
presumptive or circumstantial identification, not a positive one.
Obviously, a wallet or piece of jewelry can be stolen or even planted on a person that
it doesn't belong to.
So just finding a name on an ID card doesn't prove who a person is.
A positive identification requires forensic scientists to match unique physical attributes
in unknown remains to what's already known about a missing person.
So just like many other topics we've covered, forensic identification is really matching
unknown or questioned evidence, in this case human remains, to known evidence, which either
consists of anti-mortem records or some type of reference sample.
Establishing positive identity is a daily task in morgues around the world.
As we know, everybody that comes in for an examination is there because the death is
suspicious or might relate to criminal activity.
Most of the time the identification is straightforward, especially in cases like auto accidents or
when family members themselves report the death and provide the deceased's identity.
We've all seen examples in the movies and on TV where the sheet is pulled back and the
family member says, yes, that's him.
And really unlike on TV in modern morgues today, body viewing is done through a viewing
window or by photography.
They don't have family members traipsing around through the autopsy room.
But most positive IDs are still simply made by having somebody who knows the victim visually
confirm the identity.
In rare instances there have been mistaken identities, even by visual confirmation.
I heard of one case where family members identified a young girl as their missing daughter and
buried her, only to have their living daughter knock on their door one Christmas about ten
years later, having finally decided to come home after running away as a teenager.
What a Christmas present that must have been.
But obviously the next issue was, who did we bury?
In general, it's easier to identify fresh remains than skeletal remains.
And I guess that's obvious.
But in my years of work with the NamUs system, I've seen plenty of cases where people who
would easily be visually recognizable are still unknown.
This is particularly true of transient people, like some migrant workers or homeless persons.
I think it's really sad when I see a case where, for example, a pedestrian was struck
by a car in a large city and taken to the hospital where they died within minutes.
And yet then, and now years later, even when the case is in NamUs, nobody still knows who
that person is.
It makes you wonder what life must be like when nobody apparently cares if you live
or die.
There are other cases where traumatic injury results in such damage that a person becomes
unrecognizable, like somebody who's hit by a subway train or jumps off a building.
If there aren't any clues from the personal effects, investigators may have no idea where
to start.
But in general, as you can imagine, recent deaths are more easily readily identifiable
than in cases of advanced decomposition.
A related generalization is that deaths in heavily populated areas are less likely to
result in advanced decomposition than when people die or are dumped in remote locations.
There are exceptions, though.
I had one case where a young woman's body was put under a mattress in an alley in a
heavily occupied part of downtown Cincinnati, and she decomposed to a complete skeleton
without anybody allegedly seeing or smelling anything.
In fact, her case provides us a good example of how quickly identification can occur after
the discovery of a body begins.
When I did my initial exam in this case, there were a couple of law enforcement officers
looking over my shoulder to get my initial impressions so they can begin to figure out
who this person might be.
Right away, I said that the bones were from an adult female, that she appeared to be caucasian
from her facial bone structure, and that I thought she was fairly young.
I said I'd have to take some measurements to confirm those assumptions and figure out
how tall she was, but I could tell them on the spot that this lady had recently broken
her left elbow and it was in an obvious state of healing.
Right away, one officer said, oh, then I think I know who she is.
He knew of a young white female who was reported missing about six months earlier and had broken
her left arm in a rollerblading accident just a couple of weeks before she disappeared.
Now that didn't prove her identity, but it was a really good start, and it does show
you a couple of things.
First, people who are found in the same geographic area where they go missing are typically more
quickly identified.
Second, it illustrates that timeline is important.
People whose remains are found nearer to the time they disappeared are more likely to be
quickly identified than those who have been missing for a long time.
And third, it also shows that both the missing and the dead side of these investigations have
to work closely together to resolve cases quickly.
So now, let's take a look at the methods used to identify the unknown dead.
I tend to break these down into three main categories, soft parts of the body like skin,
more durable features like bones and teeth, and finally, molecular methods of identification
like DNA, which we've already discussed.
As I said, it's still very common that people are visually identified, and because we've
all had a lifetime of evaluating faces and recognizing people, I don't think I have to
say any more about that.
But when there's no presumptive identity, who can you ask to view the body?
In other words, if investigators have no idea who the person is, no matter how recognizable
the victim should be, what can be done?
Well, I was involved in one very unusual case from the mid-90s where a woman was dismembered
and her body parts were apparently driven around the southwestern Ohio area and deposited
in a variety of different locations.
Although we were able to assemble most of this woman like a horrific jigsaw puzzle, we still
had no idea who she was.
And these were fresh body parts, not just bones.
Ultimately, although hard to fathom, the coroner's office decided to rest this woman's dismembered
head on a pillow, pull a sheet up to her truncated neck, and broadcast that photograph of her
on the evening news, of course, without mentioning that the head was separated from the rest
of the body.
She was identified when her estranged husband, who lived across the Ohio State Line in Kentucky,
recognized her as his ex-wife Peggy, who had been missing for a couple of days from
the Kentucky residence where she lived with her four children.
The distance between Peggy's home and where her body parts had been scattered was under
a hundred miles, but far enough away that the case spanned two different media outlets
in two different major metropolitan areas.
In fact, this case sort of brings us full circle, because if you remember back to the
case I talked about in the very first lecture in this series, the case where a lady named
Shannon was murdered and decapitated, well, the man responsible for Shannon's death was
also a suspect in Peggy's death.
But eventually, another man was convicted, but not until 2010, which was 15 years after
Peggy's death.
Other body surface features can also be critical in establishing identity as we know.
Fingerprints can be taken and put into the IAFIS system, which remember is the Integrated
Automated Fingerprint Identification System in the U.S., and they can also be put into
the NamUs system, where fingerprints can be compared to records already on file or archived
for future comparisons.
Unique features like birthmarks, scars, and tattoos on the skin can be examined, described,
measured, and photographed for dissemination through the media and put into the NamUs system.
Just to show you the power of NamUs and the importance of its public accessibility, let
me highlight just one of its success stories.
An unidentified person's case from Ohio was the fresh corpse of an unknown female who
had been found in 1987 in a town called Englewood, which is only about an hour and a half from
where I live.
Despite the best efforts of the nearby coroner's office and the local media, this lady's identity
remained unknown for over 20 years, until 2010 when her sister happened to hear about
the new NamUs website on a public service announcement on television.
The distraught sister used the NamUs search engine to look for any unidentified bodies
that had a tattoo of either a unicorn or a rose.
In the system immediately suggested a possible match to the body of the unidentified woman
discovered over 20 years earlier in Englewood, Ohio.
The missing woman named Paula had disappeared from Kansas City, Missouri in 1987, and in
less than 14 hours had been strangled, driven nearly 600 miles away, and dumped on the side
of the road, and then recovered by police with no identity.
Paula's family had been searching for her that entire time and had never given up hope
of finding her, and although it's still a terrible tragedy, ultimately she was at least
eventually brought home.
As we learned in our discussions on anthropology and odontology, bones and teeth also provide
valuable clues in establishing identification.
I sometimes call these our, quote, durable goods because of the help they can provide
forensic science.
We've seen how forensic anthropology techniques can narrow in on an identity by suggesting
age, sex, ancestry, and stature of a person from skeletal remains.
And I explained how it's my responsibility to come up with a biological profile when
decomposed or skeletonized remains wind up at the coroner's office.
My assessments allow investigators to figure out which missing person's records to pull
for comparison, or my assessments give a forensic artist the background they need to
prepare a facial reconstruction to be released to the public.
The biological profile of an unidentified person can allow comparisons of morguex rays
to anti-mortem films of missing persons, including CT scans and MRI images that could be found
at a hospital or a physician's office.
The same goes for comparing dental records between unknown persons and people who are
missing.
In fact, if there's a strong presumptive ID and good dental evidence like fillings or
bridge work, the forensic dentist might even be called in first without an anthropology
consult.
But remember, whether trying to match biological, medical, or dental evidence in human remains
to existing data, there are two important caveats.
First, we have to have a pretty good idea of who we think the person is.
And secondly, we have to be able to put our hands on the appropriate anti-mortem medical
or dental records, which might not be as easy as you think, because when people move around
a lot during their lifetime and when you consider that records aren't retained indefinitely,
it can be hard to put your hands on those records.
These days, with the availability of DNA testing, you might think there's little use
for bones or teeth in human ID.
But if remains are a complete unknown, an anthropology consult can definitely narrow
the search, and dental IDs are still pretty common because they're faster and less expensive
than DNA testing.
In the old days, when I first started practicing anthropology, unique skeletal features were
pretty commonly used as positive ID if they could be matched to anti-mortem X-rays.
That's still done, but these days it's much more likely to finalize identity using DNA
taken from bones rather than the bones themselves.
Here's an example of how a skeletal ID used to be made.
In 1990, I was involved in a case where a man had been nearly completely incinerated
in a fire.
Apparently, he had committed suicide by taking two gas cans into an old chicken coop on an
abandoned farm where he used to live and then setting the chicken coop on fire.
Now, the accelerant combined with a substratum of about a foot of old desiccated chicken poop
that had accumulated over the many years the small building had been used to house chickens.
And this combination created a super intense fire that burned for four days.
As we saw when we talked about fires, when you combine an accelerant with that much
organic material, the result is an inferno.
Now, neighbors didn't realize the man was in the chicken coop.
They just thought the property owner was burning down one of the small outbuildings on the
farm.
And in this particular case, I wasn't actually called to the scene.
The investigators unfortunately just shoveled what was left of the man into a body bag,
which really increased my workload exponentially.
Because rather than doing the recovery myself in a careful and systematic fashion, I ended
up having to pick through a body bag full of tiny incinerated pieces, most no bigger
than the size of a quarter.
But as I looked for recognizable fragments, I began to notice that some of the less burned
pieces were those from the bones of his spine.
Apparently he was on his back during the fire, and his own tissues protected his spine to
some degree.
Now I did my master's thesis on arthritis and vertebrae, and I looked at thousands of
bones of the spine for that project.
And in this case, I started to notice some unique features in some of the man's vertebrae.
Now we already had a pretty good presumptive ID.
A guy that used to live on that farm had been missing for the same four days that the fire
had burned.
And that missing man's truck had been parked in the driveway of the farmhouse for the same
four days.
In fact, his wallet was on the front seat, and his driver's license was in it.
But none of that proved the incinerated man was the missing man, so we needed more solid
evidence to confirm that.
Fortunately for us, but unfortunately for him, the missing man had been in a tractor
accident several years before, and had a full series of X-rays on file.
And by using those unique features that I saw in his spine and comparing them to the
anti-mortem X-rays from his tractor accident, we were able to make a positive ID.
In most cases today, that ID would be confirmed with DNA testing.
But in this case, because the remains were so badly burned, DNA testing probably wouldn't
have been possible.
And even if we were able to take those unburned bones and attempt to get DNA extracted from
them.
We would have destroyed what remaining evidence we still had for his identity.
So this case illustrates that there's still definitely a place in identification for forensic
anthropology and the way it can hone in on unique patterns and bones.
Sometimes, ironically, it's the parts of us that are not really us that permit identification.
As we've seen, that's the case when dental fillings and bridge work are used to identify
unknown persons through comparisons with existing dental records.
But dental work isn't the only type of medical intervention that assists the identification
process.
Many types of surgical implants and other medical devices carry serial numbers that can be found
in human remains, and then through the manufacturer, they have the potential of being linked to
the surgical patient they were implanted in.
And even if those devices don't carry a serial number, they certainly indicate a medical
history that can be used to narrow down the field of possibilities when looking through
missing persons records.
In 1994, when I worked on the morgue operations after the American Eagle plane crash I mentioned
earlier, I remember vividly slogging through bags of parts and pieces of people that we
were trying to identify, and it was really difficult work.
We were all pretty tired and somewhat frustrated, but at one point, a pathologist who was working
at the morgue table next to me reached into a bag and pulled out a partial femur that
was attached to a prosthetic hip replacement.
He lifted it into the air and he yelled out to the rest of us, hey, everybody, this guy's
going home, and we had already known that there was one older gentleman on the plane
who had an artificial hip, and in this case, at least that much of him was identified.
That was a really feel-good moment in a horrible situation and was something that gave us all hope.
To wrap this series up, I'd like to show yet one more example of the interdisciplinary
nature of forensic science and how it works hand-in-hand with dedicated law enforcement
professionals.
This is one of my most extraordinary cases where teamwork and technology led to a remarkable
case of identification after almost 40 years.
On October 11th of 1970, in Dark County, Ohio, two teenagers riding horseback through a cornfield
found the nude body of a woman.
There was no obvious cause of death, but the fact that her naked body had been dumped there
suggested this woman met with foul play.
Although investigators worked the case at the time, no leads developed, and several weeks
later the body was buried as a Jane Doe in the county cemetery.
In December of 1970, the last entry was made in the case file, and no further actions were
taken.
Almost 30 years later, in February of 1999, a young detective from Dark County took an
interest in this cold case and decided to reopen it.
There were many problems, not the least of which was that the 1970 batch of microfilm
from the coroner's office had been processed incorrectly, so the investigators had no autopsy
report, no morgue photos, really no evidence to work from.
They only had the scant information in the 1970 sheriff's report.
The detectives continued to explore their options, and finally, by June of 2006, they
were able to get funding from the Department of Justice's program called the President's
DNA Initiative to exhume the remains for DNA testing.
On October 6th of 2006, almost 36 years to the day since her body had been originally
discovered, the remains of this young Jane Doe were removed from her unmarked grave.
Two teeth and a segment of her left thigh bone were sent off for DNA analysis.
Following that, in December of 2006, her skeleton was brought to my lab for an anthropology analysis,
since by this time all that remained was bones.
My analysis confirmed a couple of things that were already known from the sheriff's
report of 1970, but I was able to add some detail.
The victim was a young white female who stood about 5'3 to 5'7 inches tall, and based on
only photographs from the initial discovery of her body, I estimated she had been missing
for only about half as much time as the original sheriff's department report indicated.
They said she'd probably been in the environment for close to a month, where my opinion was
closer to a week or so, and in December of 2007, after I'd done all I could do, I sent
the skull to a forensic artist I know in Tennessee, and she produced a clay facial reconstruction
of the young woman.
Now, photos of the artist's work were then released to the local media in October of
2008, 38 years after the body was found.
An elderly woman named Phyllis from Dark County saw the image of the young woman in the newspaper
and contacted police.
She said the woman resembled her 18-year-old niece Jeannie, who was last seen getting on
a Greyhound bus in Green Bay, Wisconsin in the late summer of 1970.
Jeannie was scheduled to change buses in Chicago and then continue on to Richmond, Indiana,
which was the closest Greyhound stop to Dark County.
In Richmond, she was to be picked up by Phyllis for a late summer visit with her cousins at
Phyllis' home in Dark County.
When Jeannie wasn't found at the bus station, both Phyllis and her sister in Green Bay called
their local police offices to report Jeannie missing.
Because she was 18 years old, her disappearance wasn't taken as seriously as her mother and
aunt insisted it should be.
Added to that, according to Phyllis, the police in Green Bay said Jeannie was not missing
from Green Bay because her mother saw her get on the bus.
And police in Indiana told Phyllis that Jeannie wasn't missing from Indiana if she never
got off the bus there.
And she wasn't missing from Ohio since she apparently never arrived there.
Phyllis thought the assumption of the police officers was that Jeannie had either gotten
off the bus in Chicago of her own volition or had possibly been abducted there.
And in 1970, when the Sheriff's Office suggested the woman in the cornfield had been there
for about a month, that created a timeline too early for the expected date of Jeannie's
arrival, and so a link was never made.
In 2008, DNA reference samples were taken from Phyllis, a maternal aunt from Green Bay,
and Jeannie's only living sibling, a sister from Green Bay.
And in 2009, based on mitochondrial DNA comparisons among all these maternal relatives, a full
39 years after her disappearance, Jeannie's body was finally positively identified.
Jeannie's mother, unfortunately, never lived to learn that her daughter had apparently
gotten off the bus in Richmond and somehow disappeared immediately before being picked
up by her aunt Phyllis.
Maybe somebody befriended or abducted her on the bus or coerced her into leaving the
bus station by a back door, because ultimately, Jeannie did wind up in Dark County, but definitely
not as planned.
Although this is an extremely unusual case of protracted but positive identification,
it really illustrates how the efforts of law enforcement and forensic science can combine
their resources and use powerful technologies to benefit society.
Jeannie's case has still not been solved, but in finding out who she was, law enforcement
is perhaps better equipped to seek justice for her.
These are the kinds of cases that keep all of us doing the things we do.
In closing, I'd like to thank you for allowing me to share some of my experiences with you
and to give you a little insight into the fascinating world of forensic science.
