Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and we're here this evening
a little bit later than usual with my friend and presidential candidate, Andrew Yang. Andrew,
welcome. Thank you for keeping the portal open late for me, Eric. Oh my god. Thanks for bringing
the energy. You just come fresh off this rally, MacArthur Park. You're indefatigable, the energizer
bunny. Yes, we just had a 6,000 person rally, 7,000, 8,000. I lost track. I was counting manually.
No, it wasn't. And I should say that your hat is make America think harder. Yep. But it's
the portal's all about it. It's math. Well, we're trying. We're trying. So we don't want to keep
you up late because we want you supercharged for charge for tomorrow. So let's just dig right into
it. Andrew, I'm remembering that we were having this dinner at Zazi in San Francisco, and you were
impressing the hell out of my wife and myself. And I said, that guy's going places. She says,
how can you? I said, these are different times. Oh, thank you. So am I right that this is happening?
Oh, it's happening. Big time. I mean, our campaign is growing my leaps and bounds by all of the
measurements you would ordinarily measure a presidential campaign, crowd size, fundraising,
fanaticism. Well, that's, yeah, I guess. The yang gang is absolutely fanatical. Trust me,
I encounter them all the time on social media. Well, I love the yang gang. Thank you, yang gang.
Yeah, the excitement is palpable. And I love it. I mean, everywhere I go, now people will just say,
like, I support you and give me a fist bump. And certainly when we campaign, I mean, now
we draw crowds of either hundreds or thousands, depending upon where we are.
It's amazing. Now, let's just dig into it. We're in this totally bizarre situation. I don't think
the institutions have faced up to just how dire our situation is. No, they have not. When I go
outside, for the most part, the physical world is still humming along. But everywhere else,
you can see the signs that somehow the superstructure that undergirds the simple physical
reality has really been fraying. Am I wrong about that? No, I agree with you. And in many ways,
if you're just living life not plugged into all of the institutional decay, then you just go out
in the sun shining, the birds are chirping. And like you said, the physical world is still more
less sound, barring the occasional heat wave and unseasonal weather pattern.
So the way I see it, effectively, what you have is a world of institutions. And you have the wrong
people in the institutions. In fact, what's happened is somehow that the institutions were
built in an era where things were growing rapidly. The growth pattern changed a heck of a long time
ago, almost 50 years ago. And so what they've done is these institutions have selected for
people who can continue to tell stories about growth and to kind of play games to keep the
illusion that everything is still humming along as if it was the 50s and 60s. But that hasn't been
true for a long time. How far off am I? Well, that's what the numbers say. And I'm a numbers guy
where if you look at the economy of the 70s, you had a certain level of buying power among the
middle class and certain split in terms of the gains from the economy among different parts of
society. And then the lines started to diverge starting in the 70s. And now they're incredibly
divergent where you have middle class incomes, essentially unchanged during that time. And
then people at the very top level absorbing more of more and more of the gains in the winter,
take all economy. But we all pretend like it's still the 70s. And you can see the disconnect in
the lived experience of most Americans and most of the country where they're starting to catch on
that things have changed. And I mean, it's dark. It's dark. Well, it's incredibly dark. And it's
worth laughing about. I think for that reason, because if we don't have a sense of humor about it,
we're not going to be able to easily do the work. So I think whistling past the graveyard
and Gala's humor, definitely there's a place for that.
Well, you know, I naturally, I suppose people have said to me that I have a very dystopian
point of view, but I tend to present it in a positive upbeat manner.
I think you're trying to get us through a bottleneck that you and I both know is coming.
Yeah. And that in essence, I mean, one of the things I'm very concerned about with you is that
I don't want you to promise the world that you know how to do this. I want you just to say that
I'm the best person to handle whatever's coming next because nobody knows what to do.
Well, certainly I would never claim omniscience so that I'm going to get everything right. I mean,
I make mistakes all the time to ask my wife. She'd be like, hey, you screwed up just the other day.
But you and I were talking before the camera started rolling that I think it's going to be
a very dark time. And the goal has to be to try and survive the darkness and not
have it produce existential level harm. And I believe that I can assist in that regard,
but I certainly would never say that I have all the answers or that if I'm president,
everything's going to work right. Because the fact is there are two things I've thought about.
It's like there's the way the president makes you feel. Right. And then there's actually
solving problems on the ground. And right now, our experience of the presidency tends to be
around the feeling. If Donald Trump does something irrational, it really does not affect my day to
day existence except for the fact that I see all the news reports and I'm like, oh, that guy,
what's he doing? And the same is true in reverse. Like if Barack Obama did something decent and
human, it made me feel good, didn't necessarily change my commute or anything. And so there's
the way it makes us feel, which I believe I can assist with just about immediately for anyone who
wants someone who seems solutions oriented. Right. Positive. And positive. Data friendly.
Yeah, data friendly and genuinely wants to just try and make people's lives better. I think that
would make people feel better. But then there's the reality of trying to solve the problems
from the perch at the top of the government. And that's a very different process. I mean, I'm
locked in on this idea of a freedom dividend in part because I think it's the most dramatically
positive thing we could do that we could actually effectuate in real life that would improve people's
lives that we can actually get done. Now, I am both positive and negative about it as you
probably remember. What my belief is is that we have two claims as Americans. We have a claim
as a contributor to the economy and we have a claim as a soul because we happen to live here and
as a soul, we have certain rights as a human being just as a member of society. The weaker
of the two is as a soul, but that claim still exists. And in some sense, what you're calling the
freedom dividend or universal basic income speaks to the idea that there are these two competing
claims. And you don't want to get rid of the incentive structure that allows people to
take a dream and turn it into something. I love the dream. I love work. I love entrepreneurship.
People doing great stuff. So I think that there's a theory, that there's sort of a series of economic
theories that haven't actually been developed. And I think one of the things that's really
important to me is that we retake the institutions because what we've done is we've selected for
people who've used very simplistic models that have had a huge effect on transferring wealth,
but have not actually mirrored our problems. We've selected for the people who really don't
tell the truth. And I'm very worried how, let's talk about your first term in office, which is
going to happen. 2021, inauguration day, it's going to be a blast. You're going to be there.
He is going to be there. Yang Yang is going to be there. We're going to have a giant party.
Wait, wait, wait a second. Getting ahead of us. Who are you going to staff your government with
if you're going to have the same problem that everybody has, which once the dog catches the
car, then what? You've got all of these institutions which have selected for economists who don't
tell the truth, who have selected for sociologists who are friendly to the institutions and hostile
to our people. What do we do? My team is going to be a blend of different people with different
experience sets from different industries, even different ideologies. And I think you need some
people who are DC insiders who have relationships on Capitol Hill if you really want to get things
done because you're talking about possibly the most institutionalized town in our society.
And so if you get there and just like, I'm going to staff it with outsiders, then no one's going
to get anything done. This was Trump's problem. Yeah, you're not going to get anything done.
You're just going to be fighting with the system all the time that they're going to be
like these antibodies that treat you like this hostile agent and then they're going to just
make your life miserable at every turn. I mean, that's just the way organizations work,
it's the way cultures work. And so you need to have a blend of people that are like, look,
hey, I get it. I'm a new figure and you're concerned. And one of my principles is that I
don't fault people for the incentives that have formed them. And by this, what I mean is like,
if you show up in DC and there's someone who's been part of the fabric of DC for 20 plus years,
and they are someone who've been through administrations right and left to sort of
survive the whole thing and their goal is to just keep that function going and make sure they get
to retirement and whatnot. You can't blame that person for being part of that system because
that's what their incentives have been for years and years. And so what you don't want to do is
you don't want to get there and be like, I'm going to like turn everything upside down. I'm
going to like attack everyone. Well, the immune system will just actually, you know, the macrophages
will descend on you. And then you'll never get anything done. You'll never get anything done.
So that was one of the answers that I was dying to hear, which is, I'm going to have to work
with the infrastructure that's already there. But then there's the second part of it,
which is that I actually need to see some people permanently ejected, called out chastise,
who have been this class of people, misadvising our government throughout the 80s, 90s, early
part of the century. Well, and that's the dark part for all of us, that we sense that there's
really limited accountability in DC. Like you can give bad advice and screw something up,
and you keep your job. You know, you think tank's still there. Like no one goes back and says,
Hey, your white paper turns out it was completely mistaken. That's not the way that town works,
or that, you know, many government institutions work. So that's the challenge is that you have
to try and make changes within this incredibly institutionalized environment. And so you need
a combination of people that are well intended. You bring them in and say, Look,
this is going to feel like brain damage. You're going to come in and you're going to be like,
especially if you can't come in with the background like you and I might have from
technology or entrepreneurship, where you look up and you'll be like, wait, you have
how many people doing what and you're not allowed to do what? You know, it's like the
the story of like healthcare.gov where like the website didn't work in part because they
hired a giant consulting firm and they had all these bureaucratic processes.
And then when the website didn't work, you know what they did? They hired a bunch of Maverick
on valley types and threw the red tape out the window and then did a repair job.
So the goal has to be to bring in patriots who understand that they're not going to have like
an enjoyable time trying to turn the battleship, but that if they turn the battleship
three degrees to the right, they can do more good sort of they were in another environment
where they turned it, you know, like, Andrew, I think we're in a much more revolutionary situation
and in part to energize people. I mean, what we're talking about is a revenge of competency,
a revenge of genius, a revenge of people who actually know how to do things and care enough
who are ready and want to be mobilized and want to be called up, who've been sitting,
you know, with major league skills and in the minors or worse. And the fact is, is that what
the institutions have done have inverted the competency hierarchy. I mean, you know, there's
a guy that I don't understand named Brad DeLong, who was part of the group that brought in NAFTA
and they helped to sell this idea that free trade was good for everybody. And then years later,
I hear, oh, you know what free trade actually is? There was an esoteric version and exoteric version,
the exoteric version we put on display for everybody. We always knew that in the esoteric
version that was shared in the seminar rooms that it was a social Darwinist welfare function that
rewarded you by the cube of your wealth. And I just sit there with my jaw on the floor thinking,
what did you just say? And then he says, like, I don't understand. Maybe we hurt people in Ohio,
but we helped a lot of Mexican peasants. And I'm thinking, so you think that the American voters
who you've called jingoistic and, you know, ultra nationalists are going to be very happy that you've
denigrated their patriotism. And now what they have to show for it is, is that there are Mexican
peasants who are significantly better off, which I mean, who doesn't want Mexican peasants to be
better off? But for sake, I mean, this is, this is a class of people that needs to lose.
Yeah. And a lot of them are going to lose in my administration. Like I'm not a generally vindictive
person. No, it's not. I, you know, so I hope he has a happy, wonderful life. Yeah, exactly. It's
a kind of thing where it's like, Hey, guess what? You had a lot of influence and authority
in one era. It's over now. Like, no, you know, not going to unduly try and make your life miserable
or anything, but you know, like where we're, there's nothing vindictive. It's just, I don't want to
watch the Alan Greenspan show or the Larry Summers show or the Paul Krugman show. I don't
really need, there's no reason that these people get to be in every scene in every decade at
infinitum. Yeah, again, like I said, there's really no accountability for being wrong. And so if
someone presided over an era where, you know, there was epic mismanagement, you know, we still
are asking them what the heck they think. Can I, can I, can I hit you with another one that's
really comical for me? Sure. I watch the graphics that have your name in, in relationship to the
other competitors. And I know who the networks are afraid of and they're afraid of you. They'll,
they'll do a linear perspective graphic and you'll be the guy on the very far end and then the
presenter will stand in front. I've noticed that. That does seem to be something about. Well,
I don't think you should be bringing it up. I think the job is for people like me to be
bringing this up because they've been playing this game with like Ron Paul, with Bernie Sanders.
And I don't know if you're familiar in magic with the concept of a magician's choice.
No, I'm not. So a magician engages in a trick with magician's choice. Let's say that I want you to
choose, um, C out of A, B and C. So I, I give you the option, pick two and you pick A and B.
And I say, okay, I'll take those away. So now we'll look at C. Or if you pick A and C, I'll say,
okay, we'll take one of those two and we'll throw B away. Now, which one do you, so eventually you
think you've made a decision, but in fact the whole game was, is that the magician was pushing you
without your knowledge. This is what I,
media company's choice. This is what I think it's media company's choice. And we've got a situation
where my feeling is that the more the yang gang can find, and this, this goes for Tulsi Gabbard
or whoever else might be sidelined by this game. My feeling is, is that what you're on right now is
the equivalent of pirate radio. This is some is that for the American people. And we should be,
it's one reason I'm here, man. Well, and it's one of the reasons that we need to make sure
that these channels are opened to the very people that the DNC doesn't want running or the networks
don't want running. And the thing that I hate is, is that we're in this William Tell situation
where we've got to run against our own party. Yeah. Well, you know, again,
you may not want to say that. And I understand why, but I'll be damned if I'm going to listen
to a situation in which you were, you're shut out of airtime and you're pushed off to the
side of the graphic. Thank you, Eric. And I can say that this man is the head of pirate radio
for the 21st century. Certainly one of the high chiefs of it. And to me, again, you know, you
have these institutions with certain incentives and certain relationships, and they're going to
be naturally protective of the folks that they think are on the inside and be naturally very
leery of the people that they think are on the outside. But one of the themes of this era is
that there are more of us on the outside that are catching on and that the stranglehold that
media companies had on our attention has weakened significantly. It's one reason why
someone like me can do so well in this environment, or that someone like you can become this independent
intellectual voice that doesn't need to, you know, like get a CNN contributor contract or whatever
the hell. Well, it's very funny. One of the members of the Washington Post, which, you know,
says that democracy dies in darkness, that they're tagline. But one of them said that
everything you, Eric, you have to say that's new isn't true and everything you say that's true isn't
new. So it's like remarkably, there's nothing I can possibly contribute to the conversation.
It's just... It seems so unlikely. I mean, statistically, it's pretty hard to imagine that
everything's been said, Eric. And the only stuff that hasn't is wrong. So what I'd love to do is to
talk about some sort of new ideas to undergird some of the economic things that you and I have
traditionally talked about more before your meteoric rise. So let's dig into it. Yeah, please.
Okay. So one of the things that... Also, I want to say that I quote this man all the time. I've learned
a great deal from him and his wife and that he's one of the most profound economic thinkers that
I've encountered. And I've met a lot of fucking people. You're very kind, sir. And one of the
things that I would say is that even when I disagree with you, even on your signature stuff,
that the way I really view you is that you're the candidate who is most open to new ideas
and you're always up for a good discussion, a good argument, and you'll go with whatever is
best. And I find that you are as close to non-egoic as anyone I've met running. I mean,
you really seem to be running out of compulsion. Yeah. I don't have any native desire to be
president. I didn't feel that you ever did. And it's one of the reasons I love the fact that
you're running. Yeah. I think one of my main qualifications to be president is that I just
don't socialize that much in the sense of if you have me around a bunch of fancy stuff,
like it really doesn't do anything for me. As president, I would love to do away with a lot of
the... You do like geeking. Like the ceremony. It seems like it's counterproductive. And
no, I happen to think that might help me do a better job. So let's try to geek out on a couple
of ideas that Pia and I have been playing with. See what you think. Yeah, I love it. Okay. So one
of the things that we've been thinking about is some people are talking about the difference
between the shareholder economy of the past and the stakeholder economy of the future. Yep.
There are other issues about the dignity of work and what happens when machines replace you. You
can't necessarily defend yourself economically, but you still have a reason to get up in the morning
and do something. Well, we hope you have a reason to get up and do something. Amen. Now, the thing is
we've been thinking about this paradigm from object-oriented programming,
which is the difference between is a versus has a. So if a Lamborghini can play an FM broadcast
through its speaker, you could technically find out that by some definition, the Lamborghini is a
radio, but that seems absurd. It's much more sane to say that it has a radio just the way it has a
transmission. We make this error, I think, when we talk about workers, we say that person is a
worker. They are a bricklayer or, or a teamster, you know, completely. And that what we need to do
is to readjust our model of an economic agent to a has a model. And so the idea is that you may
have a breadwinner and you also have a contributor and you also have a consumer. And therefore,
what it is that we do all day long in the face of the, of the automation that may or may not get
here and dribs and drabs or come as a wave. We don't know that we need to have a model of humans
that recognizes a need to be active in the economy, whether or not the marginal product of our labor
is sufficient to take care of our family. Yeah, I, I love it so much and I couldn't agree more.
Okay, so that's, that would be the kind of a research program that we would love to try to see
undergirding a new economy that recognizes a much richer concept of an agent. But without it,
I'm worried that, you know, the sort of the power of that Chicago style thinking pushes us back into
humans as widgets. Well, humans as widgets is predominant. And you can see it at every turn,
or even if you ask a kid, what do you want to be when you grow up? It's, you know, they'll say,
I want to be a fireman, astronaut, baker, scientist, whatever it happens to be.
And by the numbers, we are more work obsessed now than we perhaps have ever been.
And trying to break up our identities into several aspects where you take a trucker who's
on the road away from his family four days a week and say, you know, you're a dad, you're like a
consumer of hunting gear, or, you know, like you, there's more to you than being a trucker.
When they have shaped their life around being a trucker, because, you know, it's literally,
you're behind the wheel for 14 hours a day, you get out, you sleep at a rest stop. I mean,
these are all consuming types of existences that are filled by hundreds of thousands of
American men. And, you know, 94% of them are men. So, you know, it's not like, oh, just things are
all men. It's like, come on, 94%. And so if you were to go to that person and try and have them
adopt a more holistic identity, when they have essentially shaped their entire existence around
their role in this real life, like almost circulatory system, where it's like they're
piloting this blood vessel that has a bunch of home depot crap in the back, or whatever the heck
they're transporting, like a daily basis. Having them have other aspects of their identity that
they value to a point where you could remove the work component and they would, you know,
be cool with going home and spending time with their families is pretty much the opposite of
the way our civilization functions right now. Well, we saw these deaths of despair discussed
by economists in the, you know, the heartland of America. We saw this demographic crisis that
happened when the Soviet Union fell apart with, you know, the mortality crisis,
all sorts of people were dying of alcoholism, heart attacks and stress. So this is a really
serious thing. We have to figure out about the restoration of human meaning and dignity
as different from employment. You had something like a dozen disenfranchised
taxi cab drivers and limo drivers kill themselves, you know, last year, like one of whom killed
himself in front of city hall. I mean, like did his self-destruction cause meaningful ripples in
our society? No, most people watching this or listening to this right now, it's like, oh,
that shit happened. Like, you know, like, but this sort of self-destruction is happening
all the time. And most of them are just men quietly drinking themselves to death in their
homes. And then, you know, they're dead. But
Well, I love the idea that you're talking about compassion for men, because one of the things
that I'm finding is that it's very tough to talk in a, you know, in a world that is currently
exploring this idea of toxic masculinity from some place that it might have been reasonably
defined in blowing it up past that point. It's a very dangerous thing to see a world that sort of
thinks that, you know, like all straight white guys are okay. And in fact, many of them are very
vulnerable and by the numbers, by the numbers, right? You know, yeah, it's so and this is one of
the themes that when you talk about trying to define people by different aspects of their life
that might have work as one of them, but have like others. The fact is, I think men struggle more
with breaking up our identities than women do, because if you were to say to a woman,
hey, you're a parent, you're, you know, a sister or you're a nurse, you're like all of these things,
I think they would be more ready to embrace some of the non-work aspects of their identity,
in part because of the cultural load that is placed on different types of people in our society.
They're facing a big one coming up, which is that you're going to have a huge cohort of millennial
females who pretty much would love to be in a situation with meaningful work, but also with
a family raising children of their own. And there's, first of all, isn't necessarily a supply of guys
who can rise to the, I mean, you know, it doesn't have to be traditional households,
but a lot of it is going to be male, female, breadwinner, somebody stays at home. It might
be the woman who's in the workforce, might be the guy staying home, whatever. The fact
is a lot of these families aren't going to form because we're not in a position to say,
I can afford a 30-year mortgage, I can see enough stability in my future.
And that's part of the thing is that these challenges face us all in different ways,
and it's really, to me, counterproductive to disastrous, to single out a particular subset
of us and be like, hey, you've got it rough, you're okay, you know, that's a legitimate,
you know, like thing to be upset about, that is not, I mean, like if someone
is struggling, like it ends up reaching different groups in different ways, and you can't say it's
like, oh, your struggles are somehow more valid than others. So just to wrap around this thought,
so I think that the division of our identities into like work and non-work,
it's one of the greatest things we have to overcome. And by the numbers, if you lose your job
and you're a man, you tend to have relatively self-destructive patterns of behavior manifest
relatively consistently and quickly, where unemployed men volunteer less than employed men,
despite having much more free time, as an example. Substance abuse tends to go up
in very self-destructive behaviors. A lot of time spent on the computer goes up, which so that's a
combination of gaming and some other things. And porn, I'm sure is, you know, I didn't,
I mean, I kind of implied it, but I was thinking it. This is a free radio station effectively,
and we're going to be able to say that that's one of the things that may be deranging us. We
don't know what its effects are. Yeah, no. So, and that women have struggles, obviously,
but the struggles take a different form in terms of, and the numbers show that women are more
adaptable to non-work idleness, in that they will not show the same patterns of self-destructive
behavior that men do. Now, of course, women obviously hate to be unemployed, but the thing
that I joke about that's sort of true is that women, however, are never truly idle,
in the sense that they always find ways to be productive contributors in a way that men struggle
with in many respects. For example, where you're working for your family, taking care of elderly
parents, your kids, somebody else's kids, these things are part of the fabric of civil society.
One of the questions I have is, should we talk about coming up with some new financial products
that get women the money they need during the period of their life when they might need extra
help in the house, when the binds that come from caring for elderly parents or children
are starting to knock them out of the workforce and trying to figure out how to make some kind of
creative structure to help shift the burdens to times of their life when they can better afford
it. What do you think about that? Yeah, just to sort of show the other side of the coin,
so men volunteer less if they're unemployed than employed, even though that doesn't make
any sense in terms of their free time. Women show higher rates of volunteers than going back to
school when they have more time. So it's just that the numbers show clear patterns of different
responses to non-work related time or idleness. But I'm with you on the fact that right now,
trying to map everyone's economic prospects to the market's valuation of our wages
has all sorts of distorting effects. And Tim, what you're suggesting that we should just start
putting money into people's hands at various points in their lives, I mean, that's really one of the
underpinnings of the freedom dividend, you know, my universal skincare part of it. Yeah, it's like
you put a thousand bucks a month into people's hands and then that would allow us all to make
different types of decisions really from almost day one of our adulthood. Yeah.
All right, let's try a few other things that I think might be interesting. One thing that
wins presidential campaigns that we don't talk much about is demographers. Demographers are sometimes
asked, tell me some group of people that we don't know about as a voting bloc that nobody's figured
out how to speak to. And I think I have a couple of these that are candidates I'd like to... Oh,
please, yeah, I'd like this. Maybe I'll find a new audience to... Well, okay. So the first one that
I have, you know, so these are things like soccer moms was one from years past or exerbs
between rural and suburbs where people didn't realize that there were intermediate places.
So here's one that I think is huge that hasn't been identified. Parents of super smart kids that
have some kind of a learning difference that causes them to wildly underperform in school.
This is something that makes me crazy because I think it's all over. Once you start seeing it,
you see it everywhere. Parents are tearing their hair out. Teachers can't handle the kids. Nope.
And there's just this maddening loss of human brilliance that has flushed down the toilet.
Have you come up with a name for this group? Well, I often refer to these as kids with
learning superpowers. And I talk about teaching disabilities, which is the more
dangerous version of this, that because people don't fit into the notion of what can be educated
by one teacher teaching a room of 30 people to make the economics work, my belief is that...
And I'll come up with a name for it for you. But I want to talk to all of the parents who are
leading lives of despair saying, why is my kid wildly underperforming? And I know how smart this
kid is. Why are we doing this to ourselves? And why will no one speak to it? By the way,
this is me and it's been in my family for four or five generations. Really?
Well, yeah, I'm very public about the fact that my older son is autistic. I know that.
And that when we put him in various environments, I mean, there were very, very sharp struggles.
And to me, atypical is the new normal, like neurologically atypical. And you're right that
as soon as you start seeing it, you see it everywhere. And that the facts show that it's
incredibly commonplace. And at this point, I think most American families have someone
other in the family or someone in their social circles that resembles the description
that you just put out there of this group. To me, a lot of it is that our institutions just aren't
well designed for people with different learning profiles or different...
And yet these are very often the people who are going to found new fields or going to find
new drugs for us who are going to think in such different uncorrelated fashions that these are
very often the people that I value the most. And you never know whether things are going to work
out because the kid every year is sustaining more and more trauma. Whereas these other kids,
it's like, I remember looking at the neurotypicals as if I was like Cinderella watching all the other
sisters go to the ball and I was sitting there scrubbing dishes. Every conference was Eric is
underperforming. Eric can't meet his potential. Eric was there. At some point, it's just like
you don't realize how much damage you're doing to maybe as much as a fifth of the country.
Well, someone described it as like you're getting regular low-grade psychic beating.
It's pretty good. And that's something that you obviously wouldn't wish upon anyone,
much less little kids. Yeah. And by the way, the autism thing, I don't know whether
your child is high-functioning or not, but it's certainly the case that a lot of us have the
idea that we almost don't want to deal with people who aren't in some sense on the spectrum or having
some kind of ability to focus and to work with abstractions. Very often, I think of... I'm on
top of this. I'm colorblind and I always make the point that I see camouflage. Did you know that
you're wearing bright purple right now? Stop it. That used to happen. I used to dress myself
before I let my girlfriend, now wife, make these decisions. I would make terrible decisions.
That's good. You look great. Yeah, you look great. I'm gonna show you something to do with it.
So that would be one group. Here's another one that I think is really important. Now, I know
that you are the child of immigrants and that I'm, of course, married to an immigrant.
The temptation is for us to be very defensive of our immigrants because we have some forces
at the moment that have become very jingoistic. And I think that that's right. But I also think
that we have to recognize that there's a story about immigration that's very unpleasant and ugly,
which is how Americans have used immigration to redistribute wealth amongst ourselves.
And effectively, the immigrant is used as a tool of redistribution. Then people get angry or
protective of the tool. And one of the things that I think that's very important is this huge
chunk of America is highly xenophilic. They like foreigners. They like traveling abroad. They like
food music. You probably read Righteous Mind by Jonathan Haidt. You're probably friends with
John, right? Yeah, I figured. Continue because this is what it reminds me of. Okay. The thing is,
is that xenophilic restrictionists are a good chunk of this country. If you do a poll and you
allow for all four boxes, xenophilic, xenophobic restrictionist expansionist, xenophilic
restrictionism is a giant cohort. Nobody speaks to it because if you say anything about restrictionism,
the media will instantaneously label you as xenophobic. Can we at least distinguish the idea
of the immigrants as souls like ourselves who have been an important part of our national tapestry
together with the fact that very often they are used as instruments of transfers of wealth?
I agree. And that we should be angry at our fellow Americans who cynically use immigration and hide
behind the immigrant to take money from one sector and put it into their own pockets.
Or you should not be angry at someone who's angry about the immigrants. Because there's
something, like you said, it's like in some ways someone can have a very legitimate grievance
about the fact that there have been these instruments of wealth transfer that have been
imported into our midst. So I call these the Americans who redistribute our wealth
immigrant entrepreneurs. And the idea is that if they could use puppy dogs to redistribute our
wealth, they'd use puppy dogs because nobody can be against puppies. And so it's a very cynical
use of the Statue of Liberty. It's something that's very difficult to talk about, but it's
something that I've been talking about for a while because I think that I'm so far in the
xenophilic category, it would be comical if somebody decided I actually had a problem. So
I've been bold and I haven't really had the problem. But most Americans feel very uncomfortable
talking about immigration because they have two different feelings. They one have a really good
feeling about the person that they know who happened to come from Uganda or India. And
they have the sense that something is wrong with the story. We're going to have to disentangle it
and restore something that makes us feel good about it rather than uncomfortable.
I agree. Great. And you know, I think I may be able to help in this regard.
I think you're perfectly positioned for this. You know, part, I'm the son of immigrants who
loves this country, loves that immigrants have been an incredible source of dynamism. But
you know, you can't have open borders and unrestricted immigration. I understand the
sentiment where people are struggling with the fact that our country has brought many people
in either intentionally or unintentionally in ways that are changing our economy and society
in ways that in like some people have legitimate problems with.
I think we need to be able to have an open conversation about difficult topics around
this and pull them apart. And the fact is we need we need people to feel comfortable that
it's okay to feel uncomfortable as long as you're trying to explore it. But the current
president from my money gets way too close to jingoistic sentiments.
And that's one of the natural reactions is that if the current president says one thing,
the right thing to do is say the exact opposite. But then the nuance gets lost. And then unfortunately,
we end up falling into these polarized camps. It's so important not only to defeat the current
president, but also to defeat the kleptocratic center of our own party, as well as the regressive
left that poses as the progressive left. And then to take care of the constituents that are
currently all over the spectrum in a new world. And one of the things I love about your slogan,
which is not left or right, but forward, right? Yes, that's the slogan.
Yeah. And that that thing is that it's moot. It's a question.
It also happens to be the truth. It's not just I know that that's the thing. It's moving out of
flatland. Like we've been we've been given this smorgasbord of bad options and just say, Hey,
I don't think I want to dine from there. I think these things that are available off menu. Do you
mind if I, if I, you know, like for example, Starbucks, I think we'll sell you a short cup
of coffee, but they won't put it on the menu. You have to know that to ask for it. So I like
to think of you as the guy who somehow knows that there are things that aren't on the menu.
I am animal style at in and out. I am Andrew gang is animal style.
Let me give you, I agree that I can change the political conversation in a way that
many Americans find very exciting and productive because 25% of Americans
are politically disengaged, including I'm sure some people watching this.
And I believe it's up to 48% self identify as independent, which is almost twice what
identify as other democratic I'm so close to identifying as independent. I can't stand my
own party, but my feeling is I have to stay there and say, Hey, we're out of control in order
to save the structure because I, you know, the two party system. I mean, I agree. That's why
I'm running as a Democrat in part. It's like, well, you have these two parties. Maybe you can
turn one of them into like a highly functioning party with great ideas and the rest of it. I
mean, that's like an easier solution than what I really want to do is I want to read.
I want the insurgency that you and I have been sort of a part of this loose collection of people
who are thinking completely off the menu to start retaking our institutions. We always had
heterodox people of high caliber who are, you know, effectively heretics housed inside the
harvards and MITs and Caltechs. And I think we've gotten rid of that kind of, or if they are there,
then they're scared shitless to like say the wrong thing or else they'll get, well, do you
remember the time? Do you remember the situation where MIT turned over Aaron Schwartz? I shouldn't
laugh because I mean, it's dark. But we should laugh. No, no, I mean, I'm for laughing at the
dark. Yeah, I laugh at the dark. It's like everybody knows that, but you're not allowed to do it in
public. So screw that. You know, we had the situation with this guy, Aaron Schwartz.
Did you know Aaron? No, did you? I've, you know, just a friend of friends.
Yeah, you know, and this guy almost certainly was a pretty pure hearted human being who
was fighting a good fight. MIT is supposed to shelter those people. And instead they cooperate,
you know, in turning them over. As soon as you get the institutional incentives in a particular
direction, then like, I mean, this is not near, and like, this is just like recent,
because in recent memory, but you know, I stuck up for Shane Gillis, this comedian that
had said, I saw that and the idea that, you know, you were in a position to say, look,
I'm the candidate. Personally, actually, yeah. And so if anyone should be offended, it's me.
And so I think he shouldn't lose his job over it. Well, this is the thing that the quality of
mercy or forgiveness or just recognition that there should be space for remorse and redemption.
This is what makes so much of the intolerant left feel cult like. And I thought what you
were doing was you were showing the best aspects of a truly compassionate left.
I was trying to be a human being, you know, like you looked at him being like, well,
is that a job losing offense? But then the fact that NBC ended up firing him was entirely
consistent with our corporate incentives. Because if you look at it, say like, well,
is this person that we've invested a lot in that's a revenue generator for us? No,
because he hadn't even worked for one day. It's like, are our corporate incentives
to can him and thus like, you know, put an end to any controversy or advertisers or whatnot
that would be troubled by it? Yeah. So it's like, so if you'd asked me, it's like, hey,
do you think he's going to be fired? I mean, like, he's almost certainly going to be fired
because that's what the corporate incentives. Well, I understand. So one of the things that
I'm really interested in doing. But it still made me sad. Like I was like, hey, this would be
unusually human and forgiving if they decided to. Well, they lost a teachable moment because
one of the things that's going on is that so much of the information economy is very, very marginal
in the sense that you're almost producing a public good. So for example, I slap ads on my podcasts
and when I start from a sponsor, isn't that what I'm trying? Well, what I'm trying to do is I've
tried two new models, one of which I'm calling reverse sponsorship, where I shout out some great
company, which doesn't know that I'm going to say something positive. And maybe they become
sponsors, maybe they don't. But the other one is risk advertisers, where people get to know me
over long periods of time. And the hope is that you're going to say, look, you're not going to
catch me being horrible and bigoted and all of these things. But I might say something dangerous
like something that I just said about immigration. And will you make sure that you will not run away
from me during the period where the mob descends and the frenzy is that it's worse, right? Because
if we don't fix the economic models, we can't have deeper discussions because everybody's
going to run away at the first sight of trouble. And so part of what we're trying to do ultimately
with the advertising of this pirate radio pre advertising, what do you think? I mean,
I love it. It's like, leave it to you to try and solve that kind of problem.
All right, I got some other things that I want to talk about as demographics.
Oh, yeah, please. Okay. So let me first say, I am a parent of a neurologically atypical
young person. I agree with you that I think that many of people have a different perspective are
going to end up being contributors in highly distinctive ways. I will say that even kids who
are not going to be contributors in highly distinctive ways still deserve schools that
can support and accommodate them. And that to me, these kids are like the shorthand I use is that
they're spiky. It's like you have very high capacities in some respects or a different
point of view and then real challenges and other respect. And so if I send you into
social environment where there are 30 kids for one teacher, you're going to have a terrible,
terrible time, you know, and that's 100% predictable. And so if then you have like a critical mass of
people that resemble this, then you should try and design an institution that takes that into
account. And I feel so deeply for families that struggle with this, like you struggle with it
sounds like you've experienced it. And you and Pia, you know, me and Evelyn like we have an
unusual level of ability to try and, you know, manage situation. And I meet single moms around
the country who have, you know, autistic or neurologically atypical kids that don't have
the means and they live in a part of the country that does not have like a lot of resources in
place for kids that are different. And it breaks my heart. Like the fact that there are all of
these kids that are heading into these schools that are getting, you know, more than low-grade
psychic beatings. Oh my God. This is why I leave my DMs open on Twitter. And this is one of the
number one things I do it for is people write to me and they say, I know you're really busy,
but I just want to tell you nobody had ever spoken to my situation. You're proud of something I'm
always ashamed of. And I guarantee you, I'm not the first presidential candidate with autism in
the family. And the fact that I'm the first talking about it is to me long overdue and ridiculous.
And, and, you know, and I get, I get some of the same messages that you get, but,
you know, like I want to actually try and solve the problem for those families. I mean, it makes me
feel glad that they feel spoken to and that they realize not the only ones going through. I want
to see more money going to figure out how do we diversify the classroom of the future so that
the load isn't borne by people who don't fit the economics of the teaching model.
Yes. And part of it is that we regard the education of our kids as a cost. And so then the city then
is like, well, I can't afford to have like a teacher for your neurology typical kid. And so
what we have to do is talk about inverting the model is you have to look at the education of
our children as an investment. And then you say, what's that like these kids require, you know,
like X and Y, then we should make that investment with the certainty. And I share your confidence
in this that you have a couple of those kids do something highly atypical and remarkable,
then that pays for whatever support or structure. I mean, I just had a very well known professor
reveal to me that he couldn't read papers in his field. He just can't read, you know, and he has
to figure out what the paper is likely to be saying. There is such a weird world of unexpected
achievement. And this is the demon. This is the demon that we have to slay in many ways is that
the negative externalities are not being encompassed within the budgets of various
institutions. Very well said. But but then also we're forgoing all the potential
positive value creation or generation from proper investment in our human capital.
And another dimension too, and this is like another hearing right there, but I was just with
Dean Cayman in New Hampshire, and he was talking about how the FDA like all their incentives are
just to like regulate the shit out of anything. And then I said to him, I was like, you know,
what they should start measuring is the foregone utility of keeping something away from
from people. Like if you had something and what is the cost of the regulation? Yeah, he had like
so he had like this prosthetic limb that he was trying to give to vets. And the FDA was making
it really hard for him to do so. And he was like, are you kidding me? I'm trying to give
limbs to vets who had amputated. And so by you're making it hard for me to do so, like you multiply
like all of the limbless vets who aren't getting a limb, like, you know, it's like so if you had
that as like an actual measurement for the FDA, it's like, you need to have these companies
internalize the negative externalities of things like pollution and the rest of it. But you almost
need like our institutions like our schools and our regulatory agencies to start trying to somehow
capture the potential gains from investing in our kids or allowing a certain innovation into the
market. Like the big problems are that our measurements are really primitive. And it ends up
and you end up with binary incentives where you lose a lot of the value. And so you end up being
like, hey, don't have a teacher for your kid. So your kid's going to, you know, just end up
sidelined. And sidelined is like a euphemistic way for saying destroyed.
I know. One of the things I wanted to do at some point, actually ended up talking to the Heritage
Foundation of all people about this, was the idea of national interest waivers so that we
could have a skunk works with very light regulation hanging off the side of every large
company. And the idea is that you would put some portion of a company, you could put some portion
of a company outside where the rules were effectively different because you needed people
to take massive risks to be able to move super fast to be dealing with highly non-neurotypical
people. And this is one of the things that drives me nuts about the political conversation is like
you get like, they get like yelled at for a particular, it's like, oh, you made a mistake,
it's like, you kind of need to have an environment where you're going to accept a
certain level of mistakes, particularly when you're talking about large-scale society-wide
investments where like, of course, you can't get that stuff right. And you know, it's like,
and the problem is that the political incentives are for everyone to try and avoid like a negative
headline or something that that's. Look, a lot of us are very disagreeable, very difficult to deal
with. And you know, I saw you pick up endorsements from people like Elon Musk, you know, which is
that I hear his his personal life being criticized. I was like, I don't really care.
This guy is responsible for how much in the species, how much, right, how much innovation.
If he's got a few foibles, let's give him some privacy, let him be in peace and just recognize
that we're getting an unbelievable deal. And yet this desire to somehow stamp out outliers,
I mean, outliers are essential to the American project. Yes, I could not agree more. And you
know, I'd consider myself, it's pretty funny, Eric, because I, you know, I think I had in many ways,
like a highly conventional upbringing that helped like, I feel like I'm sort of a hybrid
where to the extent that I was highly contrarian or dissimilar, you know, it's like I, you know,
I came up through a series of institutions in an era where, you know, I think I learned to adapt,
but then I look at my boys and I think to myself that, you know, that, that their
way of life is going to be very, very different than mine. I'm sure yours too,
because we came of age in a different era. Well, this is true. I mean, I was just talking about
this actually with Brett Easton Ellis sitting in that chair that, you know, I grew up as part of
this free range world, largely before Aton Pats got kidnapped and the milk carton kids changed
everything. I worry about the sort of, we were too free range and these kids are too sheltered,
that we have to find some new, new mix, but I want to get to another give me one more demographic
and then yes, let's do it and then we'll close it out. I want to talk about something which
really makes me angry and excited. I think that America has, without question, some of the finest
sources, um, educationally for brilliance in STEM subjects. We've pretended for a very long time
that Americans are not good at STEM, that we are disinterested in STEM, that STEM careers are fantastic
when many of them are pretty shitty and that we don't recognize that the entire STEM complex
is suffused with bullshit because the model, the economic model for investing in basic research
went belly up because the, the universities were built on a growth model that was unsustainable
and I want to stop lying. So one, I want to start recognizing that we have high schools that have
more Nobel Prizes than all of China, that we are using Chinese labor and other Asian countries,
not just because we are exporting education is a good, but because we have a cryptic labor market
in basic research where we pretend people are students when they're actually workers.
We pretend that we're importing them to educate them, but actually what we're trying to do is
use a poverty differential. We have our own people who are really fantastic because they're not very
obedient and instead people prefer obedient people coming in who aren't here on temporary visas,
therefore they have to follow orders. The entire National Science Foundation,
National Academy of Science Complex is bizarrely suffused with nonsense and because of this,
we can't actually have the National Academies adjudicate what's true because they are the
prime offender of this. How do we get back to a situation which we can recognize that we have
a Stuyvesant or a Bronx Science or a Far Rock away or any of these unbelievable high schools
that are turning out people who desperately want to do STEM subjects, they're not being paid when
they finally get their degrees at appropriate levels. They've been secretly studied by our
Science Complex because these career paths are known to be crappy and we have completely
suffused this with a misdescription so that nobody can actually fix any problems.
That's an incredible description and to me, the lack of proper resources for basic research
for things that ended up being foundational for many of our current industries.
It's the biggest bargain in the world, it's just the future you're investing in.
It's just right now we're so brainwashed by market-driven thinking that if there's not some
short-term profitability tied to it or there's no drug company funding it or something like those
slides and this is something that the government historically has been the leader in where it
said, you know what, we can lay the foundation and create paths for people to be able to do basic
research, the benefits of which will be unclear, they may not exist, they may not materialize for
decades but it's similar to what we're talking about with the neurologically atypical kids is
that like a few of them pay off and then the pay off can be unfathomably significant.
Well we call this long vol investing in hedge fund land where most things don't work out but
a few that do pay for all of the losers. Yep and right now to me this is a role where
historically the government has led and you need a government willing to make long-term
sustained investments that may only pay off way down the road and may not pay off but you still
need to be able to make them. Well also the other weird part of this is that by using our own people
and letting in particular China know that it can't operate a relatively totalitarian government
over there and have the benefit of freedom over here with a pipeline for all of our innovations
to immediately go back over there, China needs to be induced in some sense to understand that
they can't get by without giving their people freedom and what they're right now doing is
that they're using our freedom and a periscope by which they can see everything that we're doing
and if we actually cut that off I know that the universities are going to scream bloody murder
but what's going to happen is China's going to have to start investing in the right of its own
people to give the middle finger because irreverence is the secret of American ingenuity. Yeah
yeah and you know that this reminds me of a joke that they told in artificial intelligence
which is how far behind is China than the US and AI and the answer is 12 hours
because they you know obviously they wake up and then they see what we did. I can't tell you how
fantastic it is to have you come into the studio you're coming off of this big rally in MacArthur
Park you're welcome any time to come back I'd love to continue the conversation. I would love this
too man this this feels to me like half a conversation we're gonna have to have the second half
at some other time so if you enjoyed this convo let Eric know and then hopefully he'll have me
back and if you'd like to join the yang gang you should know we are a very very cheap gang to join
is that right. Well our average donation is only $25 so our fans are even cheaper than Bernese which
no one even knew could be a thing in politics but here it is but you get $25 times enough people
and you wind up putting up very very big numbers and you'll see like we're already into the eight
digits as a campaign and we can take this whole thing we can contend because a lot of people
watching this right now you're ignoring politics as usual we can actually have a different sort of
politics that takes real thinking real ideas real solutions and brings into the highest levels of
our government it just needs enough Eric's and Pia's and you all watching at home to say
I prefer this to the stuff I'm getting through the the cable tv network. Well Andrew one of the
things I think that's been great about watching your meteoric rise is that you are outside of
control without being out of control and that having a kind of a mature person who's not easily
bought or swayed who's speaking in a way that nobody knows what he's going to say next has been
hugely positive for the entire process. Well thank you you know the only the only current
answer to is ideas in humanity like you you know you put a good idea in front of me or
a good person I listen. Well you've been that way since before all the success so we wish you
continued success and we'll have you back here the next time you're in LA with a little bit of
time. I would love that brother. Thanks you've been through the portal with Andrew Yang presidential
candidate for 2020 and telling us to make America think harder. Yes this man's going to make you
think harder all the time. All right be well everybody.
