Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm lucky to be here
tonight with Anna, and here it comes, Hachin.
Thanks for having me.
Oh, did I screw that up?
No, no, no, no, no, that's right.
And Anna is half of the up-and-coming podcast Red Scare, which has everyone talking.
Everyone.
Not everyone. I'm exaggerating slightly.
Yeah.
But I just got introduced to you by a colleague of mine, Blake Masters, Peter Teal's co-author.
And I've been addicted to your podcast, not quite understanding why. It's one of the strangest
things I've ever found. Can you say more about what induced you to do it and why you think it
might be working?
I have no clue why it's working. I know that it's probably due to some sort of
alchemical, inarticulable thing that's totally out of my control and that has something to do
with my chemistry with my co-host who's an actress called Dasha Nakrasova.
But I think maybe it struck a chord. I know that it consistently infuriates all the wrong people,
which was never my intention.
It's so innocent, and it's so beautiful, but it's also not entirely believable.
Because it does seem like what you're doing is you're crowding out a certain kind of piousness,
and we had an epic lunch the other day.
Yeah, we did. We had what they call a power launch.
Is that a power launch?
Yeah. Okay.
I just learned at the last minute that this podcast is being filmed because I was telling
Eric here that the way that we run ours is like a bunch of wires and crap strewn on the floor,
chain-smoking. Dasha literally sits on the ground objectifying herself at every turn,
and I sit on my disgusting, stained, and cigarette-burned couch.
But this is my bad side, and I wish I was more of a diva like Mariah Carey and could demand
that we switched seats.
Really?
Yeah. No, I'm kidding. I'm being hyperbolic.
Well, and we always pick up the syringes before the guests.
Yeah. Anyway, what was the question?
Well, the question surrounds what I was going to get at is that we had this
bit of a riff where I've said that I'm trying to be long good and short nice,
that nice doesn't really have a future because nice is really this kind of performative version
that crowds out good, and you seem to have mastered this formula where I detect
a deeply buried good, and there's an attack on nice at all times.
Yeah. I mean, I think that nice on some level is a futile position. I mean,
even you look at like female social politics, right? And there's always kind of
irrepentant bitches masquerading as nice girls, and then there's nice girls masquerading as
irrepentant bitches. And I think I would like to think that I'm the latter.
Remains to be seen.
Yeah. I don't know that I have any sort of earnest or let's say, let's put it this way.
I don't know that I have kind of a sustained political vision that I would like to enact.
It's kind of out of my control as, you know, my father who used to say you're but a crumb
floating on the face of the earth, but-
Was that to build your confidence?
Yeah. That's the Russian way of parenting. It's like Russian self-esteem.
But at the end of the day, I have kind of a very earnest ethical agenda that I'm hoping
to populate the minds of my young girl and gay listeners with.
I would have said infect, but okay, populate.
Yeah. Yeah.
Infect is another good one.
Wonderful. So let's just dig into a little bit of your background as you're mining it
for the kind of motif that even though it's an intrinsically American show,
it's informed by this sort of broad Slavic soul and you were born in.
In Moscow.
In Moscow.
Yeah. In 1985, the internet and my Spanish Wikipedia says that it's 1986.
Every year I'm aging backwards on the internet.
Nice.
Next year I'll be 32.
Yeah. It's great.
Great. Yeah. I'm like the Benjamin buttons of neoliberal critique,
but I was born in 1985 at the tail end, right before the collapse of the Soviet Union.
There's no way that that experience along with the kind of
inevitable trauma of immigration doesn't inform your worldview.
So if I understand correctly, not only are you coming with this sort of tail end
Soviet influence, but it is also the case that you've got access to the twin genocides of Jews
and Armenians.
That's true. Yeah. I always say on Twitter, it's very depressing that my ancestors survived
the Armenian genocide and then the Holocaust. So their descendant could become a podcaster in
Brooklyn now Manhattan.
And no doubt because you're white of hue, you are going to be labeled as privileged because
you come from these two ethnic groups, which for some reason we can't actually locate in
human history or what these groups have been through, which I find also weirdly amusing.
This is a very, I mean, this is a very interesting point. I don't know if we want to,
I'm not drunk yet, so maybe we should get into the intellectual.
Can we toast to sobriety? Yeah, let's toast to sobriety.
To sobriety.
Yeah.
And this is Darovia.
I don't, so I'll get into all the kind of like heavy handed intellectual stuff in the
first half, let's say, but this is one of I think my central projects or critiques that I'm
interested in. I don't obviously, I don't dispute the completely gross horrific legacy of
American slavery, right? It existed, it plunged an entire population into poverty, into social
fragmentation. The legacy is still alive and well today. What I object to, I think is the
wholesale export of the American view of race relations to elsewhere in the world,
to people who don't have the similar experience.
Well, I guess from my perspective, what I find very odd about all of this is that
having been close to people in the Armenian and Jewish communities,
there's a tremendous amount of intergenerational trauma because there has to be.
My sister and I call it hand-me-down trauma.
Yeah.
It's something you inherit, like a brooch or a necklace.
Well, I would say it's also a set of behavior patterns for detecting when things are starting to
get really dicey. You have to know that it's not that the generation that goes through these
things is the only one that has a claim. The longevity of these populations is about saying,
we don't know whether there's going to be another one of these episodes in your time,
so everyone always has to be ready. There's no state of not being ready. We've made it.
We finally, we're orthodontists, we're going to be fine.
Yeah. I mean, you can't rest on your laurels effectively.
And I think.
You have to sleep with one eye open in some sense.
Yeah. Well, yeah, with a knife under your pillow.
You're going to give away all of our secrets?
Yeah. I have so many dark family secrets, but I think the basic
correct principle, the basic critique of certain, I guess, leftist intellectuals
in the United States is this idea that, okay, well, somebody like me is not only white,
not only would be associated as white or would consider herself white, but is essentially
white passing. So therefore, even if I was not hypothetically white, I could rake in the certain
white privilege that, for example, or a black or Latino person couldn't.
Well, this is what I've called the intersectional shakedown.
Yeah.
And the populations that are maximally irritating to the intersectional shakedown artists
are the populations with recent claims to oppression that are nevertheless making it
economically because really what it is is an attempt to take a real history of oppression
and to turn it into cash.
Yes. Well, I tweeted literally today moments before I came here that the idea of cultural
appropriation, that debate makes perfect sense in a culture where identity is viewed as a form
of capital because it becomes then a zero sum game if somebody like Rachel Dolezal, right,
perpetuates this myth that she's a black woman, she is basically taking food out of the mouth,
power out of the hands of an actually black woman.
Right. So there's that absurdity, but then we actually have to contend with the weird
aspect. For example, if you look at the exploitation of black musicians who very often,
at some point, you had a lot of illiterate genius musicians in the Delta who were brilliant enough
to produce great music, but weren't capable of defending themselves in a legal structure.
Right. Exactly.
And so you actually had cultural exploitation of one group by another through appropriation,
so you'd get, I think at some point, I saw Otis Blackwell performing in New York City,
and he had to say, look, I'm the guy behind Elvis Presley.
Right.
And the idea is that when Elvis sang it, it was acceptable to a market that he couldn't sell
into. So there is a real aspect to cultural appropriation, and there's a totally fake
aspect, which is this sort of, and they're coexisting. And so it's very tempting for
people like us just to point at the bullshit, but there actually is this unfortunate reality
that's braided with it.
Yeah, absolutely. No pun intended. Sorry.
Oh, braids?
Braids, yeah, the box braids. No, but it's absolutely true. I mean, you can give the
example of like Hesh and the Sopranos, right? We talked about the Sopranos at our power lunch,
who's the guy who's kind of this like kindly sensible Jewish grandfather.
Within a mafia context.
Within a mafia context. It's so warm and loving and steadily, and this is a guy who has historically
stiffed black musicians for royalties, right? And there's that famous reparations episode
with, I think it was Bokeem Woodbine playing the rapper, Minigark guy.
There's a question about whether he's going to visit violence upon him, but it turns out
he's going to visit a lawsuit or something.
Yes, yeah, exactly. But then you have like these cultural examples of like, you know,
like Katy Perry or Miley Cyrus wearing cornrows, like Kim Kardashian wearing cornrows in a
Kardashian like beauty photo shoot, which I find completely preposterous. No one owns cornrows.
I don't know enough about female hairstyle.
There's no direct line of monetization, right? Okay.
I don't see it that way. And so that, that's a discourse that I think, yeah,
your right exists as like a proxy discourse because people are afraid to confront the deeper,
more complex issues. Well, I think that, and you have one set of legitimate issues acting as the
stalking horse for this infernal shakedown. And my hatred of this comes from the fact that
if American Jews who have made it financially in one generation are somehow safe and secure,
and therefore privileged, something is entirely broken with your cosmology.
Well, how do you mean?
Well, it's just like, I assume that the German Jews in the, you know, before Kristallnacht,
the two nights before Kristallnacht were privileged and should be worried about their
privilege. It's just, this is stupid. Yeah, it's a silly argument. And I think,
you know, I get into spats about, listen, I'm, I'm frequently accused of like being
racially insensitive. And I, you know, as Quentin, the late great Quentin Tarantino said,
I reject that hypothesis. It's patently false. What I've always said is not,
I'm not in the business, I'm not interested in having an oppression Olympics and saying like,
well, okay, look, I come from a historically oppressed background on two sides. But yeah,
I, you know, grew up in a totally middle class milieu. And, you know, but I'm going to use this
kind of identitarian card, I'm going to play the card to be oppressed. That's not at all what I'm
interested in. What I'm saying is that as a person who comes from a different culture,
I can view the legacy of American slavery at a critical distance in a way that American people
may not be able to, right? Because in Russia, you have a parallel system called serfdom.
Right. These, the slaves in the serfs were emancipated within I think a year of each other.
Right. But I mean, I just had J.D. Vance in your chair.
I've heard only horrible things about him. Oh, yeah.
I'll introduce you. I like him quite a bit. He, you know, his family, of course,
is coming from Appalachia and hillbillies were de facto enslaved, maybe a form of light slavery,
if you will, just we serfdom is a different form of enslavement with company towns, company script,
company stores, company housing, private armies of detective agencies. So, you know, the idea that
that is seen through the lens of white privilege shows you the mental impoverishment of the current
woke ideology. And my claim is that we cannot afford to dispute it. We must ignore it just because
it, it sort of shouldn't qualify intellectually. It didn't make. I mean, as George Bush II said,
you don't negotiate with terrorists. And this is, I think my big opposition to it
is that woke ideology by and large is an emotional hostage situation. It really is.
It's a hostage crisis. Yeah. Well, you seem to be ignoring the credible
threat to your reputation. In fact, it's making your reputation. So, you're metabolizing this kind
of weird resentment and hatred that people are experiencing through fear because these are
reputational attacks. In general, they're attacks that say, I'm going to make it impossible for
you to earn a normal living by making an attack on your reputation, which you need to negotiate
the institutional world. Yeah. And it's like, you know, Jordan Peterson famously said, like,
I figured out a way to monetize the SJWs. And, you know, you could possibly say that about
Red Scare, but it's not kind of. No, I think you guys are doing something much more
bizarre and interesting. Yeah, yeah, I agree, but it's not intended in that way. But
that was never the premise or the interest. It was kind of this earnest, it was truly kind of an
earnest frustration with liberal mainstream feminism and liberalism. I don't even know
whether it's liberalism. I mean, like everything is so watered down and metastatic and bizarre.
That it's the vague whiff of the left gone mad. Yeah. Right? Like, it's not liberal. It's not
progressive. We don't even know what it is. It just sort of technically resides to the left.
It's not conservative either, right? No. You can't rightfully call it that.
Self-hatred is obviously a very large part of it. I think, yeah, self-hatred. I mean,
this is another kind of, you know, I repeat myself loudly and often.
Well done. According to the advice of my hero, Quentin Crisp, who said that that was kind of
the way to make yourself memorable. And the problem with the left, and I'm talking about kind
of primarily the online left, is that these are people who are thoroughly infected with the virus
of the neoliberal ethos. They're completely, they play completely within the terms of the system.
And, you know, this brings to bear a very important point that I also like to repeat loudly and often
by the new left critic Christopher Lash. And I'm going to paraphrase it because I don't know
verbatim because my synapses have been zapped by being too extremely online, you know? But he said,
like, hey, you know, all the kind of traditional bedrocks, all of the traditional values and
institutions of liberal society, we're talking about monogamy, marriage, the gender binary,
any number of other kind of traditional values have already been dealt a serious blow
by advanced capitalism itself, long before the social justice activists got their hands on them,
before they mounted a fight against them. And that's a very important point to remember.
So the way I see it, and you'll let me know if this dovetails or in fact conflicts or maybe it's
just total myths, is that the family and the religion or culture provide many of the same
things that the market provides, like let's say an insurance policy. All right. So for example,
if you're trying to smooth your income stream over a lifetime and you have recessions,
a family might take in some members who are out of work and put them to work in portions of the
family business that are still functioning or work inside the home in a way that sort of socializes
some of the risk. And at the same time, you might buy some kind of a policy to try to smooth things
out or you'll try to save in an institutional context. As these things conflict, the market
has denatured some of these older structures. When people talk about American families are weak,
what they usually mean is that American markets have been regular and strong enough
that people have leaned less on the pathologies of their mishpochah in order to try to get cleaner
expressions within the market for their various needs. Like instead of having a mother come and
be with a child when a new baby is born. To your laundry. What? Yeah. To your laundry.
That you hire somebody to do it. And the idea is if the market is working in some sense,
the family starts to fall apart because you don't need it.
Right, exactly. And people are smart. They know that seven, eight years of psychoanalysis is a
very tall price to pay for having your mother come every week into your laundry. And they'd
rather be, yeah. And there's this whole rhetoric now about a work-life balance, whatever. And I
think that part of the kind of psycho, let's say, the psychological anima of the market is that
it provides people with a scaffolding and infrastructure through which to relieve themselves
of their family. Right. So one of the things that's interesting to me is that you're coming from
a background which is very familiar to me where you have a Jewish Armenian parentage
and your father was a famous mathematician working in linear programming, sort of optimization
science, and came up with this amazing algorithm that changed our picture for how things could
be optimized using smaller and smaller ellipsoids. Right. And your mom, how did she figure into the
story? My dad, his whole kind of level of achievement is way over my head, obviously.
But my mom and my dad, I mean, they met when they were very young and they got married quite a bit
later. My mom, I think, would probably be very irate and disappointed if I described her like
this because you know she's going to listen to this. She is an artist who became a housewife,
and I think that she is the great genius of the family. She's the great kind of organizing
and destructive force in my family. That's interesting very often. So I have to say that
when we had this lunch, which you're describing as a power lunch, yeah, I drunk no alcohol during
it. I'm not positive that it qualified. I mean, are you supposed to drink? I don't really know.
It would be my first power lunch. Oh, right. It's just a stupid girl bossy hyperbolic term.
I have to drink. Okay. Well, very good. And smoke at all lunches. I didn't smoke.
You didn't smoke. But I'm such a neurotic. I'm so shy. I was telling you that I can't,
you know, I have to constantly occupy. Is that because you're reveling in your neuroticism?
No, no, no. I'm not like a Woody Allen person. I don't get off on it.
Sure. It's something that I hoped to shed with the kind of accumulation of experience,
like habituation. Okay. Yeah, that's not something I think you should look up to in yourself.
I don't know. But yeah, I think that my mom is kind of like a bizarre,
freewheeling, artistic genius, a true eccentric. And I think that I derive a lot of my personality
and my tendency toward critique from her. I mean, she's always spinning paranoid polemics
about the world. It's really quite impressive. And she's right most of the time.
I think it's very strange that, I mean, this really actually echoes your earlier point that
we tend to see accomplishment only if it shows up in the workplace. And for a lot of us coming from
kind of ethnic families, for lack of a better word, very often people who were inside the home
were well known to be the local genius, the eccentric or the life or the whatever. It was
not clear in any way that if you were the Schmatte salesman, that that was really the
higher expression of the two people in a marriage. And it happens that your father did something
very creative in a very analytic context. It's hardly surprising. There's nothing at all surprising
to me that your mom might mostly be at home with the family and be the major force of the family.
Yeah. And I think like, you know, my dad probably gets all the credit for
being kind of the genius. My haters like to point out that I'm coasting off of my father's
accomplishments, which is not true because I'm actually way more famous than him on Reddit.
So there, yeah, there you go. He would be so, I'm here to disgrace my family name.
But basically, I think that it's a very interesting, this kind of old breakdown of my
parents' marriage is a very instructive example of the way that women wield unofficial power
through the domestic sphere. Again, it's like unofficial. The language is even wrong to me.
It's like, in what world do we not... I guess the idea is that it's official if it shows up
in Wikipedia and it's unofficial if it only shows up in family lore. I think it's official
if you're getting officially compensated for it, right? Well, this is the issue of kin work that
I would bring up, which is that I think that a lot of the wage gap work is extremely weak
and manipulative, but I think it's also the case that the real wage gap is that you have to figure
out how to compensate for kin work, you know, taking care of elder relatives or young children,
and that you can arguably say that women should be paid more on average because that is uncompensated
work and it has to show up somewhere. And sometimes it would show up in like prestige,
the matriarch of a large family is kind of an impressive position to hold. And that with smaller
families, it's no longer so cool to be grandma. Yeah, sure. And I think that there's a general
disrespect for the institution of motherhood. Let's talk about that. What the hell is that?
In the culture at large, particularly on the left. So that this is something which I totally
resonate with like, when did the left go and they're going to claim, oh, we're not anti-family,
but there is some weird anti-family thing. I think that that's absolutely a kind of collective
defense mechanism because we're talking about people much like myself who are millennials in
their late 20s, early 30s. You know, my father always used to say like, well, Anna, you can't
really ascend in class, you know, contrary to the myth of the American dream, but you can't
really fall in class either. And now we're faced to the generation that's quite a bit like the
lost generation in Russia, my father's generation, all of whom who drank themselves to death by the
age of, you know, 52, which is this millennial generation of people like myself.
Your dad was two years younger than I am now when he died of a heart attack.
Yes, yeah. And, you know, he died in the United States, but I think that he is part of the same
generational trend. What year was that? In 2005. But there are a lot of people, my age, who are
male and female, who are confronting for the first time the reality that they will
actually fall in class, especially relative to their parents. They will never own property,
they will never pay off their student debt, they will never have a safe, independent health
care situation, they will never be able to afford children. And I think the kind of
broadly anti natalist trend on the left is a psychological defense mechanism because you
have to reframe, I think in the neoliberal framework, you have to reframe all adversity as
opportunity and what they're saying to themselves. I don't have to be burdened by babies, my breasts
will be undeformed by breastfeeding. Yes, I'm a girl boss, I don't need a man, I'm an independent,
strong independent woman. So they've had to kind of re-calibrate. By the way, this will work out for
a minority of the people who claim this to be true. It's not BS. What's BS is how broadly
this plan is likely to work. Yeah, how applicable it is across. I mean, I started noticing,
I actually got a lot of flak for this and I still don't know why, I started noticing
in the pop lyrics of the last two decades or so kind of minute shift. You can go back as far as
actually the 1960s, I remember this interview with Amy Winehouse where she's like, I much more
prefer, I gravitate toward the music of the 60s, the 50s, 60s, whatever, as opposed to the music
of the 2000s because in the kind of female vocalists of the 60s, they expressed kind of
a longing, a yearning for companionship and love, a desire to subordinate themselves
to the will of others or something greater than themselves. Let's put it that way, that feminists
have interpreted as a fundamentally misogynistic or sexist outlook. Whereas now, with the coming
of somebody like Beyonce, you have these lyrics that literally are like, I don't need you,
I don't need a man, all men are trash, I'm going to keep stacking my bills.
And it's this form of feminism that I find to be very callous and creatinous and ultimately
counterproductive. Let's take what you just said. It was actually weirdly on both sides of the
gender. For example, let's say John Denver, when he sings about, you know, that's like,
kiss me and smile for me, tell me that you're waiting for me. He talks about when I come back,
I'll bring your wedding ring. Like he's excited about the fact that he's screwed up in this
relationship. He says, I've played around and then he says, but I realize how important this is
and I'm going to make it right. And I'm excited about becoming betrothed to you.
Right. I'm going to make amends.
Well, not only make amends, you know, like when Beyonce, I mean, just to connect these two data
points, she's saying, if you like it, you should put a ring on it. That's really what she wanted.
But like, you didn't exercise your options, very transactional. So now I'm up in the club
getting jiggy with this other guy, you shouldn't be upset.
Yeah, yeah, sure. It's, it's, it is a very kind of transactional ethos that permeates
all, like there was this like, kind of stupid trend on Twitter where people,
that people were mocking because other people were tweeting out kind of empathy templates.
So, you know, somebody texts you and they're like, Hey, I'm like really going through a hard time,
you know, I'm having to get getting a divorce. My mom's dying of cancer or whatever.
You fire back with like, Hey, I'm currently at capacity. Do you know somebody else who slash
I'm going through some personal problems to slash? And it's like a kind of prefabricated
template for how you should respond to a person in need.
Wow. Yeah.
That's the thing.
I didn't even know this.
Yeah, you're so lucky. You're, you're so lucky that all this stuff is way over your head.
I have to live with this every day and it shrinks my will and libido to live.
But it's like this kind of thing that, um, is hyper transactional.
All relations have become so transactional.
All relationships. I mean, look, my take on this is that all relationships have
an aspect of exchange, but that what distinguishes the transactional from the rich relationship
is how many layers of indirection separate, uh, the people involved from the exchange.
Yes.
So dinner in a movie is a lot more abstract than turning a trick on a street corner.
Yeah.
And then you, you go further, you know, with courtship, it becomes incredibly
distant in terms of the number of layers.
And what we don't recognize is that those layers of indirection are essential to a rich life.
Yeah. And a rich emotional life.
And what we're dealing with now are people who, if they are not economically, uh, impoverished,
or spiritually impoverished, because they have no institutions or values on which to depend.
Okay. So this gets me back to like your crazy podcast and your persona.
So first of all, I mean, you're playing with all sorts of associations and breaking them
in ways that the indisha and the underlying, like the proximate and ultimate are separated.
So I normally associate vocal fry and up talking with stupidity.
Right.
I don't associate it with your level of insight and commentary.
Right.
You guys sound stoned out of your mind and there's a tremendous meta vocal fry.
But what it speaks to is this like crazy metacognitive distance that you and your co-host have
from the topics that you're discussing.
And you're sort of, you're constantly bemused by this sort of very weird period of the human condition.
Is that wrong?
I think bemused is a nice way of putting it. I think that we're very frustrated.
What do you want?
I, I don't know. We're wet like all women. We don't know what we want.
No, I mean, I think I want.
I think you do know what you want.
I think I want, I mean, on a, on a kind of broad social level,
I think that we have to take kind of the old Nietzschean adage, God is dead.
Right. People always interpret that as, you know, I think people have a tendency to interpret it as
God is dead and therefore we can get like weird septum piercings and tattooed sleeves and go
fucking and sucking in polyamorous arrangements.
And that's not at all what he meant.
He meant God is dead and now it is up to secular humanity to replace
the value system that was evacuated with the death of God with an equally viable one.
Do you think that's possible?
No, I don't know, but I, you know, what else can we do?
You know, Dosh always says to me like, you have to stay cheerful in the face of adversity,
like the Greeks.
Yeah.
Well, all right. So I mean, in part, and I don't know how long the show is going to get
away with it, but ultimately it's about for me recognizing what the religious impulse was.
It was a load bearing structure of our civilization because it caused you to think
in intergenerational terms, like in our, the shared part of our tradition, the Jewish tradition,
the concept of generation to generation goes under the name Lador Vador from generation to
generation. And that thing about you have to be seeing yourself, you have to subordinate and
submit. And like this is against the ethos of our time, but it occurs everywhere because
our soma, the parts of us that are non reproductive are finite. They always die.
And if you do not link yourself in a chain with others, then Rome has to be built in
the day because there's nothing more over for you. As we say, well, that was far more eloquent
than I had said. Yeah, but I mean, it's true. And look, I mean, investing or kind of honoring
posterity is a means of investing in the future. It's a means of envisioning yourself in a greater
human chain, a human centipede of drudgery and debauchery. No, but and what's lost now? I mean,
this is like the cardinal sin, right? In kind of neoliberal discourse is subordinating your will
to somebody else. It's bizarre. And to see this kind of ethos then flourish on the so-called left
is profoundly dispiriting. Well, it's such a simplistic version of empowerment.
And it's, you know, it's one of the things that I've advocated repeatedly. So in terms of,
I'm going to take your adage and start repeating myself loudly and often. I keep saying that
magic happens when people pass power back and forth. If you retain all your power,
then you don't get to the magic of giving your power to somebody else and having them give you
an equal amount, you know, of a different kind back. And so we never actually build those super
powerful relationships when we're hoarding our power saying, I'm not going to give anything up.
You're interested in motherhood, like for yourself. For myself, of course, but in general.
Yeah. I mean, I think this is the most kind of noble, honorable institution on the planet.
And it really matters. I mean, this is one of the things that
a family friend is very dear to me, took me aside at some point and said,
you want to know something magical? Look at your children. That's what happens when a
PhD stays home to raise them. Yeah. You know, and it was just like,
are you getting a little reclaimed? That's beautiful. I get, I get way too reclaimed on the
shows. Yeah. But it's, you know, my wife was out of the workforce for like 10 years or something.
And, you know, she came back, you know, with mentally guns blazing. Yeah. But
I think that this hatred of motherhood has to be acknowledged. First of all, it's denied.
Oh, we don't hate motherhood. We just think it's about choice. But you look at it,
the mommies who work and the mommies who don't. One gender is built to reproduce our species.
And I just, I can't stand what we've done to it. Yeah. And there's kind of no
honoring also among men or women of the gender difference, which exists. It's very real and
unpalpable. And I think feminists have this idea that if we acknowledge that we're different,
we're acknowledging that we're unequal. And that's not at all the case. We're differently equal.
We're differently abled. So this is the weird thing. If you try to make this argument at the
level of like racial groups or geographically separated groups, there really isn't a great way
of saying that there should be equality because there's no reason that separated groups should have
variables having common means. Within a group, there actually is this weird principle of Fischer,
the biological theorist, which says that it is as good to be female as male from the perspective
of the fitness of the two genders' strategy. And the problem with it is that you have to,
what fails is what you might call the Ginger Rogers principle. So the old, as the joke goes,
Ginger Rogers could do everything Fred Astaire could do, but backwards and in heels. And the
feminist version of this is women are as good or better at everything men can do except peeing,
standing up. And that can't possibly be the case if Fischer's theory is to hold because then women
would simply be better. Yes. Unless peeing, standing up was like the be all and end all, which
I mean, it's pretty good, but it's not that great. That's part of the problem, which is if you
claim that you're better at something, biology tells you you have to be worse at something else.
Right. So that there's a kind of an implicit trade off, right? Or balance, let's say.
Well, then it gets to this really, like here, let's get into trouble with psychologists and
psychiatrists. The whole co-dependence concept, yes, there is something which is really dysfunctional,
but a lot of interdependence is labeled as co-dependence. And the modern notion that you
should be a completely functional person who can do everything and able to walk out on a moment's
notice that completely destroys the concept of coupling. Yeah. I mean, I think this all goes back
to the atomizing logic of the market and all my big issue, I think, my big critique, kind of the
central organizing theme of my work, right, is this idea that progressive activism is now effectively
marching in lockstep with the very market imperatives that they are opposed to on the face of things.
It's mad. And it's so intellectually incoherent. It's kind of amazing that it's still hanging
together as a pseudo philosophy. Yeah. All right. So now, like, I feel like you're revealed, you're
somehow reveling on your podcast in this like really dangerous kind of memes, which suggests,
you know, royalty plunged into boredom and cocaine and wanton sexuality. But in fact,
underneath it, you're coming from an academic tradition and, you know, embracing very traditional
values. There's no reason to leave left of center thinking because traditionally, what
has the left been? It's been about empowering working families. Right. And that's what I'm
interested in. It's funny that so many of my critics and I, if you really look at us, it's
you know, the narcissism of small differences, like we are completely indistinguishable to
like an Afghani fig farmer, you know, 99% of our politics are equivalent. Are they?
I'm sure. I mean, like, who are you pissing off? I think people that kind of are self-identified as
leftists, but are basically, and I say this with the most empathy possible because I understand
their position. I feel completely insecure and precarious in the market. They feel that they
have no future. I up until a year or two ago felt that I have no future. It was really a toss-up.
Okay. So what happened when you got a future? I mean, I started this podcast.
I know. But I mean, what happened to you? Did you have a physiological change?
Physiological. I mean, when I've been shit out of luck.
Yeah.
And then I get some luck. The chemicals that are running through my body are totally different.
Yeah. I mean, you start to even like look more like resplendent and wonderful and whatever, but
You get plumage.
Yeah. You get plumage. I think like, but this is the first time I'm 34 years old. I'm kind of like
an old geezer by millennial achievement standards. You know, it's like you have to be like 23 when
you peak or something. But again, I'm merely an individual, right? And there's a whole generation
of people who are like now left behind. Do you know my friend Peter Teal at all?
I mean, not personally.
So he's got a great quote. I don't know whether he said it publicly, probably has,
but he says things to me and I just, I kick myself for not having thought of them first.
He says a boomers golden era is in his or her twenties, a gen Xers in his or her fifties.
And then he looks at me and he says, and we're just getting started.
It's been, it's like, I didn't get suddenly interesting like in the last few years because
I ate a mushroom. Yeah.
It was, there's this thing I've called the distributed idea suppression complex or the disc.
Is this your coinage?
Yeah, coin lots of stuff.
Yeah, you coin a lot of, yeah.
Yeah. But then the weird thing is you watch it in the world and it only works if you're
coining something that people actually recognize is real. It's not like you can make up anything
and it just goes. But there is this thing that tried to suppress all ideas. It's still working.
Like they're trying to make Andrew Yang not appear on MSNBC on any of the graphics or Tulsi
gets, you know, dropped at every opportunity. Yeah.
This thing just doesn't want to hear that there's a massive intergenerational transfer where the
two vampiric generations of the silence and the boomers
transfuse the Xers and the millennials in order to allow them to live in the style to which
they become accustomed. And like the most obvious place that you see this is the university system.
Explain that.
Oh, it was a pyramid scheme that was expanding. And when the growth that was natural in the system
ran out, there was no way to give people professorships who had been contributing their youth to the
research of those above them. And so what the universities did, almost every top university
loaded up on administrators and then made tuition insanely expensive and made it impossible to get
rid of the debt in bankruptcy so that you can die, you know, getting a social security check and
still paying your student loans. I'm going to do a show hopefully with Sugar Baby University,
which is a program inside of seeking arrangement sugar dating, where it would appear that the
appeal is that young women who are in some men burdened with student debt can graduate debt free
by dating older successful people and getting an allowance every month,
which I think is just like, it's weird to imagine a generation sort of selling its
daughters into borderline commercial sex work. Yeah, I mean, it's monstrous. And the idea that you
would institutionalize this with like a degree, it's like the University of Phoenix for hookers.
Why don't you get a job busing tables to pay off your student loans when student tuition has gone,
you know, above medical tuition, which is above regular tuition, regular inflation,
I mean, sorry, medical inflation is above regular inflation and tuition inflation is above medical.
The whole thing is mad, but the system couldn't be kept together.
And so that is an intergenerational transfusing. Yeah, I mean, look, one of the most one of the
biggest rackets in this country after management consulting is the idea that all people should
go to college. I think Germany has it right. They send most of them to vocational programs.
The idea that you should even be paying, you know, $40,000 a semester in tuition to get a
communications degree as a super senior for five years is preposterous. Nobody needs to be saddled,
huh? You're going to blow it for these generations. Yeah, why? Because it's a scam, man. They turned
the most amazing part of our country into this wealth transfer scam. It's just, it's funny,
but it's painful. Yeah, I mean, and it's horrible. I was thinking about, you know,
the kind of the idea of, are you familiar with this concept, stob, the Russian parody?
Stob, stob. We can get into this later because it's a whole.
Don't know it. I think that this is like to really understand the Trump era, for example, you have
to view it through this particular lens. Well, give it to me.
It's a, it's a late Soviet parody genre or style that involves an over-identification,
so extreme that it's unclear whether you're endorsing, authentically endorsing a position
or perpetuating an elaborate troll. So it's basically a post-ironic gesture. If you look at
the golden age of liberal entertainment as John Stuart, The Daily Show, which was kind of
characterized by, this is a really long-winded digression. I didn't mean to go here. Drink up,
let's do it. Yeah, I'll keep going. As characterized by this kind of snarky, implicitly morally
superior, ironic posture, right? That was, I think, supplanted eventually by this kind of
stob over-identification, right? Where it's unclear, for example, with people like me and
Dasha, it's unclear what position we're actually endorsing, right? And Trump, for example, is
the master of the strategy. And so he plays. So we do, we both acknowledge that Trump has
some crazy genius to him. I think he's a total genius, but I think that he's an artistic genius,
not a political genius. Yeah, he's an artistic genius. I think that he's an artist. He's a
Gemini just like my mother. My mom hates Trump with like a fire because they're the same person.
Down to the kind of miserable, conty expression, they kind of emote when they're in an irritated
mood. It's really something. How is that conty in? Huh? How is that conty in?
Conty on conty, conty. Am I okay? But I'm very gullible, which is why I'm not a troll. But you
take somebody like Trump, the guy is so over-invested in performing his own incompetence that any
parody of him by an outsider reads as cringy and over-determined, which is why SNL has sucked
for the last time. But in part, you have to get something right before you compare it to it,
right? Yeah. And I don't know if you ever saw this video. I think it's called something like
because of the music in the Hall of the Trumpian King. No. Okay, so it's all of these liberal
comedians from this golden era that you're talking about in the most knowing and oppressive way
possible saying, buddy, you're not going to win. Come on, we all know it. And everyone's saying like,
oh, please run. Oh, it'll be so entertaining. Like, there's no concept that this is real.
Yes, yeah. And every single one of those people who appeared on this, including John Oliver and
Stephen Colbert, became unfunny to me in just about everything that they did after they went
so over the top. Yeah, momentarily, yeah. That they showed that they didn't understand. Like,
you can't mock this stuff. And what a betrayal, like on a Freudian level, what a collective
betrayal of parental authority that was. We really believed in these guys that they could be,
that they could parse like, sorry. They believed in them. They, yeah. But this is this thing I've
called the gated institutional narrative. It was protected against reality. I mean, I don't know
whether because of your. You have to publish like a coffee table book of your like coinages
and neologisms. I'd rather you make fun of the red scare. That could actually be fun. Yeah.
One of the things that I, and again, this is, this shows you how twisted my soul is, but as a
pastime, I sometimes watch the last days of the Cheshaskas in Romania. Because like right up until
the end. Go on a porn hub and Google the execution. Right. Under Slavic milk. It's very much,
like there's a rally and somehow the rally goes out of control. And order has to be restored
and the cameras have to break the filming of what's going on. And so right at the end,
they've got their shrinking group of loyalists who are still terrified that these people are
going to regain power because that's the way it's always been, but everywhere the spell is broken.
And I guess that's sort of what I saw is that this thing was just, it was an American version of
propaganda that had been so believed that when it started not to be true,
the organs just kept pumping out all of this encouragement that, you know, think
Hillary is going to win. There's no question she's inevitable.
I mean, even now they're running, you know, Kamala's out. So they're really going whole hog with
Buddha judge. But it's yeah, there's a certain lag between the progressive and
Trumpian and between kind of like traditional Democrats and conservatives and the Trump
administration. And I think like Trump uniquely among world leaders possibly in the history of
the world has been able to do this thing. I mean, I wrote a whole essay about it. He was able to do
what the Russian avant-garde and the socialist realists had been trying to do, these two kind of
sequential propaganda like arms of the culture industry in the Soviet Union,
which was maintain, which has achieved a total synthesis of the material and the imaginable
or the imaginative. What, you know, sounds really good. Slow it down, give it to me.
I mean, what, you know, it's kind of like the typical like Soviet avant-garde idea that we were
creating a total synthesis of art in life, like a single kind of art political project.
And Trump alone has been able to do this, though crucially under a very capitalist,
not communist regime, he's been able to marry
what we can imagine and what is materially possible.
Yeah, he's been very ineffective in bringing in
an entire, like there is no theory of Trump, because almost no one either on his side or
in the opposition side actually understands how much method he brings and it's cryptic.
So it looks, you know, there's a lot of indirection. He understands indirection.
He does, but he's got these formulas and I can't tell you how bizarre it is. I mean,
you probably know my friend Sam Harris who was sitting here and we were having this argument
friendly, but an argument nonetheless. I'm going to rub the seat for good luck.
A lot of weird stuff has happened in that chair.
Has Joe Rogan ever sat in the seat?
Not yet.
I have a crush on Joe Rogan. I know he's married, but...
I think everyone does.
Yeah, everybody does. I think that he really could be the guy who could run and win against
Trump.
He does not want me to talk about this because he's got a great life and the fact that everybody
loves him causes people to sort of do weird things in his presence. He just wants to be
a regular guy. He's also, you know, and I don't mind saying this behind his...
Average Joe.
Yeah, yeah.
That he is not.
Yeah, yeah.
I mean, he's running an incredible operation, but whatever it is, there's a lot of method there
because if you think about how difficult it is to turn these shows out and to keep them fresh,
it's almost impossible. So there's a ton of genius going on in Joe's front. He has not come yet,
but we agreed to do each other's podcasts.
What Sam did was to say that he, Sam, thought that Trump was the evil Chauncey Gardener,
that that was his theory of mind, and I thought that is insane. I mean, it's not that...
Sam and I tried to have it out. We can't see each other's point.
I'm not saying that Sam is wrong, but I see so much method to Trump's trolling.
And he doesn't. He thinks that this is all kind of like arbitrary.
Well, I think what he does, another thing I say is that Sam is more focused on honesty,
and I'm more focused on meta-honesty. Trump is not an honest person,
but in a weird way, he is meta-honest.
Right. So he's right when he says he's an honest person because on some level, he is.
Yeah.
Yeah. But what we care about is that, for example, Trump knows the liberal mind is automated.
And as soon as you break through one of its shibboleths, it has an automated,
non-thinking reflexive reaction. And he can map that, and then he can say,
okay, I'll do something that will cause the reflexive reaction, but I will put something in
place, which is totally different so that when you have that reflexive reaction,
you will be shown to be an NPC.
Well, what's that? Am I allowed to look at my phone or is that hilarious tweet?
I will stall for you.
No, that's okay. I don't even have to, but I have to look at my phone every 10 minutes or
else I die. There's that tweet that he had today about Greta Thunberg and how she needs to get
her anger issues under control.
Hilarious. It's so wrong, but it's so...
Okay.
I mean, the man has the mightest touch when it comes to Twitter.
But let's talk about that tweet.
Yeah.
So Greta is this self-described autistic girl who's mad as hell about climate
and who is being, even if she has authenticity to her, there's an entirely inauthentic
complex that has settled her on her, wants to use her the way the World Wildlife Federation used
the panda bear as charismatic megafauna. So in some sense, Greta, the actual human,
is also the charismatic megafauna of a propaganda campaign, which is lying in order
to probably tell the truth. So you've got this real climate emergency.
You should be able to do a truthful campaign, but that can't work. So you have to do a lying
campaign and you use an actual human being as your mascot. So it's like layers and layers of
confusion. And the idea, of course, is that you can't attack an autistic child, particularly a
female one, because she's angry. And so Trump sees opportunity and he's going to go at the layer
where he's going to say she has anger management issues. She should get it under control, go to
an old-fashioned movie with friends. And then he uses chill, Greta, chill, where chill is both
an admonition in terms of chill out, but also a reference to global cooling.
Right. Yeah. And also keep in mind all of this just days after on the heels of the Pamela
Carlin remark about Barron Trump that prompted Melania to tweet in her little baby daddy voice,
do not talk to my minor son that way. I love and I read everything in her sexy baby voice.
Yeah. And so, okay, so.
By the way, I'm so jealous because I can't say anything like that because you have the XX
going. You get away with murder. Yeah. The XX and advanced, what's it called,
like wet brain from my years of being a Russian alcoholic. But it's, you know, okay,
so this woman who's like a state witness for the impeachment proceedings ostensibly insults
Trump's kid and that's not kosher, but he can insult a 16-year-old climate change activist.
This whole thing, so if you look at how complex this troll is,
he is appealing to all of the people who see the manipulation of the real Greta for this
fake campaign, which in my opinion is actually crowding out the real campaign that should be
there because climate is an issue, but it's misportrayed because it has to be done in a
simplistic fashion. You've got like millions of layers there and Trump is finding his support
in the people who see through part of it. Yes. Okay. The other thing is, is that he does have
this thing where he knows that because his own child has been brought in as a combatant,
that he should be allowed to do something like this. You should be able to use somebody else's
child as a human shield. Well, particularly one that is being pushed forward by time as person
of the year. Yes. Oh, God, are we there? Yeah, we're there. Okay. That happened, didn't it?
Oh, I thought Lizzo was the person of the year. I thought it was Greta. Oh, I don't know.
They should just mud wrestle and get it over with. Anyway, go ahead. Okay, so in any event,
that was a perfect version of this isn't Trump the child. This is Trump the master strategist.
It's a trap because the liberal or left-of-center mind just says, whoa,
Trump attacked an autistic girl. And if that was the simplicity of it, they'd be right. And it's
in no way shape or form the simplicity of it. Right. But he's really kind of a genius at doing
that. And it's so sad that there is no avant-garde art. I mean, I said this on my podcast.
Avant-garde art today is the sum of the Trump PR team's social media output
and coupled with the kind of unintentional comic fallout of woke ad campaigns.
Well, for example, you use the word retarded. Yes.
If I were to say, I'm really offended. I have a developmentally challenged relative.
You might respond, oh, I don't think retarded people are retarded.
Right. And they wouldn't understand that it's a comment on an overloaded term.
Right. Well, it's a commentary. It's a critique. It's a mockery of people who
disingenuously oppose the use of the word. It's not actually a commentary or a mockery
of actually stapled people. But you could see that there was a reason. I mean,
as somebody who developmentally struggled in school,
I have a certain... Oh, we're talking. I was like, are you talking about you or me?
Me. It's like, you don't know me. You can't judge me. Anyway, go on.
As somebody who struggled in school, I have some sensitivity around.
Right. Okay.
Having somebody say, if they see my handwriting, people say, are you an axe murderer?
Yeah. What's your handwriting?
Doesn't look like anything. It looks like Jackson Pollock.
It looks like prisoner scrawls. Yeah. I love that Trump's handwriting,
by the way, is very bubbly and girlish. You can almost see him drawing a harp
above the eye that they did in high school. Oh, definitely. Yeah.
And it's very, very like angular and swoopy. Yeah.
But I can see how it started, but then it became like the language police
and it's completely out of control. Yeah. I mean, look, and I object to being... I resent
being policed by people who were guilty of the same crimes just like 18 months ago or whatever.
Yeah. I resent in general, not people, but how the culture, the system, or whatever you want to
call it, has become so callous, so transactional, so interested in meeting out punitive justice,
and so incapable of giving people the benefit of the doubt. There's no large
of spirit. Nobody believes that anybody does anything out of like humor or juisance anymore.
Well, because in many ways, it's become like a scavenger hunt where you have to collect,
do you have the head of a racist? Do you have the head of a misogynist? Do you have the head of
an anti-Semite? And then you get bingo if you call out all of these people. So partially,
it's a reward structure. I think one of the ways which was called out, and I hate that term,
but there you are, really well by Joe, is that he had a... He was... I watched him work up a routine
over several nights on wrestling is gay, and he starts off with wrestling is really gay.
And because gay is an epithet in some cases, people made the association, okay, wrestling is
stupid. That's not what he said. He said wrestling is gay. So they take the bait. This is very
Trumpian, but this is Joe doing it as a comment. And he says, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa, whoa. You
just completed that in your mind. I didn't say what you think I said. And then now you're in
the pitcher plant or the Venus flytrap is closed. And he says, let's think about this. You got two
guys in gold shorts with lace-up booties, rolling around, sweating bodies together. Yeah. If this
isn't gay, what is? Well, when he starts doing it that way, you realize that you took the bait.
You had an automated reaction as opposed to a thoughtful one. And that shows off the comic skill
by laying the trap. I mean, you saw another one of these with Dave Chappelle, where he says,
I'm going to do an impression of the audience, and the audience is insufferable. He says,
I'm going to do an impression. I'm going to ruin your life. And I'm going to make it impossible for
you to earn a living. And like people thought it was Trump. And he says, no, it's you. So the fourth
wall is broken. The finger is pointed. Yeah. I mean, look, and that's on some level. I feel like I
shouldn't be fully confessional because that'll take away some of the allure and the mystique.
But this is what I do with my Twitter. I set things up in such a way that people always
inevitably take the bait. Those people don't watch this program. Don't worry.
Yeah, they don't. Yeah. And this is true. And the thing that that's so kind of,
it's eternally amusing and yet disheartening. My only goal now that I'm like a glass of red
deep is to get people to think and to draw their own conclusions. But when they do think,
this is why, you know, democracy on some level isn't possible. When they do,
now we're getting into the ASMR portion. Now this sounds like my podcast, we're like pouring,
popping bottles, pouring wine. I'm going to light up in this studio, just kidding.
But when people do kind of get their little engines a-turning, they always somehow, or the
people that I'm used to dealing with at any rate, always somehow draw the worst possible least
mutually flattering conclusion that speaks volumes about where the culture at large is at.
But when you look at yourself metacognitively, like I have this thing that I call the robot,
which is the thing that I observe making these automated decisions. And then I have another
thing I call the metacognitive perch, where I watch my robotic self, and I'm just horrified
by what it makes, how it conducts itself. I see you as having this distance as an intrinsic
part of your personality and the person I'm talking to is really sitting on the metacognitive
perch. Yeah, I mean, but this is the kind of blessing and burden of being a dysfunctional,
traumatized Russian person. It sucks being Russian. What are you talking about?
No, you see the chessboard, which is a, it's more of a burden than it is a blessing, because
it makes life very difficult to live. Say more. I sympathize with people like Brett Easton Ellis
and Michelle Welbeck, who are my two favorite novelists. People laugh because I'm not reading
like Flo Bear or Balzac, but because they have this metacognitive perch. Their books are about
meta-commentary. It's social commentary disguised as fiction, which to me is kind of the most
elite form of writing. Well, Brett, you know, so Brett sat in your chair and we talked about this
issue that I had accused him of privatizing our mutual childhood since we came from the same milieu.
And he talked about the importance of the narrator, I guess, Clay in less than zero,
who's detached from the horrors of what he's seeing. He's weirdly drawn just the way we are to
look at an auto accident, but he's also just clinically kind of detailing, well, this is
what happened. And somehow I brought up Joan Didion in that session and he confessed that this
was his favorite author. And I think about her detachment where she was watching the sort of
60s debauchery and he was watching the 70s debauchery. And just the sense of having a traditional
sensibility, viewing the destruction of traditional, you can see that this is a very long unraveling
of the fabric of society. Yeah. And that's, I mean, that's my beef with all these critiques of
Wellbeck, right? The primary one being that he's kind of a nihilist and a misogynist.
And in my mind, especially with this new book, Serotonin, which I don't know if you've read,
but if you haven't, you should read it. It's a giant eulogy for the decline
of Western civilization and the moral failure of liberal consensus. But the main question,
the kind of principle organizing theme of his work in my mind has always been,
is love possible under advanced capitalism? What kind of nihilist is it that concerns
himself with the question as meaningful and significant as the possibility of the question
of love? Why do you think that comes up? In order for that to book to be interesting,
that question has to be interesting. What makes that question interesting?
Whether love is possible under advanced capitalism? Well, if I said, is transportation
by automobile possible under advanced capitalism, it wouldn't be an interesting question.
So why is it even a question, is love possible? Because I think a vast kind of significant
majority of people, at least people who are kind of inoculated into some sort of intellectual
society or professional society, professional class, believe that it's not or suspect that it's
not. But what is it? For example, if I were to ask you, let's go ahead.
I suspect that they actually want it to be true that love is not possible under advanced capitalism,
because then that offloads their own say in the matter, their own responsibility
to the system or whatever. If I asked our novels possible to read,
like our great novels possible to read in the age of Twitter?
Sure. Yeah, they're possible to read. I don't know that they're possible to write.
Or to feel. I'm not positive that they are. Many of us have noticed a bizarre inability
to plunge into a book. We think of ourselves as book people,
but we feel that our brains have been rewired much the way porn has changed the way in which
we find our lovers. I think that Twitter has changed the way we find our novels.
Right. On some level, yeah. I mean, there's no longer a need or I don't know about a desire,
but there's no longer kind of a necessity for a long, for a work of art that has a long form
expository narrative structure. I totally disagree.
You think that, I mean, I think most people don't sense that.
Television got so weirdly good at it, nobody was expecting that.
Right. But TV came out of nowhere. Modern TV has longer narrative arcs than any movie.
Yes, because the movie industry was completely eroded, right?
Because the Sopranos and Mad Men and all that figured out something we didn't understand.
Yeah, but I think TV is also like watching is meaningfully different from reading.
Well, I guess what I'm trying to say is that
if you think about this from an evolutionary perspective, there's kind of an adaptive landscape
for various forms of memetic dissemination of story narrative information.
And some of them have gotten terrible, but like if you looked at 1970s television,
I went back to look at the love boat from my youth. It's unwatchable.
Right. I can imagine.
But Game of Thrones is weirdly strangely compelling.
Yes, it is, yeah.
And the way in which movies, like there was just this transfer of wealth from cinema into the
idiot box. And that's fascinating because everything else tells us, or long form podcasting,
is a very strange parallel structure. Where are attention spans getting really long?
They're getting long somewhere.
Somewhere, yeah. It's being transferred. I mean, you know, I had this thought earlier today in my
hungover state where it dawned on me. I had a little bit of a kind of like a feminine imposter
syndrome moment. And I was like, this is ridiculous. So I'm like going on this guy's podcast. I'm
some hostess from Bushwick, you know, and then I thought, yeah. And I was like, you know,
that's a retarded, it's gay, whatever. It's all this kind of bevy of ridiculous words.
It's like completely.
By the way, to all the advertisers who just left the program, it's been a great run.
Yeah. But then I think about it and I
see that with podcasting, there is the possibility of a revival of the era of the public intellectual.
Which is something that people crave also. Like the new, as undignified as it sounds,
the new class of like podcasting personas are possibly, will possibly be able to
revive something like that image or social role, which is important, I think.
Well, I think you could also look at this a little bit like William Tell
or, you know, Philip Petit walking the tightrope between the Twin Towers.
Part of what makes long-form podcasting exciting is the idea that we could screw up at any moment
and destroy our names and reputations. And I think that that-
Should I do it for you now? I can.
We started.
Yeah, I'm a little wind up now.
Is that right?
Yeah, yeah.
That, well, but you see, you're a vice-signal.
Uh-huh. You said this to me during our power lunch. You have to re-
I say this to the audience with no hint of sarcasm. I really like when
men mansplain things to me. I think that it's fun and cool.
So vice-signaling, I think more people are talking about it now, but I originally
started talking about it because it came out of the theory for me of contract bridge,
where you have to say what it is you're going to do, and then you're judged by whether or
not you accomplished that, which you said you were going to do. So what I view modern society
as being is a game in which you're fitted with a white suit that you did not ask for.
And then the key question is, do you keep it clean or does it become soiled?
Okay. Well, my first belief is you're crazy to accept a white suit because that's not going
to work out. Right. So I picked Dan Bilzerian as my example and your fellow Armenian.
Another fellow Armenian, yeah. So his thing is guns, drugs, and automatic weapon.
And that's in money. Don't forget the hose. Sorry, guns. It's the wine. Girls, guns,
and drugs, and money. Those are his four big things. You can't embarrass him by saying,
hey, you just took a bunch of chicks out into the desert and gave them automatic weapons after you
coped them up or gave them weed because like, yes, that's my business model. And as a result,
there's no industry trying to take down Dan Bilzerian. Right. I mean, I think I said this
to you. I don't remember because I was wind up then too. I said, you know, it's the same thing
with somebody like Howard Stern or Donald Trump. They never promise to respect women,
so they can't get taken down for not respecting women. Meanwhile, all these guys who are playing
like the virtue game get at least, they at least get their reputation.
The two cases that you talked about, Howard Stern's original gambit was that he wanted to
be lashed to the mast and be surrounded by TNA and just as much cleavage as was possible,
and then he would do nothing. And so that was his game, was that he was Ulysses.
And so it was a promise, and he was married throughout, and then his wife would call up
while he was surrounded by temptation. In the case of Bilzerian, he's got a different promise.
The promise is, I will not lie to you and you will not lie to me. I'm not telling you that you
have to be a monogamous with me. I'm not telling you any one of a number of things.
I will be straight with you. You will be straight with me, and if we can't have honesty,
then you have to leave. So those are incredibly weird gambits. You have to give both of these men
their due. They're very unusual. Right. Or socially engineering something.
Well, my favorite Dan Bilzerian post on Instagram is he's there, I think, with no shirt because
he's also kind of a confection. He serves himself up as a snack. And he's reaching out to this woman
who's more clothed than he is to come up a step somewhere in Greece. And the caption is,
come with me, I'll ruin your life, but you'll have fun. And I really think that's his proposition.
Yeah, I really have to hand it to Armenian men because they alone among men are just as vain as
women. Are they? Yeah, they really like to objectify themselves. Well, but you see, in my opinion,
women are really the males of the human species because as the adorn, as the adorn gender,
I don't know, take it seriously. You are now echoing a thesis proposed by this woman,
Andrea Long-Tru, who's like a transgender writer, who was also echoing Valerie Solanis,
who has the same hypothesis. It's interesting to hear Eric, you say Weinstein.
Weinstein. I think the power move, the power move, Eric, I may say so is to have Harvey
in this chair. No. No, you can't.
No. Well, no, I mean, there are people who have been canceled who I'm interested in.
And there are people who have been canceled that I'm perfectly happy that they are canceled.
And this is part of my problem, which is that, well, I mean, this is a difference between us,
which is the way I view it is that you have accepted the game, but you're going to behave
really badly within it. I haven't accepted the game. I've rejected the game. And
I understand the motivations for how this woke stuff got started. And I'm sympathetic with them
to a point. And I'm completely unsympathetic with how non-self-reflective and shallow and mean-spirited
it is while pretending that it cares. And I'm going to carry that tension. So you and I are
on slightly different missions. Yeah, yeah. You're going to carry the tension of...
I'm okay being earnest. My answer to your Nietzsche point is around you. So for example,
this is a three-dimensional projection of a four-dimensional convex polytope.
Okay. And I find it transcendent. So I'm holding up, what is it? It's a 120 cell.
It's just the name of the convex polytope, which is a generalization of the dodecahedron
to four-dimensional space. And you have one over there that's the 24 cell, which is the unique
one that doesn't correspond to one of the platonic solids. I look at that one by you,
and I just marvel at it. And I think about it the way people think about
like seraphim. It's like, I don't have religion in my life at the same level that my ancestors
did. But I have the wonder of mathematics and physics and biology that plugs the same religion
shaped hole in my soul. And so that's how I've solved the Nietzsche problem. That's why I remain
earnest, much to the chagrin of some of my listeners. I know, but I actually think that
we're fundamentally at the end of the day on the same page about this. I think we're very close
to being. And I think this is one of the reasons why I covertly brought up your father,
because this, I think that the Jewish and the Soviet and the Armenian,
you know, all of these things, these are very old tradition that feel very deeply,
and they were naked about caring. Right. And I guess we're actually, we're back to where we
started improv baby. But the, there's this idea, I think the kind of in America, there's this very
reductive idea of like white people, right? White people, there's, there are all these different
non-white ethnicities and cultures, but white people are a singular block.
Through the magic of this country only. Right. But I've, but you know, I mean,
I don't know if you have the similar kind of experience. I've always felt, for example,
very alienated from Nordic non-Jewish whites, right? Or just to give you an example. Right.
I don't, you know, have any beef with them, but those people are not my people on some level.
You think that, and then one of my largest constituencies abroad are Sweden and Norway.
Your demos. Yeah.
That makes sense, because they're also actually very earnest people.
And they're also weirdly having their idealism that has worked very well on this. In fact,
trotted out by the left abused against them so that they are now starting to feel like WTF.
Why can't we talk about some of the tensions that we're experiencing? Like there is something
that it means to be Swedish or Norwegian or Icelandic. Right.
And to be told, well, this, your identity is just that you're European. And even that is only
like this whole question about software nationalism versus hardware nationalism.
You have lots of people in the UK, for example, from South Asia who by going through the Oxbridge
system sound entirely like the British upper crust. Exactly. Yeah.
And further, sometimes they come from the high castes that the British favored working with
in India, Pakistan. Now the idea that enlightenment ideas or Anglo-Saxon ideas can run on any
hardware. It's like bootcamp where you've got an Apple machine that's running windows.
I don't really care too much about the hardware. I care a great deal about the software.
And the idea that everybody of European descent or who are interested in European cultures
should apologize. I'm having none of this. I mean, there's so much music and science and
architecture and all the terrible things that happen too. I will not have that watered down.
That's an authentic experience. So the thing that bothers me about it is, and this is another one
of my riffs, you have this problem with vanilla, where vanilla has two meanings. One is boring,
flavorless, bland. And the other is like the most flavorful of spices and flavorings and
tastes. And somehow they're both vanilla. Well, white is the same thing. White is the most bland,
boring. It's like a canvas that has been gessoed, but not painted upon. On the other hand, if you
look at European culture, is there anything richer and spicier and more intricate and interesting?
And somehow our minds are just bananas over these two.
Yeah, I mean, it's, but it's, it's always, it's very offensively reductive on a way that personally
strikes me because it's kind of the only thing keeping me from being, becoming like a typical
Wellbeckian protagonist or one of these like horrible millennial girl bosses who's fundamentally
empty inside is a great deal of kind of like honor and respect that I feel for my ancestors
and the cultural kind of the amniotic fluid that we all came out of.
Well, but it's worse. I mean, you're in a very funny position. You are culturally,
like your podcast is called Red Scare. And you are culturally very
Russian, Soviet, Jewish, Armenian. But if you really look at it, you can see that it's fading.
And you're not going to have grandchildren that relate to you.
Yeah. And that's, that's really a terrifying thing. And it's actually a terrifying thing on
two levels because right, A, you're not going to have grandchildren who relate to you on like a
practicable level, but B, to even acknowledge that you want grandchildren to relate to you
kind of flies in the face of this very leftist doxy that a culture is relevant. And it makes
me think of like, you know, the idea of narcissism that somebody like lash was so
kind of brilliant at identifying, diagnosing. And at the time he was writing in the 60s and 70s,
he billed it as kind of the generational pathology of our time, the kind of liberated persona.
But even at that time, narcissism was still at the very least a system of positive affinities.
So you identified through affinity, right? Originally, maybe you identified with your
ethnicity or your religion. And then later you came to identify with your lifestyle markers,
you know, you did yoga or composting or recycling or whatever. And gradually over time, that's yielded
to kind of a negative narcissism where people at large identify with their oppression and their
adversity. But Russians identify with their oppression and their adversity in a very strong
way that doesn't look anything like what we're doing in the US. Okay, see, I've never heard
this one before. Oh, really? Yeah. I just thought we were kind of miserable melancholic people.
I think there's a general kind of, you know, on the parable of the great Russian ballerina
said that the Russian soul is marked by melancholy. Yeah. Yeah. I think that it's
it's, well, you know, the it's very interesting. When I had Gary Kasparov on the program,
he, there were some very odd moments. So I tried to do a, an intro in Russian where I said that
he was unclear that he was, if he was Gary Kasparov or Gary Weinstein, because that was his
first name, and he immediately just didn't bite on it. Yeah. I'm jealous that you didn't do the
Russian language intro for me. Really? You know, my chop liver, just kidding. No, go on. Okay. Well,
I felt that in order, well, I mean, actually, I didn't even talk about it. Almost no one reacted
to it. Yeah, yeah. One of my hopes was for the program was to start personalizing it to all
of the cultures that I care the most about. And so I did this thing about
Astroshnidveriakrivaetsya, because in the Moscow subways and the subways of other cities,
there's this thing which says, you know, warning doors are closing. The next stop Sladiusha
Stanza, Yidropark, you know, that thing. I always thought it'd be cool that the portal was like
the Moscow doors opening and closing. And he just didn't react at all to it. The one weird thing
where there was like a shiver of recognition was I talked about the Russian satirical magazine
Crocodile and how dissent and irreverence existed within the Soviet Union, but in this very
specified way so that there was a valve to let things to let off steam. And it wasn't the American
picture where nobody could say anything at any time because that would never work. The Russian
system was much more sophisticated. And that was the one moment at which he sort of gave me a little
bit of a nod like, wow, you really know your stuff. And the thing is, it's very hard for an American
to connect to the broad Slavic soul. Yeah. And for us to connect to the broad American soul,
I think I said this to you, you know, the kind of idea that Russians are basically
optimists masquerading as cynics and Americans are cynics masquerading as optimists. I mean,
that's like broadly on some level like stereotypically true. And I also remember saying that
Russians unlike Americans, you know, if you have a classroom of American kids and you ask them like
who's done X or who is why the hands shoot up because in America, it's much less dangerous
historically to identify yourself and Russians are in the business of indirection, misdirection,
non identification, because it was at some point a political problem that had a kind of material
real world consequences, but has been handed down to successive generations as a behavioral
quirk that's actually really problematic if you're trying to have like a, you know, a romantic
relationship with like an American man, for example. But yeah, work is very weird, damaged
people. I mean, I said this, I tweeted about this, that conversation with Kasparov was really weird,
because it was like an insight into all of my communication impasses with American people.
Say more about that. Well, and to the degree that I don't like to disclose or identify myself.
Right. I like to misdirect by saying a great deal of stuff that seems kind of superficially very
confessional and personal, but actually nobody knows anything about me. People know a lot more
about you than you think they know about me. Yeah, but only through kind of a nonverbal or
subconscious means. I think that's right. Yeah, not through anything that exists on the verbal
register. Well, but I think that, you know, I don't know how many podcasts you've done like this.
Probably none. Probably none. And I do think that you're going to find that your mystique
coexists with your revelation. They're not as rivalrous as you might imagine.
Yeah, that's possibly a good point, but I think like...
But what did you hear in the cast, like, so you listened to that podcast?
Yeah. Well, because we famously tried to talk over each other. He's very forceful.
I would like to think that I've been far less forceful with you than I was with him.
Yeah, but I'm also easier to get along with. Well, I view you as potentially more dangerous.
Yeah, but that's only because I'm a woman. Because Sparov and I have the same
ethnic breakdown, basically, which in Russia is called Grimuche Smith.
Grimuche Smith. Like explosive mixture. So it's like...
A binary weapon that when combined... It's a dynamite.
When Armenians and Jews join forces in a single person, it's basically
an incredibly difficult, combative, categorical personality. And I think that's probably what
he is. I mean, I don't know a ton about him, but I'm kind of obviously interested because...
He's cheated of his meaning because there's something about the fact that Putin, to him,
is this unrecognized master menace that we're running a clown show while the fate of the world
spins out of control. He has very much of a cold... I mean, I have much more of a cold war
overlay in my mind than most of my contemporaries and certainly than my millennial audience.
I can't believe that we have nuclear weapons that they haven't been used in a long time
and that we imagine that this will go on forever.
And that they're laying kind of dormant for now. I mean, but this brings me back to the whole
concept of Stov, which dovetails very nicely with the idea of hypernormalization, which
the documentarian Adam Curtis took the title for his famous documentary from this term,
which was coined by this guy, Alexei Yurchuk, who's an anthropology professor who did a lot of
research on Stov with this guy, Dominic Boyer, a fellow anthropologist.
And I guess the basic principle of hypernormalization, as I understand it in my female brain,
is that there was kind of an elite guild of experts, technologists, financiers,
politicians who kind of, if not conspired, then agreed to
invent kind of a fake world at the top of the real world that we inhabit,
because the real world had grown so complicated that they had to model it in simplified terms.
It's almost like fastbender's world on a wire where you're living in like a
successive, a nesting doll of like successive simulation.
And I forgot where we were going with this, but we now live in this kind of like hyper
trophyed, hyperreal reality where you said to me, it's like very few people can see that they're
part of the simulation. I don't know if I actually agree with that, because I'd like to think that
people are a lot smarter than we give them credit for. Well, see, I don't think it comes
down to smart, I think it comes down to our self-blinding. Yeah. And so one of the reasons I
was asking you what you had heard in the Gary Kasparov podcast was I wasn't sure what happened
during it. I think that he, I mean, I don't know if you want me to psychoanalyze, this is like a
very meta podcasting. We've gone pretty meta. Yeah, I think that he was deflecting your earnest
attempts, mutual identification, which is like the basis of all kinds of bonds, right? I'm so excited
right when I meet kind of a fellow traveler in any capacity itself. You find yourself in the
area. Yeah, and I told you this during our lunch, I was like, oh my god, we're like, you know,
relatives, right? There's something very familiar. Like I've known you for forever and I've met you
twice. Yeah, and there's something very familiar in meeting other people from a kind of a similar
cultural background. And I tend to collect them. And you know, if that's racist, let me know.
It's very racist. But so I think the Russian tendency, which I've tried to, for example,
minimize, mitigate in myself to adapt better to American society is to deflect any such
attempts and to kind of not to not give anybody an inch to not let anybody get to know you
and to stay kind of distant. Are you open to being the unreliable narrator?
I'm not sure what that question means. Well, sometimes like, I forget, maybe if Edgar
Enpo's telltale heart where you're telling a story about the self and the story reveals
something to the audience, maybe Captain Quig in the Cain Mutant, you would be a better example.
We're just talking about the strawberries and the men and really he's discussing his own paranoia
in a way that's leaking out into the testimony he's giving. So what I see with you is
that you are Russian post-Soviet enough, but that you're very worried that it's not really
a sustaining quality in this homogenizing sea. Like your mother, you can see there's no way she
can get away from it. I have never met the woman, but I can feel her presence as being intrinsically
Soviet. And your podcast is called Red Scare, but first of all, that's an
invocation of like the 1950s or earlier. Yeah, and menstruation.
And menstruation and the thong and there's a tramp stamp. And you know, there's this whole
aspect of you're worried that you can't actually keep it together. You can't hold the information
back. You can't keep the identification with Eastern Europe because it's starting to fray.
Yeah, on some level, but also on another level, I feel kind of like a complete dinosaur.
I'm relatively young. I'm youngish, but I feel like that sometimes I feel kind of insane, right?
Because I'm the only one who has in my circle, for example, has kind of an attachment to certain
religious or ethnic cult. I took an Ivy League admission at the University of Pennsylvania.
And when everyone else went into investment banking or law or medicine, I went to math
grad school, like your father, because there was something ancient about and respectable about it.
Well, but in the respectable in the sense of like a Jewish concept, it was a very Jewish and
self-destructive thing to do to take this fantastic opportunity and say, okay, I'm going to try to
achieve something for all eternity that seven people are really going to deeply understand
something like that. And there is an aspect to this, which is this is what animates Star Wars.
The idea that Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda mysteriously survive. I mean, I'm not a fan of the Star Wars
pictures that are supposed to come chronologically early, but there is one scene which is precious
to me where the emperor says, execute order 66 and all the Jedi are killed, except two,
one of which lives by accident. That's Obi-Wan Kenobi and Yoda intuits,
shit, you know, this is the genocide and I'm going to be all that's left. So you are that thing that
carries the seat. Yeah. That's a huge responsibility. That's why you have a podcast, but it's also the
case that you're corroding in this extremely alkaline environment. That's like really beautiful
and poetic and also a horrifying reality to ponder. But yeah, it's... First of all,
it's a gift to a Russian if I gave you a horrifying tragic mission. Yeah, we'll eat it right up. Yeah.
But look, I remember Camille Poglia, I think I'm supposed to say Polly really kind of
changed my thinking on the Star Wars franchise, which I've always thought to be kind of like
the nail in the coffin of the golden age of American cinema. I'll say more, I really want to hear
this. You know, it was kind of like, it really opened the door. It paved the way for these mega
franchises, the marvelization, the dignification of film. And her feeling about it was that it was
a kind of epic, eternal legend, saga story that was fulfilled or produced by means of the most
cutting edge technology and that this is where art resides now in kind of the technological
capacity of the Hollywood industry. Because transcendence is difficult to manufacture. And
when you first see what a technology can do, the matrix would be an excellent
other example to discuss. In that case, and I'm very partial to giving this example,
there were multiple innovations. There was the wire work, there was bullet time with using still
and moving camera images and interplaying between them. And then there was CGI. And so the mind was
never sure what it was seeing. And so you devote extra cognitive resources to the legend and
archetype that's being explored when you're opened by transcendence. And that's why we litter the
set, for example, with Klein bottles often, because you know, to have to have a glassware from the
fourth dimension that defies the laws of inside and out opens people up to, well, what are these
people going to be discussing? Is this a way out? Because I think everybody wants escape.
Yes. And I think that if you go back to our Jewish tradition, the entire concept of like,
what is the epic that we tell every year is our Star Wars. It's the Passover epic of the Jews
escaping. Now is the time when we understand why we tell that story, because we need to get out of
here. Yeah, I think the kind of flattering, uplifting version is escape. I think the cynical,
not so flattering version is offloading your responsibility in the way that somebody like
Eric Frome described, foisting the responsibility for your life onto another.
Can I ask you sort of a final set of questions before I invite you back to the podcast when
you're next in LA? I hope you'll move here. I want to move here. It's so horrible. I'm
meant to be an Armenian juice slut who hangs out at the Glendale Galleria. I'm not a New York
girl. Anyway, go ahead. I'm going to pass on that one. Where are we in gender space? I have the
feeling that men and women of a heterosexual mindset needed to put their own mask on before
helping everybody who was trying something different. I like that. That's like the plane
and out the oxygen mask. Yeah. That's right. Yeah. And then at the moment, we're trying to like solve
12 million things that have all been lumped under trans. And I always give the analogy that
strokes occur from excessive clotting and thinning. So you can't say something about
strokes in general because you don't know which type of stroke. So we don't know which type of
trans. But if you just say, look, okay, we've got all these things about polyamory and bisexuality,
homosexuality, non-binary relations, et cetera. Very complicated. Let's assume we have the best
of intentions to everybody as a soul. We are now neglecting male, female, heterosexual,
procreative relationships. It's like an afterthought. We got to do something where our concerns for
all of these other variations don't obliterate the major workhorse of societal perpetuation.
What are your thoughts? Well, what's the question? The question is,
are we getting dragged into a world in which we can't focus on the fact that the major
workhorse of perpetuation needs its own care? Like, for example, if you and I both opt in
to heterosexual, heteronormative, cisgender, et cetera ideas, we can't really continue to focus
on our subset of people because immediately the point is, well, you just excluded 12,000 other
categories. I see you as trying to- Just excluded .01. Well, but I see what you're trying to do in
some sense. Yeah. As reestablishing feminine mystique. Is that a fair comment? Yeah, absolutely.
What do you see the role of mystique being in heterosexuality?
The role of mystique. That's a good question. You see, I'm so instinctive and non-intellectual
on some level that I don't even think about this. I think the app, I would answer it in the negative
way. I think that the absence of mystique kills libidinal energy. Absolutely. You can't be taken
seriously as a woman if you disclose everything about yourself, if you publish naked photos of
yourself at all times. I mean, that's a statement of fact, not of value. But we used to, for example,
teach women to send mixed messages. Right. And we used to teach men and women to play games.
Mm-hmm. And now, increasingly, there's a sort of doctor-ruthification of male-female relations,
which is like, people should learn how to communicate, be direct, say everything that you
want. Save sex, affirmative consent. All these things that- Has anyone ever achieved enthusiastic
consent? Right. I know who, like, who are these people? Like, you pull out an iPad when you-
can I touch your breast? What's the- It's a really weird- I want you so much we should call our lawyers
immediately. Yeah, yeah. And sign an NDA, an NDA. It's like, every time a Buddha judge has sex with
his husband, he signs an NDA. But it's maddening because the whole allure of sex is precisely
the unsafe, the unconsensual. I'm not talking, obviously, about rape or coercion,
but women like mixed messages. They like giving them, they like receiving them,
because it's correct that they, on some level, don't know what they want. Not because they're
stupid or weak, but because it's an evolving communicative process that unfolds-
Do you know me well enough to order for me? Yeah, right.
Like, maybe I would do a slightly better job of choosing my dish, but if you'd do 90% as good
as I would have done ordering my dish, and you can show me that you actually grasp me.
Yeah, not only do you get to enjoy the benefit of having a dish that you wanted, but you get to
enjoy kind of the meta-benefit of knowing that your partner knows you. I got in trouble for a
tweet where I said that I like when my boyfriends order food for me. That's so hot. I know it's so
hot. Why would any woman not want that? Well, I think because, I can answer that from the guy's
perspective, we've all thought we knew somebody well enough, and we ordered just exactly the
wrong thing, which shows that we have no concept. We think we're on top of it. We're just not.
Yeah, okay, look, there's some baked in disappointment, the potential disappointment.
Well, remember the Aziz Ansari thing where, like, he didn't understand which wine she wanted,
and that was cause for you to give her the word. Yeah, for her to write a, yeah, meat to medium,
which it was a Times expose, right? That was babe.net. But the key point would be that in order
to handle certain edge cases, we deranged the general case. The world's most predatory men
have to be kept away from the world's least agentic females. So in order to handle that case,
we gave nuclear weapons. I think Caitlin Flanagan had a beautiful observation.
I love Caitlin Flanagan, yeah. I can't get over her.
Yeah, she's great.
She's great.
The one that got away anyway.
Anyway, she said something to me to the effect of what's new is that all sexuality
proceeds on exclusively female terms. The idea being that men have to be completely non-agentic
because whatever the woman says happened or should happen is the law of the land.
And this is precisely what women don't want. It's almost like a prisoner's dilemma type situation
where you end up with the most suboptimal outcome.
If you're guard against the thing that you fear the most, you'll never get the thing that you
want the most.
Right, yeah. And it's a really kind of like bleak thing because no heteronormative women
want a man who lacks agency. I mean, you said this to me, women want, they don't want a guy
who's an asshole. They want somebody who's credible and the easiest, shortest way to
display that is by, yeah, being an asshole.
This is a reference to a conversation we were having in which I claimed that
many men learn a terrible lesson, which is women want you to be an asshole.
And the real lesson is women do not want to be told how beautiful and brilliant and this and
that they are without some of that energy being spent on credibility.
Yeah, without some of it accruing into reliable, dependable material action.
Well, but sometimes you have to say, you look very nice. It's not my favorite dress.
But, and that sounds a little non-positive, but it goes a long way to saying, okay, I'm
actually getting real feedback.
Are you describing the art of neg? You have to nag a little.
No, I'm saying that that happens naturally. Negging is where you actually create a kind
of a hole in the person solely. No, it's exactly not negging.
This is the thing. I mean, it's a beautiful example. It's a miscommunication.
But in the process of giving somebody, you can give somebody very positive, constructive feedback.
And the slightest whisper of that wasn't exactly my favorite thing will be heard as a shout
because that's how we human beings process criticism.
And so you have to spend some, people would be much rather that you spend some of your time
building credibility so that whatever you do say that's positive is actually a credible
indicator of something because traditionally the key question is, very often what women
are asking is, is there something you find in me that is so rare that it would outweigh
all other temptations? And can you please tell me a story in which that's true?
The answer is no, ladies. The answer is no. Run for the hills. I'm kidding. I'm just being
a sarcastic little bitch, but... Well, don't do that, man.
Why not?
I don't know. I mean, if it's your shtick, but I do think that there's some aspect to this where
we have to struggle with this for... Like you're an older millennial.
Yeah. I'm an elder millennial.
You're an elder millennial.
Yeah. The guys in the studio are going to get snacks or so tired. They're enough of this.
I'm an elder millennial, Ron.
I do think that in part, you probably knew more life before the apps.
That's going to be a big transitional issue.
Well, it's going to be a huge issue. I don't know what's going to happen to the next generation
after me. I'm afraid for them. I mourn for them because they have no... I mean, all social
relations, it's like going back to those empathy templates that I was talking about.
All social relations and on some level, particularly sexual relations have become
very Aspergian. They've become autistic. People can't read nuance and they are completely incapable
then of the art of seduction. And so everything operates according to templates and consent form.
Phone trees.
Yeah. And it's terrifying because I think it's not just women who desire credibility.
What each sex desires from the other is credibility manifested in different ways.
I made this joke. I started seeing a shrink recently.
You went there?
I went there because I guess my Jewish side finally overwhelmed my Russian side that's
like profoundly hostile and suspicious of therapy. I did it primarily to appease my
boyfriend, but that's another story. And it occurred to me. It dawned on me during the
process of seeing the shrink. It's like the old psychoanalytic concept of transference.
I mean, everybody does, right? And I think transference for men is saying...
Oh, I saw this. This was wicked.
What?
The tweet you're about to quote.
You know, transference for men is telling the shrink, I want to fuck you. Transference for
women is asking the shrink, do you want to fuck me? And semantically, it's a slightly different
configuration, but it comes down to the same thing. And it's like that John Berger quote that I
quote all the time, ad nauseam to the point that it's become annoying and my friends won't speak
to me because it's all I do is quote this quote all day. Men watch, women watch themselves
being watched. That's the nature, right? The kind of old traditional basis of female or male versus
female sexual arousal, right? You said this to me, which I thought was very astute. I've never
heard anybody else put it this way. Yeah, we've both come to some version of this independently.
Of the same thing. Yeah. It's men are aroused by the woman, the presence of the woman.
Women are aroused by the kind of picture of themselves arousing the man.
Or that the man in some ways metaphorically acts as a mirror and the better the man,
the better the quality and the more flattering the quality of the reflection.
And that's not to say that women are completely indifferent to male looks and the like, but that
to an enormous extent, we've demonized narcissism when in fact we find narcissism
to be an extremely beautiful trait in a future spouse as men.
And this is a very important point too, because I'm very much a critic of like kind of narcissism
as a generational pathology, but that I'm critical specifically of kind of the
maladjusted pathological manifestations. Well, the maladaptive version.
That doesn't attach properly to the partner. Yeah, not the positive kind of credible.
And this was really wonderfully, you know, sometimes I feel so awful about myself because
I misjudged the situation. I'm so used to like people and ideas being kind of low density and
low nutrition and I'm kind of starved for stimulation in that way. And sometimes I'll read
or see something that I find really remarkable. And I always have to ask myself the question,
like, Hey, like, have my standards plummeted so much? Or have I grown more tolerant? Which
at the end of the day is the same question. But there was a very viral short story on the New York
or by this woman, Kristen Rupenian, also an Armenian, by the way, who it was called cat person.
And in it, she describes kind of a classic me too type situation where a young college co-ed
gets into a relationship with like a kind of older washed up 38 year old guy. And there's
a say older and 38. Well, for her, because she's like 21. It's okay. I think I think I think a
man. Okay, look, don't backpedal. I'm not backpedaling. I think kind of peak manhood is 35 to,
let's say 55, right? That's a good window. That's when the male race. I'll give you a shovel and
you can try to dig yourself out of the hole. Yeah, I'll dig my own grave. That's what I really want.
I'm like, you know, that guy fundamentally identify with the Russian guy and the sopranos and the
Pine Barons episode. Oh my gosh, you don't even get it. It's fantastic. But basically,
Rupenian, she has, she crafts this whole sex scene where this girl is like having sex with
this guy that she finds profoundly unattractive and undesirable. But what gets her off at the end
of the day is her imagining his arousal or her like new bile young body writhing around for him.
And I thought that that was like a really brilliant glitch that was a shock that like,
you know, a liberal paper of record would publish. It's very odd what gets through these
things. I watched your description of the wasted opportunity of sexualizing stewardesses
where everyone has the sense of, oh my God, you know, Pan Am stewardesses in the 60s.
It's a universal kind of weird beauty norm, but there's now this very strong sense of like,
and wasn't that horrible. And so the sort of the two dimensional fantasy of coffee tea or me
versus the abject horror of, okay, well, you weren't allowed to compete on price because
of the regulation of the airways. And so people competed on the sexualization of the flight
crews. And then some of the flight crews were like actually being oppressed and some of them
were self sexualizing like people do on Instagram because they wanted the attention.
And there's no language to pull these things apart.
Well, as usual, people missed the point of that tweet, which was not about stewardesses. They
made it into a labor issue because increasingly the culture has kind of dried up so much that
people increasingly see things through the lens of politics. That tweet wasn't about labor at all.
It was actually kind of a very rather subjective indictment of the way that American women behave
relative to women elsewhere. Women in Italy, in Thailand, in Spain, in Brazil, in the Middle East
understand that their unofficial power is garnered through indirection, as you say. American women
understand no such thing. I mean, Camille Poglio again has been beating this drum for decades now.
So this had nothing to do with it. It wasn't like a labor...
But it isn't, it isn't. I mean, this is the very difficult thing coming from an American context,
which is that very often the cultivation of exclusively womanly power
took place because women did not have alternate options. And sometimes we've gone too far in
American culture by giving away power that is entirely functional. So you and I both discussed
having economics and mathematics in our background. The brilliance of Sylvia Nasser's book, A Beautiful
Mind, I did not see the film. And... You haven't seen the film? No, I refuse. We'll get back to that
in a minute, but... Okay. Yeah. And then we talked about Rebecca Goldstein's The Mind-Body Problem.
In both of these books, you see this very strong hand of the community of wives of the mostly
male mathematicians and economists directing the field, who should collaborate with who,
who should make up with who, who's having a spat, who should be hired, who should be invited to the
conference. And that kind of... There's a question about when women stopped wanting that role in
the United States context. No one took the role over. And so it was like a load-bearing role that
was now vacant. There are ways in which I think it's terrible that nobody's fulfilling that role.
And there's a ways in which I think it's terrible that women were expected to fulfill that role,
having now seen fantastic contributions in mathematics, you know, of people
like Karen Ulunbeck or Lisa Jeffery, that any one of a number of female mathematicians who've
put structural things in our world that I can't live without. And so I think that there's a really
interesting and rich conversation about how much power from the old ways should be retained
and how much of it should be seated so that more standard professional accomplishment
can occur. And because we're having this very simplistic conversation, we're not getting to
the really rich conversation, which is what should be the renegotiation of male and female roles
around. It shouldn't be that women are trying to be a substitute copy of men.
On the other hand, it can't really go back to women hold power.
Barefoot and pregnant.
Well, I wouldn't say that. No, it's also the terrifying matriarch that the hell that
daughters-in-law are put through in many culture. You know, it's a very, the key issue,
and I think this comes through with everything you talk about. The war that we have to wage
is the war on simplistic easy answers as opposed to nuanced richness.
Yeah. And well, and this goes back to this question of hypernormalization where we are
grafting, we are affected. I mean, Angela Nagel talks about this, who I think
Angela is a friend of mine, but I think she's also like the most brilliant,
young intellectual around now, and she gets kind of pilloried all the time for also being
like a reactionary, conservative, whatever. Nagel talks about this idea that we, in her critique
of the Handmaiden's Tale or the Handmaid's Tale, sorry, that we are kind of left fighting the
simpler battles of the past that we've grafted this kind of Cold War, binaristic analogy,
you know, the East versus the West, conservative versus progressive or liberal, that no longer
computes because we live in a bizarre, nonlinear world with a kind of profusion, a superfluity
of information that makes anybody's brain short-circuit.
Well, you know, this is like what our friend Amanda Fielding, the psychedelic countess
who extols the virtues of psychedelic chemicals. Her point is that the default mode network is
this thing that suppresses our brain from experiencing too much and that sanity and
a well-functioning mind, for the most part, is attached to not perceiving everything that's
going on around you. Yeah. And it's selectively kind of maybe subconsciously cherry picking
things that are flattering to your narrative. The quantum soup that you and I are currently
swimming in can't be perceived. We need to perceive a simplified classical world in which
you are a unified person rather than all sorts of subroutines running,
you know, simultaneously, some of them conscious, some of them not.
And this is, I think this is the difference between, on some level, again, this is all
very like improv-y and stuff, but it all kind of goes back, folds back on itself. The difference
between Russians and Americans is that Russians think that they're an intellectual and moral
advantage because they perceive all the metaprocesses, they see the chessboard,
but they're actually at a disadvantage fundamentally because they're kind of overly
hyper. They see too much, they feel too much. They see too much, they feel too much and they're
overly not only critical of the outside world, but they're hypercritical and they're fundamentally
a self-defeating law on that level. You know, I have to say I have a sadness about some of your
views on Russia. Oddly, and I didn't think about this, you are the third out of, I don't know
what is this, my 16th interview at this point. I don't know when you'll debut, but
of a Russian background. I had Vitalik of Ethereum fame, Gary and you.
This I knew. I made a quip to my boyfriend. I was like, oh, I'm going to do the Eric
Weinstein podcast. It's funny that he chose Kasparev and Buterin. You have also some sort
of like a psychic Freudian compulsion to draw to. I care about meaning. Yeah.
To be honest, Russia and the Soviet, I mean, there are places that just are pregnant
with meaning. With meaning, yeah. And there's a ton that I hate about that world. And I think
I talked to you about the barbell society with the lowest of the low and the highest of the high.
But I chose to retain this culture. I mean, you know, it was my grandparents on one side
and my great grandparents on another who came over. So I'm a little bit deeper in this thing
than you are because you were born there. I don't want to give it up. And I work my
ass off to retain it, even to the point of learning a tiny bit of Russian, just to deal
with Russian relatives that who were rediscovered when the Soviet Union came apart. We thought
it all been wiped out in the Holocaust. You're going to have to work your ass off to keep that
connection. I know. And I intend to have many more Russians, many South Asians, many people from
very particular places. I have the utmost reverence, for example, for the UK and the
genius of Spain and Italy. Yeah. There are these particular places
that are just incredibly pregnant. Well, Spain and Italy, I mean, are wonderful because
they're, you know, every once in a while, I'll go to Italy or Spain and you'll be like,
at a little cafe, like an outdoor cafe, and they'll serve you, they'll give you some free
shit with your coffee. They'll give you like a little biscuit or croissant. It's a really weird
model because the thing that makes them economically unviable, that makes some kind of
fundamentally obsolete to the neoliberal system is also the thing that makes them morally redeemable.
But it's also an unabashed, look, Russia's a genius-based culture.
In what way?
That you revere the Love Landows. You revere, you know, the Rachmaninoffs.
Yeah, but this is, I think that this is a thing that is dying now because
the last 30 or 40, how long has it been? It's been 40 years now since the Soviet Union
collapsed, the last 30-something years. The last several decades of privatization,
I think, have been much harder on the Russian psyche than the 70-odd years or so.
But we're all getting worse at this.
Yeah, but I think that this is solely waning. You know, Russia was known basically for its
educational system, for its athletic programs, and no more, right?
Yeah, but some of these things were bizarre. Everybody's getting less genius.
That's true and also not true.
Who's getting more in a really profound way?
In a profound way. I mean, that's a good question. I have to, I'll get back to you on that.
I'm just saying, everybody's taking a huge hit at the moment. It's like we started belching out
lead exhaust from leaded gasoline that the IQ of the world functionally is getting
dumber and dumber and dumber.
Like since the medieval era, I mean, people frown upon the Middle Ages as like,
they're not called the Dark Ages for nothing, but people reached a really high pinnacle of
achievement. I mean, I listened to music from back.
Yeah, I do too, and I don't even like music. I mean, I do, but I have like a very kind of
one dimensional hobbyists sensibility. I'm not like a musician or composer, but
yeah, I think the whole, but I think this is due kind of to the proliferation of information
technologies, the triumph of the internet. And you look at Me Too, Me Too is the nexus of
kind of the imperatives, the market imperatives of the internet and the triumph of feminism.
It wouldn't have had, feminists are very fond of saying that we live in a patriarchy.
If we lived in a patriarchy, there would be no viral online movement called Me Too.
The fact is, you know, now in this day and age, women are the cultural brokers and gatekeepers.
And they're not doing that great of a job. I mean, I want Hedy Lamar back.
Yeah, and I was going to write this book about Marie Curie called Radium Slut.
And it was about the, it was going to be about the prohibition of her to come to Stockholm
for her second Nobel because she was getting stooped by a married guy.
I'm, you know, my favorite story in physics is Madame Woo who figured out the asymmetry
of the weak force and the cobalt 60 beta decay in an electromagnetic field.
I want those amazing, hot, sexy, brilliant chicks back.
Yeah, that they don't exist. That's why, that's why, you know,
there's a cultural fixation on Russian women because only in Russia,
or like in the Russian amniotic fluid, can you find a woman who has like a PhD in philology
or linguistics, but looks like a supermodel and is great in the sack and knows the powers of
seduction. Well, this is like the super dangerous thing. There's a way of saying it's a little bit
less fun than what you say. I love listening to you, but I also like not being nailed to a cross
one when, when, when, when this debuts to the audience, which is to say that the cultures that
where women enjoy self feminizing, but don't see this as competitive with intellectual achievement.
Yes, Russia and to some extent Eastern Europe is one, but East Asia is also in this.
I think those are the two big ones. Yeah.
And I would love to talk to you about all manners of dangerous, disgusting,
horrible, vile and illegal things. Yeah.
But I hope you'll accept an invitation to come back through the portal when you're
next out in LA. And thank you for showing up and just bringing aside that maybe not
everybody's seen before. That's horrifying. I'm very happy to do it. I'm happy to chat.
Anyway, thank you for having me. Well, I'm sorry to horrify you.
No, wait, do you get a buzzer that tells you when the time?
No. Okay. I'm just sort of thinking that you've got this happening party to go to.
Oh, okay. That's right. And I want to be respectful of your time because
otherwise I'd completely monopolize you till the cows come home.
Yeah. Yeah. Yeah. No, it's fine.
Okay. Yeah.
You've been through the portal. Anna, Hachin, Hachin, please check out the Red Scare podcast.
Come with an open mind and hopefully don't give her too much grief unless that's good for
building her audience. With respect to the portal, please subscribe on Apple Stitcher,
Spotify, wherever you listen to podcasts, and also navigate over to our YouTube channel,
where if you'll subscribe and click the bell, you'll be notified of any upcoming episodes.
And the, the Svedanias Siva Luchava, all the best. Be well.
