Hello, you found the portal. I'm here today with my guest in studio, Ben Greenfield, down
from Washington State. Ben, welcome to the program.
Thank you. And hello.
And hello, sir. So you are the first health guest, I think that we've had on the program.
We can talk about other things.
But you've had healthy guests.
We've had health.
Just not health.
Healthish.
Okay.
Yeah.
What I wanted to talk to you about is a little bit, this issue of how we sort through our
bodies and our minds as mechanical systems.
What do we do with integrating the tremendous amount of information?
Some of the literature in the biomedical field is almost unreadable and it's extremely
confusing.
In all studies, you don't have a lot of discipline across different fields to keep any kind of
interoperability.
And so I've always been afraid to enter this space, but you've been recommended as one
of the countries or if not the world's top trainers, you've been an extreme athlete.
You've been studying this from an academic perspective and you seem the ideal person
to be our jungle guide into the wilds of what is known about us.
Aside from the extreme athlete piece, I don't think masochism lends any great deal of credibility
to one.
Aside from a little bit of time spent testing things like ketones and carbohydrate mixes
in the trenches and finding out what might give you explosive diarrhea, but I do love
to read.
I love to study this stuff.
I've always been a voracious and curious consumer.
I just figure if we can profit from your pain, that seems like a pretty good deal.
Well, yeah.
Yeah.
Maybe a little bit.
You're right.
It is difficult with closed access to many of these journals and the ability to be able
to review and abstract.
As we were discussing before, we started recording an inability to determine whether or not a
fasting study was done on a male or a female population or whether or not a headline that
might say vilify red meat is actually looking at the lifestyle practices of the people consuming
said meat or the sourcing process versus unprocessed.
There's just so many nuances to take into consideration.
I think the saving grace though is that we live in an era now where the type of self-quantification
that would have been prohibitively expensive 10 years ago is now readily affordable and
available in the comfort of your own home in many cases.
I think that we can delve into this if you would like, the ability to be able to gather
data about your own body and then decide what type of nutrition or exercise or supplementation
protocol would be appropriate for you allows you to bypass a lot of this epidemiological
data that paints with a very broad brush.
These are all great topics.
I mean, one of the great mysteries since you've already brought up explosive diarrhea, we
probably lost half our listeners with that one, is why is my toilet not a laboratory
that is always taking data away from what I'm passing through me?
Right.
Or your toilet paper.
Exactly.
For example, your toilet paper and a dongle on your iPhone.
That's one of the tests that's certainly very helpful.
I think actually more helpful than these newer microbiome companies that are making a lot
of predictions based on biome data collected from stool that don't have a lot of research
behind them such as, you know, we've tested your stool and determined that based on your
biome data, you should be on XYZ probiotic that we are by the way manufacturing and selling.
But there are other tests that you can do that I think are very helpful and we could
start with the bathroom since we're there already.
Not literally.
We don't have to get back to just introducing you, but we're already-
Yeah, we're not actually sitting on porcelain.
These chairs are more comfortable.
There are tests like, you know, I run once a year, a test from Genova Diagnostics.
It's a three-day stool panel and a multi-day collection is important because everything
from parasitic activity to yeast, fungus, bacteria, all that changes on a day-to-day
basis and you can learn a great deal about your gut and inflammatory markers in your
gut, bacterial balance, the presence or absence of parasites or, you know, a yeast or something
like Candida, for example, by simply on a yearly basis, doing a panel like this.
You literally, for three days in a row, just swab and it goes into a little tube.
You keep that much of the chagrin of my wife, typically in the refrigerator until all of
your poop is ready to ship off to FedEx.
And you receive a beautiful PDF in two weeks that's got everything you would need to know
about whether or not you might need to say supplement with a digestive enzyme because
you have low pancreatic enzyme production or whether you actually do need to take that
popular cleansing supplement because you have some kind of a parasitic overgrowth or something
like that.
I mean, I actually want to get back to this issue of your wife because I think the issue
of whether or not your behavior is viewed as bizarre by your family has a lot to do
with whether or not most people can stick to a regime.
I mean, I am someone who believes that in general, institutional wisdom is usually so
polluted by the economic incentives of the institutions that I'm always open to the idea
that the conventional wisdom is exactly what you would expect when institutions have perverse
incentives.
But if everyone in your family or your social environment doesn't worry about these things
the same way you might and isn't sort of willing to take responsibility for, you know, you
break it, you bought it style approach, it can be very difficult to, you know, to get
somebody to go along with putting your stool in the refrigerator as if that was normal.
Let's get to that in a second so I can at least sort of get some background from you.
Can you just give us a very quick sketch of your academic and non-academic experience
that brings you to being one of the most sought after fitness experts?
Yes.
Academically, I attended University of Idaho, not necessarily known for its rigorous health
and medical program, but I studied exercise physiology and biomechanics there because
for most of my younger years I was most interested in exploring the boundaries of human performance
and how to maximize human performance, which in retrospect is a far cry from enhancing health
or longevity. And there are many people who are, you know, fit on the outside, but once you take a
look at blood and biomarkers and some of the self-quantification we were talking about earlier
it actually can often fly in the face of longevity to be operating at peak performance.
However, I studied that at University of Idaho and competed in tennis and in bodybuilding
and water polo and volleyball. I just played a lot of sports and progressed from there to
almost 20 years of competing in professional endurance sports and doing things like Ironman
Triathlon and Spartan Racing, obstacle course racing and adventure racing and just all sorts of
kind of masochistic multi-day type of events, which were interesting to me just from a pure
physiological standpoint because those are really sports of attrition, right, where you must have
pretty robust management of everything from macronutrients to things that would affect fatigue
more dramatically than say, you know, baseball where you might be, you know, sitting in the dugout
and if you stop moving, you know, in many cases you're still going to be okay. And that was a
great playground for me to explore a lot of the nutrition and the performance and the recovery
concepts that I've been toying around with and still utilize. But I also am just a voracious
consumer of content, you know, I pour through research every morning, I read a lot of journals,
I read, try to read a book every day, you know, typically it's in the health or the performance
or the nutrition realm and I podcast, blog. Can we plug your podcast? It's just the Ben
Greenfield Fitness podcast, horribly narcissistic title that doesn't lend itself well to branding,
but that's my podcast and I write books. I just finished a 650 page book on all things,
anti-aging, longevity, gut immune system, hormones just kind of delved into every nook and cranny
of human physiology. Heart rate variability. Quite a bit in there in heart rate variability.
That's an interesting topic that you bring up. Is that something you're interested in?
You must know June Young of Palo Alto Partners, who is a physician turned sort of hedge fund
manager. I do not. So we were talking about how to make radical longevity a normal part of health
and physiology. And because it had this sort of bizarre patina of, I don't know, a quixotic
desire to find the fountain of youth, there was a period of time where it had to be
de-risked by Silicon Valley. So it was sort of almost seen as being immoral to pursue radical
longevity as a research program and Arbery de Grey and Peter Thiel and various people were
instrumental in kind of taking the slings and arrows from the outside world, said,
oh, this is rich people trying to live forever on the backs of everyone else. But June was
instrumental in trying to work through the system by giving some money for the Palo Alto Prize.
He asked me to give the keynote. And it was a lot about talking, and we were talking a lot about
if you strip off things like environmental insult or the burden of disease or self-harm or all of
these other things that one can die from, are you left in the end with trade-offs between cancer
and aging? It's an essence. And do we understand the essence? And so June's perspective was that
heart rate variability was the best concrete marker to target, to proxy for improving longevity
in a meaningful way, because his theory was about homeostatic capacity. Can you get back
to homeostatic? Absolutely. I would say pushing aside some of the more fringe markers out there
that you can track for longevity, let's say something like telomere length or a
Horvath methylation clock or any of these things that are... It's called as fringe. I would say
that they're just bad proxies in some sense. Yeah, they're poor proxies. They're less available
and less scalable and less affordable for the general population compared to...
So they're just knob-a-peel. Yeah, compared to what I would consider to be three very
useful markers to track overall health and longevity. And that would be glycemic variability.
And how often is the blood sugar fluctuating throughout the day? And to what extent is the
sugar remaining in the bloodstream versus transiently passing due to physical activity or good
insulin sensitivity or good blood sugar management? Something that can be measured
via a $20 to $30 blood stick from CVS or Walgreens or something. I wore the entire year last year
and gleaned a great deal of actionable data from a DEXCOM G6 continuous blood glucose monitor,
which allowed me to see everything from blood glucose response to a cup of coffee to
plate of green beans to exposure to heat versus cold. And I learned some very interesting things.
For example, the blood glucose rises dramatically in response to a cup of coffee,
which is actually what you'd want. It's mildly hyper cortisolic and it gives you a surge of
energy and that sugar, assuming that the coffee is black and doesn't have a lot of calories in it,
that sugar is mostly glycogenalysis. It's released from the liver and it's a short spike in blood
glucose and doesn't contribute a great deal to glycemic variability. But I found it interesting
how high the blood glucose rises after a simple cup of black coffee in the morning.
So it was a narrow peak?
Narrow peak. I also found that my blood glucose responded quite dramatically to green beans,
of all things, which were kind of a staple in my diet. And so because of that, I went out and
got what I would consider to be one of the gold standard food allergy tests out there that doesn't
give you a laundry list of false positives. It's called a Cyrex food allergy panel, CYREX.
And it turns out that one of the only foods that I produce a significant immunoglobulin reaction
towards is green beans. And the blood glucose response that I saw after eating a vegetable
was actually my body mounting an inflammatory autoimmune-based response to the vegetable.
But it gave me a clue that I was able to dig more deeply into. I also found something very useful
and quite useful for us since we're sitting in a cold room right now. The best thing I could do
to lower glycemic variability and keep my blood glucose stable the entire day was a brief bout
of cold in the morning, just two to five minutes, cold shower, cold soak, jump in a cold river,
dramatically controlled blood glucose the rest of the day. So glycemic variability would be one
thing that I think is important to measure. Inflammation would be a second. Inflammation is a
little bit trickier because it does require a blood measurement that typically right now
requires you to go to a lab to do a blood draw. But I'm talking about getting a measurement of
something like HSCRP to see if your C-reactive protein is low. There are other inflammatory
markers like fibrinogen or homocysteine or cytokines that you can measure. But doing
something like a quarterly measurement of just your HSCRP levels, that's a $30 to $40 lab test
that you can run. That also is because inflammation is so tied to stress and a variety of other
health conditions. You see that responded as something like dairy? It can respond to food
allergies, it can respond to stress, it can respond to, and this is something to be careful with in
terms of the timing of when you run the test. Exercise can elevate it significantly, which is
why sometimes if someone does a hard weight training session or run, then does their fasted
lab test the next morning. The results come back, show elevated CRP, and a doctor wants them to go
in for a heart panel and spend a whole bunch of money when their CRP was just elevated due to
exercises that they prior. This is one of the continuous monitoring, is that it has really
shown us just how inadequate it is to pick some random moment and then decide that that is where
your body is because your body may just be passing through that value of whatever it is.
It needs to be precisely controlled, and when you look at hormones, it's even more important
because if you look at the gold standard right now for hormone measurement, at least what's used
predominantly, then we can get back to heart rate variability, which I would consider to be the
third measurement to look at in addition to glycemic variability and inflammation.
But when you look at hormones, for example, most tests are running a fasted blood draw
in the morning of testosterone, estrogen, DHEA, what have you, but hormones fluctuate
widely throughout the day. And because of this, I think that that a urinary measurement for
hormones, you know, there's another test that that I think is great for self-quantification.
It's called a Dutch panel to drive urine test you pee on a stick five times during the day,
and you get a running value of where your hormone levels are fluctuating throughout
the entire day so that you can see if you're truly whatever high cortisol, low cortisol,
high testosterone, low testosterone, etc. And furthermore, urine test will show you the upstream
and downstream metabolites of a hormone. And the reason that's important is because many people
will, for example, get a blood measurement of their cortisol levels and see that they have very,
let's say very low cortisol and some functional medicine doctor, naturopathic physician or
something like that will tell them to have adrenal fatigue, your adrenals are pooped out,
you're not making cortisol, you need to stop exercising and go to a vipassana retreat for
10 days or whatever. And it turns out that, for example, a highly active exercising individual
who is producing cortisol just fine, cortisol gets turned over very quickly. And you aren't
going to see this on a blood test, but on a urine test, you would see high levels of cortisol
metabolites, meaning that cortisol is being produced just fine by the adrenal glands,
but it's being cleared very quickly. And so paying attention to the actual, the fluids being used
to run the test is important as well. So something like hormones should be tested via urine,
but for the inflammation piece, just running like a quarterly blood panel to see if your
inflammation is staying under control, I think would be the second most useful measurement
that is low hanging fruit for a lot of people, in addition to the blood glucose. And then the
final would be heart rate variability. You said more about that given that we started
to fully define it. So heart rate variability, you know, I wear, for example, a ring to track it.
There are wristbands that track it. Bluetooth enabled heart rate strap is a little bit more
of a gold standard, more accurate measurement, but it is simply a measurement of the delta
between your heartbeats, you know, the inter beats variation from heartbeat to heartbeat,
which should display mild variations from beat to beat, meaning that your vagus nerve,
which innervates the sinoatrial node of the heart and monitors or controls to a certain
extent the electrical activity of the pacemaker cells of the heart by feeding into the sinoatrial
node, that should be giving good sympathetic fight and flight and parasympathetic rest and
digest information to the heart. And if someone is able to control stress well,
is in a relatively low state of inflammation and a high state of health, well rested, etc., and has
good vagal nerve tone, the heart rate variability tends to be high. And I originally became interested
in heart rate variability because it is an excellent predictor of injury and illness in
athletes, meaning that if you're, if you're training a team or an individual athlete and the
heart rate variability begins to drop, typically you can predict injury or illness about two to
three days later with surprising accuracy. And so that's a situation in which you would adjust
the training program and give someone a rest day or recovery day. Well, in a, in a person who's
just tracking this for health, maintaining a high heart rate variability and maintaining good vagal
nerve tone is one of the best things you can do for decreasing stress for controlling inflammation,
etc. And, and the vagus nerve itself is just fascinating. I mean, you know, we were, we were
briefly chatting about the gut brain connection earlier and the vagus nerve is largely responsible
for that. I mean, it snakes throughout the entire body, it innervates that. So we should just say
for the listeners that there's two very strange things about the gut. One is that it's a home
to a large number of people who sort of are you, but aren't you? Yes, exactly. In your microbiome.
And the other is, is that it has a very extensive nervous system all its own, which has been called,
it was Gershwin's title, the second brain. Second brain, yeah, the enteric nervous system and the,
the efferent fibers of the vagus nerve will feed from the central nervous system to
wide variety of organs, you know, the pancreas to control insulin, the, the kidneys to control
blood pressure, the liver and the gallbladder to control bile production and detoxification.
And then the afferent fibers will travel from all of those organs, including the biome,
back to the brain. And so there's this constant interplay occurring between the gut and the brain,
which is why for anyone who wants to, to maximize cognitive performance, you know, care for the
gut is actually very important. And vice versa, for anyone who wants to limit things like gas,
bloating, gut motility issues, et cetera, paying attention to the, the hypothalamic
pituitary adrenal axis, the amount of stress that you're putting on yourself, the, the HPA axis,
the amount of stress that you're placing on, on your central nervous system affects digestion
quite dramatically. You know, that's, that's why when we have family dinners at our house,
we all take a deep breath in through our nose, through our mouth three times and we prepare
our parasympathetic system for digestion. We're activating the vagus nerve and settling down
stress from the central nervous system, which would impact the, the enteric nervous system.
And when you look at research done on vagal nerve tone, there are a variety of things that tone
the vagus nerve that increase heart rate variability because a lot of the vagus nerve travels through
some of the muscles around the throat and the neck chanting, singing, gargling.
So how much of our religious and cultural traditions are cryptic health programs that
we throw over at our peril? They, they are indeed. I mean, that fasting originally was,
was a religious practice, not a, not a weight loss or a ketogenic fad, you know, it's tied into,
for example, the Mediterranean diet. That's the often neglected thing that people don't bring
up when they talk about the health impact of the Mediterranean diet is if you look at the way that
say the Orthodox church practices the Mediterranean diet, there's a great deal of fasting. There,
there are periods of time spent in protein restriction. You know, we know that
catabolism in the cellular cleanup of the, what's called the autophagy that takes place
during those periods of protein restriction. That's what has life extending properties and,
and fasting is a, is a big part of that diet as well. It's not just about, you know,
unlimited breadsticks and goat cheese and, you know, oodles and oodles of extra virgin olive
oil. I mean, there are other components of that diet tied into the religious aspect.
And alming, you know, such as in, in meditation or the, the breath work in yoga, these things can
tone the vagus nerve, cold water, the mammalian dive reflex that, you know, when a baby is first
born in, in many cultures would splash cold water in the baby's faces or for several months,
dunk a baby in cold water to tone the vagus nerve, to activate digestion, to activate the
building of that biome we talked about. All of these things are wonderful for the vagus nerve,
breath work. And so you can, you can train and control heart rate variability. And I really
like that because it's so easy to track in real time. And I would say if you're tracking
glycemic variability, inflammation and heart rate variability, those would be, those would be the
three biggest things when it comes to health and longevity. Well, that's very helpful that you're
narrowing it down to three things that many people will never have heard of or thought about.
But that are easy. But the thing that I want to get at, and maybe this is a good place to break,
most of us don't know how to think about these things. I can't tell you the number of times
I've been walking down the street and somebody says, wow, would you look at the nerve tone on that?
I mean, nobody, nobody talks about these things. The vagus nerve on that baby. I know.
Um, that, we, we don't know how to think about all of the messaging chemicals, all, you know,
the, if you ask people to break down the body into three layers, how many people would come up with
cytology, histology, physiology and anatomy. We don't, we don't remember all the cranial nerves.
We don't, can't quite keep straight with the pancreas, the gallbladder and the liver up to
cranial nerves. Yeah. Um, I remember that the, the, the pneumatic on old, the pneumatic on old
olympus power tops of fin and German views, some hops. Hey, I never get a chance. Just don't ask
me to name them all. Yeah. Yeah. That's funny. I had thought about that all the time. Um,
we don't know how to think about our bodies and prioritize these things. In other words,
if somebody says, look, I don't want to get this deep into what it is that you're talking about
here's my time budget. Here's my mental budget. What can I afford to think about without feeling
lost? Because I think one of the things that I find very off-putting is that there seems to be
kind of a Rubicon. Either you go in for this health thing and it becomes a large part of what you
discuss every day with your health friends, or you're sort of frozen out on the other side of
this thing, not quite sure of yourself. You know, in some ways people feel the same way about this
as they feel about mathematics. They're lost. Yeah. I don't necessarily think that you need to be
immersed in the data of self-quantification. I think that there is a great deal of value
if you do want to learn about your body and do something like a yearly comprehensive blood panel.
A yearly gut panel, heart rate variability tracking, measurement of inflammation.
I've done some of these things. I get it back. I scratch my head. Somebody tells me what something
means. I start doing that thing to rectify the situation. Somebody else says, well, that's not
what that means. Right. And so my question, I mean, here's my ideal. I'd like to get the 10
sharpest minds in the field, into a room, and then ask questions and watch them duke it out
intellectually. So somebody can say, well, you know, that's true in general, but if you condition
on this variable, then that's no longer true because that's just part of this natural response.
And some, you know, fair or not fair. Well, that study, you know, really only looked at a very
small sample. That's the tricky part is the biochemical individuality. And Roger William,
I believe, was back in the 60s, wrote a book that dictated the 12 different shapes of a liver
and a stomach and a pancreas and the fact that some people have extremely robust vitamin D
excretion rates and should therefore get plenty of sunshine and perhaps even supplement with
vitamin D, whereas other people would get arterial calcification from supplementing with vitamin D.
Some people have very high rates of oxalic acid and uric acid excretion and can eat,
you know, nuts until the cows come home and other people will get gout and pain in their
big toes from having a few handful of almonds each day. So it varies widely from person to person.
That's the variability of the person under study. I'm saying that's part of the whole
quantified self thing, which is understanding which particular machine you've inherited and
what you can do with it and what you can't. But then there's the other issue, which is
sort of sensitivity analysis for information. That is, if there is a slight change in our
understanding of something, does the prescription flip wildly or does it move a small amount?
You know, and then just to get really into where I think a lot of these problems go wrong,
I want to hear many more of these things talked about in terms of trade-offs where, well, this is
good for you in this regard, but probably bad for you in that regard, whereas a lot of the advice
is phrased in terms of that's a great thing for you. And I just don't even believe in general.
The ketogenic diet is a perfect example of that. Say more.
Say more. Many of the studies on it myopically focus upon weight loss,
or sometimes upon lipids, your cholesterol values. When you look at the ketogenic diet that may have
helped your neighbor to lose 20 pounds, putting coconut oil and butter in their coffee every
morning and having some kind of ketogenic fat bomb after dinner every night, some people have,
for example, an FTO gene that would predispose you to very high levels of inflammation, which we
talked about earlier, in response to high amounts of saturated fat, particularly the levels of
saturated fat that exceed 10% of total daily intake of fat, which on a standard modern
ketogenic diet, it's common to eat 30, 40, 50% of your total fat intake from saturated fat.
Others have familial hypercholesteroemia, which would dictate your cholesterol values.
And this would be, I don't necessarily think LDL cholesterol is indicative of cardiovascular
risk, but in people with FH, it actually is. So very rampantly high levels of cholesterol in
response to a ketogenic diet. Other people have poor liver and gallbladder function, which would
dictate that they're going to have horrible bowel movements and a great deal of digestive
distress in response to that diet. But if you look at a meta-analysis of ketogenic diets that
say that this is favorable for the general population, in many cases, they're looking at
weight loss, not inflammation, not bowel function, not lipid panels. And so the problem
could sometimes be the value being measured. Right. What I'm trying to get at is,
I don't see a solution for muggles, for civilians, for the average person who's not a
high net worth individual, not a fitness geek. They want to avail themselves, perhaps,
of whatever the best thinking is, but they don't know what happens when people conflict.
I mean, if I listen to physicists or mathematicians, you can very quickly usually tell
who's talking sensibly. They're willing to give up. Well, that's absolutely,
that's technically true, but in this case, blah, blah, blah. When I listen to health people,
the conversations are usually dyadic. It's usually two health people talking to each other.
And often with a great deal of conflict of interest because there's a diet book or a
supplement company involved. Right. So conflict of interest is terrible within the health
institutions. It's terrible within the anti-institutional experts as well because of
the fact that there are products on the other side of this thing. And then there's this question that
every single biological system I've ever studied is incredibly complicated. If you
look at the Cascades, just from one homologous system to the next, they're totally different.
It's very hard to figure out what we're talking about in trade-off space. You can
measure a bunch of stuff, but even there, if it doesn't lend itself to continuous monitoring
through a relatively cheap device, you can be pretty unclear as to whether or not those values
even really represent you. Right. And from one standpoint, it's a frustrating conversation
because it is such a soft science and because there is so much biochemical individuality.
At the same time, to me, it's an exciting and promising conversation because I believe we're
on the cusp of everything from micro-needling patches that can be slapped on and you forego
the trip to a laboratory, you put an envelope, you mail it off and you have all the data right
there, hundreds of blood biomarkers from the comfort of your own home to iPhone dongles
or anything else that can be used to collect this data. If we were to combine that with AI or
algorithms that can actually feed through that data and produce digestible information that's
understandable to the general public and people can take their health into their own hands using
easy self-quantification combined with essentially using AI and algorithms, which I
have a hunch you know a great deal more about than I do. I think that's the promising future
of healthcare and self-management and longevity. We're in an intermediate state and there are
companies working on this, but I think the difficult piece is curating and collecting
all the laboratory measurements that are going to give the most useful and actionable data because
it can't just be, I said like a micro-needling patch that you could put on your arm, but
we already talked about the urine. We talked about the stool, right? You have to collect more
fluid from the body than just blood. I wasn't feeling like that should be done passively.
What do you mean? My toilet should be a laboratory. That'd be amazing. That'd be absolutely amazing.
I mean if it can have a cold, warm bidet and vibration and wipe your ass for you,
it should be able to collect that. It feels to me like the Japanese have thought about all
sorts of aspects of my comfort and luxury and what I really want to know is my markers.
Yeah. It shocks me that that doesn't yet exist. The ability to be able to more easily and precisely
quantify this and then have it fed into an algorithm that will spit out actionable data that's easy
to understand, but the fact is I should say to my knowledge it doesn't yet exist. I'm pretty
plugged into this sector when it comes to all the different ways out there that one can test
and the different companies that are doing the testing and the information they're putting out,
and there's no platform yet that's doing blood, gut, urine, saliva, heart rate variability,
and some of the other metrics you'd get from a wearable device, then taking that,
putting it through an algorithm, and then pushing out the exact lifestyle, dietary,
and supplementation or medication steps that someone could take to affect the biomarkers
it tested. Well, another thing that I would love to see this coupled to is some sort of a software
product that has the 15 leading health and performance experts talking about the same
data. So just the way you have market analysts and you want to see
whether the market analysts are all talking to each other or whether they're disagreeing,
and then you want to listen in on the disagreements. I mean, one thing I'd love to do is to have you
back with three or four other people in your field who, if you all respect each other,
and say, well, I think that that could easily be misinterpreted or you're taking us too far into
the weeds, or I think that that study has been given far too much weight.
Yeah, and people have toyed around with that. I think Joe, for example, has hosted a meat
plant debate. And there's some chatter like that going on. I personally don't really use my own
podcast as a platform for argumentation or debate as much as exploration of ideas,
but you're right. It would be interesting. I think it might just lend more confusion to the
matter. I don't think so. I think this is a big miss. I think that one of the things that I'm
finding is that the public wants to listen in on conversations between people who are talking
almost in tongues. And then because they have the ability to slow it down and annotate,
like right now, there is a Discord server that pours over every episode that I release of this
podcast, and these guys dissect everything that gets said. They hyperlink it, and they teach
each other. They're forming reading clubs and the whole thing. And the audio is searchable now too.
Well, Google is searching audio. I use an app called Cast Box. It's fantastic. I use it for
all my podcasts, not only because it's got good smoothing algorithms where you can play one,
two, three, and four times speed, and it still sounds good, but I can use the search function
on that, and it will search the audio. Let's say I want to learn about some random health concept,
like small intestine bacterial overgrowth. I can search. It'll scrape not just the show notes
and the title and the description, but the actual audio itself. And I can go directly to the timestamp
where that discussion begins and jump right in. If the fidelity is high enough, it depends what
the nature... I don't know how the fidelity feeds into it, but it's... No, sorry, the fidelity of
the transcription. Right, right. No, it's not searching the transcription. It's searching
the actual audio. It's an audio search engine. So, if you say something that's technical, I mean,
I guess I'm just confused as to how you're saying it. No, what I'm saying is that let's say someone
is searching for glycemic variability, a term that I've already used two or three times,
and whoever's producing the show notes for your show or the title or the description isn't actually
typing glycemic variability. It's not scrappable by a search engine in terms of the text that the
audio is now being searched as well. And that phrase will be picked up on the audio and display
in search results. Okay, but it has to have... So, if you put in the search as a sound and then it's
looking for some comparable sound. Right, exactly. But it may miss in a highly technical speech. I
don't know that we're there, that it's 100%. Yeah, I don't know the level of accuracy, but I've found
it to be of great utility. So, leaving that aside, I mean, the point that I was trying to get at more
was just that if you had like health UFC, where experts go at it with each other.
Well, it's what's the old MTV, the Death Battle? Oh, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah, those claymations.
Yeah, exactly. Yeah, like that. Exactly. Well, but I think that's what people want. And they believe
in some sense that once they can hear a group of experts sort of handle their concerns, it's...
They don't have to be the one filtering what's durable, what's ephemeral, what's a fad,
what is fairly solid. I think that's the great appeal of listening in on an expert conversation
when you have a community that's actually dissecting it and is able to do more with it.
Yeah, I think as long as people are aware of any pre-existing bias,
because there's everything from the investments that that expert might be involved in to the
supplement companies they might own to the dietary books that they wrote five years ago
that they're still married to, even though research has changed because those diet books have
served them quite well from a monetization standpoint. I mean, there's a lot of kind
of backend issues you got to pay attention to, but yeah, I mean, it would be interesting at least.
Let me do something dangerous for my own podcast. I have a few products that have
health implications that some of which I've come to really like. Are you familiar with any of these
cooling systems for mattress pads so that you don't wake up in a pool of your own sweat?
Yes. The bed jet, I'm familiar with that one which uses air to cool. And then I personally use
one called the Euler. My wife has one as well. I don't think it's ever been flipped on, returning
to your illusion to the bizarre health practices that spouses sometimes don't adopt. But I think
about the Euler system because you and your wife don't have to have the same set.
Yes. And I find it useful. I can set it at 55 degrees. I would say just when you look at a lot
of the wearables out there, one of the sleep metrics that people struggle with the most is
deep sleep. During which a lot of the nervous system repair and recovery is going to take
place. I mean, memory consolidation and learning. That's a short term to long term.
Things like that would occur during dreaming, during the lighter REM sleep stages. But deep
sleep is particularly important for recovery and seems to be the one that people struggle with the
most. And the two things I have found to impact deep sleep the highest are sleeping in a cool room,
sleeping on a cool surface. If I've done anything to heat the body, such as a heavy meal or a heavy
exercise session within three hours prior to bedtime, some kind of cold walk or cold shower,
something to cool the body back down and wearing wool socks to bed. When you wear socks to bed,
it actually cools the rest of the body. So that and higher dose CBD have been the two things that
have increased my deep sleep the most. So yeah, I sleep on one of those pads. So that's, by the way,
that's the spawn, the one that you sleep on is my sponsor, which I did, which I didn't mention.
Yeah. Yeah, I'm still confused about whether they're calling it the chili pad or the cooler,
but it's I think they have two different products. But that was my favorite find of 2019.
Because I didn't know. And I again, I like the pad really cool. Yeah, I like the
comforter to be really warm. I don't even know what it is that I'm interested in.
It's interesting because there's actually a couple of interesting things.
A, I think it is at Stanford that they have researched now that cooling the forehead is
particularly helpful for sleep latency, meaning shortening the time that takes you to fall asleep.
So they've just developed this company called, I think it's EB. I'm not financially affiliated
with them at all, but it's a it's a headband that cools the head as you're falling asleep.
And and it's similar to the chili pad, except you wear it on your head.
And then the the the other piece, the wives into this. What's that?
Do wives think this is attractive looking? Please say yes. No, no, not in the least.
The the chili pad can be set to to switch to a warm setting at whatever time you want to wake up.
So slowly warm the bed as you wake. I haven't messed around with that function at all. I just
set it at 55 degrees and pass out. But it's useful. So so I would say yes, there's something
to the idea of sleeping on a cool surface. Absolutely. I remember the other thing I was
going to say is, you know, people talk about sleep hygiene, you know, absence of light,
presence of cold, a silent room, red, blue light. Right. My my entire bedroom is red incandescent
light bulbs, because you don't have any suppression of melatonin levels when you flip off the lights
at night to pee or when you're getting ready for bed at night. But I think one thing that folks
neglect in sleep hygiene is safety, right? This comes all the way back to the vagus nerve, an
activation of the parasympathetic nervous system, the same reason that you would take three deep
breaths and chew your chew each bite of food with with pretty high frequency. If you are sleeping
and your brain is convinced you're in a safe environment, you sleep much better. You know,
this is why so many people struggle with sleep when they're traveling.
I have found one of the best things aside from never having my laptop in the bed,
because if my brain associates the bed with work, you get sympathetic nervous system activation
and lack of safety. Bigest battle that I can't stand bumping into the middle of a laptop. Even
if I'm in a small hotel room, the laptop, I just don't allow it near the bed. It's always
somewhere else in the room. If I want to lay on my stomach and work on my laptop, it's on the floor.
But the other thing is a gravity blanket. I don't know if you've ever used like high
compression 20 to 25 pound like breathable cooling gravity blankets. But what I do is I
have the chili pad underneath me. I pull this gravity blanket over top of me and it feels like
you're just blanketed in safety. It's amazing. I totally believe in this madness that you're
one of the best sleep hacks I've adopted over the past year. Okay, another one of my sponsors.
I'm curious. I hate mushrooms like with a vengeance and a passion that you can scarcely
believe the one way in which I can get mushrooms is this a psilocybin experience in college or
no, no, no, no. This is a experience with my parents growing up, putting things in my spaghetti.
I don't think it was psychoactive spaghetti. I actually love this company that puts mushrooms
and coffee and tea and because I'm able to get it in. I think that it has some kind of
psychological impact. I can't prove it, but I believe that mushroom chemistry is incredibly
powerful. Are you a devotee of any of these particular like chaga, lion's mane and other
mushrooms? The cognitive piece I find particularly intriguing because if you look at this idea of
the doctrine of signatures, it's this idea that the way that things look in nature indicate the
biological impact they might have on the body. So we know that we know wall nuts have
high amounts of choline and DHA in them and they're good for your brain. We know that pomegranates
are good for cardiovascular functions or tomatoes and when you cut them open, they almost look like
the ventricles in the atria of the heart. This is a serious marine county thing.
Crack it open in a pan. It looks like an eye and we know that the lutein in the egg is good for
the eyes. When you see lion's mane mushroom in nature growing, it looks like a cluster of axons
and dendrites and it turns out that it's chock full of nerve growth factor, which is actually
wonderful for neurogenesis and neuroplasticity and cognition. So yeah, there's something to be
said for lion's mane for cognition. Some of the beta-glucans and say turkey tail have been demonstrated
to be anti-carcinogenic and anti-angiogenic to tumor growth. So that's another useful one.
I use Rishi mushroom for relaxation. Cordyceps is good for pre-workout. Yeah, there's all sorts of
interesting blends out there. So yeah, I'm a fan of mushrooms. I think they have a lot of utility.
Are you a fan of psychedelics? And I'm happy to unask the question if I should.
Yeah, yeah. I mean, psilocybin, particularly when combined with lion's mane in small doses,
I'm a fan of that as a neutropic blend. My concern with psychedelics is that they have become,
it seems, of late so culturally acceptable and also culturally acceptable and more and more
accessible that I think there's some rampant abuse going on that is now justifiable. Whereas
whatever, dropping into a k-hole or doing ecstasy on the weekends, you can now say you're using
ketamine to manage some mild depression issues and using MDMA for some self-therapy work that
you're doing for PTSD or you're using LSD with great frequency. You know, many people using
that as a microdose every day. And the problem is you look at something like ketamine or MDMA,
which people are using a lot of. That's neurotoxic. And if you look at something like...
That's one of those things that I keep hearing going back and forth.
The neurotoxicity?
How neurotoxic MDMA.
It is in a trip dose. It's definitely neurotoxic. I would say a microdose of ketamine for something
like managing mild depression or anxiety is relatively safe, but there are people using
a lot more than that. I mean, I know people who are addicted to their ketamine nasal sprays and
their ketamine trokies now and using those. I think there was an initial issue that a lot of the
sort of Schedule 1 treatment of some of these drugs was so preposterous given the twin criteria
that are supposed to define what goes on Schedule 1, that a high propensity for abuse when
LSD is weirdly self-limiting, for example, and that the high degree of harm. And in fact,
the... I was shocked to find out that I had been propagandized and that the harm had been
exaggerated.
The lethal dose of LSD is through the roof.
Well, nobody's ever found it, I think.
Yeah. I think the one elephant that they were able to kill and find a lethal dose of LSD for,
it turned out that it was actually the drug they were co-administering with the LSD.
Some kind of a... It was some kind of a tranquilizer or something like that.
I didn't want to think about this.
Keep the elephant from berserking, but my concern is potential for
neurotransmitter depletion and imbalances due to overuse of psychedelics,
as well as potential for neurotoxicity.
Let me just clarify the question so that it isn't...
My guess is that we've gone through... There was an initial lie.
The lie was found out to be a lie. Then there was a new lie that was told by those using the
psychedelics that effectively these are not that dangerous, that the load is quite modest.
There are ways in which that might be true and there are ways in which that's not true,
even for something where the physical load is modest.
I mean, I don't think we know how we're reordering the mind,
even if you don't find a strong physiological impact of something like LSD.
Yeah. That's my concern is serotonin imbalance, dopamine imbalance, dependency.
There is a biological impact that I think a lot of people do not take into account.
To reply to your initial question, yeah, I'll microdose occasionally with psilocybin.
I wrote a fiction book last year and I'd write every Friday on a microdose of LSD.
I will... What's a microdose for you?
For LSD, about 20 micrograms.
It's a fairly large microdose.
I tend to have high tolerance.
And on a quarterly basis, I will journey with my wife, actually.
We do couples therapy every quarter and our facilitator uses a variety of different
Amazonian medicines. There's always a great deal of preparation going in,
a great deal of integration going out.
And even then, this is actually fresh on my mind because I have a journey coming up in six days.
I take vitamin C. I take 5-HTP. I take methionine donors or methyl donors like SAM-E.
I use NAD, IVs, and injections. I completely prepare my cells for the toxic...
You need to be careful not to be unnecessary.
...overload they're going to experience exactly.
And then I supplement going out with everything I know my neurotransmitters need to
replete themselves. Dopa-macuna and more 5-HTP, more vitamin C for the toxicity.
So there's a great deal that I do to reduce the biological impact that I know even a single
journey can produce.
Is this a DMT-based journey or is this more of a mescaline?
This would be similar to something like MDMA, ayahuasca and psilocybin over the course of
anywhere from 10 to 20 hours.
And the ayahuasca would be isolating though, wouldn't it?
Well, it's a similar feeling. It's not ayahuasca that's being used. It's actually
the person who facilitates this for me. They're using a series of injections and pills that
because of legal reasons, they actually won't tell me what they're using, but I can tell you
it's similar to the same type of feeling as you'd get from something like a 5-MEO combined with
ayahuasca or MDMA or psilocybin.
5-MEO is the extract isolated from the Sonoran Desert.
Yeah, the Sonoran Desert Toad, yeah.
But what concerns me are the people doing their 38th ayahuasca treat and some New York
City loft with their personal shaman and just completely abusing in terms of frequency of
these things and not taking them as seriously as they should.
What do we do about explaining quickly to the government that it's in everybody's interest
to stop bullshitting about schedule one designation and to start talking about really coming up with
some regulation that is beneficial, that recognizes the health benefits? Seems to me that we've got
sort of a wrong new culture in place around the abuse of these things to compensate for
the wrong culture that we have at a legal level.
I think Johns Hopkins and the MAPS Foundation, they're beginning to roll out good research
that's actually being paid attention to. I think academic institutions are doing good
service for that. I think that the implementation of physician-
Or shut it NYU at the same time.
Right, NYU physician assisted PTSD and trauma clinics that are using ketamine or what I would
imagine pretty soon will be psilocybin under physician supervised protocols with proper
integration and proper medical management going in and going out. I think that that will be something
that we see with increasing frequency, actual physician overseeing clinics.
You think that there's an aspect where we're expecting the physician to step into the role
that a shaman previously inhabited and that maybe physicians aren't really,
they may be more medically skilled, but that a lot of the impact is not at the level of
needing it.
There's a need for physician education programs, absolutely. I know that
field trip, which I think is rolling out in Toronto, LA and New York over the next year,
they're combining physician education programs with physician clinics for things like PTSD and
trauma using plant medicines or using ketamine. I think we're going to see this strange hybrid
physician shaman type of model where folks are actually educated in clinical management,
medically educated, but also have a working knowledge of things like Amazonian medicines and
integration and useable to facilitate as well. I think the music is huge. I think that when you
look at, I was even toying around with some apps because I love to play handpan and guitar and
ukulele and there are somatics apps that you can download that will translate the music into
recognizable geometric patterns. I think that the use of music in conjunction with some of
these therapies can elicit almost like a vibratory response within the cell that's based on a
response of these sound frequencies that can enhance a journey or take it to a certain state.
I don't know about the cell. You really think there's like a cellular level for music?
I think there's a cellular level and I'm not speaking based on science or research or anything
like that, but I suspect that we are actually impacting our cells with sound frequencies
and that these geometric patterns that we're seeing that you can visualize that music is
producing and like an app are actually occurring within our bodies as well.
Have you looked at these hands from the perspective of frequency analysis?
No, but I can tell you that I feel amazing. I have a handpan that I'm learning to play right
now. I place it in my lap each night and they're impossible to sound poorly on because they're
all tuned to a specific scale like mine is in a B scale. I can strike it anywhere and it sounds great
and it's very calming in the evening. I try to look at this and my understanding is that if you
think about steel drums, steel drums have that very muddy kind of sound and that with the hang
which is sort of the great innovation in this area coming out of Switzerland,
the problem is that a two-dimensional metallophone doesn't have good harmonic discipline relative
to a one-dimensional media so that if you think about a flute or if you think about a vibrating
string that you would have, let's say on a violin or a guitar, the harmonics have to sort of line up
in some well-defined fashion because of the one-dimensional nature of the medium that's
vibrating. When you have a two-dimensional medium, everything is off and what the Swiss did was to
figure out how to get enough precision to get the two-dimensional medium to sound at least for the
first few harmonics as if it was a one-dimensional medium. I don't know if I exactly have that right,
but that's why it's impossible to sound bad because you're hearing something that effectively would
never be found in nature by just taking a metal plate and banging on it.
Yeah, that makes sense. I was always under the impression that it was simply the
tuning of the instrument itself in that each place where you strike, where each of the
different locations, for anyone listening who hasn't seen a handpan, usually there's
eight or nine different locations that you strike, it's basically all tuned to the same scale.
You may have a pentatonic scale or something like that where it's hard to find a wrong note.
Right. Or tuned to the same root, I guess I should say, in this case, B.
Well, I think you could tune it to any.
Oh yeah, you can tune it to C, you can tune it to D, but once you buy a pan,
you're buying a pan that's tuned to a specific frequency and you can't play and sound good
a pan that's tuned in B with someone who's got a pan tuned to C, for example.
What can you leave my audience with as the best way for somebody who's not
familiar with a lot of the words that you've used or concepts we've discussed,
but they're realizing that the processed food that they're eating might not be good for their
lipid layers. They know that their sleep is off, their stress is too high. They don't know enough
about physiology and anatomy to understand everything that's being said. What is the best
way of handing off from the show to somebody who wants to enter a kind of more mindful and
intentional space and feels unsure that they have what it takes to digest the information and
confusing signals that are coming out of this?
I have two thoughts. The first is be patient and wait when it comes to this self-quantification
piece because as we discussed, I think we're in an intermediate phase and I think it's moving
quickly and I don't think that the frustration and confusion is going to be around much longer
as we roll out tools that allow for easier self-quantification and interpretation of that data.
For now, I would pay attention to eight things. The first would be regardless of the exercise
program, just regular low-level physical activity throughout the day. We know this concept of neat
non-exercise activity thermogenesis regardless of whether you go to the gym just moving throughout
the day as much as possible. That's the first thing. The second would be of all the diets that
I've seen out there in terms of good research. I think one of the best ways to eat would be some
semblance of a relatively low-carb Mediterranean diet. I think that that's the one that seems to be
the best for most people because it controls glycemic variability, introduces you to some
elements of fasting, has lots of herbs, spices, supportive oils, etc. I would be out in sunlight
frequently because we know that photons of light are very healing to the body and there's this
amazing new concept of human photosynthesis and our ability to create electrons and ATP in response
to photons of light. I'm immersed in a few books right now on that and it's absolutely fascinating.
In the same way, I would be outside barefoot or touching the ground every day.
This is four or this is still three? This is four. We have low-level physical activity.
We have some kind of a low-carb Mediterranean type of eating approach, exposure to sunlight,
being outside barefoot or in touch with the planet, which allows for, if you look into the
research on earthing or grounding, a great decrease in inflammation and improvement in a wide
variety of health parameters. These fingered, vibrant type? These are not grounding shoes,
but going outside barefoot without big rubber-sold shoes on. Introduce heat and cold. We know from
Finnish longevity studies, for example, that sweating or being hot on a frequent basis is
very good for the body and we know that cold thermogenesis, cryotherapy, cold showers, things
like that are wonderful for things like weight stability, nitric oxide production, blood flow,
etc. Low-level physical activity, some kind of a low-carb Mediterranean diet, sunlight,
grounding earthing, heat, cold, and then finally good clean water and minerals like a good salt,
good trace liquid mineral, anything like that. I would say that if you address those eight parameters,
the movement and the relatively... Let me see if I got it. Okay. All right. So low-level physical
activity. Regardless of the exercise program. Regardless of the exercise program, a low-carb
Mediterranean diet, then there's going to be sunlight, then being barefoot, and alternating
hot and cold regime. Heat and cold would be five and six. Oh, five and six, okay. Didn't realize
I had two there. Yep. And then minerals and... Minerals and water. Minerals and water are seven
and eight. Yeah. Okay, now I got it. And largely, and I know we're running a little short on time,
but largely the idea behind those latter six, photons of light, negative ions from the surface
of the earth, the movement of electrons via heat and cold, and the carrying of electrons with water
and minerals essentially treats the human body as a battery. And because each of the cells operate
on electrochemical gradient of a negative charge inside and a positive charge outside,
one of the best things you can do to charge your human battery is light earthing, grounding,
heat, cold, water, and minerals. So that's where I'd start. All right. This is pretty intense. Ben,
we would love to have you come back and potentially we'll pair you with somebody
who is more up to your level of knowledge of the human body as the amazing machine.
Would we decide to call it the deathmatch? Yes.
The portal deathmatch? Well, health UFC for the moment. Do you have anything you'd like to
tell people so that they can come find you and get some more wisdom if they're hungry for more?
Other than the Ben Grid Greenfield podcast? I would take a dive into my new book.
It's called called Boundless and you can get it anywhere. Fantastic. All right. You've been
through the portal with Ben Greenfield. Thanks for tuning in. Remember to subscribe on Apple
Spotify, Stitcher, Cast Box, wherever you listen to podcasts. Also, meander over to our YouTube
channel and remember to both subscribe and click that bizarre bell icon so that you're notified
whenever we get around to dropping the next video episode. Thanks for being with us and be well.
