Hello, this is Eric Weinstein.
I'm gonna be recording a short introduction
to this episode because I think it's probably
the most important episode of the portal to date.
That said, under normal circumstances,
I probably would have either edited this heavily
or not released it at all.
It starts off quite slow and it gets quite awkward
before finding its pace.
Now, what's going on is that the interview subject
is none other than my brother, Brett Weinstein.
In Brett's case, you probably know him
if you know him at all, as the heroic professor
who stood up against what can only be described,
and I swear I'm not making this up,
as a Maoist insurrection at an American college
in the Pacific Northwest, the Evergreen State College.
It was a very strange situation because somehow
the national media that we would normally have thought
would have covered such a story, for example,
the media that covered the takeover of Straight Hall
at Cornell in the 60s.
That media was almost absent completely.
At least they were absent for a very long time
before they entered late in the game.
And why is that?
Because the story ran counter-narrative.
That is, the students at the Evergreen State College
who were behaving in a racist fashion
were actually students of color.
And this was an exactly counter-narrative story.
And Brett, who stood up to this racist insurrection,
was in fact somebody with a history
of standing up against racism.
He had in fact been a student
at the University of Pennsylvania,
my alma mater and Ivy League school,
and had had to leave because of death threats
when he stood up for women of color
who were being abused for the amusement
and the sexual amusement of white fraternity students.
So Brett was supposed to be familiar to many of you
from that, from an old national news story.
And he was also the hero of a book
called The Taper's Morning Bath.
But somehow the news media who chose not to report
on the Evergreen story was not very interested either
in figuring out who Brett was
because the stories showed that there was
a contradictory problem with the main narrative.
In some sense, that's going to be recapitulated
in this episode.
There is an official narrative
about what happened in the scientific episode.
And there is a narrative which I think
is much closer to the truth,
which I happen to be one of a very small number
of witnesses to this alternate story.
Now the key question is whether to tell the story or not.
And you're gonna see that both of us
have a certain amount of trepidation and energy
around the question of whether or not
to break a long-standing public silence.
When Brett found himself as professor in exile
along with his wife, Heather Hying,
I had thought that the American biology establishment
would realize that one of their own
had been thrown overboard as Jetsom.
And that he would have been invited
to many universities to give seminars in biology.
And it took a while for me to understand
that because he was found at the Evergreen State College,
the people who taught at highly ranked research universities
thought that Brett was something more like a teacher
rather than a researcher.
In fact, he'd been the top student
of one of the most important evolutionary theorists
in the United States, Richard Alexander
at the University of Michigan,
as well as a student of Bob Trivers, formerly of Harvard,
arguably one of the greatest living evolutionary theorists,
I think presently at Rutgers.
Brett was somebody who had actually done
really interesting work in his thesis.
And for some reason, the system found it very disturbing
to consider the full implications of his work.
I think in this episode,
we're going to do something interesting.
I see Brett in two separate ways.
On the one hand, I view him as a very heroic figure
and he's an absolutely brilliant person.
It's been a pleasure sparring with him throughout my life.
However, I'm also his older brother
and you're gonna hear me at sort of my overbearing best,
brow beating him a bit.
Now the point isn't to push him down
but quite the contrary.
I'm rather competitive as Brett's older brother
and I don't wanna compete with the weakest version of Brett,
the professor in exile.
Instead, I want him seated again inside of the institution
where he always belonged.
And in order to do that,
I want him to tell the tale not with embellishment,
but as it actually happened
because I think it's one of the most fascinating episodes
in modern biology that I've ever heard.
So I hope that you like it.
We're gonna put it in front of you as an experiment
and we're gonna test to see whether or not I'm correct
that the portal can be used to augment the usual channels.
I believe that a lot of us are sitting on intellectual gold.
I don't think that the story that somebody's work
didn't say the light of day
or got attributed to somebody else is as exotic
as the institutions would have you believe.
In fact, I think it's quite common.
I think many of us find that we don't have careers
inside of science because something goes wrong
quite early when we're quite vulnerable.
And my hope is that some of you listening
who I know are struggling as graduate students
or as postdocs or as undergraduates will listen to this
and find some courage to stand up for yourself
because quite frankly,
if you choose not to do it
in order to make nice with your fields,
the chances are you will probably won't have a career
in the long term.
You might as well swing for the fences
and you might as well clear your throat
and tell your story as it actually happened without fear.
I don't know that this is going to succeed,
but we're going to run an experiment.
And I think both Brett and I are up for it
to find out wherever it goes.
The one thing I would say is that if anyone else
in the story wants to tell their version of events,
it would be an honor to have you on the portal.
There are no bad people in the story, in my opinion.
There are a lot of bad incentives.
And if we're going to actually fix the system,
we're going to have to look past the interpersonal.
But the point of this, in my opinion,
is that I think it's sufficient to open the case again
and to seat Brett Weinstein inside of the university system
that is the research university system
where he has always belonged.
So have a listen and I hope you like it.
Hello, you found the portal.
I'm your host, Eric Weinstein,
and I'm joined today by none other than my own brother,
Dr. Brett Weinstein.
Brett, welcome.
Thanks for having me.
Okay, well, what should we do?
What do you think?
Wow.
Well, I don't know.
I would imagine a certain fraction of your audience
is going through the usual sort of...
They randomly call us either Brett or Eric.
Yes.
So far as I can tell.
Which our parents also did while we were growing up.
I suppose that's true.
Including the pets' names were also sometimes thrown in
if I recall correctly.
That's true.
Okay, so if you don't mind,
I was trying to think about the fact
that we have an opportunity to do something
that might be slightly different
because you and I share a lot.
And what I thought is that we should begin
to really focus on areas of your expertise
with respect to biology,
rather than the way in which many people have come to know you.
So can I ask you to just quickly dispense with in 30 seconds
how the world has come to recognize you
if they recognize you at all?
Sure.
To the extent that I am recognized,
it is typically as a result of the meltdown at Evergreen
and my stance...
It's Evergreen State College.
Evergreen State College in Olympia, Washington
where I taught for 14 years,
along with my wife, Heather Hying,
who taught there for 15 years.
We faced a mob of people who accused me of racism
and these were students.
They were students I had never met.
And the event was so colorful
and eventually when the world caught on
to the fact that the protesters who became rioters
had uploaded footage to the net.
And so the whole event could effectively be seen
from their perspective.
It raised interest in some other quadrants.
So for example, I ended up on Joe Rogan's program,
which is the place I'm probably most recognized from.
And my first appearance there,
we talked about the Evergreen situation.
And anyway, that's the bulk of how people know me.
All right, so you were a biologist teaching
at a relatively obscure college
that had previously been known for social activism.
And I didn't love your introduction
because when you say, well, the students accused me of racism,
that leaves sort of a weird question.
Why was he accused of racism?
Let me solve the puzzle just immediately.
Maybe you can't do this
because that was the closest we'd seen
to a Maoist takeover inside of the United States
of America ever.
Like it was a case of mass insanity
and the videos showed it to be mass insanity.
And unless you had been indoctrinated to believe
that Maoism of some form, Maoist reeducation was normal,
the rest of the world said OMG,
what the heck is going on at this completely insane?
And it wasn't just like one of these college craziness pieces.
This is really an episode of broad institutional madness
that was localized there.
And I just, I want to take it to be self-evident
because it is self-evident, the video exists.
And if you took the people who were trying to pretend
that you were a racist in their own terms,
that was sufficient to, it was like the unreliable narrator.
They were debunking themselves in the eyes of everyone
who hadn't come under the spell
of this particular kind of madness.
Well, there's a little more to it
in the sense that they were entirely unprepared
for a white guy willing to say,
no, I'm simply not a racist.
And it just didn't occur to them that that was going to happen.
And it didn't occur to them that my own students
weren't going to flee to their side
at the point that they leveled their accusation
because those things would have been normal
in this environment.
But in my case, I grew up in a home,
there were plenty of flaws in that home as you know,
but one of the places I don't think it was flawed
was that it was very clearheaded about issues
of inequality, race, justice.
And so I really have the sense
that these issues were really not new to me.
And I had a long history at the college,
lots of students of color.
You know, you're explaining too much.
I don't mean to be rude about it,
but they were just crazy.
They were crazy, but my point is
the accusation is in and of itself
so powerful in modern circumstances
that people, the idea of standing up to it
doesn't occur to most people.
And the fact is, I was not well enough positioned,
the thing descended into madness.
It descended into literal anarchy
with armed students roving the campus.
The same mob was looking for me, searching car to car.
For example, it was a very dangerous situation.
With baseball bats.
With baseball bats.
But what I'm getting at is I checked with myself
and did not feel vulnerable to this accusation.
I felt most people could not endure it,
but I was in a position to.
And in an odd way.
You've been effectively driven out of your own university
as an undergraduate standing up against racism.
Indeed.
These people had flipped the script
and said, if you don't sign up for our racism,
you're a racist.
Yeah.
They didn't.
I don't, you know, here's the thing.
I have two documents that I've studied
that have a lot of longevity to them.
One begins with, we hold these truths to be self-evident.
And the other one begins with in the beginning.
And I think we've made a huge mistake
taking this as an argument.
It's a non serious position held by morons and idiots
or people who've been indoctrinated and infected
with an idea that there is something left wing
about being a racist.
I'm not interested in that.
And I also think that it's really important
to stop giving these people their due.
Like it's really important to exclude them
from the conversation because if you have to have
a three day symposium as to whether or not racism
can be redefined in a way that makes it impossible
for certain people to be racist,
but impossible for other people not to be racist.
There's just no point.
It just needs to be thrown in the garbage
because it's a suicide idea that wastes everyone's time
and plunges the world into stupidity, madness and hatred.
Well, you and I are in total agreement about the necessity
to shut the bad actors out of the conversation.
I do have some concern about a large number of people
who fall into one or two camps.
They're either confused or they suffer from so much cowardice
that they will sign up for ideas
that they ought to know are wrong.
Yeah, but I think you're not getting the message.
We've made a huge mistake and I refuse to spend time
because these people have decided that this is a tax
that we should pay that they have a serious point.
It's a non-serious point.
It's a terrifying, moronic, non-serious point
that you can redefine racism to be anti-racism
and anti-racism to be racism.
Nobody knows this better than me.
Great.
Okay, are we done?
We are.
With that aside, my concern, you know that I play this game
which is called what is the least interesting,
interesting thing about X where I take a person
and I take their top characteristic.
So for example, the least interesting, interesting thing
about Dolly Parton is that she's busty.
The most interesting things is that she's a genius level
songwriter and a fantastic singer and entertainer
and a great business woman.
It doesn't matter, but the key point is we get hung up
on some stupid superficial characteristic
and we don't see the actual interest or majesty in a person
and I feel like that has happened to you.
I feel like at some level, having known you
for a very long time, you are an incredibly interesting
person for totally different reasons than the reasons
for which you have become famous.
And I would like to use this episode and you're,
by the way, you're welcome back anytime.
Love to do a series with you.
Love to make this a regular part of our lives
if people like it.
Cool, I think you and I both hear a lot of curiosity
about what our relationship is like
and what our discussion sounds like
and so I think there's lots of room for that.
What I'd like to do is to try to be the foil for you
that I don't think anybody else can be
because I've actually, I was tracking this story
very early and by the way, when I originally tried
to get you help and allies, I think almost the only person
who could get what was happening at Evergreen State
was our mutual friend, Sam Harris,
who was willing to amplify and retweet this
because it was so confusing that most of the rest of the world
just never seen these kinds of arguments.
Now it's much more common for people to be aware
of these problems, but when it started happening,
we didn't even have any framework
for how to think about these.
Yeah, and in fact, Sam, I remember even the content
of his tweet where he entered this discussion,
where he suggested that what was necessary
was a deep programming for these people
and from living inside of this very confusing scenario
to hear a message of reason from the outside
that it was visible how insane this was meant a lot to me.
Really, it changed things.
It was like a reality check.
Sam is a real hero in that regard.
It's just amazing that he got there early
and he got there correct and more power to him.
Yeah.
Okay, as you know, I was not happy about you
being at Evergreen State College
long before this problem was occurring.
I viewed you as sort of retreating
into this very obscure college
and using the undergraduates
as if they were graduate students,
teaching very advanced concepts
and running kind of a weird Harvard-style program
with very adventurous material
with no recognition that this kind of
unusual educational environment was even occurring.
Fair or unfair?
Well, it's mostly fair.
It was not really an appropriate place.
I don't regret it.
I think for the last year or two,
Heather and I were living on borrowed time
that this could have come for us in a worse way
and it could have come for us at any moment.
But the thing about the job I had
was that it was the upside
of a crazy experiment in education.
The founders of the college had broken
every rule of a normal university
and half of what they did in breaking it was crazy
and half of what they did was brilliant.
Nobody ever bothered to separate the two
from the prototype and fix the broken part.
Didn't happen.
But the administrators had no power
and very little knowledge
about what was going on in the classroom
which meant that I could create a learning environment
that worked both from the point of view of students
and worked from the point of view of me
and my objectives to keep advancing a research program
that frankly I would have had no way
to keep on at a normal college.
I would have been so burdened by teaching
that I couldn't have combined the two things.
So anyway, I do think one has to figure out
how to make their way in the world financially.
One has to figure out where to raise their kids
and from many perspectives as much of a mismatch
as Evergreen was for me in some ways.
In some other ways, it was not a bad place to be part.
It gave me, I was anonymous from the point of the world
and I could make progress on biology.
So I have fewer regrets than I might.
Okay, this is so uncomfortable
but it is also the real substance of our relationship.
I always resented the fact that you really excelled at
and enjoyed teaching as much as you did
and you saw this in terms of a place to play with ideas,
to teach students, to have a pleasant and enjoyable life,
healthy as it was in the great outdoors, et cetera,
blah, blah, blah.
And I still see these characteristics in you
and it drives me nuts
because you're your own worst enemy in some ways to me.
What you really are to me is an unbelievable
thinker and researcher
and beneath this kind of very nice friendly pedagogue
is a thinker that the world doesn't know
and I've watched recently your interactions
with Richard Dawkins and it was absolutely infuriating.
I mean, he's very clear, he's like,
well, Brett is a real hero so far as free speech
and standing up for free inquiry goes
but he's very confused.
Well, no, I don't think that that's right.
I think that you guys had a really substantive interaction
about biology, which I wish he would spend more time on
because he's phenomenal at it when he's focused on it.
And you're phenomenal
and that was supposed to be a really different conversation
but because we got to know you the wrong way,
in my opinion, you're always the guy who is strong enough
to stand up to students at an obscure place
and this completely masks who you've always been
and you're not willing to take up the yoke
which is the more important role for you.
Well, I don't know that I'm not willing.
I think you and I have a different approach to this
and it may be birth order stuff or whatever
but I also have the benefit of you in the world
doing what you do which I do wonder sometimes
what would have happened to me at Evergreen had,
I only had my own tools at my disposal.
It's quite possible I would have been effectively
snuffed out in private
and I don't know what I would be doing at the moment.
As it happens, the Evergreen story turned into rocket fuel
that propelled me into a strata
where there's lots of interesting things to do
that may not be exactly what you're talking about
but they make sense.
Yeah, it's frustrating.
I'm trying, I don't think you understand
what it is that I'm trying to do here.
I believe that you're miscategorized
and you're really not grasping that this is my opportunity.
No, I am grasping.
What I think distinguishes us is that we have
very different styles with respect to approaching things.
I, for example, take a certain perverse pleasure
in watching Dawkins slowly move in my direction
which I believe is happening.
Now, I would like him to move faster.
He's not a young man and I think it's actually
quite important that he recognize
where the errors in his own thinking are
and to be honest, I believe I know
where at least several major ones live
and I know what he would see if he could be
brought to understand the nature of those errors
and to confront the, frankly, the portal that opens
if you walk through a slightly different door
than he's been walking through.
But it didn't work in one evening.
I always wondered if it would.
But there is still the possibility
that he will have the epiphany that I hope he will have.
I really don't understand
even where we are in this conversation.
Okay. Okay.
You're not getting it.
You were found at Evergreen State College.
That is a communication to the world
that you weren't very good.
Yep.
And every time I try to say, this is completely wrong,
you don't catch the ball that's being thrown to you,
which is you're not understanding what you're up against.
He doesn't take you seriously
because you don't have a list of publications
that speaks to who it is that you actually are
or what you've done or where you've been.
And as a result, you continue to be the good guy
who's very well-spoken, very thoughtful,
says very interesting things
and constantly gives away power to other people.
I don't think so.
There's a question about how to confront the opportunities
that you've got at the hand you've been dealt.
And I think you and I share a certain delight
when we do our homework
and we discover something interesting
and absolutely nobody else gets it,
that would feel bad to most people
because they would feel like, what am I doing wrong?
Why does nobody else understand this point?
So you and me, that feels good.
It is to know that you have achieved something,
you have discovered something,
and that nobody else can even recognize.
It gives you some sort of sense
of how far ahead you might be.
The question is what to do with those things.
And there, I think the question is,
if I went through something with,
I said something intemperate to the new atheists
and suddenly Steven Pinker, Jerry Coyne,
Michael Shermer, Richard Dawkins,
and Neil Shubin came at me all at once.
Not on the topic that I had caused a fence,
on a totally different topic.
They had picked something off my YouTube channel.
Jerry Coyne had claimed to have debunked it.
He was wrong, but nonetheless,
it provided fodder for them to attack.
Their point was that I didn't understand natural selection
and that to the extent I might believe
I knew something that other people didn't know,
the right thing to do was to submit it to a journal
and go through peer review.
I pointed out to them that peer review
was not Richard Dawkins' style
and that he in fact advanced the ball
for the field substantially,
but has barely published a paper.
That backed them off that course
and their tune changed to,
well, how about a book then?
That's what Dawkins did.
And to me, that's a win.
The idea, I'm not against peer review.
I want peers to review my work,
but I don't want it snuffed out in private.
And so to the extent that that little battle
was the result of them underestimating me
and not knowing that something was going to come back
that was cogent and responsive
to the world as it actually is
and having them back off their position
and say, yes, actually, a book would be a fine thing.
That was positive movement from my perspective.
They underestimated me and they had to back down.
So I can't regret that too much.
To me, on a different time scale,
I believe I'm making progress toward a goal
that you and I agree is the right one,
but I'm not sure that coming at it guns blazing
is the way to go.
Well, I'm happy to stop the interview
right here and right now
because that's adorable and it's sweet
and it's incredibly patient
and it's a beautiful sentiment.
But I also feel like I sat through all of the wars
and battles to get your ideas into the world.
And I'm not funding that program.
Does it sound to you like I'm surrendering?
No, it sounds to me like you're boring me.
Like this is really uninteresting.
If I think about what actually happened.
Yep.
This is a mis-telling, this is not even honest.
Okay.
Floor is yours.
Okay.
I wanna talk about something I'm calling the disc,
the distributed idea suppression complex.
And it has nothing to do with Richard Dawkins
and peer review and Jerry Coyne
and a bunch of other things that almost nobody cares about.
It has to do with about a 50 year period
in which great ideas got buried
no matter where they occurred
because great ideas were very likely
to be highly disruptive to an institutional order.
And between you and your wife and me and my wife,
three of our four theses
ran into incredible problems
because they were trying to break really new ground.
And the amount of delay that you suffered,
I mean, you're now 50 years old.
This is a very late start in a career.
You're coming from a very inauspicious place.
You've been fitted with a story
which is he's a sweet guy who stood up to a mob
and that's his claim to fame.
And you're not really understanding
that you're not being taken fully seriously as a biologist.
In part, what Jerry Coyne is saying to you is,
hey, you're really unknown to us.
I'm at Chicago, Richard Dawkins was at Oxford.
You know, he was the Simone professor for the...
Public understanding, sure.
Science.
Right.
And the point is you're not part of the super club.
Don't get confused.
You're just some guy who stood up.
Oh, I understand that's what's being said.
Okay, so my point is I don't have time
for your fairytale about a healthy and kind and sweet.
Who said anything about healthy?
Look, I'm interested in winning for a couple of reasons.
One, the payload, the insight that opens the portal
to the part of biology we don't know
because we've had bad Darwinian tools.
And for those who heard that as an attack on Darwinism,
it is not Darwinism needs fixing
and there's nothing wrong with what Darwin contributed.
It's what happened after.
Will you do me a favor?
Yeah.
I really, you've got your own podcast.
It's called The Dark Horse, right?
The Dark Horse podcast.
I think this is a great place for you
to explore gradual change, incremental progression,
turning minds around, opening hearts, all this stuff.
This isn't your podcast.
This is my podcast.
Right, but we're talking about my life.
Am I right?
We are talking about your life,
but if that's what you wanna do,
I don't know that I'm that interested
in doing what I was going to do,
which was to try to get your ideas
out into the world curated by somebody who isn't you.
You know, one of the things,
and by the way, I've had this issue with you.
Do I take it we are not in a podcast at the moment?
We are in a podcast.
Oh, believe me, I'm gonna put the hurt on you
because you are backing out of your role in history
and I'm sick of it.
Look, one of the things, look, I love you
like you were my own brother.
Amazing.
It is the case that you have always done this
and it means that you're not taking your place properly.
And I had to go to the extraordinary length
of tricking your advisor, Richard Alexander,
one of the great evolutionary theorists of our times.
Absolutely.
Right, one of the absolute tops,
member of the National Academy of Sciences,
chaired professor at University of Michigan.
I had to trick him into writing a letter of recommendation
for you so that we would have some record
as he was getting on in years of who you actually were
because I knew that Evergreen was not going to be,
it's not part of the game.
That's true.
Okay, here's what he had to say about you.
Brett Weinstein may well be the brightest graduate student
I have ever known.
His thesis defense involved only one
of his four thesis chapters.
And it alone was far more than sufficient as a thesis.
I don't know anyone who knows more than Brett
about not only a wide variety of topics
in biological evolution,
but the problems and possibilities of cultural change
and the means of bringing people together
and solving difficult problems.
For 40 years, I held frequent,
sometimes almost daily seminars with my doctoral students
in evolutionary biology.
While he was a student,
Brett was a major element in all of those seminars.
When he spoke, there was almost always respectful silence.
Even when he was junior to most of the people involved,
Brett's thesis topics are so significant and timely
and so well-treated on the lifetime patterns of humans
and other species, the function and importance of telomeres
and explaining lifetimes as hedges against cancer
and several other important topics
such as species diversity and sexual selection
that he dramatically converted on the spot to reluctant.
And by the way, reluctant is British understatement here.
I will say mildly and skeptically evolutionist,
members of the committee.
I think that despite his youthfulness
in terms of the characteristics I listed earlier,
Brett is the best candidate.
You were the number one student of Richard Alexander
who ended up at the Evergreen State College,
which was a giant mistake and it was always a mistake.
You should never have been there.
I was completely right.
I'm sorry to be overbearing about it,
but like how many years did I tell you
you gotta get out of that place?
Well, look, first of all,
Dick was very clear with me about the fact
that were he trying to compete in the modern academy,
he did not believe he would have succeeded.
And he was clear about the fact
that there was no good solution to the problem.
So, you know, I can't say that I've ever heard that letter.
I can't say that I've ever heard that letter.
I believe you have quoted parts of it to me before.
Yeah, because you're gonna do this thing
where you downplay your gift and I'm sick of it,
I'm tired of it, I just have had it.
And part of it, what happened is
that you are now distorting the history of science.
You have a place in the history of science
that you are not taking up, you are not advocating for.
There's something that you don't like about this.
No, no, I don't think this is true.
I just think I'm pursuing it,
maybe I'm pursuing it in a way
that it doesn't work out in the end,
or maybe I'm pursuing it in a way that it would,
maybe there's more than one path.
I've been through too much helping you,
trying to make this happen,
where people become aware of the complex of ideas
that you've been pushing out.
And my feeling about this is that you maintain
this very beautiful, very calm position.
And it's enough already.
Like you have a story,
and that story is an explosive story.
I mean, I'm happy to bury this podcast
so that nobody ever hears it.
But I wanna actually explore the truth
rather than this extremely good for you, high fiber,
you know, low sugar bowl of granola.
I just don't think that's where we are.
I've been very clear and very public about the fact
that I think my entire field is spinning its wheels
that they've gotten caught by a few bad assumptions
and that they are spending decades in the weeds
for no good reason.
That there is a way out
that I didn't know what it was for a long time.
I did figure out what it was
and getting their attention
on the question of what they're doing wrong
is a Herculean task.
I've made that clear.
The question is,
what is the best use of the opportunity that I've got,
the cards that I hold,
and we have a difference of opinion
about what that might be.
And you may be right.
I'm not saying you're not right,
but I am saying that there's at least a discussion
to be had about what the best way to play the role is.
Why don't we have that on your podcast?
I accept your invitation to come on.
This is my podcast.
We're gonna do it my way.
Let's do it your way.
All right, I'm the older brother.
I've noticed.
I have the ultimate martial, martial, martial problem.
All right.
Brett, this is not the story of your career and your life.
What happened is is that you got stuck
at the University of Michigan
for a very long period of time
because you made people very uncomfortable.
What he's saying in that letter of recommendation
is that you wrote four different theses
so far as I can remember.
And they were on widely different topics.
Furthermore, here's an interesting one.
No one that I know of,
despite the amount of discussion that's been spilled
in ink over evergreen has put you together
with the hero of a book called The Taper's Morning Bath
that appeared years earlier.
It's odd that it never shows up.
Right, it never shows up.
And then you're also the recipient
of the Golden Gazelle Award,
I think of the National Organization of Women
for standing up to ZBT at the University of Pennsylvania.
And it got ejected effectively from an Ivy League school
due to threats of physical violence
for standing up for black women being exploited
by white men.
I mean, like, then you're like the field assistant
and main student as an undergraduate
of another legendary evolutionary theorist, Bob Trivers.
And somehow, you know, Richard Dawkins is treating you
as a guy who isn't really his equal.
He's, you're not really a major theorist.
You're very confused and you need to learn more
about the extended phenotype and all this kind of nonsense.
And you're so polite that you're not even just,
I don't know, I think you're out to lunch.
No offense.
I get it, I get it.
And, you know, like I said, you may be right.
Okay.
I wanna talk about the subjects
that you're most associated with starting with your thesis.
And I wanna get into the science of it
using the portal podcast.
If people get left behind, they get left behind.
Okay.
Okay.
Now, Dick Alexander is a legend in evolutionary theory
because it's very hard to use evolutionary theory
to make predictions that can be verified in the world.
It's sort of like this loose amorphous collection
of techniques and viewpoints.
And people sometimes think it's not even a theory
because it doesn't seem to be predictive.
And then there are a few predictions.
So am I right?
Darwin started this game off by predicting
that there would be a moth with a really long tongue
because there was a flower that had a really long distance
to go before you could get the nectar out of it.
Yeah, he had been sent an orchid by Bateson maybe
with a foot-long corolla tube.
And he reasoned very straightforwardly
that it would make no sense for this plant
to have invested in this very long structure
if there were not a tongue that could reach down
to gather the nectar.
And I believe he did not live
to see the discovery of that animal.
I didn't know that.
But he was absolutely correct.
There is a moth that has this beautifully long tongue.
It's a sphingid hawk moth,
one of these sort of hummingbird-esque moths.
And anyway, yeah, it's one of the major predictions,
demonstrations of evolutionary theory
actually can be used to predict phenomena
that you haven't been able to observe.
Okay.
And Darwin famously couldn't, for example,
like I don't know how much I've talked about this in the open,
but my favorite Darwin book
is the one he wrote after Origin of Species,
which is on the various contrivances
by which British and foreign orchids
are fertilized by insects.
It makes absolutely no sense as a title
because I think that's what's so funny about it.
And because orchids are so highly speciated,
it turned out to be the perfect place
to explore the consequences of evolution.
And he couldn't figure out my favorite,
I don't know whether it's clade or group of-
Clade's pretty safe.
Yeah, clade of orchids, the ophry's system,
which is just unbelievable
because it mimics the pollinators,
the female of the pollinator species,
using pheromones and some sort of replica,
good enough to fool males into copulating
with the lower petal level of an orchid.
It's a step-
3D replica of the female that smells like her.
And it just so happens that when the male lands on it
to copulate, he gets these pollen packets glued to him
and then he screws up and makes the same mistake
at another flower and delivers.
Well, he may, he may or may not.
Let's put it this way.
But only the ones that screw up twice get to fertilize.
The reason that it gets glued to him
is that it has worked enough times
for this strategy to have been so beautifully refined.
Right, so Darwin saw that there was this mimicry going on,
but he couldn't put it together.
He spent pages and pages not getting it.
So I think it's very funny.
So he predicts some things,
but he can't predict something else
in a very closely related system.
Okay, fast forward.
Dick Alexander comes out with a crazy prediction,
which I still don't fully,
I mean, it's just amazing that he made it,
where he says, I bet that you will find
the kind of behavior we associate with wasps and bees,
which is in this clade called hymenoptera and ants,
of you social breeding patterns and organization.
But in mammals that will live underground.
So I think the way this story actually worked,
he didn't say you will find it.
Or you could find it.
What he said is, in principle,
there's no reason that a used social animal
has to be an insect.
That in fact, you could get such a thing in a mammal.
And then he predicted,
I forget how many characteristics there were,
but he named some large.
There's something funny about the system of ants, bees,
wasps, which is that they've got this very strange
haplodiploid chromosomal characteristic.
Do you want to say a word about that?
Cause that makes the prediction more.
Sure.
So it has long been understood that the hymenoptera
behave in this incredibly cooperative fashion,
which effectively all of the workers of the colony
forego reproduction in order to advance
the reproductive interests of the queen.
And it was late discovered
that actually their genetic system
is unlike our genetic system
and that males have basically
half a full complement of genes.
They have enough genes to function,
but they have half the female complement of genes.
And for reasons that are mathematically
slightly complicated and require a chalkboard,
the females are more closely related
to the daughters produced by their mother
than they would be to their own offspring.
They're three quarters relatives to her offspring
and they would be 50% relatives to their own offspring.
Spot on.
So they are actually evolutionarily favored
by very standard mechanisms.
Once you understand the crazy genetics underlying the thing,
they are favored to engage in behavior
where they forego reproducing and foster them.
Once you understand the chromosomal difference
of this system, it is far less surprising
that it would behave as a loosely coupled,
in some way, don't overreact unified organism,
which is distributed, that there's a way in which,
and there are ways in which the hive behaves
as a super organism and there are ways in which it does not.
Yeah.
Well, all I wanna say is,
I'm not sure how clear we have the story
with respect to what precedes what.
It's completely plausible that the behavior precedes
the evolution of the genetic system.
And I actually frankly just don't know
where that research stands at the moment.
We have found many other insect systems
that have various versions of this.
Interestingly though, the termites are not hymenoptera.
Right.
And the termites engage in this behavior.
The termites are you social, but they're not haplodyploid.
They're you socially behave very much like ants.
Okay.
But they don't have the strange genetic system,
proving that the behavior can evolve
even in the absence of this genetic system.
Well, the reason I bring this up is that if you look
at, for example, Prince Peter Kropotkin,
the great anarchist theorist,
he was obsessed by finding analogs in nature
of preferred human structures.
And so it's very simple to say,
why can't we work together the way an ant colony
all works together?
And then there's a counter to that,
which is, well, they have different chromosomal structures.
And then you say, well, but yes,
but that's a kind of a cheap way of achieving you sociality.
There are other ways of,
so we through this crazy kind of investigation,
we get to Dick Alexander who,
and I think you're quite correct,
says there is nothing prohibiting us from finding
a mammalian species that exhibits ant and wasp like behavior.
And it would be likely to have these characteristics.
It would live underground in a...
Yeah, underground, I believe eating tubers was on the thing.
It was a crazy list.
Crazy things.
And you know, my understanding from Dick,
Dick is now unfortunately dead.
He died a couple of years ago.
But my understanding from him
was that he didn't actually expect to find such an animal.
He was speaking very abstractly,
just completely theoretically.
And at the point that he unleashed this idea,
it may even have been in a talk rather than a paper,
the information made it back to him.
Actually, what about naked mole rats?
They match your characteristics.
And study reveals then that actually they are you social.
They behave very much like ants, bees, wasps, termites, et cetera.
And...
This is like one of the great moments in modern science.
I really think it is.
It's certainly the moment that people who know
who Dick Alexander was references sort of the high watermark,
because it's comprehensible.
You know, Dick did a lot of things.
He was very interested in people and other things.
But this particular demonstration was so,
it would be impossible to have predicted such a thing
and have gotten lucky.
He had to have understood some things
that were extremely deep in order for that to have worked out.
And so, yeah, it's really, I don't know of another example
in evolutionary theory of a prediction
that clean of something that obscure.
I know one.
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
I once heard a story about a graduate student
who predicted that the breeding protocols
of laboratory rodents would compromise the laboratory system
in terms of its relationship to so-called wild type versions
of the same species.
So you have the bred rodents
and you have the wild rodents
and that they would be distinguished by virtue of the fact
that the non-coding nucleotide sequence
at the end of the chromosome, known as telomeres,
would be wildly different in length
if the prediction were true from pure evolutionary theory.
Wild.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, that story, it didn't happen exactly the way
you said it, but you know, it's been a lot of years
and takes a second to get back there.
Yeah, I mean, you did that.
Yeah, I did that.
And that story, unfortunately, has not really been told
and it is in some sense your central origin story
as a biologist.
It's a pretty good one and it definitely changed
the way I saw myself in a way that has been very productive.
Okay.
I want you to talk to me about that story
and because I lived it with you,
I know that it happened
and I know that it got buried.
And I know that it's part of what I'm calling
the distributed idea suppression complex
because quite frankly, you were not the only person
who was a part of the story and the story had to die
because it said something,
which is that the power of your theory was sufficient
to predict from first principles,
a manifestly observed and surprising result
within molecular biology from pure evolutionary principle.
Yep, all right.
I'll try to do a short version of it.
You know, this is long form podcasting
and you tell however long the story is,
I guarantee you when people finally figure out
that it may be that the rodents that we've used
to test drugs on, let's say, might be compromised
and compromised in a way that would be potentially
extra permitting of potential toxins.
In the form of pharmaceuticals,
I think that it's gonna be fascinating.
It's gonna be repaid, it's gonna repay the study
that it will take to understand the story.
The floor is yours.
All right, so let me just set the stage a little bit.
Evolutionary biology has-
Give me a favor.
You can get into a very patient, careful,
pedagogical mode.
This is an exciting story.
Tell it the way it actually occurred.
I'm gonna tell it the way it actually occurred
and I'm gonna be careful.
I'm gonna try not to be,
there are parts of it that were for a very long time
kind of emotionally fraught, but anyway,
I think I remember it well enough
to do a sparse but complete version.
Evolutionary biology has long been biased
in the direction of abstraction
rather than thinking about mechanism.
That is to say, we deal in the phenomenology of things.
We talk about gross patterns that we see in nature
rather than talking about the fine detail
of what drives them.
That has been changing in recent decades,
but it has a long history
and it comes from a very mundane place.
That mundane place is that we just haven't had the tools
to look, for example, inside of cells
and we haven't been able to read genomes.
We could have been able to read a gene here and there
at great expense, but the ability
to peer into genomes is pretty new.
The ability to peer into these molecular pathways
is pretty new.
So anyway, there's a historical bias
in evolutionary biology against mechanism
and in the direction of phenomenology.
I have never been particularly fond of that bias.
I've always been interested in mechanism.
I'm interested in the phenomenology too,
but I've always kept my foot in the door
with respect to mechanism.
And as an undergraduate, I took lots of mechanism classes.
I took a development class
at the time developmental biology was,
in my opinion, a bit stuck.
It is now unstuck in a very dramatic way.
But anyway, I took a developmental biology class.
I took some immunology or immunobiology.
And anyway, I was armed with these things
in an environment in evolutionary biology
where most people were not.
Most people were in the phenomenology.
And one day I happened to be in a seminar.
Dick Alexander was running a seminar for graduate students
and a student was there who was very out of place.
He was studying cancer and he on a lark
decided to take an evolution seminar
that looked good to him in the catalog.
And it wasn't right for him.
And he gave a talk at some point.
And his talk was on his work with cancer.
And frankly, because all the other people in the room
were evolutionarily oriented,
nobody was really tracking what he was saying.
But what he said struck me like a bolt of lightning.
He said that in the realm of cancer research,
people were looking at telomeres,
which are these repetitive sequences
at the ends of chromosomes.
And they were toying with the possibility
that the fact that these telomeres shorten
every time a cell divides,
that that is providing a resistance to tumor formation.
Very straightforward.
Counter counts down and that would prevent.
So let's just, for the audience
that maybe needs a tiny refresher.
We are taught in general that DNA is a string of letters
called nucleotides, A, C, T, and G.
And that in general, three of those that are adjacent
to each other form words called codons.
And for every word, there is an amino acid
or an instruction to stop coding for amino acid.
So this is the instruction tape that tells us
how to string together amino acids into proteins
to make machines, molecular machines.
This is some weird different thing
where the region of DNA could be interpreted
as coding for a protein, but in fact,
might be instead just counting how many nucleotides
are at the end, it comes across as a counter.
It's a little better.
It was known not to be a coding sequence.
It wasn't a useful sequence.
So what you had is a bunch of DNA
at the ends of chromosomes that's just repetitive
and the number of repeats varies
and the number of repeats correlates
with basically how many times the cell
can divide before it refuses.
This being interpreted as a cancer prevention thing
made perfect sense, but the reason it struck me
like a bolt of lightning was that I was well aware
of the existence of tumors and their implication
in something entirely different.
What they had been implicated in as far as I was aware
was something called Hayflick limits,
which were the tendency of perfectly healthy happy cells
to grow and grow and grow and grow in a Petri dish
until they hit some number of divisions
and then to stop without apparent dysfunction.
So this was the theory of Leonard Hayflick.
Yep.
It was the discovery of Leonard Hayflick
who basically overturned the prior wisdom about cells,
which was that they would grow indefinitely
as long as you kept feeding them
and making an environment that was conducive to division.
So I don't exactly know why that result
had been misunderstood at first.
Maybe somebody had a cancerous cell line
and so they got the wrong idea and it just spread,
but Hayflick checked it and it turned out to be false.
Turned out there was a number of cell divisions
that healthy cells would go through
and then they'd stop.
The mechanism was not obvious to Hayflick,
but later it became clearer and clearer
that the mechanism was these sequences
at the ends of chromosomes,
which shorten each time the cell divides.
And the implication was that potentially
this was a cause of what we call senescence,
what in common parlance would often be called aging,
the tendency to grow feeble and inefficient with age.
If your cells are each in a cell line
and that line has a fixed number of times
that it can replace itself before it has to stop,
then at some point your repair program starts to fail
and that repair program failing across the body
looks like what you would expect aging,
follows the pattern you would expect
if cell lines one by one stopped
being able to replace themself.
So we know that there's a special sort of,
I don't want to call it cell line
because you keep correcting me
for every tiny mistake I make in speech,
but if we divide our body into two kinds of cells,
soma and germ, where germ lines are that
which has a hope of immortality through reproduction,
then it's the somatic cells that have finite limits
on their ability to undergo mitosis
and cellular repair and what not.
And the germ line can't because if it did,
your lineage would go extinct as a result of-
Small addendum.
Small addendum, so it's the soma,
the parts of your body that don't go on
to produce babies that have this effect.
The reason it struck me like a bolt of lightning
was that I was aware of another very elegant piece
of research done by a guy named George Williams.
George Williams had finally-
One of the greatest of modern evolutionary.
One of the greatest modern evolutionary biologists,
I actually knew him a bit too.
He's also now gone unfortunately,
but George Williams had laid out in a beautifully
elegant paper, the evolutionary theory of senescence.
It is an absolutely elegant argument that says
that in a lifetime, there are, well,
let's start somewhere else.
A creature is built of parts and traits.
It has a relatively small genome
and a relatively high complexity.
At the time it was thought there might be
100,000 genes or something and you have maybe
30 trillion cells with a ton of complexity.
In order to get that small number of genes
to dictate how to produce a creature that complex,
the genes are doing multiple things.
Williams' point was when a gene has multiple effects,
what we call a pliotropy, those effects may be good or bad.
If effects are good early in life-
By good we mean contributing to fitness.
Fitness enhancing traits at some cost late in life,
then they will tend to be accumulated by selection.
The reason for that is because,
well, there are two ways to think of it really.
If a negative trait occurs very late in life,
then a large number of individuals who have the gene
for that trait will not live long enough
to experience the harm.
So if it came bound to a positive thing early in life
and you're dead before the late life harm accrues,
you got away with it, right?
So Williams' point was he was building on
earlier work of metawar, but let's skip that for the moment.
His point was because of trade-offs,
you will have lots of traits
that are good early and bad late.
Selection sees the early traits much more clearly
than it sees the late traits,
and it prioritizes them because of the discounting
that arises because so many individuals
aren't around to experience the late life harm,
and if they are around to experience the late life harm,
a lot of their reproduction is behind them anyway.
So they count less.
Selection counts more early in life,
and this timer starts at the moment of first reproduction,
the usual moment of first reproduction.
For its viability.
For your species.
So this is a beautiful hypothesis,
and it was beautifully articulated
with many predictions,
which is the way really good work is done.
And we knew at the point that I was entering graduate school,
we knew that the hypothesis was right.
It was a theory, and the reason that we knew it was right.
The hypothesis is the antagonistic
Pliotropy Hypothesis.
Antagonistic Pliotropy Hypothesis for senescence.
We knew that it was right because it predicted
so many phenomena in nature that we could readily
go out and measure, and this is again,
where the phenomenology versus mechanism comes in.
We know that creatures that are poisonous
or have a shell that protects them
or can fly away from danger
are disproportionately long-lived for their size.
Small creatures tend to live shorter lives
than large creatures, but if you can fly,
then you're off the line of the other creatures
of your size.
So for example, they're small bats
who have been recovered after 30 years in the wild.
So creatures that have special protections
have disproportionate longevity.
This matches William's hypothesis
because it is their ability to fly away from danger
that makes the likelihood
of their experiencing late life costs go up.
So selection sees their late life
more easily than it sees a small creature.
I just wanna say something.
This is a podcast.
It's an unusual podcast and we can talk science
and I'm thrilled, but we always have our colleagues
in our minds when we're talking to a general audience
and the colleagues are always in a gotcha mode.
Well, you forgot about this, you didn't mention that.
I'm even interjecting little bits
because I wanna make sure that you're immunized
from all the bullshit that the act is.
So I just wanna make a general statement,
which is we can come back and get into any level
of specificity that somebody wants to
if they wanna take you down.
I don't care.
What I'd love to do is to tell the story with enough punch
that people understand what happened.
So we're about to jump into the meat of the matter.
The theory of antagonistic pleiotropy was well-established,
but in four decades of research on the genome,
nobody had found a gene that matched it
so that we knew that this explanation was right,
but we couldn't find the genes that caused it.
The mechanism was missing.
So anyway.
Does that mean to be a gene
that has to be protein coding?
Yeah.
Anyway, I knew this as sort of,
I was well familiar with Williams paper
at the point that I saw this talk on cancer
and I knew already about the question of senescence,
everything came together.
This was obviously the answer,
where the missing pleiotropy was.
Well, the missing pleiotropy had to do with a telomere,
which wasn't exactly a gene.
It was genetic, it was DNA, but it wasn't a gene,
but it was perfectly capable of producing
exactly the effects that we see in senescence
across the body.
So a counter and not a protein could be the answer.
Right.
Now, I saw this instantly at the point I heard this talk.
I raised my hand and I tried to articulate
what was so obvious in that moment
and I couldn't compel a single person in the room.
They couldn't even understand what I was trying to say.
Which is bizarre.
It was bizarre, I mean, Dick was in the room
and Dick was very broad-minded
and I just couldn't make it clear.
Let me just interject something,
you can correct me if I'm wrong,
but my impression of it is that it was a very simple idea
attended to by an outrageous amount
of irrelevant complexity
that had to be very carefully pried off of the central idea.
Yeah, I think that's well said.
So anyway, I left the room feeling like
I had just glimpsed something so important,
and I wondered, could it be right?
And I started to just do the first bit of library research
to figure out whether somebody else knew what I knew or...
So I'm not even sure that you fully said it.
I wanna make sure that I'm even clear on it
and I'm gonna, I think I'm right,
correct me if I'm wrong.
What you're saying is,
what if the hay-flick limit is a protection
against dying from immortality at a cytological level
that some cell gets a dream of immortality
that it shouldn't have because let's say it's a somatic cell
and it says, okay, I just wanna keep dividing
and dividing and dividing.
Nature knows how to do this
and that immortality, which sounds good at first,
is actually called cancer.
And so in computer science, we would say, okay,
you've introduced a recursion limit into a while loop
or a for loop to make sure that you don't have
a resource leak, which is what a tumor is.
Yeah, so let me say it this way.
If you have a damage to a tissue cut on your arm
or something, the cells on both sides of that cut
suddenly become aware that there is a problem, a gap,
because they can't hear a neighbor on one side of them
and their natural reaction is to start growing
into the gap until they can hear a neighbor,
which is the sign to stop.
If you imagine that something like that
is occurring in every tissue or almost every tissue,
the problem is that that means that every tissue
in your body for which that story is about right
is in danger of having damage from radiation or whatever,
turn it deaf to its neighbors.
A single cell that has turned deaf to its neighbors
will suddenly start replicating.
And if it is deaf to its neighbors,
then there's no message that it's gonna hear
that's gonna tell it to stop.
So that thing, imagine any cell in your body
just taking off and growing and growing and growing.
Okay, this is terrifying.
What you're saying to me is that if I'm comprised
of let's say 30 trillion cells and I view them
as each let's say subroutines,
any subroutine that is not denucleated, right?
Like this wouldn't happen in the lens of your eye
because the nucleus has been removed.
But any other reasonable cell is potentially your assassin
because its mitosis process might completely go rogue.
It can run away.
And so the rather elegant and very simple idea
is that there would be a hard limit
so that any cell that had become damaged,
so it started down this path would just simply run
into the number of cell divisions
it was allowed in a lifetime and it would stop.
So like the moles on my face that some of my less coof
commenters love to talk about
are effectively attempts to kill me that may have stopped
and that the perimeter where they stop
is where the Haiflich limit took over and said,
this cell line must die so that the patient will live.
The name I gave them was prototumor.
And the idea is a prototumor is a patch of cells
arrested at their Haiflich limit
because they had become unregulated.
If you go to the dermatologist and you say,
what do I look for?
They tell you certain things to look for.
So a round patch of cells
that suddenly becomes irregular in shape,
well that's what would happen if you took one of those cells
and gave it a second mutation and it started growing again.
Got it.
So anyway, the idea that a limit on cellular reproduction
is adaptive to protect you from cancer.
There's a little bit of a mind bender
because what you're telling me is that I've got
to avoid immortality which can kill me
and that the solution to not dying is death.
Yes and that what selection does is it balances
these two competing forces to give you as much vigor
and longevity as it can.
So all of the other diseases and insults
and things that I can die from sort of start to fade away
and at the complete core of biology in this theory,
there are two things that I can't get away from.
One of which is death by immortality
and the other one is death by recursion limit.
That's it.
It's a very elegant thing and now the problem is
is that there's all this weird attended complexity
that you had to deal with.
So it's like stem cells versus germ versus.
So when I went into the literature,
what I found was that people had played around
in the neighborhood but that there was a particular fact
which blocked every attempt to make sense
of what was going on and the fact was
that rodents were understood to have
ultra long hyper variable telomeres.
And I didn't know what that meant at first
but the more I looked into this possibility,
the more I realized that dozens of long standing problems
would be solved if my hypothesis was true
but that my hypothesis couldn't be true
because basically mice have long telomeres in short lives.
Why is that?
And I banged my head on the table for a couple weeks
trying to figure out what was going on.
Yes, maybe even literally on occasion.
But the question was, I began to wonder
if there was something wrong with the idea
that mice had long telomeres.
Sometimes like in Hayflick's case,
it turned out that a bunch of people were copying
some wrong result in it.
So it seemed like a lot of people had seen it
but only one had not checked.
Was it true that there was something,
everybody was parroting one study
that said mice had long telomeres?
And it turns out lots of people had tested it,
mice have long telomeres,
like 10 times the length of human telomeres.
It just didn't fit.
So finally, it occurred to me that it was possible
that what was going on, I discovered something
in trying to figure out what they meant by mice, right?
There's a lot of species of mice
but all the mice that we use in the lab
with rare exception are from one genus
and often from a particular target species.
You were focused, if I recall correctly,
on muspreetus, musculus?
Mus musculus, which is the common one.
What shocked me was that it turned out
all the mus musculus that were being used
in labs across the country
and in many cases farther afield than that
were coming from one place, which I had no idea.
There was one.
I remember getting a phone call when you said,
what do you know about the Jack's Lab?
The Jack's Lab in Bar Harbor, Maine, right?
They seem to be the source of everybody's mice.
And so it began to be, it was a possibility
I could not shut down in my mind
that there was something about what was going on
at the Jack's Lab that had resulted
in the mice that were being sent out
to all these other laboratories.
As if they were representative animals.
Right, these are model organisms.
People were just using mice
because mice were a convenient mammal
but they're all coming from one place.
And it began to occur to me that that one place
was not just a source of mice
in the sense that we might think it,
it was actually a selective environment
that was impacting those mice.
And when I dug deeper, it turned out
that the mice had all, they were descendants
of a long lineage that had lived in captivity
under conditions at the Jack's Lab.
And at some point, I realized that the most likely thing
going on was that there was something
about this environment that had wildly elongated
the telomeres of these mice.
And that was simultaneously an unbelievable idea
but the only one I could think of
that made sense of everything I had seen.
And so-
Well, it's unbelievable because the consequence of it,
I mean, look, I have not even heard
whether anyone has said, yeah, we did that,
we screwed that up.
But it is like your favorite model organism
for mammalian trials being screwed up
by a central facility because also there's this weird thing
where medical people very often stop taking
into account evolutionary theory
because they treat that as, well, that's that class
I took in college or the beginning of graduate school.
Right, so I began to focus on this question
and I did something that was the right thing to do
but I did it in a way I will forever regret.
I found somebody who was represented in the literature
who I regarded as very well-versed.
They made sense to me, their papers.
My name was Carol Greider.
Carol Greider is now a Nobel Laureate.
She was not at the time.
She was the co-discoverer of the enzyme telomerase
which is the enzyme that elongates telomeres
when that occurs.
With the famous and co-nobel recipient
that she was the student of Elizabeth Blackburn.
Elizabeth Blackburn, exactly.
She was her student and they shared the Nobel Prize
with Shostak.
In any case, her work seemed good to me.
I called her up cold.
I went into the insect division office
and I sat down at the phone and I called her.
I said, Carol, you don't know me.
I'm a graduate student at Michigan.
I'm an evolutionary biologist.
I'm racking my brains trying to understand something.
Can you tell me, is it possible that mice
don't have ultra-long telomeres,
that it's only laboratory mice that do?
And she said, huh, that's really interesting.
I'm pretty sure that mice have long telomeres universally
but it is odd that if you order musk spritus
instead of musk musculus and you order from European suppliers,
the lengths are very different than what you get
if you order musk musculus from the jack shop.
Next slide.
And I said, whoa.
And she said, yeah, that's really interesting.
And then she said, I can't remember if it was
the same phone call or if we had a second phone call
but she said she was gonna put her student,
her graduate student, Mike Heeman,
who I think is now at MIT, on the project
and he was gonna do a little work to figure out
whether there was anything to this.
And Mike did some work.
They sourced some different strains of mice
that were actually not wild mice.
Wild mice would have been the right test
but she couldn't get wild mice for obvious reasons.
She sniffs by the woods.
Right, exactly.
And so she got several different strains of mice
that had just been in captivity much less time.
She actually got one strain of mice
that was treated very differently in captivity
but never mind.
She put her graduate student on it
and he measured their telomere lengths
and I get this excited email.
Mike Heeman sends me an email that says effectively,
whoa, the hypothesis is true.
Mice have short telomeres, right?
Now.
I'm sorry, this is like as close to a who done it discovery,
jacuz, the mice, you know,
I remember you were over the moon.
I still am.
I still can look at this email
and it is the moment at which I realize, A,
there's no way I'm kidding myself
about how well I understand this, right?
That prediction was. How old are you?
No, no, no, no, no, when you get this email.
When I got that email, I was, it was 1999, 1998,
something like that.
Okay, so over 20 years ago.
Yeah, so I get this email and.
By the way, that puts you at about 30.
You're at the beginning of your career
and you, in this story, you've just predicted that.
It's a stunning coup for a graduate student
and it wasn't in my advisor's wheelhouse.
So it was clearly my own work
and my dick was great about not.
Okay, you are a dirty dog liar.
And I was there at the time.
Yeah, or.
Or, so we're both dirty dog liars
about this particular story or,
or one of the great moments in evolutionary theory,
which is, and let me just curate this
because I'm not a biologist,
but I think I can more or less get this
because it's a breeding protocol that is the alteration
in the evolutionary landscape for these laboratory mice.
And because it's acting on a non-protein coding region,
the adaptation to a change in the breeding protocol
can be extremely rapid.
It doesn't have to undergo
some sort of completely crazy typical Darwinian story
about random mutation and some of them being retained
and others being rejected.
It's, it's even better than that.
The creatures are presumably,
so we haven't gotten to what the breeding protocol
has to do with this, but the creatures are built
in some sense to detect how dangerous their environment is.
And to the extent that the level of extrinsic danger
changes, their telomeres respond quickly
so that they are better adapted to the environment.
So they're built to detect the environment
and then what is actually a strict matter of market forces.
Okay, so there are no predators in this environment.
There are no predators in this environment.
And we, we're not killing them particularly early
based on their skills.
So environmental insult is sort of absent.
Environmental insult is more or less absent.
What we are doing is imposing an economic rule
on breeding so that we can maximize the rate
at which we turn mouse chow into mice,
which is obviously economically the right thing to do
if you're selling mice to all these labs.
You want to produce as many mice as cheaply as possible.
So producing as many mice as cheaply-
You're the genius of the market.
It's the genius of the market.
There you go.
So in order to produce as many mice as cheaply as possible,
what you do is you don't breed animals past eight months.
They breed faster when they're younger because of senescence.
And so you don't breed older mice,
you throw them out and you replace them with younger mice
who breed faster.
What that effectively did was it eliminated
the selection against cancer
and it turbocharged the selection
in favor of youthful vigor.
Well, let me see if I get this.
In general, almost all cancer,
like cancer of the germline happens early in life,
but all the other cancer in general
is much more common later in life.
I got a pause.
I realized I forgot to tell you one thing Carol told me
in my first phone call with her, that's vital.
In addition to telling me that there was something funny
about Muspiritus, she told me that consistent
with the hypothesis that I was conveying to her,
that all mice die of cancer.
She said, if you let them live long enough
and then you do the necropsy,
you find cancer of one kind or another.
And that was perfectly consistent
because they had these wildly long telomeres
and no cancer protection.
That would be the prediction.
That's an extrapolation.
It's not really all mice.
It's all mice that we see in the lab,
which happens to be the mice that are ordered.
Right, she was still speaking from the mindset
of somebody who thought that the mice
she was getting in the mail were representative
of mice in the wild.
Got it.
Okay, so let me clear up why the breeding protocol.
And I should say that it is the breeding protocol
that is causing this.
That part, I would say, is still a hypothesis.
It has not been directly tested by anybody.
But what I would say is many hypotheses were tested
in the aftermath of the discovery
that lab mice have bizarrely long telomeres
and wild mice don't.
And no other hypothesis has stood up to scrutiny.
So it is the last hypothesis standing
and I'm all but certain that it will turn out to be true.
Yeah.
The reason that the breeding protocol
has this weird effect is that when you throw out the mice
at eight months of age,
you eliminate selection against cancer,
you turbocharge selection in favor of.
So when you throw out the mice
for breeding purposes at eight months of age.
Right.
When you throw them out for breeding purposes
at eight months of age,
you are increasing the importance
of their early life breeding
and you are discounting anything related
to their ability to fend off cancer
because they don't live long enough
in that period of time to get cancers that kill them.
And so what has happened according to this hypothesis
is that the mice that have longer telomeres
have driven out the other animals from the colony.
The trait of having long telomeres
has swept through the colony
and the telomeres have been elongated to an absurd degree
creating animals that do all die of cancer.
And interestingly enough,
another thing that's evident from the literature
is that if you look at their tissues,
do not age in the way that a normal mammal's tissues age,
they remain young.
Well, so there's one aspect of aging
but that there's a far darker interpretation
of what you've just said.
If I'm understanding it correctly,
never taken a class in biology
but I have lived this adventure with you.
Those tissue have at a histological level,
at the level of how cells are organized,
the possibility of radical histological repair.
Yes, radical, effectively indefinite capacity to repair,
which is gonna come back in the story
in the worst possible way.
Dude, this is like, I mean, I just forget how great of a...
Me too, I go years sometimes
without telling the story deeply about it.
Yeah, okay, so the story now gets kind of ugly.
I recognize I've got all the pieces
of the puzzle necessary to tell the story correctly.
I have taken on a co-author,
we've found the literature necessary
to do it in proper scientific form.
This came from you,
but I wanna mention your co-authors name.
Yeah, Debbie Cizek.
Okay.
And Debbie was an excellent co-author,
strong contributor to the paper.
Anyway, we put together over the course of a year,
I took a break from effectively my real dissertation work
and wrote a paper.
Dick thought it was a fantastic paper.
He was blown away by it.
Well, I remember the revisions and I remember,
this was like, I mean, if I think about what's on the line,
like this combines one of these freak situations
where you're using evolutionary theory to predict something.
And in this case, it's at the level of molecular biology.
So with Darwin's Orchid, it's a tongue
and with Dick's thing, it's behavior in naked mole rats.
This thing is actually at a molecular level
and it couldn't be more important
if mice are going to be the major system
in which we are going to test drugs,
which are highly sensitive to what?
Histological repair.
Yep.
It's so profound on several different levels
that I'm super energized about getting this into the world.
It's transformative.
Dick looks at the paper, he says, this is fantastic.
He puts me through the ringer to get it really tight.
We get it tight.
We send it to George Williams.
The number one guy in the world.
The number one senescence guy at the evolutionary level
in the world.
And he writes a beautiful recommendation letter
for this piece.
We're going to send it to nature.
George Williams tells nature,
you need to take this piece very seriously.
We send it to nature
and they send it back with one of their absurd form letters
that says that the nature of the article
is such that it's probably not of interest to their readers.
And we're, I mean, we had a good laugh about that.
It's cancer, it's senescence.
Dude, it's so bad.
This is a response that indicates either malfeasance
or an Eliza program or the janitor ended up responding,
who didn't know any biologists.
It's the craziest thing.
And, you know, the cherry on top
is that they're turning down George Williams recommendation.
Like, how great, do they know who he is?
Like, what, where is-
On what planet?
On what planet do you turn down his recommendation
to look at something about senescence?
So anyway, I get back this rejection
and I have purposefully not shown Carol Greider
the paper in preparation,
which I am afraid she might have read some way.
The reason I didn't show it to her
was because I wanted to preserve her independence
as a reviewer for the paper.
I was hoping because I still thought
she was an ally of mine.
I was hoping that nature would send it to her to review
and that she would look favorably on it,
especially since it was, you know, very clear
that she had done-
She wasn't sure it was her lab?
Right, it was-
It made the confirmation?
Yeah, and I, oh, another thing I forgot.
I asked her at some point,
something that now rings in my ears.
I asked her, Carol, you've now got this result
about, no, actually lab mice have long telomeres,
but wild mice have short telomeres.
That's a big result.
The hell of adulthood.
Where are you gonna publish it
so that I can cite it in my paper,
which is the natural thing to do.
And she says, we're not going to publish it.
We're going to keep the information in house.
That was her phrase.
I was too young to understand
what the hell she was talking about.
I'll be honest, I'm 54
and I don't quite understand it myself.
Well, it's so heartbreaking.
What she has effectively done is decided
I could publish this result.
And then everyone would have it.
Huge, but then I'm on a level playing field
with everybody else.
If I don't publish this result.
I have a stream of papers I can get at.
Then I can start predicting other results.
Nobody will know how I am doing that thing.
I will look like a super genius.
And so holding it in house is a mechanism
for a whole slew of paper.
To be 100, you can afford to bend over backwards
and not make inferences.
Let's say the following.
Holding it in house is a seemingly inexplicable decision
in science, but for the fact that it fits
at least one story of this kind,
which is that it is consistent with wishing
to publish a stream rather than the source
of the information that would allow you.
So you can either do one discovery
or you can do a stream of predictions.
And that makes a certain amount of sense
given the ruthlessly competitive
grant winning environment.
And we don't know exactly what happened,
but there is no world that I know of
in which you're allowed to hold back
that kind of information
because in part of what's on the line.
Right.
So, I mean, this is not just a question
of academic interest.
Because these mice are used for medical testing purpose.
Not even that.
It's medical testing, but it's also all of the science
relative, at least to cancer,
senescence, wound healing, all of the science
that is stacked on these mice that is contingent
on their function relative to their tears
is all compromised.
You're letting year after year of this stuff accumulate.
It's malpractice at an incredible level.
So I don't know that she has turned on me,
but I call her up and I say, Carol,
we are stunned to find that our paper was turned away
without review from nature.
Without review.
Without review.
We need your help.
Can I send you the paper and have you look at it?
And she says, yes.
And I send her the paper
and she sends back the paper with an unbelievable number
of intense criticisms that are not sensible.
She pans the paper, does not believe a word.
You still have the card.
I have that paper.
I have that paper with her handwriting.
I believe I also have the FedEx envelope
in which she sent it to me.
But she hates the paper
and I have now forgotten a bit of the sequence.
But as I am attempting to fix this up for another journal.
Oh, here's, sorry, I hate to tangle this story,
but it's important to get it right.
You haven't told this enough.
I haven't told it in a very long time.
After the rejection from nature,
after Carol has seen the paper and said it's cruddy,
I get a letter I don't expect from a journal.
I don't, I know it exists,
but I'm not super familiar with it.
Experimental gerontology, experimental gerontology says,
we are the editors of experimental gerontology.
We have heard a rumor of your work.
We're very interested.
Would you be willing to submit a version to our journal?
And oh, this is happening prior to Carol
looking at my paper and panning.
So the only way they would have known about this
would have been from nature or from Dick or,
we don't even know.
I'm pretty sure I know based on what they, again,
I was too young to sort out really what they were saying,
but they indicate that they're fans
of antagonistic pleiotropy, right?
So what happened was George Williams having heard
that it got rejected, contacted some friends of his
and was like, you should really take a look at this.
So I begin the process of revising it.
I've shown it to Carol.
She's panned it.
I send the revised version to experimental gerontology.
They send it out for review.
As you know, review is blind.
You don't know who your reviewers are,
but you can often tell who they are.
It's not as obscure depending.
If it's a small field.
Yeah.
So they read the acknowledgement of my paper,
which are now on alert about Carol.
I have to thank her in the paper for the work she did,
but I'm now on alert that she's gone strange
on the subject matter of this paper.
And so I've broken her out separately in the acknowledgements.
I don't wanna be as gracious to her
because she's being hostile to me,
but I don't wanna not acknowledge her.
So I acknowledge her separately.
Experimental gerontology,
then I am 99% sure it sends the paper to her as the reviewer.
She pans it.
Absolutely brutal critiques,
just pages and pages and pages of them.
They are not high quality critiques.
I could go through every single one of them.
Don't bother, this is a podcast.
No, I can't do it here, but I could have then.
No.
But I didn't know what to do
because she was in line for a Nobel Prize.
That was well understood.
I didn't wanna accuse a leading light of the field of not...
Okay, this is exactly why I got angry
at you at the beginning of the podcast, you moron.
No, no offense.
You were in line for a Nobel Prize.
You didn't, I mean, I'm sorry.
There is an aspect of this,
about giving away your power before you've even accused me.
You don't even have a PhD at this point.
I'm just saying, at the time, if you mentioned her name,
people would say, oh yeah,
her Nobel Prize is one of these years, right?
So my point was I was in the awkward position.
I didn't understand what I was supposed to do.
I didn't wanna send back a review that said,
I don't know who the person is who reviewed this,
but they don't understand the material
and all of their critiques suck
because I didn't wanna accuse somebody
who was that powerful of not getting it.
I mean, here's the problem.
What do you do?
You don't actually have evidence in the hard form
where you have got videotape,
but on the other hand, these are small worlds.
All of this is preposterous.
Right.
So I sit on the review for too long,
not knowing what-
Well, you don't know how to-
I don't know how to handle it.
I'm sorry, I have no advisor.
Your advisor was not equipped for the modern era.
He wasn't equipped for the modern era.
He wasn't equipped for molecular biology.
That's true.
I finally settle on a strategy that I can live with
and I send back a note.
I send back the review and my note says,
I don't know why,
but this entire list of critiques is not high quality.
If you would like to point me to any of the critiques
in this list that you would like me to address,
I am more than happy to do it,
but I don't think it makes sense to address the entire list.
And as I recall it, I hit send on the email
and within minutes, maybe it was an hour,
I got back a response.
Your paper has been accepted for publication,
which blew me away because I-
Makes no sense according to regular protocols.
Right, it makes no sense because clearly
they're supposed to send it out for review.
The reviewer's supposed to say
whether it's supposed to get published.
The reviewer said it shouldn't be published.
I said I refuse to address these critiques
unless you ask me to.
The editors have overridden the reviewer.
They understood the reviews were cruddy.
They needed me to say that in order to justify
the move that they wanted to make.
They knew the paper was good
and the review was crap.
So they effectively overrode normal peer review.
Was my paper peer reviewed?
Well, it was by the editors who were experts.
Let me jump in.
Peer review is a cancer from outer space.
It came from the biomedical community.
It invaded science.
The old system, because I have to say this
because many people who are now professional scientists
have an idea that peer review
has always been in our literature
and it absolutely, motherfucking has not, okay?
Used to be that the editor of a journal
took responsibility for the quality of the journal
which is why we had things like nature crop up
in the first place because they had courageous,
knowledgeable, forward thinking editors.
And so I just want to be very clear
because there is a mind virus out there
that says peer review is the sine qua non
of scientific excellence, yada, yada, yada,
bullshit, bullshit, bullshit.
And if you don't believe me, go back and learn
that this is a recent invasive problem in the sciences.
Recent invasive problem that has no justification
for existing in light of the fact.
Well, not only does it have no justification for existing.
When Watson and Crick did the double helix
and this is the cleanest example we have,
the paper was agreed should not be sent out for review
because anyone who was competent
would understand immediately what its implications were.
There are reasons that great work cannot be peer reviewed.
Furthermore, you have entire fields
that are existing now with electronic archives
that are not peer reviewed.
Peer review is not peer review.
It sounds like peer review, it is peer injunction.
It is the ability for your peers
to keep the world from learning about your work.
Keep the world from learning about your work
because peer review is what happens,
real peer review is what happens after
you've passed the bullshit thing called peer review.
Yes.
Okay, so the paper was accepted
by experimental gerontology.
They went on to publish it.
This is called Life Slow Fuse?
No, Life Slow Fuse was the title as sent to nature
and I changed the title because I did not want
to compromise the story.
I didn't want to confuse the story.
The original submission was called Life Slow Fuse.
We probably have a copy of that somewhere.
Of course.
All right.
Then the experimental gerontology paper, what is it called?
The Reserve Capacity Hypothesis.
That's right.
Okay, which is a much less catchy title, but nonetheless.
The paper, I'm very proud of how it's written.
People read it who were not expert could understand it.
The abstract is extremely clear and it ends
with the clear point that because we have unearthed,
we have predicted and Carol Greider has shown
that wild mice telomeres are short
and that telomeres have been elongated by captivity,
that there is a clear danger that the mice we are using
for drug safety testing are biased in an egregious way
and the bias would look like this.
A mouse that has very long telomeres has
an indefinitely large capacity to replace damaged tissue
and it has a vulnerability to cancer
that is preternaturally high.
So we may be overrating, if we use these mice,
we may be overrating the danger of causing cancer
and vastly underrating the danger of toxicity.
And in fact, one of the things, so the point was
you give a mouse who's got an effectively infinite
capacity to replace its tissues, a toxin
and either the toxin is so deadly that it dies right away
but if it doesn't die right away,
it just eats up the insult.
So those animals would lead us to release drugs.
By insult, what you mean is cellular necrosis?
Damage, yeah.
What this would cause us to do is release drugs
onto the market for human use that are highly toxic
across the body and.
Wait a second, if the mouse standard was the last standard.
Well, no, even if it's not the last standard.
Well, it's important to say this.
The problem is, I mean, you can imagine how hard it is
to test on large, slowly reproducing animals.
Well, and the ethics of testing on humans is very.
Absolutely.
Restricted, so mice is the last cheap place.
It's the last cheap place.
Large N data.
Not only large N, but it's the one place
that you can make the following move.
You can imagine that in many circumstances,
the accelerated lifespan, the accelerated life cycle
of mice allows you to see long-term damage
as it would accrue in humans on a very short time scale.
That doesn't work with monkeys.
It doesn't work with human patients.
It works with mice, maybe.
But in the case of mice with ultralong telomeres,
those insults will be invisible.
Well, let's just, I wanna back up
because I think this is a really important part
of the story.
What you're saying is, if you take an organism
that has an expected, let's say 40 year lifetime,
it's very expensive time-wise to say we ran this experiment
and found that there was no immediate damage
that was visible, but towards the very end of their lives,
we saw a market increase in morbidity or...
Yeah, I mean, if you took a drug
and it knocked 15 years off your life on average,
that might not show up in any notable way
in a short-term study.
If there was pressure to...
Right, and nobody is gonna wanna let drugs,
you don't wanna wait 40, 50 years
to find out what happens to these patients.
So what we do is we make the assumption
that if we give large amounts of a drug to an animal
that lives a very short life, we will see those effects early.
And if the animal happens to have ultralong telomeres,
you won't see those effects early.
So it's a perfect storm for causing us to release drugs
that should never have been released into public.
Can you think of one?
Oh, I sure can.
Vioxx, for example.
So Vioxx was discovered to do heart damage, right?
Heart damage, why do we know that it's heart damage?
Well, the thing about hearts, A,
hearts for reasons we can get into maybe another time,
hearts have a very low capacity for self-repair, right?
That's why they're vulnerable to heart damage.
Not much turnover.
Not much capacity for repair, not much turnover.
Now, there's an adaptive reason for that,
but hearts don't repair themselves very well
in a healthy person, and when they fail,
it's hard to ignore, right?
If somebody who's 30 has their heart fail,
there's questions asked, right?
So anyway, Vioxx was released into the public
having past drug safety testing.
This isn't the only system that doesn't have
a lot of mitosis, like for example, neurons.
Neurons don't have a lot, cartilage doesn't have a lot.
Your eye cells don't.
Now note, all of the tissues I've just mentioned,
when was the last time you heard about anybody
having, you know, cancer of the cartilage
of their knee, cancer of the heart.
No, if they get brain cancer, it tends to be glial.
It's glial cells, exactly.
So the tissues that have very low capacity
for self-repair do tend to wear out,
and they don't tend to get cancer,
which is exactly one of the predictions of my paper.
Right.
Okay, so Vioxx is known to do heart damage.
That created a big scandal,
because how the hell did it get through
drug safety testing?
Turns out a lot of drugs have done this.
You've seen it in Gleevec, Fenfen, Erythromycin,
your doctor probably still doesn't know that Erythromycin
does heart damage.
Right, there's all of these cases of drugs
that were released, and then later understood
to do heart damage.
Now my claim is they don't actually do heart damage.
They do cellular damage, and the heart damage
can speak to it.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
Geez, this is like another layer of this thing.
It's like a huge fucking nightmare, right?
Well, but it's this thing about perseverance
and the disagreeability.
You've got all sorts of things that sound
like something that invalidates the theory,
and then it's sort of theories upon theories
that allow you to see the original simplicity of the idea.
I see the original idea is very simple,
but if you know a lot of weird facts
about what you think are just mice
or something about hearts,
you can't put together what is going on.
The idea that ambient damage is only manifest in the heart
because that's the one system or the neural system
that really doesn't have a lot of mitosis.
So, well, piece of advice to anybody
who finds themselves in remotely similar waters.
The signal that you are on the right track
is that stuff starts canceling.
Complexity in the story, which has accumulated
because something was missing,
starts disappearing in the story.
You begin to take on a model anyway.
So yes, we've got a situation
where we've got a bunch of drugs mysteriously producing
heart damage.
So now you've got a paper that's out.
You've got a real world application.
You've got a theory coming out of evolutionary theory.
It's making a molecular prediction.
Yep.
Successfully predicts mouse telomeres.
One of the world's leading labs has confirmed the prediction.
Yep.
Where are we now?
What year is this?
God, well, let's see.
The paper came out.
And my recollection, and just to be horrible about this,
is that your fucking department at the University of Michigan,
which has some great people, is also holding you back
and innervating you year after year by not allowing,
because this is groundbreaking stuff.
This is Nobel quality work at least one or two times over,
in my opinion.
Now, I could be wrong.
I'm biased because of your brother.
I'm your brother.
But what concerns me here is that you
are not comfortable with what this story really might be.
No, look, it's not mine to judge.
I'm very proud of this work and the work.
But the problem, Brett, is, is that Jerry Coyne and Richard Dawkins
did not know that Dick Alexander, Leonard Hayflick, and George
Williams were all on this thing because that community had broken down.
The irony is, I sent a letter to Dawkins
when this was going on asking for his help.
And he sent back a letter saying, this is very interesting.
It's not my area of specialty.
You should talk to Bill Hamilton.
And I was in the process of writing a letter to Bill
Hamilton on Dawkins' suggestion at the point
that Bill Hamilton came back from Africa having,
he was pursuing a remote hypothesis about humans having
accidentally unleashed AIDS into the world with polio vaccine.
But anyway.
So Bill Hamilton, I'm sorry, not everybody's going to know.
This is the guy who came up with inclusive fitness.
Yes, he was one of the great geniuses
of evolutionary biology in the late 20th century.
He was held back by John Maynard, right?
I don't know that story.
I think Maynard is interviewed on Web of Stories.
Maynard Smith, yeah.
Sorry.
Yeah, Maynard Smith, right?
Yeah.
And Maynard Smith talks about, it was very unfortunate.
I didn't really understand who he was.
You should check it out.
It's pretty amazing.
Well, as long as we're doing this, years
after this story had cooled, I ran across a paper
from John Maynard Smith that I now
don't remember exactly what its nature was,
but it appeared to predict my whole story, right?
And John Maynard Smith was dead.
I couldn't contact him.
I really wanted to say, oh, my god, you nailed it, right?
But anyway, so I was in the process of writing
to Bill Hamilton to get his help.
He was sort of on a par with George Williams,
and he went into a coma on his trip back from Africa,
having contracted malaria.
And then there was, I think, complication with aspirin
that he took or something.
And he never woke from his coma, and he died tragically.
So he never got the letter.
And who knows what he would have done.
OK, but look, that's a tragic and interesting story.
But Hayflick was positive towards you.
Williams was positive towards you.
And Dick Alexander, those were the three that blew me away.
That's a huge amount of firepower.
That's a lot of firepower, and it wasn't enough.
But here's the punchline to the story, effectively.
At the point that my paper is out,
and it very directly alleges the danger
with these drugs being released when they're not safe,
and the drugs have started emerging and turning out
not to be safe, and the government is now really
interested in what's going on.
The government puts together a FDA commission
to study the question of the book that they put out,
and literally a book that they put out at the end of their study
is called The Future of Drug Safety.
I hope it's a blue ribbon panel.
It's not exactly clear what it was.
What is clear is that you can search the manuscript
of this book.
Nowhere does it mention mouse.
Antagonistic plyotropy.
It doesn't mention antagonistic plyotropy.
It doesn't mention the genus Mus.
It doesn't mention telomeres.
It's not in there.
It's alleged in the literature in broad daylight
that this is what is causing the problem.
And now you're, see, this is the vampire effect
where you don't exist if nobody reacts.
Right.
And so I start going to members of the press.
I think this is a huge goddamn story.
Somebody is going to make a career on it.
And I call it members of the press,
and it's always the same, right?
Always the same.
It's always the same.
They're very excited about this story.
You know, they're initially, the reporter.
The reporter is excited.
And then the reporter.
Talks to someone.
They talk to someone, and then either they stop
returning a call, or they say,
I'm sorry, the story doesn't hang together.
It's again and again and again.
And there's just nothing you can do.
You remember what I said about the distributed idea
suppression complex?
Yeah.
And the people who man it don't even know
what they are for most of them.
They don't know what role they're playing.
Look, you see the same thing with like string theory
because none of the reporters are actually string theorists.
So they're dependent upon this.
You saw this with this woman alleging
that she had the Epstein story three years earlier
but that the editors said, well, we might lose access
to the baby pictures of the royal grandchildren.
Like, you know, you're seeing this with catch and kill.
There's this, I mean, I want you to take this seriously.
You're just showing a part of what I'm calling the disc,
the distributed idea suppression complex.
We have 50 years of such stories.
Yep.
And it happens that in our family,
three out of four of us created such a story
trying to get a PhD.
And the idea for me is that every time you have to go
into some closed system, like there's a committee meeting
or there's a blue ribbon commission
or there's a peer review process
or there's a, what do they call them?
The panel's study groups for grants.
That's where the disc lives.
We know that it's localized to the things
that protect the integrity of science.
It's an autoimmune disease where what we have
is an ability to stop highly disruptive ideas
from getting a hearing in the general population
of experts by virtue of the fact
that a carefully chosen group of experts
can stop publication.
Because look, if you're wrong about this stuff,
there's a cost.
It's not cheap.
No, I mean, in fact, it would have been career ending.
I'm pretty sure had I been.
I don't know that it would be career ending
if it was done in good faith,
but you know, this is my problem with this
is that you're sitting on one of the great scientific stories.
I would say that I've ever heard,
but you know, I'm sort of kind of saying,
well, Brent, what happens next?
You know, obviously I know a lot of this stuff.
I've forgotten it, but I live this with you.
And this is, I can vouch that this is more or less
the order of events as it was taking place,
as we didn't understand what was happening.
Yep.
So I have to go through the final Carol Greider chapter
in order for this story to fully make sense.
Where the Nobel Prize is given?
That's the very tail end.
Make sure you include that.
Okay, so at the point that my relationship with Carol
is changing its tenor and she is becoming hostile
and I'm not clear on what's going on,
I contact her and I discover through talking to her
that she and Mike are about to publish their paper
on the long telomeres of laboratory mice.
So this is the delta between a wild type
and laboratory mice.
Yeah.
And I'm shocked because she's told me
they're keeping it in house.
And instead they've got a paper that they're,
she says in final revisions, they are that day
submitting their final revisions
to nucleic acid research with their paper.
And I say, Carol, can I see the paper?
And she says yes.
And she sends me a manuscript,
not the preprint of the paper.
She sends me a manuscript of the paper,
no acknowledgments, no figures.
And I contact her and I say,
can I see the acknowledgments and the figures?
She sends them to me.
And I contact her and I say, Carol, I'm disturbed.
This was my hypothesis that you were testing.
I should probably be an author on this paper,
but at the very least I need to be an acknowledgement
in this paper so that I can go back and point to it
and say that was-
It was everything that it was a prediction.
It wasn't just something that was stumbled upon.
Absolutely.
And her response is, I have been through my email
and I see no evidence of the communications
you are talking about.
Now, when I said at the beginning-
You called her.
I had called her.
That was my error.
This is such fucked up.
I mean, I don't swear a lot on this program.
Yeah.
Such fucking academic, petty, stupid ass bullshit.
This is one of the great stories of all time.
It's one of the great stories of all time maybe
and human life hangs in the balance on this.
Nope, sitting.
Right?
Okay, so Carol does get awarded the Nobel Prize.
Carol Greider, Elizabeth Blackburn and Shostak.
Shostak, who mentions at the point
that the Nobel Prize is awarded,
that he was shocked as all hell to get a Nobel Prize
because his work was so deep in the history of telomeres
that we just didn't expect it and suddenly-
No, I should say, I want to be very clear, right?
All of these people have made fantastic,
Nobel-worthy discoveries. Totally.
There's zero allegation that these people weren't deserving.
No. Absolutely.
No, and they, you know, Carol and Elizabeth
got their Nobel Prize for the discovery of telomerase,
which is a huge, huge progress.
So anyway, I don't deny that they were worthy of this prize,
but what Carol Greider does with her Nobel lecture, right?
Nobel lecture being the biggest lecture
a scientist will ever give.
The lecture that- And filmed.
And filmed is she delivers a paper
in which she very oddly has now embraced
my entire set of hypotheses about the effect.
She has come over from the comparison
between the paper of mine that she panned
and said didn't make any sense.
She is now a total convert to the idea
that senescence across the body is being caused
by Haiflich limits that are telomere-based.
Okay, and this is the first public incident
that we know of in which the delta
between the negative comments on your paper,
which is not an anonymous peer review.
We have that- No, we have it, you know, envelope from her.
Got it.
And it's immediately after the Nobel Prize
that the wisdom of that line of thinking is embraced.
Right, but there's more to the Nobel lecture.
So she spends her Nobel lecture
on what is admittedly a very beautiful presentation
of the connection between telomeres and senescence.
She goes through tissue after tissue.
So cirrhosis of the liver is what happens
when you have short telomeres in your liver, et cetera.
She goes through tissue after tissue.
She projects the data, the blot actually,
from the paper with Mike Heeman,
the paper that I should have been a co-author on.
She projects it on the screen,
but she does some weird freaking dance
where she, instead of describing the long telomeres
of laboratory mice as a major bug in the system,
she describes it as a happy accident, effectively,
because it allows us to test certain things.
Like, oh, isn't it delightful
that they have long telomeres?
It's like, what the hell are you doing?
There is so much writing on correcting this,
and you're presenting it like it's just a bonus.
And she, in her presentation,
she's got several experiments
that I did not know she had run that I had suggested to her.
I said, things like, Carol, do you have any idea
if a cell has many different telomere lengths?
Is it the shortest telomere
that controls how many reproductions a cell can do?
She's run that experiment.
Interesting, lo and behold, it's the shortest telomere.
It's a good guess, but anyway.
So she goes through this.
There's no mention of me.
There's no mention of the actual implications
of the long telomeres for things like science
and safety testing and all of that.
And I can't seem to raise the issue
of the safety question with anybody, right?
At best, I get journalists who are interested
until they call somebody,
and the somebody's on the other end, I know what they say.
They say, everybody knows that mice aren't great models.
In fact, there's a paper out there
that says something like the mice lie.
It's not about this issue.
It's just about the fact that mice aren't a perfect match.
The issue in question could be solved.
It could be addressed thoroughly.
And for all I know,
once the Jack's lab figured out what they were doing,
for all I know, they quietly have fixed this.
And there was a, you know,
I've heard that there was a private meeting
in which they decided.
Look, this is the thing.
Yep.
You see something like this in statistics.
Everybody knows that most distributions
that are bell shaped are not normal, right?
Yep.
And on the other hand, we all use normal distributions.
And as a result, there are lots of things
that at one level, everybody knows.
Yep.
But don't percolate down to the important layers
in which we test things.
And I don't know where, like you and I have never
been able to fully put together,
because we're not molecular researchers,
and I'm not even a biologist.
How important are these results?
How robust are they?
Has there been a change?
This is a quiet world at some level.
It's a quiet world, but I think what I have concluded,
working backwards from the phenomenology of the field
and how it reacts to this problem,
is that there's a tremendous amount resting
on failing to acknowledge the error,
even though the error was obviously an honest error
to begin with, they would rather sweep it under the rug.
I mean, imagine you've got all these knockout mice, right?
These knockout mice, there's a major investment in them.
It takes a lot of work to knock out a particular thing.
Dude, you've got a single point of failure
whose projections are tendrils into everything.
Right, and you've got how many careers built on papers
that are now suspect?
This is like a centralized irreproducibility crisis.
Yes, it's that bad or worse.
Okay.
And what happens, let's say somebody hears this podcast
and they check into it and they find out,
lo and behold, this story is true.
Well, now the FDA has a problem.
Wait, wait, wait a second.
I don't want to get too far out over our skis.
We have enough listeners that people will get a chance
to hear an unbelievable story.
And if there are things in the story that are not true
or misremembered or unkind or there've been changes
or maybe we don't really fully understand
how the drug testing works, I'm open
and I want to be very clear
and I want this in the podcast.
I'm open to the idea that the most straightforward
implications of the story are subject to adjustment.
However, having lived the story,
I can say that this was an egregious story
at multiple points with conflicts
between the evolutionary community,
the biomedical community,
the professional publishing community.
This is a terrible story.
And it's also an amazing and beautiful and wonderful story.
And, you know, I felt really lousy at the beginning
of this podcast, goading you and prodding you,
but I am so bored of you.
No offense, as the guy who stood up
to the funny kids at Evergreen.
And, you know, we know what's in the heads of these people.
If you're at Evergreen, you're not that good, right?
And that was like, this is the,
I just want to be open about it.
No, look, I appreciate it.
And I'm glad to have this story out.
The story has many different layers of meaning.
I know, I remember where I was
when I finally sat down
to watch Carol Greider's Nobel lecture.
And I had one of the oddest experiences of my life.
I was actually in a hammock watching her lecture,
watching her present my hypothesis
without my name anywhere on it.
And then she projects this image
from her paper with Mike Heeman.
And I was flooded with two simultaneous emotions
that are just completely incompatible, right?
I've never felt anything like it.
I was absolutely elated to see my work projected
on a Nobel stage, right?
That changed me.
You know what I call the horse and rider problem?
No.
The point of the official complex of science
is to knock the rider and take the horse,
where the horse is the theory
and the rider is the attribution.
Well, this was it.
I was elated and livid simultaneously.
And I can still almost feel what it was,
almost like my body was trying to figure out
if it's one half supposed to feel one thing
and the other feels the other.
But this story has many levels of importance.
Personally, it gave me the ability,
I was already, as you are, very good
at not being persuaded by the fact
that everybody else disagrees with you,
that that has an implication.
Every great idea starts with a minority of one.
And you have to be able to endure being alone
with a great idea in order to advance the ball significantly.
This story was so extreme and so clear in the end
that it just left no doubt.
And I must say, I don't know how young students
can arrange to confront material
so that if they're really good,
they get a clear demonstration like this,
that they're really good so they know to keep going.
I think you're selfish
and I don't mean to be horrible about it.
I think that this story is an inspiration.
I've lived the story with you.
I have my own version of the story
where instead of it being the slide
from the paper of Greider and Heeman,
it's equations that are known as the cyber-witten equations.
And you see what you did with somebody else putting it up
on a board and it starts to change the field
and you suddenly say, you mean I'm not an idiot, right?
And what I'm claiming is that the next layer of this
is, well, why don't you just submit a paper?
If you have ideas, submit a paper,
submit a paper, submit a paper.
Who is this fucking supposed to fool?
Well, right, and this, I mean, I just,
I think the idea is that if you have a seat on the exchange,
you know that by submitting a paper,
your paper will get reviewed
because you present a credible threat.
It doesn't occur to you
that what you're saying is effectively like,
let them eat cake to somebody
whose paper is going to be reviewed
by the person who's like holding them back.
No, this is exactly when Jerry Coyne came at me
with, you know, Brett doesn't understand his Explorer mode
stuff is nonsense.
And then Richard Dawkins echoed it.
Brett doesn't understand natural selection.
And, you know, if he did, he'd submit a paper.
My feeling is I lived this story
and you're going to pretend that there is even a mechanism
Look, here's my proposal.
To get a proper hearing.
Here's my proposal, all right?
Yeah.
I think that you, Pia and myself
are indicative of an entire layer
of Gen X academicians
and now probably millennial academicians
whose work was suppressed
and where don't feel comfortable saying these words,
which is that the purpose of the university system
in the time that we were there
was in large measure to make sure
that big disruptive new ideas did not upset the apple cart
because there was the ability to deny.
I mean, this is what you guys call interference competition,
which is that you keep people from sitting down
in the chairs in a game of musical chairs.
And then the idea is we have lovely parting gifts
for our contestants.
Doug Prasher, who did green fluorescent protein
ends up driving a shuttle bus in Huntsville, Alabama
features in the front page of the science times.
A year later, he's still driving a fucking shuttle bus
in Huntsville, Alabama.
Meanwhile, we're being told
that Americans don't care about STEM.
We're not really good at science,
but thank God, thank God our friends in Asia
are amazing at science
because as bad as our children are
at thinking for themselves,
we've got huge numbers of people who wanna come
from China, South Korea, India and Taiwan
in order to do the study in the labs,
which is actually work.
And I'm the guy who found the secret study in 1986,
which says, hey, we're gonna have to pay
these American academicians over six figures very soon
because of the supply-demand relationships.
And then they took away the demand curves
and they only showed the supply curves.
They said it was a demographic
rather than an economic analysis.
So price and wage certainly didn't enter into it.
Our problem is that the American Scientific Enterprise
headquartered in the National Science Foundation,
National Academy of Sciences
and our university systems is fraudulent
and it serves to suppress radical new ideas.
And I'm not saying that everything
is guaranteed to be right about your story,
but this is a story that you and Carol
should have ward out in public
without your submitting into a system
where you don't know who reviewed this,
you don't know how to respond to the comments,
you can't measure the delta where somebody
in one year says this is crap
and the next year they say, this is my theory, right?
And what I want, I would love to invite Carol Greider
onto this program because I think she deserves
the right to rebut what you're saying.
Yep, that'd be cool.
And Elizabeth Blackburn is fantastic.
I'd love to have, and these are great scientists.
Frankly, you're gonna say this is me being too nice.
I'd even like Carol to come clean
and just put this behind us.
I'm not, you know, at this point.
It's not a question of that, Brett.
There is, you have the right to offer somebody a hand up.
Yep.
But you're skipping the step of, let me be blunt,
how many universities offered you a position
after you were run out of this crappy
Evergreen State College by a weak president
who refused to stand up for academic freedom,
freedom of speech and anti-racism, which you exemplify.
Professorship, zero.
How many biology lectures were you invited to give
at top tier AAU universities,
American Association of Universities?
No.
Association of America.
Okay, what the fuck is that?
I mean, let's just say the word fuck a lot,
because I had Andrew Yang in that chair.
I don't say fuck a lot.
Yeah.
Okay, so the idea is you can have a Maoist insurgency
against a student of Dick Alexander
who's supported by George Williams
with support from Leonard Hayflick.
He's predicting something from evolutionary theory.
It registers in molecular biology.
It may have drug testing implications.
And like nothing, silence.
And you're terrified to talk about this.
I don't think I'm terrified to talk about it.
Well, I'm sorry, can you tell me something?
Where have you told, you have a podcast.
Where is the story written up?
Where is the story lodged?
You and I have the ability to lodge it.
I'm forcing you to do this on my podcast.
I haven't heard you do a podcast about this.
I hear you talking about free speech.
I hear you doing things with the Heterodox Academy.
I hear you doing things in the Intellectual Dark Web,
something with Andy No, something with Antifa.
Okay, the whole purpose of the Intellectual Dark Web
is to keep the channel open based on merit
because if we do something like the diversity of ideas,
for all I know, the people who are suppressing you
are more diverse than you are, you know?
Okay, these are ideas that needed to come out.
There are health implications potentially of these ideas.
This is not ethical to suppress.
And in fact, it's not ethical for you not to talk about it,
not to be rude.
No, no, look, I get this.
I tried for a decade to get this story to come out.
Now, I'm sure I would have been less aggressive
on the social front.
I would have let Carol go in order to get the story out
and get the drug safety issue addressed.
I don't know, I don't know what you regard that as.
It's not a question of this.
Look, there is a Carol Greider and Elizabeth Blackburn
and everybody else in like Senescence land,
Judith Campese, who knows?
Everybody's got a problem,
which is there's way too much transparency
and there's too little funding
and there's not enough autonomy
and there's too much peer review.
And for whatever reason, a new game is cropped up
where everybody says we need more transparency,
more diversity.
We need to make sure that we're not wasting taxpayer dollars.
We have ever more oversight.
All of this is denaturing our society.
We have to compete with China now.
We're gonna have issues with Iran and Russia.
And we are losing our minds
because we are serving a baby boom group.
Almost like you pick a leading university,
it is headed currently by a baby boomer.
It's almost true without even telling me.
If I ask you, hey, Brett, pick a university,
don't tell me which one it is.
I will tell you that the number of administrators
at that university has soared above the levels of admissions.
The tuition has soared above medical inflation,
which is above regular inflation.
If I ask you about the grant structure,
older professors have winning more grants
and younger people are winning fewer grants.
This is a giant complex.
I am going to have somebody from Sugar Baby University,
which is a subset of seeking arrangement
because the baby boomers made student debt
non-dischargeable in bankruptcy.
And now this group is offering older men
the ability to date younger women with an allowance.
So we're starting to get into gray area sex work,
where the baby boomers to keep this lifestyle
to which they've become accustomed
are effectively enslaving.
Well, they're hoarding well-being on every front,
including the sexual, which is no surprise at all.
Here's my claim.
We are in a holding pattern.
I'm in my 50s, you're in your 50s.
I've done work that has never seen the light of day.
You've done work that's never seen the light of day.
Pia's done work that's never seen the light of day.
I don't know about Heather.
My claim is it's time to crash land the planes
into the control tower.
It's enough.
Wholeheartedly agree.
Okay.
Brett?
It's been an absolute pleasure having you on the portal
come back anytime.
I wanna say that anybody who is mis-portrayed
by this podcast is welcome.
We are not claiming to have absolute and universal knowledge.
You are more than welcome to correct the story
if you have knowledge about this that checks out.
And, but the problem is,
is that this is a story that needs to be told.
It's like the story of Margot O'Toole
and David Baltimore that played out at MIT
when I believe that she found
that she couldn't reproduce the work
of Dr. Imanishi Kikari.
And of course the system turned on the person
who is trying to say,
hey, I'm seeing irregularities.
I'm seeing problems.
We have a biomedical complex that needs whistleblowers.
It needs iconoclasts.
It needs challengers.
The food pyramid has been off for years.
Our health recommendations are completely off.
I think that this is an essential story.
You need to move out of intellectual dark web stuff,
which was about keeping the pipe open.
Let somebody else do that.
And it is time to hire you as a professor
at a top tier university.
And I'll be happy to talk to you about what happened
when you and Richard Dawkins
had counted each other on stage in Chicago.
Because I think in terms of pure evolutionary theory,
it is time to boost a young Richard Dawkins
who contributed two of the most important ideas
in the form of extended phenotype in the meme,
which largely dislodges the old Richard Dawkins
and his hatred of religion,
which has appeared to take over his thinking
as regards his own contributions to biology.
We got a lot of work to do.
No question.
All right, my friend.
Well, thanks for having me.
Thanks for coming.
You've been through the portal with Dr. Brett Weinstein,
professor in exile from the Evergreen State College.
Please subscribe on Apple or on Stitcher
or on Spotify, wherever you listen to podcasts.
Navigate over to our YouTube channel.
And not only subscribe,
but remember to click the bell icon
to be notified when our next episode drops.
And hope to see you back on the next episode of the portal.
Be well, everyone.
