Hello, you found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and today we're here with
a fabulous author who many of you will know, Brett Easton Ellis, famous from less than
zero American Psycho, and now the book, White. Welcome.
Thank you for having me, Eric.
I don't know exactly how to approach this, but one of the frames that I have is that
we're sitting here in a very unusual city, that many people don't understand how important it is
and what makes it so unusual. One way I might frame that is that because Los Angeles is the
home of the entertainment industry, there's a weird way in which this is the only city in
the world in which I could make the argument that everyone somehow partially lives here,
whether they know it or not. They've consumed the street scenes, which are used as backdrops for
movies and TV, and they have an idea of what the ethos of the place is, which sort of seeps into
the screenwriter's mindsets, no matter who they are, and in any way that LA is different,
it does broadcast itself to the world. Does that resonate with you and can you add anything?
Well, I think it may be resonated that way for me maybe 10 or 15 years ago a lot more.
I think the entertainment industry is not centralized just to Los Angeles anymore,
or at least that's the way we look at entertainment. It seems to be this kind of global thing and not
wholly concentrated in Los Angeles where it used to be. Though now you might have to
say that it is because Disney is the entertainment business. Disney now owns everything. That's
the conglomerate that is going to produce an inordinate amount of content for the rest of the
world. So maybe it actually has come back here and is centered here. But you know, it's strange.
The entertainment business or the notion of the entertainment business is now this global thing
whether it's China, whether it's India, has a massive, has the biggest entertainment
complex in the world, the highest grossing movies. I mean, the biggest... Sure, but that's a different...
The consumer base for Bollywood is very different. So if you're in Indonesia for example,
or if you're in East Africa, you'd be much more likely to run into somebody. I mean,
famously Raj Kapoor and some of his songs are known by all Russians. But that hasn't had the
same impact, I think. I mean, I think you could take the biggest films like a Sholey and people in
the US have never even heard of it. They haven't. That's correct. But I think it's because LA has
been so central in our minds to the entertainment business since its inception, I guess in the 20s
or before that, that we... That's where all of our associations are. They're all... When we think
about the movie industry, when we think about the entertainment industry, that it's just been around
for so long that we always think that we connect LA with that. And I also think that it has a lot
to do with the way LA looks as a kind of paradise, a kind of Eden-like location. And of course, we've
seen so much of it in so much of the content we've consumed over the years. We've seen its roads,
we've seen its hillslides, we've seen its beaches, we've seen its deserts. That might be one reason
why we connect LA with the business of entertainment. I mean, I think just to rip off what you're
saying, if I just thought about street names, why is it that Mulholland shows up in Tom Petty's
Free Fallen or is the title of a famous David Lynch film, Sunset Boulevard, all of these streets,
only New York might have in some sense as iconic street names, which are sort of projected out
through the industry. So that's one indicator to me that if I thought about streets in Houston,
I have no idea what the name of important streets in Houston might be.
No, nor do I. Yeah, I mean, well, look, so much of the talent that creates this content, of course,
lives here. And they reference everything about the place in their work. And, you know, look,
I have to say, as someone who grew up out here, and someone who has written about this in about
three of my novels were wholly, wholly set in Los Angeles. It is the most creatively suggestive
place that I've ever lived. And I've lived in New York, and I've lived in Vermont, and I've lived
in Virginia, and I spent a long time in England and in Paris. Nothing really compares to Los Angeles
in terms of how it's activated my mind and made me want to write. And I still feel that way. I've
always, I felt that way since I was a teenager. There's a sense of possibilities and a sense of
freedom here because of the constant mobility and especially the freedom I associated with
being a young person in LA and having access, if I wanted to, to be at the beach, and then an hour
later be at the mountains, and maybe an hour and a half later be at the desert, that this whole
thing was so available to me. And I had the mobility to get to all these places. And that
activated a kind of freedom in my mind that wasn't only physical, but it was also creative.
And it's very hard to explain that to people. I mean, when I talk to writers
that I knew who grew up in New York or grew up in the suburbs, I don't know if they really
can access that. And I think about that a lot.
It seems to me that in some ways that huge number of different environments
really defines the place. And because LA doesn't have, in what I consider to be,
a good general description in the world, we don't think about it the way we think about Paris,
for example, or even New York, people very often don't realize that this is the home
in part of the Rand Corporation or that there's an oil field that partially defines the city.
It's not a very easy to understand place. And I thought that in part, just as you're talking
about the natural environments of Los Angeles, also the ability to go back and forth between
skid row and sunset strip and to see the ways in which the illusion of the Hollywood Hills and the
dark underbelly make this place just far more generative and dark. It's one of these places
that fits the description, a sunny place for shady people.
Well, that's what I thought about a lot when I was growing up out here in the 70s and
particularly in the early 80s. For example, Venice is a good place to start. I mean,
Venice in the 70s was dark, very dark place. You didn't go to Venice after night.
You didn't even go to Venice during the day. But I remember they started opening
a few restaurants there. There were a few art galleries. I remember 72 Market Street was one
of the very first restaurants, a very upscale kind of piano bar restaurant in a kind of
derelict alley. And there was something kind of very Los Angeles about that, very thrilling,
right off the beach. And Los Angeles really does have the kind of imagination
that allows that to open there and then flourish into other restaurants began opening. I remember
Wolfgang Puck opened Xinhua on, I think, Main Street. And then everything kind of started to
flower out of that. But that was not unusual because I remember a lot of times there would be,
especially as a club kid and going to a lot of clubs, you go to these really cool
chic clubs in the sleaziest parts of downtown in the lower, lower reaches of Wilshire Boulevard.
And there was just something kind of fabulous about an environment that allowed all of this to
kind of coexist. And Melrose, for example, was a place, a strip that I spent a lot of my
adolescence on. And there were very high end stores next to discount clothing stores next to
vintage sunglasses stores next to the sedious bar imaginable. And the fact that all of this could
coexist on a block was really thrilling to me. And it just didn't exist anywhere else
that I've lived in the world. And it's something that I still appreciate about the city, though,
of course, LA, I think, like all places now to a degree, and I don't want to grossly generalize
about it. But, you know, we're sitting here in Hollywood, basically, in a newish high rise.
And all around us is massive construction. There are high rises going up all around
Cahuenga, all around Cole, right by the York Light Theatre here. And Sunset Boulevard,
the Sunset Boulevard from my childhood, is kind of gone and has become a corridor,
not unlike some of the canyons of Manhattan, not unlike the Wilshire corridor in a lot of ways.
There is massive expansion and massive building here. And also done on that kind of global style,
free zone that is so popular wherever you go now around the world where you'll,
I mean, I know they just redid, well, a few years ago, they redid the Bel Air Hotel's
restaurant and bar, which was one of the more fabulous enclaves here. Very mysterious,
you'd walk through a forest over a pond. I guess they were ducks or geese, swans,
they were swans. And then you'd enter into this mysterious, dark, dark bar from out of the 30s,
and a very kind of charming, conservative dining room. Very, very old school. And when they did
the redesign, it basically looked like any airport restaurant in Finland or in London or
wherever. It just, something's happening. And as someone who tours a lot, I see it all over
the place. It's kind of global style is taking over. And the restaurant on the bar at the Bel Air
now resemble pretty much everywhere else, as does if we're talking about this Spago in Beverly
Hills, which Wolfgang Puck recently felt he had to redesign in the same anonymous global style.
Kind of already black and white photographs, these futuristic like tiki torches. I don't know.
So the LA that I think you and I are referencing, and that you can still find in pockets around here,
is like everywhere else, it seems, kind of fading into the new generic global style.
And in a way, I sort of agree with this. However, I've been coming here visiting in hotels,
and there are ways in which the old weirdness of LA keeps sort of, you know, like the Rose and Spanish
Harlem popping through the concrete, that sort of dark underbelly does recur. So I was just,
for example, at this, is it the Saddleback Ranch, which has a mechanical bull on sunset strip.
And I was at a table and a lovely looking young woman says, you know, do you mind if I sit down?
I sort of thought that was odd. I was eating alone. She's like really quite complimentary,
very friendly. I just turned to her and I said, are you a working girl? And she says, yes. How
would you like to go back to the hotel? And I said, why are you doing this? And she turned to
me and she said, well, I just got my real estate license, but unfortunately, this month is a little
slow. And I just thought, well, that's a conversation that's not so easy to have anywhere in the world.
No, it's not. And it reminds me a lot of Hollywood and it reminds me a lot of
a lot of actors that I met out here when I was casting a couple of big projects.
Yeah, that is very much an LA thing, this sort of gay for pay hookup culture that is
big among actors out here in terms of they, you know, the bartending gig didn't work out.
They're auditioning tomorrow. They, you know, they really need some cash.
And yeah, LA operates, but LA has always operated that way. I wrote a novel about it.
Less than zero, there is ways that kids can make pay back their drug dealers.
And one of them is prostituting themselves. And I had heard stories when I was at Buckley
about a couple of brothers I knew who, if not exactly having sex with older men were,
you know, a little teasy, maybe they strip, maybe they'd put on a little bit of a show,
not necessarily have sex with, but there's always been this kind of gray area between sex, money.
Well, also class classlessness, you know, also, I was talking to a very big
mogul, huge mogul. And I was in a conversation at cocktail party and someone asked me,
where do you think the best looking people are? And I said, well, I think I was thinking Italy,
Sweden, and then this mogul who was over listening and said, uh-uh, it's LA, Los Angeles.
This person is very intelligent, has a very good taste, insanely wealthy. And I thought about it.
And I now believe that's true. So this intersection of money, sex, whoring is,
it almost feels like an inevitable thing. And I've written about this twice. And I, and I'm just
kind of realizing this now, or remembering this right now in this moment, not that I, you know,
I don't think about this all the time, is that both of the narratives of my two LA novels,
less than zero. And then 25 years later, I wrote a sequel to a Cold Imperial Bedrooms,
where we kind of figure out where everyone's landed after they were 18.
Both center around this, this, the central metaphor of prostitution in a way, and that,
and beauty and money, and that these were the things that seem so suggested to me about LA.
I don't know, means what? It ties back into the entertainment industry. It ties back into
exploitation and exploiting beauty and youth, and a certain kind of handsomeness if you're a man,
and a certain kind of beauty if you're a woman. And that also being for so many people,
their, their calling card, it's what they really depend on. I remember talking to a very good
looking actor, and someone had made a joke about, oh, it's not going to be fun to see you get old.
And just in this bro, and he was devastated, absolutely devastated completely. And that,
I don't know, that kind of mentality really becomes the emotional basis for the town in
so many ways. So it's not, it's not strange that that happens, because there is that,
that intersection of, you know, beauty, money, exploitation is just, you know, it lends itself,
it lends itself to noir. Right. Well, this is, this is, this is the thing. LA really does,
in some sense, live its noir at a level that would be fictional somewhere else. I mean,
I think about, so there's this very strange coincidence that you and I came from essentially
the exact same milieu. We both graduated high school in 1982. Yes. We were both at, in the same
sort of private school milieu. I believe that we knew people in common, although I've forgotten
who they, who they might be. And I very much had the sense that when less than zero debuted,
that you had privatized my childhood, and that it was this, it was this period, which if somebody
hadn't written about it, would never be believed. And it, the reason I'm trying to get at this,
I guess, is that I think it had an importance that we didn't understand while we were living
through it. So I wanted to try some theories with you, because I think that you are, in some sense,
the poet laureate of whatever this firmament was, which is sort of Los Angeles Gen X. And then
I'll tie it back, if successful, to what I think its significance is for us now, because I don't,
I think it's underrated as a sort of a point of departure with the past. So I guess what my theory
is, is that if you look out at this backdrop behind, behind this, imagine a neutron bomb went off,
which was the divorce bomb. And it started with no fault divorce in 1970 with Ronald Reagan,
who himself was divorced, signing this thing into law. And if you look at a graph of divorce rates
per, you know, whatever, 1,000 women, it's got this weird sort of, it's declining,
declining, declining. And it just sky rackets for the entire 1970s before it starts to want to
decline again. And we lived through this. And while I'm asking, do you remember that suddenly,
like everybody's parents were on the rocks, that suddenly the parents disappeared, that there were
children supposedly of privilege roaming the streets and that it was really dark?
Well, that's a lot.
Am I just remembering?
No, no, certainly remember a lot of divorces, becoming much more aware of them as I entered
into junior high school. My parents' marriage was very strained by the time I was 15. And I
realized that they were going to split. My sisters and I were however relieved because there was
so much tension in the house caused by numerous things, including my father's alcoholism.
So that was, the divorce wasn't the problem, the marriage was the problem. So that was,
the darkness, and I have to say as a teenager, I wished that I had, and I did to a degree,
enjoy this milieu much more than I did. But I was an alienated kid and I was haunted.
One of the reasons I was so alienated was I was gay, which was,
even living in liberal Los Angeles in 1980, 81, even when it seemed gayness was in the culture
and announcing itself in specific ways with whether it was David Bowie or Prince or American Jigolo
or Calvin Klein advertisements, you still weren't out as a teenager. And so that alienates you and
you begin to see the world in a slightly darker place. Or I think you begin to see the world
as it really is. You see through the facade of it. You see through kind of the poses everyone is
making in order to get through. And you really see the lie of high school in so many ways,
when you're gay and you're standing on the sideline and no song is about you and no
movie is about you and you have to kind of reprocess everything. So that was a bit of
the darkness of my LA experience. Divorce, sure. But I think that for me, it was being gay and being
a writer. I didn't know anyone else that was writing a novel. I had written one already when
I was 13 or 14. And those two things really did separate me from the rest of the crowd.
It's not to say that I didn't participate. I went to parties. I even had a girlfriend.
I went to the beach. I had my group of close male friends. I danced at parties.
You knew you were gay at what point? Always or?
Six.
Six, got it.
Seven, yeah. And it was nothing that ever agonized over. It was something I just kind of accepted
and said, OK, this is another thing that I've got to deal with. How am I going to navigate
through this? And it really was never something that tortured me or I felt I had to tell other
people or come out to anybody. So I had a very even keel acceptance of that. But it does separate
you. You are only four percent of the population. There isn't a large pool of other people like
that. So that was my burden in a way. And I also did. There was a kind of darkness in LA
in the late 70s and into the early 80s. I felt it. I saw it in music. I saw it as a kind of,
it was minimalism. And it was a kind of numbness that was being explored in a lot of the art and
a lot of the music, certainly in part of the punk scene and in the new wave scene.
But it was a numbness that had a feeling as well. It was numbness as a feeling.
This is beautiful.
And I completely, that to me was what influenced less than zero. This notion that numbness was
a feeling and that numbness was something that you could enter into and play with and try to
express in some ways. And that was where I was at in my late teenage years in LA. That was what
was on my mind all the time. And that's what influenced the style and the tone of less than
zero. That makes any sense.
Well, this is the weird thing about it. I've never heard anyone say this. Numbness is home to me.
Like there is a weird way. I found myself driving the Ventura freeway
after college and I had gone to some party that hadn't quite worked out and was unclear what the
address was and whether somebody's was squatting and somebody else's like had all of these weird
characteristics and the emptiness just washed over me. And I think Tom Petty was playing on the
radio and I just felt I'm totally numb. I'm completely alienated and I feel completely home.
That is what I felt, but I do think that might be very specific to our generation.
So that's, I think our generation is weirdly the key to a lot of what we see going on in general.
But because our generation is also invisible and because this place had very different
characteristics, I do see it that there's a little bit, you know, the portal theme here
has to do with trying to figure out how do we get out of all of these mysteries that
were trapped within and culturally in part, my belief is that LA pushed out a lot of this kind
of nihilism to the world. It couldn't easily travel. And so we were talking about music before.
I remember being very cued into this band X. And X I thought was going to be huge. It was a huge
mistake on my part. And how could it not be? They were witty. They had these weird harmonies,
I think that happened in fourths between John Doe and Xeen. Billy Zoom. Billy Zoom was the
DJ Bonebarus, the drummer. So do you remember the song, their big hit regionally was the song
Johnny Hit and Run Pauline? Of course I do. Off the Los Angeles LP. Right. Now this song,
dude, do you remember the lyrics to how it goes? Um, vaguely. You got to remind me.
He bought a sterilized hypo. Shoot a sex machine. It's about serial rape. He's got to rape
24 women in 24 hours and the last one wouldn't cooperate. This thing is so off. It's so dark.
It's so completely wrong. And it felt normal for Los Angeles at the time. Yeah. And it was like
this massive miscalculation that first of all, no fault divorce hadn't happened nationwide.
Like New York, it doesn't happen until I'm really late. Right. And so there was something about
this period that was highly regional, but also was being broadcast everywhere,
even in kind of cryptic ways. And I think that your book probably less than zero probably looked
kind of like wildly weirdly exaggerated to the outside world. I don't think it was that exaggerated.
Well, look, certainly there were things in it that I wanted to do as a writer. I certainly
did not see a 12 year old girl get gang raped, which happens near the end of the book and where
it's treated as just as natural as stubbing your toe or something to come across them and
like, isn't there something about where people are hanging out with a corpse? I mean, well,
now that was based on something that I had heard. You're kidding me.
There was a story going around that there had been this person who'd OD'd in an alley. I think
somewhere along Melrose, this rumor went around in 1981, 82, and that kids just were brought to see
the body of another kid. And people had heard about it and someone would meet someone at a party
because of course, remember, there was no cell phones then. And then people would come over,
find the space and just gawk at this dead body. And that is a scene in lesson zero. But overall,
I really did try to make it seem as realistic as possible. And almost as if it was journalism,
almost as if it was reportage, that Clay, the narrator of the book, was really describing
the world he was a part of, but not necessarily describing what his emotions were and all of
the things he was feeling during that time. You understood that he was very detached and alienated
because he never talked about himself. And he just described what his friends would say,
he just described what he would be seeing. And I think part of why the book works for people
is that this voice never varies as the book gets darker and more violent and nightmarish in a way.
And so I guess that's what I was aiming for when I was writing it, to find that kind of
accumulation of power by resisting hyperbole and then describing everything in a very flat,
minimal way. And of course, writers in the past had done this, but transposing that into a
contemporary teenager living in a big city was something that I hadn't seen before.
Teenagers in who were narrating novels were usually very emotional. Look, going back to
the few that there were, whether you were going to Judy Bloom, or whether you're going back to
the granddaddy of them all, the catcher and the rye, I wanted to do kind of the anti-catcher
and the rye in that way. But I think I drifted away from your question, which was kind of about,
I mean, first of all, getting back to X, they were part of the reason that they didn't
fully work as a band was that they didn't have hits. They kept each subsequent studio album from
Los Angeles to, I guess, Adult Toys to Under the Big Black Sun. And then I think it was,
the Eight Love Grand was their stab at MTV, kind of a commercial record.
I left the story then.
After Under the Big Black Sun. I thought that was my favorite of the three records that had been,
even more so than Los Angeles. You could see that the songwriting was kind of moving
away from the really kind of rough speed rock of Los Angeles and entering into a kind of more
thoughtful kind of songwriting. But for whatever reason, they never really broke. And I think
that they were a huge influence on Less Than Zero. One of the epigraphs in Less Than Zero is from X.
So I was obviously thinking about them, but I was also thinking about Led Zeppelin,
because Led Zeppelin is also the other epigraph in Less Than Zero. But exaggerated, I don't know.
Look, as I said to you earlier, I really ran with that story I heard. And I also knew parts of,
from a couple of boys who were living on their own, actually, in Beverly Hills, who were not staying
out of Malibu with their divorced dad, couldn't deal with them. And they got an apartment in
town at 17-year-olds, or the father had rented it for them. And I often wondered how they had such
nice clothes, how they were able to go to this place or that place. And it was interesting,
because look, at that, they knew a guy named Ronnie Levine, who was murdered by Johan of
the Billionaires Boys Club. Is it Levine Eleven? Ron Levin, right? I should know this. This was
my high school. And so I got to know Ron Levin through these kids. We were all 16. And I remember,
this just goes to give you an idea of what my adolescence was like. We would congregate because
we all had cars at Ron Levin's and have drinks in Ron Levin's living room. And then Ron Levin
would pour us all into his convertible Rolls-Royce. And he would drive us to Flippers, which was a
roller rink kind of bar disco that's on the corner of La Cienega and Santa Monica Boulevard that is
now a CVS. By the way, this is a weeknight. This is a school night. And so we would go with Ron
to his booth. Ron must have been, I guess, 48, 47, maybe. And he was gay, very definitely gay.
And he would have six 16-year-old boys sitting with him at a booth. Flippers was all ages,
by the way. There were a couple of clubs around town that were all ages. He didn't need to be
18 to get into some of these clubs. Well, this is just to short stop it. I left this town when I
was 16. And when I think about all of the stories that I had in clubs and bars,
they have to be 16 and earlier. And it doesn't make any sense to me.
Look, I guess the drinking age was 18 in LA. It didn't move to 21 until I think the mid-80s.
It was always, look, I got into, when I was 16 in LA, I got into everywhere. I got into bars.
Was it ordered drinks? I could get into the whiskey on a weeknight. I never, and all my
friends did, too. I never remember having any problems with getting carted or anything along
those lines. Like somebody would always know somebody. The place was totally fluid. I mean,
I want you to keep the love and story. I'm sorry about the short stop.
There's nothing else about the love and story. It's just, it gives you an idea. And maybe there
was a little cocaine involved. But that just gives you, and that must have been 1980, 1981.
That kind of just gives you an idea. And all, nobody was damaged. None of us were triggered.
None of us felt we had to go to the police. None of, everyone just felt, okay, but true. But
how many funerals did you go to back in the day? I have to tell you. I didn't know. I didn't go to
any. I didn't. I mean, look, I mean, compared to now in terms of... Or emergency rooms. I mean,
maybe funerals wasn't that much, but this was not cheap. It wasn't that everybody was fine at the
end of it. No, but I do think comparatively, there was a kind of Gen X resiliency and strength.
Which is what I want to get to. Okay. But I do, I think there is, and I think that
we were not wimps. Let's just put it that way. You know, I, sure, I knew people, you know,
you have to understand drug problems. We didn't really know what that was in 1981 or 1982.
I didn't have friends who had outsized drug problems. And I really never heard of rehab.
Well, people were doing amazing quantities of drugs and then going off to Yale and Princeton
and Stanford. Of course. Or UCLA, where a lot of them went. But, you know, the notion that
no one believed you could get addicted to cocaine in 1982. No one really believed that.
Look, I don't know if I've ever heard anyone who's been addicted to cocaine either. But
back in high school, look, the other thing that I had got to say is that, and by the way,
the love and story is finished. That's, I just want to see. Good, good, good.
Nothing else. Well, ultimately what happened, Ron Loving up murdered by Joe Hunt, which is a
whole other story. But we, I don't want to lead over that. We've just had Quentin Tarantino release
once upon a time in Hollywood. It's the story leading up to the Manson murders where with an
alternate ending. Yes. And I guess for me, I was thinking back to this very,
I don't know whether Joan Didion's writings move you, but they've moved me a great deal.
She was perhaps the biggest influence on lesson zero and my writing.
Okay. So when I read, I think it's the white album where she's talking about how the 60s
ends spiritually with the murders on C.L.O. Drive. And, you know, she writes with this just
exquisite prose and it's so, it's so perfect for this in a city that thinks about earthquakes and
canyon fires. She says, you know, that the rumors spread like wildfires in the Hollywood Hills or
something like this is just dripping with this gorgeous analogy. And I thought about that.
And then I thought about how that gives way to the 70s. And the 70s is this period that's like
the golden age of serial killers. Yes. And then you end up with like this very weird concept of
privilege, which is one of the reasons that the millennials concept of privilege absolutely
doesn't work for me, where you have like these very privileged schools and you have a murderous
club of investors who somehow the kids are just not happy with their station in life.
And, you know, there are these schemes maybe to kill parents and, you know,
you get the Menendez brothers. And I get the feeling that her feeling is that things ended
with the murders on C.L.O. Drive. And our story is like just getting started in some weird way.
That the 60s versus the 70s is a big shift because the 60s had this horror and idealism
fused together. Yes. And the 70s that the sort of the idealism just drops out, but the horror
keeps going. Yes. I think you said something about that's very interesting about living here.
Maybe you didn't say it. Maybe I'm taking what you said and moving it some less.
I think me and my peers were very aware that we were living in a particular time
that was a kind of movie. And that was youth culture of the early 80s really seemed to be
centered in L.A. You saw it in all of the movies from Fast Times to Valley Girl to the music that
was being made to the go-go's being thrown out there. There was this sense that we were at
the Red Hot Center of Youth Culture in Los Angeles in, say, 1982. Certainly, look. Listen.
With some echo of like Jim Carroll on the opposite coast.
I guess so, but there was something more interestingly contradicting about Los Angeles.
There was something, you know, the darkness and the beach and whatever. I mean, it was
this yin-yang thing. And so, being very aware of that, of course adds, I don't know, a kind of
artificiality about the way you interacted with people and the way you behave. Now,
I'm saying this not on a completely literal level. I'm saying this just an overall sense of a costume,
your car, the decor of a nightclub that you would walk into and be very aware that, you know,
this was the place. Just the staginess. This really goes back to what you first talked about.
L.A. as this stage, this movie set, Sunset Boulevard cruising around, Mulholland Drive,
going up to Mulholland to get high. The beach, the beach, such a huge part of your Southern
California childhood. But that's also not to say, to move it out for a little bit, you said this
about the East Coast. I felt that time for the East Coast wasn't necessarily the late 70s.
I think it comes in, well, for me, I felt I was never more in a movie than I was during the
yuppie years of the late 80s in New York, right before the crash, 1987. And that to me. And even
afterwards, the crash didn't really change or alter the way New York operated. But 87, 88, 89,
Manhattan to me was something as evocative as the roaring 20s or the swinging 60s of London.
You were very aware. When was Gordon Gekko? 87. Okay. So you're moving with the party. You see,
for my trajectory was I'm in the same ferment with you in Los Angeles. Then I go to college on the
East Coast. And suddenly it occurs to me that the East Coast has not gone through this. People are
getting drunk on cold duck for the first time. And I'm thinking that's so cute. Because we're
getting drunk on cold duck in ninth grade. But anyway, I mean, yeah, I wasn't conscious of
wanting to chase the scene. But I don't know how you felt, but I felt growing up here,
which really now in retrospect was kind of glorious. Growing up as a teenager here in LA is
like fantastic. It was the worst thing ever. It's so interesting. You're a writer. So you're able
to do something. Well, look, I wrote less than zero, which is a complete. No, no, that was it.
Kind of. Yes. But there is also, I mean, I got to tell you, Eric, that so many people who read
less than zero, so many kids loved it because they wanted to move here. They wanted to be part of
that scene. That's a weird thing. They thought it was so cool. And it wasn't supposed to be in
some weird way. Well, but when you have death and sex and money, people react and respond
mimetically, even if it's the most unhealthy thing in the world. Well, that's the late 70s.
Here we are in the late 70s and into the early 80s. But I completely lost my train of thought.
We were talking about, oh, yes. I mean, less than zero was dark. There was darkness around my,
the years that led up to me writing it. But I also, when I was living here, I know what I wanted
to say, but it had to do with the fact that in so many ways, I feel that we were lucky to grow
up out here. Yes, it had its disadvantages and its darkness. But looking back, I mean, there were
things about it that I loved. And maybe I loved them at 17 and 18, and you missed those two years
of the massive freedom that one would have. We weren't living out here in 17 and 18,
where you graduated at 16, and then you went off or did you stay here?
No, no. I was 16, turned 17 in Philadelphia, and then I was in Boston. And what I found was
that, I mean, just to be honest about it, I've stayed away from the city really for 37 years
because I just thought it was the blackest to darkest, most seductive hellhole.
Which it is. It can be.
Which it is, and it can be. And it was generative. I mean, so that notion of repulsion and fascination
home and total alienation, it's been impossible to talk about because it's all these things that
usually come bundled, like home and support and meaning, and that bundling didn't happen. And
what I start, if I think about the title of this film that you probably remember,
the decline of Western civilization about like Derby Crash and the Cramps and the germs,
all that kind of stuff, that seemed like overblown. And in many ways, I actually think, well,
whatever the thing is that is unraveling the American tapestry was really present and visible
early here, and where I'm going to try to get to and see if you're willing, and if you're not,
that's fine too. One of the things that people may know me for is coining this
phrase or pushing it out, the intellectual dark web, which people don't, I've never heard
with all the commentary and almost all the commentary on the IDW is bad commentary because
it's the commentary at trying to figure out who are these people without union cards and
why are they commenting on the world. So they're always trying to figure out some way of getting
rid of this thing. It was very much two things. It's an LA phenomena to an extent that nobody
has understood. And it's a Gen X phenomenon to an extent because Gen X is invisible to both boomers
and millennials. Millennials think that Gen X is the boomers. And the idea that there is this
in-between generation that's not large enough to chant things and to vote things into reality,
but is extremely generative, very robust, and has this completely, I don't know how to say it,
you couldn't pick two more different circumstances. Aetan Pats gets kidnapped in New York, I guess,
in 1979 and the milk carton kids start up and suddenly almost overnight, all the kids who
are used to playing in the streets with no adults in sight are brought indoors and things really
change. And somehow the millennials are brought up in that world. Whereas as far as I can remember,
I play back so many scenes from the 70s and I can't see grown-ups, the moms in particular,
or absent, maybe the dads have been absent a long time, but like the moms are somewhere else.
But where were they? Because I would say most of my friends' mothers didn't work.
So where were they? Were they up in their bedrooms? Were they out having lunch with their friends?
Well, do you remember? I mean, I remember some moms, but sometimes mom was getting high with
the kids. I remember that was a particular mom. There were moms who were looking for Mr. Goodbar.
There were moms who were trying to find some self-actualization and that the women's movement
promised maybe there's some new thing to do, but everybody was having a hard time finding
what that was. Right. I think getting back to one thing you said before we move on to that
is that the real darkness for me had to do with the Manson family. And the Manson family haunted
my childhood and my adolescence and still haunts my notion of Los Angeles. So if I had to choose
something that I fixated on and honestly became obsessed by were the Tate Law Beyond Commerters
and the Manson family. And that book that Vincent Bugliosi wrote about the case,
Helter Skelter, was kind of like a strange Bible for me. And it became kind of a dark
touchstone. Yes, I still saw and I was still in a group of people who were trying to have fun
when I was an adolescence in LA and especially when we were free with our cars and basically
free from our parents and had that kind of sense of, I don't know, ascendancy or being able to
go anywhere we wanted to. It erased some of the darkness. I mean, there was a lot of opportunity
to have fun out here. But I also have to say, and this I think connects more with what
in a way what your trajectory was, I wanted to get out. I did not want to stay here.
Oh, so you okay? I wanted to get out. And I knew at 14, I wanted to get out. And I had to wait
for the plan to happen because when I was 18, boom, I was going to go as far away from here as
possible. I did ultimately feel, I think, what you felt. I felt like beneath the facade of beautiful
teenagers and, you know, lovely setting and nice houses that there was a darkness that was encroaching
upon everything. And it really, I really did notice it much more strongly after I'd left for a year
and I came back after actually left for five or six months and came back after I went to college
for my first term. But that was always the plan. And I remember seeing so many movies that took
place in New York, even if they were dark as hell, I wanted to go there. And I remember seeing Woody
Allen's Manhattan, for example, and then that's where I'm going to be. I'm going to be in that world.
I mean, now that world nauseates me, but at the time I was 14 or 15, that was the goal. And I was
going to go to college back east and then I was going to move to New York. All of my friends
stayed out here. All of my friends were going to get into the film business because
that's what LA is. I mean, if you live in a certain area of LA, it is a company town
and you end up, you know, working for the company, which is the entertainment complex.
And that is what happened. My four closest male friends all got into the business.
Really?
And that was what I was supposed to be doing too because we were all making movies and writing
scripts when we were teenagers. And all of our fathers, mine accepted, were somehow involved
in the industry. And that was going to be the next move. And it just, I was writing novels
and I was working on less than zero when I was 17, 18, 16, 17, 18. And I knew I had to get out.
I don't know. You must have felt that to some degree in order to, I mean, I don't know if the
escape was your choice, but the escape from LA was certainly mine. I only applied to colleges
back east. And so I knew senior year that this was going to be over at a certain point. And
that summer of 82, I just could not wait for it to...
Well, that's the thing. I mean, that we were living through a something that I think hasn't
been understood or digested in terms of its importance. And I think that if you think about...
Well, it's being resisted because I talk about it all the time. And it's being resisted. People
don't want to believe that this happened and that we were okay. They want to...
Well, it contradicts what I've called the gated institutional narrative, that there is this
thing where the New York Times is talking to the political parties, is talking to the universities
and they've settled on this thing that's completely wrong.
It's a narrative.
It's a narrative. And the narrative has been cracking. And we have this funny thing, which I
heard you talking about being an anti-anti-Trumper, where the idea is that you have Trump and the
Trumpers. Then you have the anti-Trumpers who are the people who are completely deranged by any
mention of Trump, whatever he said. My partner, my boyfriend.
Yeah, your boyfriend is a millennial.
He's a millennial and he has had Trump derangement syndrome since the election.
And yet, Eric, he is losing that. And he is just simply becoming an anti-Trumper.
Well, because... Well, no, I don't think that that's fair, sir.
My belief is that if you are an anti-anti-Trumper, I am an anti-anti-anti-Trumper. That is, I am
against Trump. But mere mention of his name doesn't send me into paroxysms. I don't...
I'm not apoplectic with rage when he said something that's been carefully constructed
to set everybody off who carries a certain behavior pattern. And so what my belief is,
is that I'm going through a very private, weird little mini-hell in which I intellectually can't
stand the guy, but I understand him very well. I understand why it works. I predicted this in
some weird way. I wrote an essay on K-Fa, but I don't know if you've...
I do, yes. Yeah, that you were one of the people who actually suggested he could win.
It was a you?
Yeah. Well, I just had Timur Karan on the program for Preference Falls. I thought
everyone was lying about their feelings about Trump.
When they were asked about it.
Publicly.
Well, because you needed to say how horrible he was if you were part of the institutional milieu,
or if you needed to keep a job and make sure that you weren't on the wrong side of your clients.
And what has been going... What I find very frustrating, I mean, you have to appreciate,
the mainstream has no positive interest in the show, me or anything that my group is doing
whatsoever. And it's not just... I mean, it's the fact that we have this very negative view of CNN
and NPR, not what they're supposedly standing for. So in this narrative, I guess what my take on it
is, is that the dominant... I don't even know how to say idealism of a time is usually a false
narrative that's hiding how people can make money during that period of time. So we are the world
is a portrayal of concern about Africa, the poor in Asia, what can we do to uplift the people.
But really, it was a story about if we don't break our bonds to our fellow countrymen,
if we don't make sure that we can not have to take care of Appalachia and the poor in the
South and the downtrodden in our inner cities, we're not going to be able to make money. The
way to make money is to move operations overseas to keep your country with its headquarters,
wherever it's tax advantaged. There was some process by which globalization was the betrayal
of your countrymen. And that thing was portrayed as the Davos Idealism. And the Davos Idealism is
cratering because it was a wealth transfer program posing as a philanthropic effort. And so the
reason that nobody wants the Clintons, nobody wants the Democratic Party, nobody wants the
sanctimonious nonsense about our thirst for justice and our hatred of oppression is that
this is a search for a constituency that's large enough to get people elected who can continue
to keep people making money who have been figuring out how to make money. And Trump,
the reason I'm anti-Trump is that he's taking lots of ideas that are actually originally wholesome
and he's giving them this shitty kind of mean spirited, nasty spin. Like for example,
there's nothing wrong with restrictionism whatsoever. There's nothing xenophobic about
restriction. The desire to want to keep a border is not a xenophobic urge.
I completely agree. Okay. So when he tinges it with hints, he's playing around with something,
he knows what the inference patterns of the left are. So he'll say something and the left will
say, oh my God, you're really saying that you think all Mexicans are rapists and then the right...
Well, whose fault is that? Pardon me? I mean, whose fault is that? I mean, that's the left's fault
from taking the bait or overreacting. No, it's not that. They figured out a means of keeping people
in line. Whereas as you start to explore something that will stop the money making,
the transfer of wealth from whoever... It's like forced transfusion. The institutional left,
I believe, figures out how to transfuse one group to supply blood to another. And
what the left is supposed to be is something more wholesome and more decent. As you start to
question the transfusion, you start to get this question like, surely you're not suggesting that
we should close our borders to the downtrodden? That's right. And Trump is saying, yeah, I'm not
scared. You're not going to back me off by just saying that surely you weren't saying, that's a
menacing tone. And for that, many people love him because you remember the scene in Reservoir Dogs
of Tarantino where you've got, I guess, is it Steve Buscemi? And I can't remember the other actor
where they're trying to figure out who the rat is and Mr. Blonde comes in. And Mr. Blonde is the
psychopath who's shot up the jewelry store. And they can't figure out who they can trust. The only
person you can trust is the psychopath because the psychopath isn't under control. Well, Trump came
through as Mr. Blonde. And the one person we know isn't under institutional control is Donald
Trump because he would never say those things. Okay, so now we've got a new paradigm where the
only trustworthy person is the least trustworthy person, which I've been trying to map this out.
And the problem with it is you can't wake people up because they're dying to get back to the process
of making money by betraying their fellow countrymen. The globalization thing came to an end. There's
no new idea about how to make money. Right. And the pyramid schemes are collapsing. Right.
So what's going to happen? Well, that's why you're on the portal, sir.
Well, look, getting back to what you said in terms of, I forgot the name of the book,
it was about preference versus public... Private truths, public lies. Right.
I knew a lot of these people. I wrote about them in white. I write a section of the book is about
the mood in Los Angeles in the months leading up to the primaries and then to the election,
and then after the election. And it is a cast of my usual entitled characters, even though this is
a work of nonfiction. And many of these conversations play out in the Polo Lounge or at Spago, like they
do in my LA novels, with irate rich people who cannot believe that things do not go their way,
which is also something that's less than zero in imperial bedrooms. So even though white is a
nonfiction chronicle of whatever, a certain kind of the arc of a Gen Xer, I see it. It starts out
in the late 60s, early 70s with me as a child. And then I'm standing with my dick in my hand
in the summer of 2018 going, I can't say this. I can't express myself this. Where's freedom of
speech? It just seems to be... And I'm much more upset about it than my millennial boyfriend,
who's used to rules. He's used to all the rules that have been... This is maddening. I can't
live like this. I know. I can't live like this either. But anyways, so I knew these people in
Los Angeles. I knew the Obama Trump voter. I knew many of them who were making that jump.
So, and I just sensed something different by looking at everything than my millennial boyfriend
did who was already printing out his Hillary t-shirts and couldn't wait for the blastings.
No, he's a Bernie guy. He's a Bernie Sanders guy. And he held his nose voting for Clinton,
but anything but Trump because Trump drove him insane. And there was just no fucking way that
Trump could be elected president. So that was all going to be... But so I did know... And I
write about this in white. People said, don't tell anybody I'm going to vote for Trump. Don't
tell anybody I'm voting for Trump. And so I wasn't completely surprised when Trump won.
But what surprised me and this ties into what you were first asking, what completely surprised
me for the next two years leading up to now is how so many of my smart friends became infected.
By Trump. Look, the most... No, say more of what you mean by that.
Well, look, all of our narratives, we have been forced to deal with Trump. I talked about this
in an interview that I gave with Washington Post where I... Even if you don't want Trump in your
life, he's in your life. And you have to have an opinion about him because everyone else is talking
about him. Either people loathe him to such a degree that you're sucked into the conversation.
And I believe it's the same with people who love him. And I know you're... What was that huge
exhale? What was that about? No, no, I'm with you. I'm with you. I want to write an Eliza program.
I swear, I could write a small program that generates his tweets. Like, for example,
before Trump, I had a simple idea, which is that if I wanted to win an election as a Republican,
all I would have to do is to talk about the nuclear family. And every educated person would say,
you mean nuclear, not nuclear, and then they'd lose. It was like an automated reaction,
that there was a class thing that says, correct anyone who says nuclear. Okay. Well, that's a
pretty simple program. Yes, you win the correct pronunciation of the word nuclear and you lose
an election because you're a dick. All right. So Trump is going to hit this thing over and over
again. It's a... The left is programmed to say certain things, to defend certain things. And
if you have to make the point that there is absolutely zero connection whatsoever between
Islam and terror, there is no connection whatsoever. Zero. It's an illusion. Okay.
Somebody can hit that, I mean, all day long, every day. I remember reading an issue of Dabeek
put out by ISIS, where their point was, I think it was called... They had an article called
Why We Hate You, Why We Fight You. And they said, you've marginalized all the people in your
society who point out that there is an aspect of fundamentalist jihadi Islam that just hates
you because you don't believe in all of the way we do. And because that couldn't be said,
like... Why couldn't that be said? I mean, that's when I... There's the break I have as a Gen
after. I'll say it. There was, once upon a time, a heuristic that said the best way to have a
multicultural society is that you have to have some load-bearing fictions, like all religions
are equally problematic in all ways. There's no way that's true.
You know, Jains are not equally problematic as Jews. Jews are more problematic than
Jains and I'm able to say that because I'm Jewish. Of course. Okay. As a result, those heuristics
hardened into dogmas because they were necessary to keep our society operating. We have to believe
at the moment that a jury of 12 people knows how to convict somebody based on guilt, even though
the DNA evidence shows that that's not a real rubric. Okay. Well, I mean, it's a heuristic.
Maybe it works some of the time. Right. Okay. So as these sort of heuristics have been breaking
down and these heuristics of the left are on top of the ones that are necessary for civil society,
they... The desire to maintain this complex of ideas, like trade is always good. No,
trade is not always good for all people. That's beyond moronic. Right. But it's only recently
that you have economists like Brad DeLong saying, actually, what you're optimizing is a social
Darwinist function, which trade is good for you based on the cube of your wealth. So the richer
you are by the cube of your wealth, trade is good for you. Well, Brad DeLong was also saying,
and why is everybody complaining about the trade deals we inked since they helped people in Mexico?
As if like, American voters are going to vote to help Mexican peasants. I mean, it's great if
Mexican peasants are helped, but I just don't see the lowest echelons of American society having as
their top priority helping Mexicans with their vote. I mean, none of this makes any effing sense.
But then why aren't they deprogramming themselves? Because they're not going to move them forward,
say in the new world order. And that's the problem with Trump. Trump presented something
extremely new into the conversation and the left couldn't deal with it. The media couldn't deal with
it. I always felt that if they had kind of dealt with them in a neutral way and just reported
what he did without all this hyperbole, I don't know if he would have won necessarily. Because
all of the smart, honest people had to be ejected from the institutional layer.
Terrifying. But what I'm talking about is universal expulsion of people who will not
go along with the gated institutional. My theory about this, if you haven't met it,
is that we grew very quickly in a very stable way that was totally anomalous post World War II
to about 1972. And every single institution that you see has an expectation of that kind of growth
continuing. And so what happened is that all of those institutions, when they went pathological,
they became Ponzi schemes and you needed to have a group of people in that institution who would
not reveal the Ponzi scheme. And so effectively, our expert class has been selected for as the
people who will not blow the whistle on the fact that they're lying. And so you can get this at
Harvard or you can get this at Stanford. Maybe the University of Chicago is something of an
exception. Hollywood. Well, Hollywood is, right, exactly. Silicon Valley. And so all of these
institutional things are suffering from the embedded growth obligation disease or ego, right?
And so these egos have turned, like, the institutions are not interested in hearing
how to beat Trump because it's easy. It's easy to beat Trump. It is. But the only problem is,
is that if you beat Trump in the way that's easy to beat Trump, you will not service the people
with second and third homes in the Hamptons, right? And so those people are saying, well,
I wasn't thinking of spending that much to beat Trump, right? No, no, that's really,
that's what the issue is, is that right now, the exciting part is I want to retake the institutions.
Do you really want nine conservative Supreme Court justices? If you do, if that's what excites you,
I highly recommend talking about reparations for slavery. Why don't you tell some sort of a
child Holocaust survivor that they need to pay reparations for slavery? See how that goes.
Oh, I mean, this is insane. We've got just some, you know, and self, I'm used to self-hating Jews.
We've had that as an issue forever. The self-hating American. Oh, man, you know, just suck it up,
man. Okay, so you were born with white skin. It's like watching a teenage girl in a cutting
episode. You're not responsible for every bad thing this country has ever done. We're not going
to right all wrongs. It would be absolutely unjust to go after every past injustice and
like, are we going to get rid of the Arch of Titus in Rome? Because the Romans sacked Jerusalem
and it commemorates, you can see they're carrying off like this giant menorah. They stole our stuff,
man. All right, let's tear down the Arch of Titus. Let's burn the merchant of Venice. How deep
do we want to go with this madness? We're nuts. Well, it needs, well, look, I think part of why
I'm very sensitive about this is that because I am a Gen Xer, I think boomers like my parents,
like my mom, my stepdad. And were your parents born? My father was born in Nevada and my mother
was born in Illinois. They were born in the, you know, technically not. Silent. They're silent,
but my mom completely relates to boomers. Technically, you're the last boomer. Yes,
I am, but I know that you are. But just in terms of the chart, right, right, right,
in terms of the chart. So yes, my parents, my mom and my stepdad are silent, but they really are
boomers. But no, I don't, I'm going to disagree with you. I think that what we don't understand
is that we settled on a narrative in which the boomers are the problem. The silent generation
really begins the problem. And we are letting the silent generation off just as we are not
paying attention to Gen X. And I believe, sir, that you are the last of the boomers,
but that you are spiritually Gen X and that you figured out, you almost started really
defining Gen X. I forget who it was who wrote the book, Gen X. You probably know.
Douglas Copeland. Right, right. I think that what I remember from this is that a few years
either way was really important. Right. And I believe that the silence are the first generation
to wrestle with the problem in 1972, 73 that the country won't wake up to, which is that
our growth pattern changed for structural reasons. It wasn't about some bad decision.
It wasn't about the gold standard. It wasn't about the Arab oil embargo. Something really
structurally changed. Okay. And in my telling of the tale, the silence try to figure out how to
restart real growth. It's like the engine has gone out. They're going to try to restart the engine.
It doesn't work. The boomers look at these efforts and they say, huh, that doesn't work,
but it's good enough for redistribution and to play games with fake growth.
So why don't we help ourselves to fake growth and we'll just grow our slices of the pie as if
the pie were growing. And I'm sure that that must mean that somebody else's slice isn't growing,
but that's really too bad for them. And so the silence start a lot of these problems.
The boomers continue it. The millennials confuse the Gen Xers for boomers because to them,
boomer means older than millennial. Right. And the only generation, and this is the thing that
I find fascinating, that I think really has a good hope of restarting sense making is Gen X.
I agree. I completely agree with that. And I do know that whenever I attempt to do it millennial,
thinking shuts you down. And so that is what I've come up against on this last book tour I've done
earlier this year, and I'm going back out on the road in the fall, millennial hysteria and overreaction
to my talking about millennials in any kind of critical way, and even being somewhat sympathetic
to them completely. You're more than sympathetic, Brett. Oh, completely. You and I are both hanging
out with tons of millennials. Yes. And we're having some success. We're having some, like,
I don't understand this thought pattern. And the millennials, this is another thing that I believe,
and you please correct me if I'm wrong, I'm fairly disagreeable. I think the millennials are starving
to know what actually happened. And partially what I try to tell them is your, the super ancestors,
these silence and boomers who, like, I think Bill Ayers, you know, was the head of the weather
underground, and he gets his job as a professor. Whereas people I know, they say the slightest
wrong thing and they're out. Right. Like, okay, you were a, you were a leading terrorist, and you
can have a job as a professor. That world in which 25 year old men, you know, could take down a home
and immediately build a second home and everything just turned to gold. It's like, well, it's not
really that they were doing anything so clever. They just, they weren't a stream that was moving
really fast and you got a dry creek bed. Right. And yes, a few of you are going to do something so
brilliant that you can do something against that. You know, I mean, like Ariana Grande is not hurting
for money. Okay. However, the idea that you could have in the financial sense beta to a process
where you could just like, I don't know, go to law school or open a dry cleaner or, you know, start
some new nonprofit and you could have a perfectly fabulous life, that thing died. And the millennials
have the sense of like, okay, well, this is all hopeless and maybe we're not really that good.
Oh, yes. And my point is, look, man, these other guys could have three martini lunches and everything
still worked out. Yeah. There is this sense of, and I talk about it in, in my book, I talk about
all of the things I've noticed and I've marked down with living in close proximity with a millennial,
a key millennial for the past 10 years. And the things that I've noticed about them and that
I've experienced and I started to write about this, I actually tweet about it quite harmlessly
and under the hashtag generation was because I was so surprised how offended he was, how over
reactive he was bordering. I felt on hysteric about just the normalcy of the world and the way
human beings are with all of their contradictions and all of their flaws.
As I said earlier, he, and I'm not saying that he puts it out there, but there seem to be, I found
a love of rules, that rules offered a kind of pathway, a narrative that wasn't there otherwise,
and that all of these rules about what you can say, what you can't say, how you can express yourself,
how this is sexist, how that is racist was a way of kind of controlling a world that they felt
had disabandoned them in a way that there wasn't a way to make money, that the economy was against
it. But this is something they can do to you. Which is what they are doing. So it is now happening
and I see it in the reaction to this book, which is critical of a lot of ways of thinking and I
think you and I are pretty much aligned on what the problems are right now. Are we? Let's explore
that. What do you see is, because I have a different take, the rules thing for example,
maybe I'll try that and see whether. Yeah, why don't you try that? Yeah. Okay. I think people
have not understood the role of Marshall Rosenberg's nonviolent communication.
It starts off with a good idea, which is that maybe there's a way in which speech that is
particularly damaging has a physiological impact on us, our cortisol levels spike,
we're going to fight or flight. There's all sorts of, you know, fighting words as part of our legal
structure. What if we call that violence? Okay. Now we have to have nonviolent communication.
So then you have all these rules about what it is that constitutes violent versus nonviolent
communication and speech becomes violence. And then the entire concept of free speech goes out the
window. Furthermore, you have an abandonment, I think, if you probably looked at the gender ratios
of teachers in schools, my guess is that you'll find that it has changed quite considerably
being dominated by one gender rather than a mixture of the two. And as a result, you have this sort
of thing that I don't think people had really understood, which is that in part, there's a way
that boys will be boys was used to disguise a lot of behavior, which I would have called toxic
masculinity had that term not been polluted and turned into something metastatic and unusable.
Right. They're really, I went to an all boys school and man, I saw some stuff that would
absolutely curl your toes. On the other hand, we're now using it to mean somebody who makes
the joke in the elevator, third floor women's lingerie, okay, your career's over. What? That's
insane. Look, my problem isn't necessarily with the things that you're talking about. Kids getting
bullied, for example, no, this shouldn't be happening. It's a part of life. I look back on my life and
I think, well, what if I hadn't been bullied? What if I had been bullied?
Look, just as much as anyone else I knew, any other boys I knew, yes, I was. And
but it, I don't know. I mean, was it traumatic? Did it help me become a writer? Did it make me
want to become an artist? I certainly don't think I would have been a writer if I'd been
captain of football team or the prom king. Certainly things that happened to me that were
painful helped create an artistic person and help my voice as a writer. All the stuff that you were
talking about, fine, maybe there should be a big fix for them. I don't know. I mean, I also think
that life is really hard. And basically how you toughen up is that you go through the hardships
that build you into a person that can deal with life's everyday hassles and the pain that inevitably
comes to all of us. What worries me is how this affects the arts and how we deal with art, how we
let it into our lives. And that is the most worrying thing to me in the last five to 10 years,
seeing that art must be a certain way, that there have to be rules for the art to be accepted to
the community. That outlaw art, I don't know where it is anymore, certainly was a big part of
the world that I came of age in. And certainly it was something that I wanted to explore as
the writer of Less Than Zero or the writer of American Psycho, two books that I think because
of sensitivity editors that they have now at publishing houses would never be allowed to be
published in American mainstream fiction. So that lawlessness and that kind of recklessness
that great artists traffic in is really being minimized because it isn't following a set of
rules. And I talk a lot in the book about how aesthetics don't really matter, that ideology
has become the aesthetic. And that what people want is kind of an affirmation. They want a
lesson. They want to learn something. And they want it to be very, very explicit ambiguity,
metaphor. I really don't know if anybody traffics in that anymore in terms of communicating with
millennials. So that is the thing that has bothered me the most. The other things that you're talking
about, yeah, people shouldn't be in pain, but having to include certain things in your art for
it to be palatable or for you to make money or for someone to publish it or for it to be shown in as
many places as possible, that is, that's a problem. And being told what you can or cannot say in
something you create is also a problem. The list of rules now being handed out to artists about
what's acceptable, what's not acceptable. As a writer and as a public person who has a podcast
and writes essays, you know, about entertainment and about the world that I'm a part of,
and getting attacked is crazy. It is the insanity that you're talking about. I recently
wrote a piece for Italian Vogue about the differences between fashion in 1999 when I
published a large novel that took place within the fashion world called Glamorama and today.
And so I thought about it. I thought, well, okay, well, they're paying quite well when no one else
pays well. And I can riff on this for a couple thousand words. And so I wrote about how mysterious
the fashion world was in the late 90s and how its exclusivity was what it made, what it made
so alluring. Its lack of inclusion is what made people want to be a part of it so
badly compared to now where you can see the Met Gala streaming online and everyone can be interacting
and throwing out their comments while they see in close up the inside of the party and the dresses
right as they're happening. Is that, I don't know, is that exciting? Is it more exciting to
not know exactly what's behind the curtain? And of course, I'm writing this as a Gen Xer. I'm
writing about this in a way that is really conforms to my sensibility. I also talked about how
the models, the women and the men were really quite extraordinarily beautiful and they were
they were goddesses and they were gods and we looked up to them because they weren't us.
They weren't us and that's why we were so drawn to them. These women were otherworldly.
These men were otherworldly and there was something about that that I thought we don't have anymore
where we need models that look like us, that we have to be more inclusive of, you know,
a body image and that we have to accept and that and that the modeling world and the fashion world
is trying its best to do that. And you can see it in shows where, you know, they have
whatever, buck tooth, whatever it is. I'm not not people who conform to normal,
not even normal. No, no, no, but let's be clear about it.
The model bone structure is almost like a mutation. Completely. What we traditionally
think of is something that is extraordinarily rare. It does particular things for clothes
that normal humans don't. A friend of mine is a supermodel and at some point I said to her,
I never realized it, but you're really a mutant. Yeah. And her response was, yeah,
I'm all legs and no torso in her hands or like Edward scissor hand hands. Like
just the way that Mike Michelangelo had to distort the David, somehow these people are
actually distorted. I got blasted for writing this. Yeah. Absolutely blasted by millennials.
Huge, a huge controversy about this piece. Now, I think part of the problem was that it was
translated into Italian and then someone wanted to translate it into English. So when you're
translating Italian back into English, it's a whole other can be all these other meanings,
but basically the beef was, I don't believe in inclusivity in the fashion world.
Well, I meant, I meant exclusivity was what made it so erotic and alluring. No, that's,
they read it as, I'm saying that inclusivity, I don't believe in inclusivity meaning that I'm a
racist, that I am a body shamer. And it was so remarkable to me that that's the message that
they got out of an older man talking about what he liked about in the late nineties about fashion
that moved him to actually write a novel set in that world. A complete distortion of really what
I was saying based on this emotional idea of being excluded themselves. And it's just such a
remarkable way to reread something so that it conforms to your view of the world. I certainly
didn't have that when I read things that I didn't necessarily agree in when I was that age.
Can I push back on this slightly? Yeah, please. So the way I read it is that they might have
actually had a point and then they missed a point. So one of the costs of having fashion
be mysterious, aspirational, and dare I say, transcendent is that it does remind us of our
merely mortal nature. There was a period of time where you would show people without makeup
and just how completely plain and ordinary they were. There are all sorts of faces that lend
themselves to being turned into something that cannot be as canvases on which to be painted,
let's say. And that there is something powerful about deconstructing fashion. If you remember
when I bring up sometimes is Jennifer Lopez's famous Versace dress. I am sure that adhesive
is somehow lurking in the background. But the idea of having adhesive on your boobs and having
the fabric somehow stick, all sorts of contrivances, that's much less exciting and
alluring if I know how the magic trick is done. So the idea of a magic show in which the audience
demands to know how every trick is done is a very weird thing because some of us want to be fooled.
We want to be seduced, but we also are shamed in this process because of our own very plain
nature. One of the things that I have to deal with is that I have moles all over my face and some
percentage of every YouTube video that I've ever done comments and you think the guy would have
some money and he'd have the moles removed. Why is that guy wearing a wig? That's clearly a weave.
Nobody his age has hair like that or whatever. And the shaming is incredibly powerful.
On the other hand, the transcendence is incredibly powerful. And the number of people who can see
both of these things, which is yeah, they have a point and they're also creating a huge negative
externality and cost that they're not taking into account. We are in some sense in some sort of
awkward waking up that there has been a very dark side to fashion to the models,
to the way in which we've eroticized children. Very often these women are recognized when they're
12, when they're 14. And we have been complicit as a society in the eroticization of children
for a great deal of time. So what astounds me is not that they push back, but that the quality
of the pushback is so shitty. Well, it's just a reflection of their way of thinking. It is pure
ideology. I don't sense someone, I mean, look, writing anything is kind of, you know,
I don't want to say an act of magic or an act of willing disbelief in terms of you're creating
something out of nothing. And I'm creating this idea about my memories of the 90s and what I was
attracted to about fashion and contrasting it negatively to what I feel fashion is now,
where I just, it's not as interesting because it's, I guess, more inclusive in terms of letting
you see the strings and everything. But letting you see the strings and letting you see how
everything is made is really endemic to this culture now. It's in every Wikipedia page.
It's in connecting all the Marvel movies and all the backstories to all the characters.
This generation, there is no mystery in terms of that. They don't want mystery. I think mystery
frightens them and makes them feel whatever, unsafe. Ambiguity makes them feel unsafe and
it confuses them. So I don't know, is it really shitty, the thinking is shitty? I guess it is
to a degree. It also is overly reactive to me. And it, and of course it is because the minute
something is posted, you want to get your voice out there. So you post something 20 minutes.
That's true. But like I would say that, for example, I always ask this question,
do people want to be seduced? If you, if you believe that you don't want to be manipulated,
you'll never have the experience of being seduced because seduction is in some sense a willing
manipulation, usually on two people's part, right? And so when, when Jennifer Lopez was
trying to seduce the world at scale with this dress that miraculously stayed on her body,
we wanted to be in the audience. And I'm sure, you know, one of the beliefs I've had about gay men
is that in some sense, very often gay men are like magicians, assistants or consultants,
they very often take great pleasure in seeing how the trick is done
without wanting to be completely, like the heterosexual manager sitting there in the audience
lapping it up. And the gay men are like, oh, you know, did you see her makeup? It was fabulous.
Like they're actually thinking about the construction, the craft, you know, they're
sort of a different eye. An outsider eye. Yeah. A bit of an outsider because you're not being
carried away. Like women also will say, oh, did you see, I love the way she, you know, she wears
her false eyelashes. Right. Whereas men are like, if they're heterosexual, they're sort of
believing the whole thing. Right. I can't imagine living in a world where I didn't want to be seduced
daily. Right. That's what I want to be. I want to be seduced all day long. I want to be seduced by
every book I pick up. I want to be seduced by, why else would I drive to a theater?
Why else would I drive to the arc light and pay a ticket and sit in a dark, empty room? Unless I
want to be seduced. I want to be seduced by my coffee. I want to be seduced by everything. And
I do think there's a pushback on that because giving into seduction is being out of control.
It is being out of control. But that's the pleasure. But I think at this point before,
it has to do with this crazy loss of trust. And in a world characterized by loss of trust,
I do understand the desire to worry about, well, you weren't careful and you are shaming and
you're having a negative effect over here. Right. Whereas in a world of higher trust,
people say, you know, like in Silicon Valley, the concept of pitching, people say, pitch me.
You know, because the VCs who have the money are used to being seduced.
You know, like, oh, your pitch was insufficiently manipulative and insufficiently seductive.
You're going to have a harder time with your company if that's how you do things. Let me
show you how to be, how to orient things so that you're more likely to succeed because that way
I'm more likely to make money with my investment. I think that there's some aspect where this desire
for radical transparency has to do with people who feel very cut out of society.
I think it has to do with, because people don't read anymore. I think it has to do with people
don't read fiction anymore. I think it has to do with a kind of strange lack of empathy,
even when everyone says, you know, warm, fuzzy things to each other, which to me,
increasingly is just virtue signaling and acting out, you know, feeling you're virtuous and being
virtuous as I write in the book are two very different things. I think it's, I think it really
is down to people don't read anymore. And that someone can find more meaning in
Cuphead, which is the giant new video game that all the kids are playing. And that they'll never
be reading. They'll never know the mysteries of HB Lovecraft or whatever. I do think that
something has been severely minimized in terms of experience and in terms of a breath of experience.
And I don't care if I sound old. I've always sounded old. I sounded old when I wrote Lesson
Zero. I mean, I was an old man at five. But you said that you wouldn't choose novels again.
I wouldn't. I absolutely would not. What would you choose in a world?
A web series, a TV show, a mini series, I'd choose it. I do think they've replaced it. I think
adult literary fiction has slid down. We've lost about 13% of the readers since 2013.
That is a lot. That is a bad business. And that's that's over a loss of a billion dollars
in sales. That is suggestive of something. And I also don't meet anybody anymore who reads
serious adult fiction, serious, meaning quasi literary to literary adult fiction. I'm not
talking about, you know, obscure writers that are only taught in academia, but it is something that
I don't know. I am of I really do believe that reading that kind of long form fiction
encourages empathy and encourages you to step into other people's shoes and to see the world from
three or four or eight different angles rather than your own. And that to me is the purest
example of getting that experience more than theater, more than listening to a record, more than
going to a movie because it is not a passive experience. It is an active experience of actually
putting yourself in the shoes of the character and seeing the world through the way that they
look at it. And it's just that you can't get that in the other kind of medium. And if that's
going, I mean, I don't know. I mean, what's replacing that?
Well, I don't know that there is and that's one of the things I wanted to get to, which is
if we are in fact losing the capacity, as I've said, for semi-reliable communal sense making,
that we can't make sense of the incoming information in any way where we can communally kind of agree
on, well, what just happened and what should we be thinking about, about how to approach that.
If we don't have a canon where I can reference a line or two to get at a really complicated
thought, in my own tradition, we've lost canned humor where a lot of, let's say, Talmudic teachings
were contained in a joke and you would just use the punch line. Nobody told the joke once
everybody knew it. You just use the punch line to say, well, that's a super subtle principle.
Like, well, in terms of referencing one line, the idea is, that does protest too much,
me thinks, is a complicated concept. I don't want to have to explain it from scratch,
but if I can point out that somebody is falling out, Al Dershowitz seems to be protesting too
much at the moment. And I don't want to have to say more. If we don't have common literature,
common canon, if we don't have the time to sort of take a more Straussian view, which is, what is
the writer really trying to say that can't be said in the open? If we believe that transparency is
always the answer and that sunlight is always the best disinfectant. Is there any way of waking up
into a different era so that this thing that is suffusing our culture doesn't take the whole
enterprise down? Sometimes I think I'm old. Sometimes, and I am, I am old. And I think that
this is the natural state of things and that we are just moving forward on this trajectory.
And that bit by bit, you can fight, I suppose, in a natural way to try to stay on that trajectory.
But it's moving along and that golden world that surrounded you is moving on to younger people
and to sexier people and to more vibrant people. And I think sometimes, and I don't believe this
is true about reading, I sometimes think that, oh, this is what it means to become somewhat
obsolete in terms of a pop culture world, in terms of being a member of the pop culture world.
And it just goes this way and people are left behind. I think a lot about why the Quentin
Tarantino movie struck a chord among so many middle-aged men, I know, is because it's really
an exploration of that. So all of this is a roundabout way of saying that maybe people
are figuring out, and the trajectory that we're on is the one that they want to be on.
But I just don't know if it, I don't know if it is and I don't know if,
look, I don't think we're ever going back to read the long form.
I agree with that. I don't know that I want to go back to the previous world.
Yeah, no, I don't think I do either. And I am, I just wish it to a degree. And I think it's,
it's, as with you, that I guess a little bit more empathy, critical thought,
and that this notion that you can see two things in a sentence or in an opinion,
you know, Fitzgerald's famous dictum about the only smart people are the ones that can really see
both the beauty and the horror in a rose. And if you, if you, you need to be able to see both to
be an artist or to be a person in the world, if you just see one or the other, whatever.
And I don't see that anymore. And it is, that's what I miss. I mean, I don't really want to
necessarily go back. Though, look, watching, I don't know, watching the Quentin Tarantino movie,
I mean, I wouldn't, I don't know if I wouldn't mind going back here to Hollywood in 1969,
just in terms of a, on a certain kind of fetishistic level in terms of clothes and decor and
music. Well, I mean, I think that there is a golden age of Hollywood. I think that one of
the things we're missing is we developed this idea of critical thinking. And it turned out
that there was a parallel theory that never got developed, which I've called critical feeling,
which is how do you get your feeling to be responsive and adaptive as opposed to reflexive
and kind of, right? And the, the, the group feel is this very weird thing that the millennials
are traveling on. My theory about this, I don't know whether you'll bite on this or think it's
silly, is that maybe Generation X are the so-called magic Negroes to the millennials. The
millennials are a larger cohort. Maybe they're going to mean more, nobody from the 1930s who
was born in the 1930s ever became president of the United States. Maybe the idea is that Gen X
has a different role and that the millennials are hungry to be inducted by something older,
something more established, to be recognized. The boomers are weirdly not going to do it. The
silence are almost spent. And I wonder whether our problem is that we, we're angry. Like,
I don't think Generation Wuss really works because what it does is it sets us up oppositionally.
We're taking their nonsensical energy, which by the way is completely maddening. And I think it's
very strange that I grew up in a very threatening world, real physical, physical risk. And I'm
more worried about Twitter than I ever was in the world where people were wrapping their cars
around telephone poles or ending up ODing in the Cedars ER. Something about this world is weirdly
dangerous because there are no normal rules. It doesn't know when to stop. It's willing to take
away your ability to earn, to destroy your reputation, to move your private life into the
public sphere. And it doesn't seem to have any empathy. I wonder if the real trick, and this
is like the hardest thing to even imagine, is to realize that these are damaged kids and now
damaged adults and that our grit is supposed to serve them. Maybe we're supposed to lose twice,
lose once to the baby boomers in the silence. We're supposed to lose again, but we are supposed
to take up our place, helping them become a better version of themselves. I think most of my
audience is millennial. I bet yours is too. A great deal of it is millennial. And I talk about
the demise of a lot of things. I talk about the demise of reading. I talk about the demise
of American cinema, which you would think would not be interesting to them at all, but
they're there. And certainly, I have a large millennial following, despite how often millennials
attacked me this past spring with the publication of the book. They were definitely there at the
readings. They were definitely there at the signings. And a lot of them were there when I gave a talk
at the Peter Deal Foundation about a month ago. So there is that audience. And I agree with you
on a certain level. I do think they want to learn and they do want guidance. I think they're hungry
for it to a degree. But they are overly sensitive about how people see them. And that is a very
interesting and I think a new thing in terms of shame, because the guiding principle or one of the
strongest signifiers in the millennials I know is shame. Shame is a huge motivating factor to be
shamed. And that is something that I don't know. I can't relate to. And I don't think Gen X can
really relate to that as much either. It was never as powerful a motivating factor in terms of how
you express yourself, in terms of being online, in terms of how people talk about you, message
boards. It was a bigger deal for us. I think that what we don't understand is that we're not,
this is another theory, feel free to shoot it down. I've watched the very strange interactions
between millennials from a perspective of a Gen Xer. What they'll often say is that was a little
rapey. And if you use the word rape to a Gen Xer, it's like, boom, you've just dropped a bomb.
But like rapey, I would never use the word rapey. And then another one of them will say,
yeah, you're right, it was a little bit rapey. And then they go on. And so the idea is that
they're trading, they have an agreement, which is like, it's normal for people to say things that
are kind of rapey and racist and kind of like, you're starting to go into dangerous territory,
just I'm signaling to you, you probably don't want to go there. And they're like, thank you very
much. I didn't want to go there. And then they all go on their merry way. Very often what we do is say,
what did you say? Like, we're back on our heels because we're not part of this agreement.
And we have an idea of like, there was nothing wrong with what I said, don't you dare talk to me
that way. Or no, no, no, I absolutely didn't mean it. I promise you, I promise you. So we don't
understand that it's relative to an agreement that we're not part of to warn each other to back
off and give a quick apology and then keep moving on. And I don't even agree with it. Like,
from their perspective, if I'm showing them a George Carlin routine, and they say, that was a
little racist. We're now at a weird impasse where if I continue to say, I think that routine is
actually quite important, and you really need to look at it and pay attention and try to figure
out what he's saying. Now we've escalated. Wow. I gave you your warning shot and you declined it.
Now I'm going to have to call you out as really a bad person. And now I'm going to have to
potentially use my high leverage position as a reporter for a famous newspaper to actually ruin
your life. Like, we don't understand that that's not what they're hoping for. They're hoping for
the sort of, oh yeah, I don't know. What was I thinking? I would never want to point somebody
to that George Carlin routine. The ambiguity of irony, that's missing. The ambiguity of irony.
And irony and being ironic was a key, a key part of our generation. And it was a way we expressed
ourselves. And it's a way that we dealt with things, a lot of it in our novels, in the music
that we listen to. Very rarely was music this declaration of myself and how I'm feeling.
At least as a Gen Xer growing up in the late 70s and into the 80s. But that lack of irony
rips up, takes away shading and takes away a humanity because nothing is exactly as it seems.
And if you want to look at the world in that way and then every little thing that you don't like
becomes racist or rapey and you're not able to place it within a context and taking the totality
of it and look at it from three or four different angles and it's just pure reaction to, I don't
know, a litany of rules that you've been told you have to follow. I'm not doing it. I mean,
I'm just not on, and I don't apologize to them and I don't say anything. But I just don't say
anything. If people, I mean, I've never written an apology to anybody and I've never defended myself
to any of these people either because the arguments just isn't worth responding to
on a certain level. You've taken, you've deconstructed it to a degree where there's
an ounce or so of sympathy. But I also think that they should know better. I think I'm giving people
way too much credit for those pulling up their pants and understanding what it means to be an
adult and that you, you know. I'm trying to get them to entertain the idea that, for example,
if you chase injustice with greater injustice, you have not gotten rid of injustice. You have a
problem of the old lady who swallowed a fly, right? I'm trying to figure out how to get through
to their minds what I see. Now, maybe there are ways in which I'm wrong. I'm open to that,
but I'm not open to the idea that suddenly everything has been wrong and the one generation
has suddenly figured it out. I have to say something, Eric. Please. As we, I realize that I
don't really care. Yeah. I really don't care what millennials think about me, and I really don't
know if I care what I think about them. The overreaction to the hashtag generation was,
which I thought was a perfect example of a kind of snarky Gen X way of looking at millennials
was intended as comedy, and it was tended as something to talk about. No, I understand exactly.
I got a little chuckle at it. Right. But still to, and then when I did take it a bit more seriously
and expounded on it in my book and realized that I was sympathetic as well as annoyed.
Right. I just, I don't know. I think that the reaction to that was endemic of millennial
thinking and that it is, I don't know, it's problematic. But I also realized I've got other
things to worry about. That's fine. What I'm worried about is we've got a generation
that is now going to probably use its high leverage positions to derange a lot.
And cancel us. And well, canceling, you know, some of us can afford. What worries me is,
I see this as eroding the outer layers of our civil society. They're about to get to core
structure, and it's going to keep going. And I don't think it's cute. I think,
I think it is absolutely capable of getting us into war. I think it's capable of getting us a
president that would be dictatorial as an overreaction to their nonsense. So I don't think
nothing is riding on it. I think a lot is riding on it. And I have two contradictory impulses.
One is to say, what is it that you're actually trying to say? Maybe we can work to try to
understand you better. And the other one is cut that shit out. Right. And so I don't have the
indifference I think that you do. I think what I have is I have two contradictory impulses,
one of which is to say, I bet you're saying something and I'm just not getting it. And the
other is you're wildly out of control and you need to see a different path. Of course. Boomer
youth, millennial youth, Gen X youth. I know which one that I am probably most impressed by on a
certain level in terms of, and I'm shocked in terms of a kind of level of clear headed,
I don't want to say adulthood, but just a way of dealing with the world that is wildly different
from millennial and Boomer. And I think it's interesting that you think that there could be
a moment where Gen X might step up to the stage and announce itself forcefully in a way that
perhaps we have. We're doing it now. I mean, you and I, I think we're modeling a conversation,
which we have a couple of disagreements. Yeah. I think it's polite. Both of us
are capable of taking our sabers out of their sheaths, but there's usually no reason to.
No, never. And what I do find is that I just think what I was hoping to do here a little bit
is to talk about this context and this firmament, which I think has been invisible,
that we've have a Boomer millennial story. There's a very important role of Gen X that
has been ignored. Your, your, your work, I think has been probably the best example of it, to be
honest. I find it almost impossible to read because it's so, it's so right. And that what,
what we do next is we have to think about the long-term longevity of our society. I'm very
worried, for example, that some of these millennial females need to start families,
even though they're pretending that it doesn't really matter one way or the other,
whether they have families or not. I think it's going to be incredibly destructive if we don't
have people invested in the longevity of our society through somewhat normal structures.
Now, I could be wrong in that. Maybe the idea is, is that a family is an outmoded concept and
that people don't need this to be fulfilled. But I do think that if we don't actually have
adults in the room and we don't become those adults and strong and caring above, you know,
just the way you're dealing with a bratty child, we're too cowed by these bratty children. We
actually have to say, Hey, I'm really sorry, but you, you have to stop throwing a temper tantrum.
And if you have to go to your room, go to your room, but you're out of control. We can't have the
New York times becoming the agent of like individual destruction as it destroys the
reputations of people who fall out of line of the orthodoxy. That, that thing is a threat to our
society writ large. Anyway, I don't know whether you agree or disagree. On that note, all right.
I think I, I completely agree. Well, I completely agree. It's been fantastic having you here.
And you've been through the portal with Brett Easton Ellis. I hope for those of you who are
listening on Apple or Spotify, you'll subscribe to the program. And hopefully we'll be putting
it out on YouTube as well. So make sure to subscribe to our channel and we'll see you next time.
Thanks very much.
