Hi, this is Eric with A Few Thoughts for this week's Housekeeping. What I want to bring
up this week is how to think about the portal podcast, and in particular, I want to give
a few thoughts on how we should measure the scale of a critique or the power of an idea
and how these two different concepts might interrelate. Many years ago, I used to live
in Cambridge, Massachusetts, and we had our own very peculiar notion of celebrities back
then. Tracy Chapman literally used to busk on the street for money, and NPR's car-talk
guys lived locally. It was within that milieu that I would go to talks for entertainment.
As a broke graduate student, lectures were a godsend, as they were free and plentiful.
I would attend them the way other people would go to movies or concerts, and from time to
time that would include Noam Chomsky's lectures on political theory as he worked at MIT. I
was always impressed by his sincerity, and sometimes I would stay after and talk with
him. On one such occasion, I told him that I had had a conversation with a contacted
NPR, and that that person might be interested in getting him a regular slot of perhaps five
minutes or more. I was naturally very excited to make something like this happen if it were
in fact possible. Noam's response was surprising to me at the time. He was absolutely emphatic
that he was not interested. Somewhat stung, I asked him why he was so definite. He replied
in such a small slot against a backdrop of NPR-filtered news, he would appear to the
audience to be a stark, raving madman, and that there was no way of presenting a deep
critique so as to overcome the relentless framing of the news into narratives in which
NPR was engaging. I have thought about that interchange many times since then, as I have
been haunted by its implications. What good, after all, is a Chomsky-level analysis if
it is barred from having any impact when done at scale.
When we have a critique of a well-known narrative or worldview, it usually can be sorted into
a taxonomy according to whether it accepts, bends, or is forced to break the frame of
the storyline with which it contends. As an example, imagine we were back in 2016 and
I were to critique the coverage of the U.S. presidential election for failing to contend
with the ideas of Donald Trump, saying that, I feel that we aren't covering Trump sufficiently
because we all know that Hillary is going to win, would constitute a critique, but one
that accepts the narrative without challenge. Saying instead, Hillary is going to beat
Donald Trump by much less than she imagines and will have to build her mandate after the
inauguration if she is to be effective, would bend the Hillary's inevitable media narrative.
But saying instead, I think all the pundits and polls are wrong and that Donald Trump
should be expected to win would break the narrative entirely. This breaking of the frame is usually
cause for derision and is, of course, exactly what got Ann Coulter ridiculed on Bill Maher's
program when she made just that prediction. To return to our story in Massachusetts, almost
all of Chomsky's points were in fact narrative breakers in this third category. He would
have stories we'd never heard from East Timor, detailed history on Iranian self-determination
and oil reserves, data on Chilean atrocities. To accept Chomsky was to accept a world of
different stories that, oddly enough, could usually be authenticated but which were frequently
not referenced outside far left circles. Thus, Chomsky could not play inside the game
of NPR, which was often bending and sometimes challenging official narratives, but seldom
ever breaking the dominant frames within which the storylines developed. In short, Planet
Chomsky was an alternative universe in which a Howard Zinn might be found but where you
would never find Samuel Huntington or Henry Kissinger. I mean, they might have taught
down the street at Harvard in the adjacent zip code one digit off, but it was another
incompatible universe entirely. So what can one say about the style of deep critique which
must break the frame of its target without knowing any further information?
Well, in the first place, no one can really argue that all frame breaking is unwarranted.
I mean, clearly the US view of North Korea is such a critique, for example, as is the
mainstream Baptist critique of an offshoot cult like the hate-fueled Westboro Baptist
Church. And yet, when the narrative under scrutiny is our own narrative, the very one
upon which we depend to give direction, meaning, and security in our daily lives, we can be
relied upon to fight everything that breaks our frame irrespective of its validity. So
with this in mind and the COVID pandemic response as our backdrop, who are today's deep
critics? And should we be listening to them or ignoring them as is our reflex? Well, I'm
glad to say that Noam Chomsky is still going strong. And I dare to think that upon his
eventual exit from this world, he may well be remembered as America's leading public
intellectual, even by many of the respectable people who paid him absolutely no mind while
he was still a living threat to our system. Naseem Taleb, of course, is another candidate.
Now, Taleb's idiosyncrasy is notwithstanding. It is particularly difficult to contend with
the substance of Taleb's critique because it is so vast. Where other people trade accusations
about the misuse of statistics, Taleb verges on saying that the field of statistics is
itself the problem. While some might argue about the fallacy of appeal to authority,
in a particular case, Taleb instead goes after many of the expert class by name, endearing
himself to his targets by calling them IYI, for intellectual yet idiot. He does this,
I believe, because he wants to signal that all frames coming from the mainstream should
be considered dead on arrival with him unless verified from first principles. A third case
might have been my old friend and colleague Serge Lang at Yale, who I may discuss another
time as he is no longer with us. And I will leave Scott Alexander, Venkatesh Rao, Peter
Thiel, Nick Bostrom, and others for another time. My aim in bringing up these various
and varied critics is to bring to consciousness that there is actually almost no real information
content in pointing out that we disagree with nearly any deep frame-breaking critique if
it is targeted upon our own narratives. This must be the baseline expectation if we wish
to see ourselves as self-aware and metacognitive. We oppose most all such critics reflexively
and completely independent of the merit of their arguments for reasons of self-preservation.
And yet, even knowing this, my goal at the portal is, at least in part, to provide you
the listener with just such a deep critique. The problem here is that the critique as it
stands is simply so vast that it is difficult to consider independent of whether or not
it makes sense or is true. Think, for example, about the past episodes we've been through.
We've asked you to rethink science and its culture from the bottom up. The portal, in
fact, began with an interview about stagnation during a period where most everyone else was
talking about some dizzying pace of technological change. We've explored the idea of universal
societal lies and preference falsification, and the idea that Judaism might not even be a religion.
And most insanely, the need to stave off an apocalypse, potentially through planetary escape,
well before we were all told to stay indoors as a planet to avoid a killer virus. I mean,
if there is a silver lining to this pandemic here at the portal, it is surely that our talk
about the twin nuclei problem on the Joe Rogan program and worldwide apocalypse seems a lot
less far-fetched after transitioning suddenly from business as usual to worldwide lockdown.
So, how can this be done at scale without paying the same exact reflexive penalty of
cognitive dissonance as all the other deep critics seem to have suffered? If there is an
answer here, it is to be found in the concept of the portal itself. My goal is not to tell you
that where we are is terrible and contains no meaningful options. The highest ambition, in
fact, of the program is to show you how else you might think about finding passages to something
real and more meaningful than the place you were when we first met. After that, if you want to
remain in place, that would be a choice rather than a sentence. So, what I want to leave you with
is a notion which I believe goes back to Richard Dawkins. At some point, he opined that one could
measure the power of an idea as if it were a fraction. To this way of thinking, the power of
an idea is measured as what the idea explains divided by what the idea is forced to assume.
For example, Dawkins might claim that the theory of evolution is powerful specifically because
it explains the origin of all known species and adaptations, but only assumes the principles
of natural and sexual selection. Maxwell's equations, by contrast, are powerful because
they explain light, x-rays, radio waves, magnetism, electricity, photons, all as an unpacking of a
single geometric concept. Weber's theory, by turns, that all government can oddly be unpacked
from the simple concept of a monopoly on violence would be such a theory in the social rather than
the natural sciences. As such, it may be easier to accept Darwin's, Maxwell's, and Weber's critiques
of all that came before them specifically because their criticism is not scattered and flows simply
from unifying and underlying principles. In the case of the portal, we have endeavored to follow
this example. Quite simply, and there's no getting around this, our critique of modern life is
partially characterized by just how deep it is. Yes, we are really saying that we have had a
universally unworkable leadership class in place for nearly 50 years and that most of our institutions
are not functioning ethically or honestly. In other words, most of us adults grew up in a bubble.
Of course, that probably sounded a lot crazier to many before most people saw the worldwide clown
show that was and is the developed world's response to the COVID-19 pandemic. But just imagine
that almost every critical area of civil society leadership is just as badly prepared as our public
health sector to react to immediate changes in need and you will start to watch your brain tune
out as it may well have during initial discussion of the virus in January. After all, what would one
do to fix it? I mean, I myself get innervated just like you whenever I think about the most
straightforward implications. Where would we even begin for God's sake? Yet this is why we have
endeavored to provide you with a very small denominator to combat the sense of hopelessness.
I mean, if there is more or less only one root cause to the problems we are picking out,
then our idea will have power in the sense of Dawkins and we need not work individually on
thousands of idiosyncratic downstream emergencies clamoring for our attention. In our theory,
almost all of this novel level of systemic failure and institutional leadership follows from a
simple change in growth regimes. In the post-war regime from 1945 until the early 1970s, growth was
so remarkable and constant that we built our institutions around expectations of economic
expansion and technological innovation. And then, just like that, most all of that growth stopped
around 1971 through 1973, maybe having to do with predictions of Derek de Sola Price more than 10
years earlier, which we can discuss another time. Like Weber's theory of a monopoly on violence or
Darwin's explanation of selection, the validity of this simplification rests on what can be unpacked
from relatively mild assumptions through the theory of embedded growth obligations. Because
these institutions are all facing the same system of pressures, there is a near universal need for
every titular head in this cohort of leaders to hide the fact that their institution is predicated
on high growth expectations and that they are all now failing and that the expectations cannot be
met. Further, if this is correct, they are failing in exactly the same ways with the same class and
type of leaders at the helm, whose top skill must be this masking of the inability of the leadership
to meet the growth obligation embedded within the foundations of their institutions simply to keep
the game going. This is what must now come to an end. Generations are in fact defined by their
cognitive development during whatever environment was present during their formative years. The
important generational divide is likely between the silent and baby boom generations on one side
who grew up as children and young adults amidst real growth and who were thus attached to the
narratives of success under difficult circumstances, with Gen X and the millennials still waiting their
turn and largely alienated from narratives which offer them very little other than debt and near
permanent holding patterns. Once the baby boomers in silence exit the system, we are likely to see
their successors start to actually admit to the terrible state of the institutions. So if you're
interested in this theory, this is now your homework assignment. As you watch this cohort of leaders
wrestle with the COVID pandemic, ask yourself what part of the bizarre nature of this response can be
deduced from the theory of embedded growth obligations. We have now spent in the United
States the last 28 years under baby boomer administrations. So how well did they do to
prepare us for this pandemic? Did they leave us stockpiles of essential supplies? Did they resign
when they failed in their duties? Are their instincts compatible with the heavy burdens
which are now likely to cascade from here? And if pandemic leads to depression and depression
leads to war, would you wish to send yourself or a child into battle under President Sanders,
President Trump or President Biden as commander-in-chief? Or would you look for a portal instead to
avoid this choice? This portal episode introduces you to one of my favorite people and favorite
artists on earth. Now let me say this, if you were to ask me which of my guests so far is most
often an open portal to the transcendent, this is the one. And I've seldom been as certain as I am
here. It's hard to know what to say about Elu, aka Eric Lewis. Two things, however, are clear.
He is a straight up genius and a force of nature. Are we friends? I'd definitely say yes, but it is
a strange thing to be friends with an avalanche or a tsunami. At our Shabbat dinner table, for
example, he's one of our favorite guests, but he often speaks to me in riddles and sometimes
reminds me in speech of how Jimi Hendrix used to struggle to talk to mortals. And in many ways
beyond that, the comparison seems a good one. If one looks at the musical notation meant to say
what Hendrix was doing on guitar, it is remarkable how little is captured. This is because Hendrix
expanded the dimensionality of the guitar with feedback, micro embellishments, and electronic
wizardry so that the notes provided only the barest substrate for the tapestry of sound that was
being woven. In many ways, Eric has done the same thing for the piano. So just as Les Paul proceeded
Hendrix in using the studio as an instrument, and flamenco artists were tapping on fretboards
long before Eddie Van Halen changed the percussive guitar game, Eric was not the first to play with
the internal organs of the piano to coax out new sounds. But far beyond the prepared piano
experiments of art music composers, when Eric ripped the cover off the piano to play both the keys
and the harp-like strings behind, he brought so much dimensionality and soul that he at last
overcame the critical limitation of the instrument that had plagued it since his birth. The piano's
mechanical action, which is one of the great triumphs of pure mechanical engineering, ensured
that there was regularity to most every note. Eric replaced that regularity and created a
higher dimensional instrument. If the piano was Einstein to the harpsichord's Newton,
in Eric's hands the piano went relativistic and quantum finally at the same time. I should say
that this is one of many different innovations that Eric has brought. He has explored the fusion of
Baroque counterpoint and jazz into a style that he calls counterbop, which quite frankly stretches
my mind farther than it can often go, as well as innovating rock jazz to replace the Tin Pan Alley
songbook of standards. Additionally, he has innovated in several aspects of showmanship,
as well as DJing and screenwriting, which is hardly surprising as my entire body can seemingly
fit inside his brain case. As for this interview, a word of warning. I should say that Eric is being
very kind to me indeed by inviting me to at least pretend to play along with him, either on the high
registers of the piano while he is playing, or using the clogged harmonica that I happen to find
in my pocket the morning we recorded in LA on a famous Yamaha that was apparently used to record
Angie by the Rolling Stones. I would appreciate it if you didn't see it as me getting in his way
so much as an act of supreme generosity from a true innovator and friend to a humbled curator.
I hope you will look into Eric's music after you've had a chance to listen to our uninterrupted
conversation and that you'll sit back, relax, and meet the portal that is my friend, Elu, Eric Lewis.
Hello, you found the portal. I'm here today with one of my favorite people and our guest,
Eric Lewis, Elias Elu. I don't exactly know how to describe what he is and what he does,
but we'll start with pianist and we'll go from there because he's also a DJ, screenwriter,
and a guy who, well, one of the reasons he's on the show is that it seems like everything he touches,
he has to innovate. So, Elu, welcome to the portal. Thanks, Eric. So, one of the things I just want
to jump right into is that I'm super frustrated with where music has been recently, and I think
it's really interesting that you occur in our era. From my perspective, a lot of our popular music
has been getting simpler as it was getting more intricate and more dependent on musicianship
back in the 70s, and a lot of what we're seeing is a shift to the studio, to simpler forms, and
you come along, and for my money, you are innovating at the very highest levels of jazz, rock, and pop
all at the same time. Are you seeing something like that, where you were somehow like a salmon
swimming counter to the stream, or do you think that you're just a part of our age, and in fact,
the same as it ever was? Thank you, first of all, for saying that.
I think of myself as just an arch-traditionalist in some sense, part of the tradition of jazz with
a nod of the hat, or an eye on Miles Davis, John Coltrane, Arctatum. Part of the tradition of jazz
is to innovate and to individuate, as Carl Jung might say perhaps. That is the focus that I find
myself orbiting, and that's my pursuit. I've sort of painted myself in a corner in a lot of
different ways, and I use that sort of sense of being trapped or forced to commit to this thing
that I've painted myself into a corner with, and I use that particular situation, that particular
scenario, to drive out and bring forth innovation, as they say, ingenuity. What is that necessity,
is the mother of ingenuity or mother of invention? Well, that's just the thing. For people who don't
know you, and they're going to not only know you hopefully, but we have a beautiful Yamaha piano
behind us, they're going to feel you shortly. Let me just give you sort of a non-musician's
impression of where I've seen you innovating. First of all, you've taken what used to be called
prepared piano, where people would leave like bricks and paperclips in the back of the piano,
and you've stuck your hand in there to coax all sorts of sounds out that add such a rich
dimensionality to your playing that you have access to many more degrees of freedom than a
standard person, so you're playing in the back and in the front of the piano. You've innovated this idea
which you called rock jazz, which was a canonical innovation in that originally,
when jazz was coming up, people use the popular songs of the day as the substrate on which to
improvise, and you pointed out that autumn leaves is not a part of our current canon,
it's a part of our older canon, so why not use the rock songs that everyone knows as the substrate
to be true, not to the letter, but to the spirit of jazz, which is to use that which everyone
knows and show them something they don't, huge innovation. Like all of the best Jerry Lee Lewis
footage where he kicks away the bench and he's just playing standing there, you've got this
insane powerful stance, you use this armor to convey the aggression, and I think I was talking
about the violence of creativity, one of the reasons we're afraid of creativity is that we're
afraid that creativity is always a violent act. You came up with this thing called counterbop,
where you're bringing sort of Bach-like counterpoint into the jazz idiom and
achieving a level of independence, we say of your hands, but of parts of your mind that I've never,
I don't think I've ever seen at the keyboard. To say nothing of how you've innovated, I'm starting
to hear that you're DJing from inside of the piano, it feels to me like everything you touch
is a response to a constraint, that you take on the constraints of the traditional,
and then you force yourself Houdini like to break out of them. Is that an accurate description
of what it is that's driving this sort of explosion? I would say that most of it is accurate, some of
it would be argued from the perspective of branding and that sort of kind of thing.
But isn't that part of innovation? Right, so there's that, you know, that's part of creativity too,
and it's important as well. So I would definitely say that counterbop of all of the innovations
is one that's got the heaviest musical academic durability. I would say that rock jazz was innovative.
However, I'm not the first person to play rock tunes or rock covers on a piano. I think I might
be the first person to sort of go at it with the ferocity and the physical degree of power
and endurance and sort of fidelity to those pieces. So I think that I go about that particular
endeavor in an innovative way. Branding it as rock jazz, perhaps that's innovative and using that as
a wedge to create an extension of my career. So, you know, there's an innovative quality there.
I would say counterbop, which is a more recent situation, more recent device that I've come
up with. That's something that I can definitely say is innovative in the sense that
I really haven't heard anyone mix Bach counterpoint with bebop. There's a lot of people that have
brought baroque counterpoint, European counterpoint into jazz. However, and this is for all of the
people who are going to immediately pounce on this statement or scream, wail that, oh, it has been
done before. Actually, no, it hasn't. It hasn't been done in a swinging way. So the idea that
jazz doesn't have to swing or that sort of kind of a thing, that's going to be a thing in that
particular wormhole right there can go very deep, but suffice to say that no playing Bach counterpoint
or that sort of kind of a thing inside of jazz is very different from counterbop, which is why I
call it counterbop, because it's not counterpoint, it's counterbop so that you have two Bud Powell
or two Charlie Parker like lines full of all of their internal striations and internal acrobatics,
shall we say, harmonic melodic acrobatics, working within the traditions of swing and
the traditions of bebop at the same time simultaneously. There are a couple of pianists
that do have some very highly developed left hands
that are able to do it to a degree and perhaps a good degree, but I haven't heard anyone get it to
like the highest levels and I believe that I've found a way to do it.
You know, I have to say this because I'm not a jazz guy. I don't have some of the problems that you
have. There's an elephant in the room and I want to kill it at the beginning, which is jazz is such
an intellectual pursuit and it's so discriminating as to the fine points of one's ability that it
really is a Mount Olympus and it's left most of the world behind and so you always have this
problem that when you're talking the small number of jazz cats who can really track what you're
saying and know the history, like they're historians of the subject, will always pounce.
Any simple statement is going to be wrong and they'll point you to something that happened
with Django Reinhardt way back when and it's incredibly intimidating to have to work within
this tradition. One of the things I've most appreciated about you is the way in which you're
willing to both take on the constraints and totally overturn the apple cart at the same time so that
you're really true to the spirit and I think the people who will resist you at first will thank you
later. If you think about, you know, Ray Charles, for example, who wasn't quite at this level of
jazz mastery but as an innovator brought gospel into the popular idiom, boy did he catch hell for
that or, you know, playing around with country idioms, you know, the black guy taking on supposedly
white songs and showing what can be done with them. I think that one has to break sensibilities
and norms and one of the things I don't want to get caught up in is have you self-censoring
yourself so I'm going to take full responsibility for all the wrong things that we say about jazz
history on this show. Not your problem, my problem. What do you see for people who don't
understand the difference between, let's say, a Miles Davis and a Kenny G? Nothing against Kenny G.
What are the top people in this field do differently? How did America end up with
the classical music that was this advanced this quickly and who are the really top priests at
the pinnacle of that summit? For you. Okay, so that's a solid and complex, multifaceted octopus
question, which is fine. It's understandable. Okay. I'm a big fan of science and I tried to
exploit the scientific method whenever possible. So from the perspective of the human animal,
you know, every sort of opinion about this or that as far as sound goes or as far as
as far as certitude or validity. For instance, if you put Kenny G's name next to Miles Davis's name,
I think that it's difficult to have a truly acerbic scientific conversation about that.
There's going to be those that feel as though Kenny G is the greatest musician that's ever lived
and there's going to be those that think that Miles Davis is the greatest musician that ever lived
and then there'll be those that think that the idea of calling someone the greatest musician
that ever lived is repellent. And then how itself is flawed and has a bias inherent in it
that intrinsically undermines the sort of conversation or the purity of the assessment.
I don't want to trap you in that. No, it's fine. I feel as though it's important as far as in the
process of me answering your question and in the process of you getting a sense of who I am
and how I feel about things or how I classify things. So that answers the first aspect of
my approach to comparison. Got it. So, existentially speaking, they're sort of the same
depending upon, you know, for instance, you could do a mind-tack where you turn on a television
and switch the channel to something that just gives you white noise. Right. Now, you can do
a mind-tack where you could hear jingle bells inside of that white noise. You can pretty much
hear whatever you're listening for. John Cage certainly explored ideas like that.
Right. You can hear whatever you're listening for in something and this goes to politics,
this goes to, this goes all the way out into all of human thought and bias endeavors, right?
So, I'm a chess player, so I shy away from that particular battle line. I'm going to shy away from
putting a qualitative or a sort of a validation-oriented thing with regards to
the Kenny G versus the Miles Lewis and all that. Let me take Kenny G out of it.
Well, no, it's fine. I think it's a perfect example, actually. You're not going to let me
out of it, okay? Go ahead. But it's perfect, though. All right. It's perfect. Then riff with it.
Yeah, yeah, it's perfect. The extremities always allow us to get the clarity as far as I'm
concerned. That's a big aspect of what I look at when I'm evaluating things. The more extreme
something is, the more pronounced it is, the purer it is and the easier we can see how it functions
in reality. Our political climate is one of extremes these days, so then it's very clear.
Everyone's agendas are very clear, and so we can see how those things interact and
where they agree, where they disagree, and the bases is upon the bases, the bases,
bases, c's, or whatever that word is, the plural bases, the bases upon which each extreme side
proffers their position to be concrete. Anyway, so when it comes to the aspect of
classifying levels of greatness in musicians and stuff like that,
that becomes a difficult thing to nail down because of the movable objective criteria,
the attackability of the objective criteria that we would try to put out there, right?
But what we can talk about, we can talk about branding, we can say, or we can talk about
physical difficulties, we can talk about things like that. I'm trying to remember all of the
question, but I can say that as far as who really inspires me in that sense at the highest level.
Right, the highest level. To you. To me. I'm highly inspired by John Coltrane. I had a chance
to tour with Elvin Jones, who was his drummer, so I was able to be Sorcerer's apprentice for two
years, amazing experience. I would say I really look up to many of the European classical masters,
Stravinsky, Liszt, Chopin, Bach, Beethoven, Brahms, Rachmaninoff, Debussy. I look up to
Hollywood film masters, Martin Scorsese. I look at German impressionistic master,
F. W. Murno. I mean, there's so many geniuses and so many diverse fields to be inspired by,
and to me, the actual physicality or device or technique that they're using to access the light,
shall we say, the light is somewhat secondary. I just am inspired that these people
touch the light. I mean, Simone Biles, this gymnast that's out now is doing amazing things.
The Williams sisters, Michael Jordan, moving Steve Jobs, I mean, Einstein, Newton,
there's just so many numerous people. I'm inspired by the existential fact that they even exist.
Okay, well, this is in large part what the portal is all about. And just to open something up, and I
think this is the perfect episode to do it. I haven't said it before. The N is often too low
in any particular field. The number of true geniuses, like if I think about physics,
there are lots of people who would be considered geniuses in any other field, but the top level,
five people are less than the last century. And so you have to aggregate field by field by field
if you want to see the pattern. And in some sense, that's what I hear you saying is that
you're looking, you're not going to let the instrument define where you look for inspiration
and what you port back into your own craft. Sure, there are specific dynamics to executing
behaviors, ideas upon a particular device or medium. The inspiration for that sort of thing,
in my case, comes from multiple places, which I'm sure is the same for many people. As far as
within the field, who really inspires me, like I would say, John Coltrane and Art Tatum,
from the perspective of how they merged extreme, extreme technical mastery of their
given instruments, how they merged that with a profound quote, in-house, I'm referring to in
their own mind, in their own flesh, a profound in-house understanding of where to put the music
and what approaches to take, similar to a chess player in the sense that a chess game,
if you know how the pieces move, okay, cool. Yeah. And if you, as long as you're
functioning in some kind of way that you can either digitally or physically move pieces around,
you can be part of the game. So now, how do the levels begin, how do you get from there to
Magnus Carlson, right? And so that internal game of, okay, why did you decide to defend this when,
in fact, the greater attack was coming over here, you know, that kind of stuff. Okay, so there's a
great analogy with jazz in a weird way, which is if I go back to Guy, I think of as potentially the
greatest creative genius of jazz, arguably, would be Louis Armstrong, who sort of invented modern jazz
from the hot fives, hot sevens, not to slight the Jelly Roll Mortons of the world. That is
understandable to me in the same way that a game of like Morphe or Copa Blanca was understandable
when chess was sort of in an earlier stage of its development. But as both of these fields
progressed, you always have this problem, which is that the greater play loses the casual observer,
like they can't figure out what's going on. And I bring this up in the context of something,
I saw you hanging out with Herbie Hancock and it warmed my heart. I heard him describe playing
with Miles. And he said, I hit a chord that was so wrong and so off, I wanted to clutch my head.
And he said, what I didn't know is that there was a level of musicianship beyond this,
where Miles heard the same chord and figured out the exact right notes to play that made
it the right chord in arrears. And it was a keyboard player, you know, talking about a
trumpet player who was fixing his mistake because he didn't hear it as a mistake. He just heard it
as notes to be played with. And I think about that in terms of like the improvisational idiom,
yes and there are levels and levels and levels and they lose us as casual observers. Like,
would we have known that moment happened if we were in that club or at that recording date,
if we weren't at the top level of the profession? Well, I think as they say,
if you have a good plumber, you never know anything's wrong, right? So I think we're in the
business of not letting the audience know that anything has gone wrong. Now, analyzing the word
wrong and that sort of kind of a thing, that's where a matter of skill and understanding come
into play. We're talking about phenomenology at that point. We're talking about event horizons.
We're talking about existentialism at that point. Let me be slightly less obtuse.
In the world of film scoring, I think Bernard Harmon was the one who made the famous statement
about the great paradox that exists in music, where a piece of music could quote unquote be
terrible. It could be really weak, bad, have a lot of inconsistencies, fail at a lot of different
levels, clearly be mediocre in its aspirations and its execution of those aspirations. However,
however, with the right visual apparatus going with it, with the right film going with it,
suddenly that piece of music is the penultimate apex zenith of perfection for that particular
moment. This is the great paradox. So similarly, when Herbie played that chord, Miles definitely
aware of this type of paradox can come to that and put a sound with it that transcends one aspect
of sonority, transcends one aspect of analysis and speaks, as Miles Davis said, a higher level
of theory. It speaks to a higher level of theory. If you're coming from the perspective that
any sound is just a sound free of bias, free of predestination, you suddenly have expanded
your toolbox. And so then it just becomes a question of how familiar are you with employing
these quote out of the box sorts of effects and manipulating that sort of kind of thing.
You know this joke that Leonard Bernstein put into West Side Story, where he takes the most
dissonant interval, the tritone, right? And he goes, Marie, which is like, uh, and he goes to the
fifth, which is like the most consonant. And then he's like the most beautiful word I ever heard,
Maria, right? And the whole idea is that the release from maximal tension into maximum sonority
is the most gorgeous thing. So he's going to take the ugliness and just serve it up as like this is,
you know, the feeling of just having met your true love. In screenwriting, conflict and tension
are the building blocks of your story. I mean, that's drama. That's irony.
Night and day. These are the binaries. These are the opposites, life and death, pain, pleasure,
happy, sad, all of these things opposites. There was a philosophy of aesthetic realism
that one of my professors in Manhattan School of Music would talk about.
And I don't want to butcher their tenants. However, one thing did stick out. They would always
talk about was how the coming together of opposites is how beauty forms or is the component of beauty.
And so, you know, while I might not necessarily call it beauty or, you know, put that term to it,
movement, speaking of counterbop, speaking of bebop, speaking of improvisation, movement
is the core issue. I mean, even getting down to neuroscience is the brain enables movement,
moving topics around, moving pieces, moving music, moving people, movement, movement, movement,
dance, movement, choreography, movement, movement, how you use harmony, how you use writing, how you
use words, all of these things work towards that same thing, movement. Einstein said when asked
about the universe, when asked about God, something's moving. There's something moving.
So, and yet he froze it in space time. The whole concept of space time freezes the wave.
And so, there's something profound about the fact that his insight arguably got rid of movement
by putting time as part of the substrate. So, you know, and this is going to come up when
we talk about cubism, where you have been on this new project, which is, again, once again,
seemingly increasing the dimensionality of independence, like parts, no longer just two
parts of your hands being independent, like multiple parts of the same hand are now independent.
And that goes back to like Duchamp, with the nude descending a staircase, which was
something of a reference to space and time, where the tube of the nude,
like one human form creates a tube over time. Do you see that you're playing with
sort of concepts that are coming out of this science inspired exploration and the tension
even internal to somebody like Einstein? Is it movement or is it frozen?
I'm quite inspired by neuro anatomy. And I'm quite inspired by physics. A good buddy of mine is
far more articulate about math and physics than I am. He's, you know, a big
devotee of that stuff. And he's a musician, his name's Marcus Miller, not the bass player,
he's a saxophone player. But he's really interesting. And so he and I, you know,
talk about stuff like that. I tend more towards the neuro analytical side of things. So I'm
very interested in the homonculus. I'm interested in the hippocampus and the corpus
corpus callosum and how the different hemispheres of the brain enable movement,
which plays directly into my coordination. So I explore those kinds of spaces. I explore how
we perceive time less so than the actual substrate of time itself. And, you know,
although I do ponder those things, I am very concerned with what's going on under the hood,
you know, what's going on in the mind. I like to analyze transcripts of conversations between
someone who has dementia versus someone who has Alzheimer's and listen to them talk to each other.
How to understand each other, because to me, that's the same as like two pieces of music
being played at the same time, you know, because when something makes no sense at the
language level, or it's incoherent, the only way that we have to try to glean anything from it
is by analyzing it from a different perspective. So if I analyze it as music,
like the rhythm of my voice, you see what I'm saying? These are the kinds of
techniques and manners and methods of analysis that start to come into how I go about
assessing genius, pursuing genius, and pursuing challenges and pursuing fluidity
at what I do. And so getting back to that question of Miles Davis and Kenny G, again,
we're starting to get into topics that form a substrate of analysis. All these topics are the
components of a platform of analysis through which I ponder the event horizon of music and
musicians. So like Lex Luthor said to Otis and Superman, you know, there's some people who can
swerve, some people can look at the contents of a bubblegum wrapper and figure out the secrets of
the universe, you know what I'm saying? So that's the thing. So if we want to pejoratively call
Kenny G a bubblegum wrapper, but yet, actually, I know you didn't, I'm not accusing you of that.
I'm just saying, but so many people normally do. This is why I'm, the reason I chose
folks at home, the reason I chose Kenny G was that he was accessible. I agree, just like bubblegum.
Bubblegum is, people would argue, people would argue, right, that his music is bubblegum compared
to a filet mignon or a few. Well, where I was going next with that is, is that if I think about
two records of Miles, Bitches Brew versus Kind of Blue. Sure. Bitches Brew was pretty challenging,
even though it was trying to be a little bit more in the rock idiom. Kind of blue, despite the fact
that it is unbelievable musicianship, was inviting. And it became so iconic because it worked at so
many different levels. It didn't intrinsically tell me, you know, bug off kid, this is for experts
only. It said, this is the highest level of musicianship, and it's going to work in a way
that you can put it on without having to, you know, just break your head over. When I think
about Art Tatum, when I used to put the needle onto my vinyl Art Tatum albums, I would only do it if
I was in some place to receive the brilliance of this person that I could not possibly understand.
He was playing so fast and so technically at such a different level. I mean, I would, would,
would it be fair to say that many pianists consider Art Tatum, you know, at the absolute,
maybe even the top guy ever to play jazz piano? Sure. Many would, and then there would be those
claims that it's not that musical. You know, go contrary to that. And yeah, that's okay. But just
some people at home have never heard of Art Tatum at all. At another level,
there's different times for different things and different moods to every season, too. Yeah. Right.
You know, there's situations where Art Tatum's best would be inappropriate or counterproductive to
very few circumstances in my life. Do I think, wow, I really just want to hear some Art Tatum.
The only situation I'm in when I really feel that for myself, and again, not as a musician,
is when I want to remember what the human mind is capable of. And this is the great conundrum.
This is the great paradox, because as we were saying, someone could hear Kenny G's silhouette,
for instance, and experience profound tranquility and serendipity. They could listen to Yanni
and get that. There's people, if you go to YouTube, you can look in a comment and someone
would say, oh, he's the Mozart of our generation, something like that. So
incredulity is, I'm sure, of course, you've heard of it, the fallacy of the incredulity fallacy,
where just because it's impossible for you to find believable makes it untrue. So similarly,
there's only a certain threshold that classifying or dissecting
validity or worth can go. And let me put it to you this way. There's a story about Charlie Parker,
where he was at a club and he was listening to a guy play that was, to everyone else's opinion,
really weak. But Charlie Parker was really into checking it out. And he was able to hear things
inside of what that guy was doing or what that guy was going for that gave him ideas. And I think
when I was first starting out with rock jazz, that was something that I experienced in a different
kind of way, where when I first started hearing some of these young bands, and I would hear some
of their live shows on the internet at that time on YouTube, I would think to myself, man, this
doesn't really sound that great, but the people are loving it. And so then that caused me to
have a different thought process about, hmm, maybe there's other aspects that are in play that
connect to people's enjoyment of things. And so it really called some things into question.
It really caused me to think about things from multiple perspectives and basically threw me
into the ocean suddenly. It's just like what we see in politics, where you can feel really strongly
about a particular thing, then you can find out that there's others that feel even potentially for
the exact same reasons that you feel strongly about a thing. For those exact same reasons,
they feel the exact opposite thing. And it can be very a very incredulous sort of kind of situation.
Well, I bring up this example of Dolly Parton writing this brilliant song, Jolene. And if you
look at the lyrics, they're incredibly tight and economical and conveying so much more through
implication than they even state explicitly. Jack White heard the song recorded with the White
Stripes, turned it into a pre-murder ballad singing the female song in a male voice. And Dolly
Parton, I believe, wrote him a letter saying, you may understand something about guitar,
but you understand nothing about women. But I think the joke was on her that she'd written
such a brilliant song that she didn't realize that it was now approachable from a completely
different angle that she hadn't had the last word on her own song. So there are all of these weird...
And that reminds me of the difference between Newtonian physics and model versus Einstein's
physics and models and the quantum theory and things of that nature, how I might be
misstating this, correct me if I'm wrong, that classical physics start to break down at the
quantum level per se? You would say that classical physics is recoverable from the deeper model,
but only as an approximation to the true physics within a regime. But nobody has thrown away
Newtonian physics because of Einstein, because where it works, you don't need the extra Einsteinian
perspective. Now, that was an amazing statement. Did you trap me in something? No, you just said
something cool though. You just said something that blows the whole thing open very nicely.
Tell me. Well, we don't need necessarily X. We don't need to discard X in this location,
or we don't necessarily need to bring in Y to this location. So we can substitute
art tatum for Rachmaninoff. We can algebraically plug in Kenny G. Miles. We can plug in
whichever artists or things that we want to in a thing and have that same exact dichotomy of
this works in this particular space. Eric, I totally... You see where I'm going with that?
So similarly, let's just say people want to have a romantic evening. But Eric, look,
there is an aspect of this that I'm fighting, which you're making a very deep point that whatever
moves you, whether it's the way the performer looks or the feel of the evening, there is the
total effect on the audience and the listener from having been present at a performance.
There is also something which I can't get to escape, which is you're just at a different level
than just about anybody I ever meet. And we can play around with that. And I play a little bit of
piano. I know when I'm in the presence of greatness, and you are at a different level than almost
anybody I've ever met. And you don't have to say anything back, but it's an uncomfortable thing
to hear. We can talk about the fact that who knows, maybe Taylor Swift is as musically interesting
as Miles Davis. It's a reasonable... That's not what I'm saying. That's not what I'm saying.
Let's look at it from a different perspective, please. Another perspective. Let's look at it
from a DJ perspective. All right. What is a DJ's job? A DJ's job, one of the jobs of a DJ is to
curate and present music for people for a particular occasion to elicit either a certain
response or to provide an atmosphere that the venue or the client is interested in.
Now, if we take that down to a microcosmic level inside of our own head, take it to the
piano, for instance, take it to these instrumental scenarios. Each note that I decide to play in
that nanosecond and that microsecond, I decide to play it, that's the same as me DJing. That note
is a track. Now, imagine how many notes that you would hear in the average performance, and then
in my case, I'm going to play a zillion notes. So then that's a zillion tracks that I've dropped
in a particular moment or a particular session. So I'm trying to get into how mental processes
are uniform, whether it's at a hyper slow speed or a hyper fast speed, the same process is there.
So this conversation that we're having might seem nebulous or maybe even evasive on my part
or vague in my part or noncommittal or something like that. No, I should tell people that in
general, when you and I talk, what I get is a time release understanding of your points over the
next three or four days as they finally make sense to me. So I'm going to challenge my audience. I
told them at the beginning of this show that I would never spoon feed them. You are a more
challenging person to talk to because quite frankly, your perspective is just richer and you
speak in an unusual fashion. And I quite frankly, it takes me days to understand what conversation
we just had usually. Well, I appreciate the accolades and I love you too, Eric. And I really
love you. I just admire what you've done for us. And I'm going to blow people's mind by just letting
you be you. But it is important to know that these levels of being exist. And that's part of why the
show is called the portal is that you are in touch with something that most people have no ideas
even available. Well, I will say that I do find inspiration having recovered from heavy depression
and heavy panic attacks, even sort of debilitating ones that it's inspiring for me to try to share
perspectives that hopefully some people could use to get a different angle on their sufferings, say.
Like when I talk about some of these things or when I answer your questions a certain sort of
type of way, some of these techniques, some of these ways that I'm managing myself
also help me manage stress, help me manage depression, help me manage panic attacks.
And you've had anger. I've seen anger. And you certainly have anger control,
things of that nature, fury, rage. And it also helps me get a higher chess rating too.
Because well, think about the godfather for a moment. Remember how
the James Kahn character Sonny ran out the house because Carlo was being super aggressive to his
sister. But then the bad guys realized, oh, that's the way to get him out there because he'll jump on
that. And so then they manipulate the toll booth. Yeah, they manipulated his anger. They manipulated
one aspect that was predictable about him. And they manipulated that to get out there. So
similarly, I think within ourselves, there are certain weak spots or different things that
can manipulate us, whether we want to or not, into bad situations or, you know,
whether it's a micro bad situation or macro bad situation. And so it's important to develop
techniques to manage those kinds of things, ergo, box, well tempered clavier. So I always
wondered why, because as growing up as a kid, I was like, why is it called well tempered? What
does that mean? I only know one kind of temper. Well, anyway, all of these particular devices
and techniques and responses all played to trying to find the most accurate answer and, you know,
find the most accurate way to approach a situation. And that's a very musical thing. How do we
approach this? We see it in chess too. How do we approach this position? It's your move. You've got
to make a move clock ticking. How do we approach this? You can see it in screenwriting. Okay,
I've got this idea. I want to have this character save the world. How do we approach this? Okay,
I'm at the piano. The people are waiting for the next tune. Okay, I've got this idea. I'm playing
something with my left hand. And I've got this idea that I want to bring out. I've got this energy
that I'm feeling. I've got this inspiration. But how do I approach it? How do I bring this thing
into existence, existential reality, aesthetic reality? How do I do this? Intentions oftentimes
are not enough. You have to match up with execution. That's when we start to get into
the conversation of levels. Now, again, it can become a debated and subjective thing.
And that particular stalemate, getting back to the Kenny G. Miles Davis thing, that particular
stalemate only gets broken by something objective. When we're faced with subjectivity that seems
endless, then that stalemate gets broken by the simple question of, okay, who's going to pay for it?
Ultimately. So who's going to hire Miles Davis? Who's going to hire Kenny G? Now,
that can get to the lament that you were referring to earlier in the big picture.
These problems of like the comedian's comedian can't get hired, but all the people who can get
hired look to that person and they say, that's the guy who's really got it going on. This is the
confusion about this. Now, the thing quite blunt, you know, I'm just going to over, you're an
overwhelming presence. I'm going to try to overwhelm you right back. One of the things that I love
about your playing is that you're playing at this incredibly technical level. It's so inventive,
but you bring so much soul and so much showmanship and the branding, the whole thing is going on.
Whatever layer of the stack I want to plug into, it's available to me. If I want to just have
the most beautiful tunes, you're providing that. If I want to see something new and innovative,
it's happening. And what I've seen is, you know, and I, this is a little bit off color. It's like
you make love to a room of 3000 people at a time and everybody is locked in there. Everybody's in
the pocket. Everybody's feeling the groove and we're thinking and we're feeling at different levels.
I think maybe one of my mistakes here is, is that I need to get you in front of the piano first,
have you play us some stuff. And then when we talk about these levels, I'm not going to be quite as
back footed. I should probably shouldn't have done the Kenny G thing just because people will,
well, people will infer that I meant something from it that I didn't, but so be it. I disagree
with you. All right. I think that it was perfect. I think that it's actually a spectacular thing
because it's really going to be a type of provocative and easily recognizable distinction.
Well, yeah, I mean, it gets back to one of the other points that you were making with regards
to distinction. How do we tell things apart? So we have to use things that are very distinct in
order for us to have a distinction in the conversation. I mean, that's the same thing that
happens in great film. If your premise or your opening part of your film lacks a strong enough
of a distinction about a situation, that particular lackage deficiency is going to haunt
the film the whole time. The premise of dirty dancing, there's this professional dancer
and there's this competition and he wants to win that. His partner ends up having
a super dangerous, super harmful, I guess illegal, just terrible abortion.
And then there's this rich girl whose father's a doctor who saves her life, that woman's life,
but now she can't dance. And so then the daughter now who is a klutz has to be taught how to dance
so that this guy can go ahead and win the competition, but it has to happen in secret
now because the father, you know, it's the plot that however, it struck me, it blew me away
that such an amazingly painful, controversial topic, such as abortion, such an amazingly
painful, excruciatingly, mind-bendingly, sad topic. And divisive. Divisive. Yeah.
Yet, this is a dance at the finale, the dance in the finale, we see that at weddings online,
you can see different couples trying to do that. So when it came out in the, you know,
cinematically or as far as storytelling, the power of such a topic that seems, what does that
particular, what does that particular thing have to do with a dance competition? But think about it.
As a screenwriter, I thought about it, if you take that out, right, then you're sitting with
pen and paper and you're like, okay, well, I've got this dance competition. I've got this dancer.
I've got this klutz. So the good guy, you know, the great dancer needs to teach this klutz.
How to dance so that he can win the competition. Now, if you replace that other scenario with
multiple types of problems, you'll find that it's hard to get something as compelling as that.
However, that person took a heavy risk. Now the screenwriter was a woman. So then she,
yeah, the screenwriter is a woman and she was a mambo dancer and she was, her father was a doctor
and she went to country clubs. And so she experienced this Dickens-like type of life where,
you know, there's rich and poor and, you know, all these kinds of things. And I'm sure her father
was, you know, warning her about the dangers of sexual activity and, you know, pitfalls or what
he's seen and stuff like that. So she put that all together. So perhaps because she had an experience
with it and she's a woman that she was able to speak on those subjects so amazingly. And she had
the understanding of how to bring those subjects together because she lived it. Right. You know,
however, it wouldn't occur to the average person, but this is what we call genius. You know what
I'm saying? That's genius and it's lasted the test of time. But that's my whole point with why
the whole opening, and this gets back to what you're talking about when we're talking about
genius and things of that nature. You did a genius thing, yet you're trying to get me
to discount that or go away from that, but I'm identifying you're a genius and that ties to
what I was saying about how Charlie Parker would hear a guy that people would say, what's he talking
about? But he's listening intently. That's the whole point. All these things come together.
So you've created this podcast as the example of the thing that we were talking about in the podcast.
Yeah, these are wheels within wheels. This is the universes within universes. Quantum,
it all breaks down at this level, but it holds at this level. This is why we love having you over
for Shabbat dinner. All that kind of thing. So you did it from the very beginning. All right.
Your instinctive thing. I didn't force you to choose those names. You naturally chose those
names. All I'm doing is the same thing that I would do inside of my mind. If I get an idea,
the sensor filter in my mind is like, wow, that's actually pretty cool because I'm referencing
all these other things. I'm seeing all this stuff. It's just like a chess game. I'm seeing the checkmate.
I'm like, wow, this king is positioned over here. Okay, I've got to do this in such a way that by
the time I'm going to spring this trap, he doesn't even see that that subtle move he made actually
provide. The funny thing is, I think I chose Kenny G, if I recall correctly, because I think I
remember hearing that he had actually been an innovator with some circular breathing technique,
and that he was somebody who was seen as being middle of the road, but actually a good deal
above that in musicianship. So I think I had some different process. I wish it was that I had some
super clever idea, but it was probably only one or two moves deep. But thank you for saying.
It still functions perfectly. I get to dance with you. So you get to
do what Miles did to my Herbie Hancock move. And just like in dirty dancing, he had to take
what she was doing. Right. And from what I've understood about dancing in that particular
format, it's the man's role in traditionally to showcase the female. Yeah. He's more of basically
a pole, a static figure that's showcasing all the things that she can do. That's what makes
a good male dance partner. I don't know how things work as far as how we're identifying on
political roles these days. However, I think traditionally that's kind of how it works.
There's a beautiful aspect to this concept that healthy male-female relations in a heterosexual
context have to do with passing power back and forth. And so the idea is that he might have
the responsibility of leading, which people will say, well, that's an impressive act. But then if
the idea is, no, but it's not just that I'm leading, my role is also to become the substrate
to showcase your abilities. These kinds of dynamics have broken as we've gotten very
simplistic in saying, well, that's power, that's oppression. And not recognizing that these things
are part of an interwoven whole. So the idea is that if I evaluate myself as a podcaster,
and I'm just thinking about myself, and I'm not thinking about the dynamic of the conversation,
because I'm just learning this. This is like eight episodes in or something like that.
Yeah, it's a question of I need to learn more yes and because of the improvisational idiom
that podcasting is. Improvisation is everywhere. Everyone's doing it. Each word we speak
is improvised. We're drawing from a vocabulary. We're putting concepts and ideas to sound. We're
utilizing these instruments, and we're bringing out energy, and we're moving things around to
create a type of movement, progression. And these are all the things that get depicted in art all
over the place. So a lot of times it's very easy to find genius or brilliances. The hard part can be
after you've managed to identify it accurately, that is, to stay with it and then bring in enough
tradition or enough substantiation to further demonstrate why that thing is genius. That's
been my mission in this particular conversation. I thought pivoting between the Kenny G and the
Miles Davis element was brilliant, and it provided such a great foundation for the conversation,
because we can go further. We can talk about how Kenny G racially is very interesting. In fact,
that was one of the things that inspired me as Elu was the idea that
there is a huge number of black people that really got into this guy playing soprano saxophone.
They were really into it, and they made him rich. Much to the consternation of many black jazz
musicians who couldn't understand how a white musician like that could get such loyalty and
money from a target demographic. Well, because some things transcend quote, quote, color,
it is what it is. Some things transcend that for different reasons. So part of Elu was also an
experiment, because I was thinking, well, that's interesting. What if I tried that in reverse?
What if I, a quote unquote black guy from a murder capital from Camden, New Jersey. Look it up,
folks, Camden, New Jersey. There's a Rolling Stone article called Apocalypse New Jersey,
the sad story of Camden, to get a sense of where I'm from, native of that place. What would happen
if I, who has spent my life learning Miles Davis, learning art Tatum, learning all of this
traditional, quote, black music? Yeah. What if I learned how to play the Rolling Stones? What if
I learned how to play Nirvana? What if I learned how to play that stuff? Because when I was doing
the traditional thing, I won the biggest competition in jazz. I got a full scholarship.
This is the Thelonious Monk competition. Yeah, I won the Thelonious Monk International
Piano Competition. I had also gotten a full scholarship to Manhattan School of Music,
which I graduated Dean's List. All of these types of accolades, I toured the world with
Wynton Marcellus, but I couldn't get a record deal, which is always, I mean, this is when I
talked about your anger. Right. I couldn't get a record deal. I was so flabbergasted to hear this.
Right. And then the idea that you figured out this hack, which, right, which is, and that's what
we're getting into here. So when we talk about, when we talk about Kenny G. Miles Davis, it goes
deep into a lot of aspects for me because I looked at him, I looked at Yanni, I looked at Liberace.
Right. And I was like, wow, they have massive followings. If you took them to
downtown New York's jazz scene, how distinctive would they be as far as skill level goes relative to
you know, your average college musician or post college musician? So then that was where I got
the idea to, well, one of the places that I got an idea to do an experiment. Well, what would happen
if a quote unquote black guy from the hood decided to start expertly playing Sweet Home Alabama,
which I ended up playing on America's Got Talent. The enigma of that,
speaking of elephants in the room. Right. Right. The elephant in the room is, you see this guy,
I mean, sure, the average person is going to say, oh, I don't see color. Oh, wow, you're just playing
Sweet Home Alabama. But you know, I don't know. I kind of don't think so. I don't think it's just
that. But either way, that's my point. So I sought to see if the same thing could be true in reverse.
And sure enough, it did. Now, I didn't write my own music the way Kenny G wrote like silhouette.
I didn't use drum beats and things of that nature. And so there's relativity as far as, you know,
degrees of success with that. However, I did achieve a very. Okay. But like even in this
situation, just to rip off of it. Sure. You know, this movie Victor Victoria, the story of a woman
playing a man playing a woman, a female female impersonator, right? Right. Okay. So you're telling
me when you do satisfaction, that you're actually swerving and feeding the Rolling Stones black
back to white audiences, potentially a very visibly black man. On the other hand,
there's this beautiful video of Keith Richards taking apart and dissecting satisfaction. And he
says, you want to know where what it is? And he starts playing it as like a Mississippi blues
on the guitar. And so you realize that he took this, this riff, you know, off of the fifth,
sixth, flat seven, you know, typical blues pattern disguised it. And now you're sort of
weirdly the black guy playing a white guy playing black music, feeding it back to white audiences.
And in some sense, giving this really beautiful and friendly middle finger to this whole
notion of race dividing us that we have to both note it because it does exist and it influences
us no matter how much we deny it. On the other hand, it doesn't have to preoccupy us constantly
and be the only thing. I always think about, you know, this race and IQ point that keeps coming
up. I never see this happening among people who are deep into music because the contributions
have been so profound from everywhere that it just is like, why are you exploring these ideas
that clearly don't capture who has contributed and how much has been done?
For me, chess has been a great liberator or a great questioner of some of these more
quote, race driven concepts because I learned chess from basically black street hustlers
in Washington Square Park and they prefer speed chess. Yeah, Blitz guys. And so they
had great admiration and aspiration towards some of the Russian GMs and just to hear these
men who are the epitome of soul, the epitome of quote, blackness, flavor, all of that stuff,
rhythm, all of that stuff to hear them use about Kappa Blanka or to pull out a game
Nimsovich or Tau or some of these great masters to, you know, go over those games and
say, well, see, he's a killer here. No, hold on, hold on, wait a minute now. We got to
watch the bishop, watch the bishop. Boom. Okay. Okay. He saw that. He saw me coming, huh?
Like just all of the snappy pattern. I remember getting into about a conversation
in Washington Square Park about Tigran Petrosian, the chess player, and these guys were like
convinced that somehow he hadn't been understood for the soul that he was bringing to the game.
Right. So for me to get around that was like very striking because at that time,
I was really starting to feel, you know, my depression was coming in, my panic was coming in
because in my thoughts, I'm like, wow, I've won the Monk competition. I've towed the line,
full scholarship came from Camden, full scholarship, graduated, all this stuff,
but the powers that be don't find me, I guess, marketable enough to have me be a representative
of their agency, you know, in the form of a recording artist. So I really started to have
some really mind-bendingly, rageful and, you know, things going on in my head. And I noticed that
there were some other artists, quote unquote, white artists that were starting to experiment with
rock in the jazz lane. They were getting jazz record deals, but they were working with rock
concepts overtly questioning, does jazz have to swing and things of that nature that me from
the Wynton Marsalis, purist background and aspiration, I would never question, does jazz
have to swing, right? So there was a lot of anger starting to build up from a couple of
different places from, you could say, a political aspect and also from a personal aspect, because
I'm like, I can't even get a record deal here. Like, how good do I have to play? What do I have
to prove here? And ultimately, who are you guys to judge whether I'm worthy of a record deal? Or,
you know, it kind of got into these kind of simplistic and superficial anger in private
places. Which diminish, and this is one of the reasons to be blunt about it. Since I heard you
play first, I don't know, close to 10 years ago, but maybe in person a little bit less, I've often
thought I have to be promoting this guy, not because he's not going to get famous on his own,
but because he shouldn't have to say what doesn't need, it just doesn't need to be said. When I
watch you in a room, everyone knows something amazing has happened. And if I can just tell
one story from our personal life, we were having dinner, my wife and I, with Sam Harris, and he
was fading in San Francisco. And I said, hey, do you want to go over and hear a friend of mine
play a little piano? It didn't sound very inviting, but I wasn't going to tell him anything more.
So he says, you know, fine, if it's quick. So we get him over to this place and you're there.
We go over and there's this old beat up Steinway. And there's a crowd of people who are sitting
around waiting to hear you play. And this one woman will not be quiet. She's just not calming down.
She's on her phone. And you say something like, Hey, something amazing is about to happen. You're
about to have a life altering experience. You need to be in the right frame of mind.
And everybody in the room who knew you knew what was about to happen. And everyone in the room who
didn't know you said, what? Nothing. Nothing. Nobody talks like this. The room quieted down.
I've never seen Sam Harris so deep in meditation. He was his whole world was like rewoven
with with the music you were playing. And he was just speechless at the end of it. And we all stayed
up late into the night. There is something in this, which is it doesn't need to be said. I don't
know why it's so hard to get through because the music does speak for itself, but I think it goes
back to your just wheels within wheels curation. One of the things I wanted to do and you were one
of the people I had in mind when I started this podcast was I wanted to show people what is possible
in their lives. And I'll be honest with you, you have two separate effects on me. Sometimes I hear
you and I just sit down at the piano and I want to play play play and get better. And other times
I don't want to touch it. I don't want to look at it because I know I'm never going to be at that level.
And it is difficult and uncomfortable to work with genius and to and to see it in in a field
in which you're just playing and you're never going to aspire to be at the top of what you
might be able to achieve. That particular night, I know that you're paraphrasing or recalling.
I know how I get when I feel as though there's a person that's violating things for others.
So I don't recall my exact words. I'm pretty sure that I wouldn't
call attention to myself in the sense of, hey, I'm about to do something amazing in that sense.
If I did, it wasn't from a narcissistic standpoint. No, Erica wasn't. It was from a person.
She thanked. I don't know if you remember this. She came up to me and she said he was absolutely right.
That said, I just want to kind of clarify that because I don't want to create the impression of
a naked, narcissistic, egotistical kind of thing. That's not my point.
You did say something like that, but it was the feeling of it. For me, it's just that she was
ruining a situation. You've got Sam Harris there. You've got people there and she's bringing a scenario
that ultimately no one else was going to sort of deal with it. And so I kind of-
She's making a choice for everybody. And you see this. So then I had to make a choice as well.
Well, this is the thing. How often do you have a conductor who stops a performance
of an orchestra of 50 people because somebody's cell phone goes off? This is now a common feature.
We don't make the room for opening our hearts. And I think to be blunt about it,
I'm sorry if I told the story in a way that didn't convey it, but what actually happened was that we
all did have a communal experience that we're still talking about. And I can tell you that
there are a small number of performances. The time I saw Prince open for the Rolling Stones,
the time that I saw a clarinet player blow Dizzy Gillespie offstage that I'd never heard
of named Tony Scott, there are a very small number of things that actually just change your life.
And this was one of those nights. On the other side, I've come to understand
over time what aspects of my playing and also what aspects of my personal behavior or
presentation have been detrimental to my progression in certain aspects of the business.
So I also want to make sure that I bring in that aspect too because it's very immature also
to come with a Knight's Templar kind of perspective. We've seen that and we've heard that and that
also is not brilliant because the fact of the matter is there are many reasons and many contributing
factors, many dynamics that play into careers, into helium, into buoyancy and the like. And so
over time, I've come to understand a lot more about how energy works and how I've been very good
at transforming the energy in a room and bringing people to these types of ecstasies.
However, there was another aspect that I was less concerned with. Now, I think that because of the
panic attacks and the depression and stuff like that, I was a lot less sensitive to it
because in the anger as well. However, as time has gone by, I've gotten better, I've improved my
technique and I've grown through anger and I've found ways to harness anger and panic attacks
and depression and bring it into the music in a powerful way and in a technical way. It's
caused me to have even more vision and my chest rating has improved. So I'm able to analyze myself
and realize just because I could raise the roof on a place didn't necessarily provide a blank check
for me to get a record deal. They're looking at other aspects and those aspects are important too.
Like, see this is, and this gets again back to the Kenny G. Miles Davis construct the model
because one thing that I didn't understand, if I'm going to work with a record label,
then I'm making an implicit statement there. I'm saying that I want to be a part of their
family. I'm saying that I want to represent them at multiple levels. Now, I was coming from a very
uncompromising place. I was coming from a very narrow, we could say, place. I also was
sub-aware of how I sounded in certain aspects. These days, I've come to understand, as I've
gotten so much better, I've come to understand, wow, there are so many other aspects.
You didn't have the luxury back then. If I can be honest about it, I'm not really ready to be in
front of the world. It's very terrifying having a podcast because I don't have all my stuff sorted
out, but nobody does. Nobody does. One of the things back then is you were a terrifying guy
because you were completely uncompromising. I get in there and I try to have a musical
conversation with you and you're very patient with me, but inevitably it shows the levels that
we're at. I could see how exacting you were. You have been driving yourself. You were in a
competition with you alone, so far as I can tell at the piano, and you've been pushing yourself
farther and farther. I love the fact that you're getting the recognition and that it's giving you
the luxury to look at yourself. As your mental state goes up, the vision expands and your chest
rating improves, but we also have to honor that it may be that it is as a developmental stage,
and just to turn it back to the Kenny G Miles thing, that we want to shed where we were. I
was in a narrow place. I was in an angry place, but sometimes that stuff is like colostrum. It's
needed to get going and you have to go through those periods where you've got that anger and
fear, because that's what causes things to progress. That advanced your story. It's quite the
paradox. I'll have to concede that that's very true. Had I not been so angry, had I not had those
issues, rock would have never appealed to me, because what rock enables one to express, I wouldn't
have had that to express. The lyrics of rock are very different from the lyrics that you'll find
in a Gershwin or a Jazz tune, and it was those lyrics that provided me some escape from some
catharsis. Well, let us give it a say. Screw you to Neil Young and screw you to the Governor of
Alabama in the song. Right. And to your point about swing, the word rock transitioned from
rock and roll where rock is a rocking motion. It's a verb to rock where it's led Zeppelin and
it's just a giant stone edifice and it doesn't move. And the same question comes up with jazz.
But let me ask you, can I lure you to the piano and explore some of these ideas with me at the
keyboard and give my listeners a taste of what we're talking about? Yep. Fantastic.
So
the same thing we'll get from rock sports.
So
Okay, let's start this one.
Okay, let's start this one.
Okay, let's start this one.
Yeah, and I was also able to hear the independence of the lines and I'm assuming that that is a good chunk in pro.
It's all in pro.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
Okay.
