Hello. You're queued up to enter the portal, but I thought I'd say a few words before this episode.
In general, when we present science in front of the public, we do it in one of two ways.
Either we talk in an incredibly hand-wavy way about very speculative ideas like string theory,
or we have a sort of a corpse of previous scientific thought that has been specifically
arranged for public viewing. It's not really science the way we do science. It's kind of a
denatured version to make sure that we don't lose anybody because the public is famously
supposed to be squeamish about anything involving equations, abstractions, or jargon.
In this episode, we try to, well, do something different. I'm actually having a conversation
with Garrett here. He's updating me on where his thinking has gone with respect to unifying physics.
Now, it's very unusual for anyone to try to unify physics, and I have a tremendous amount of respect
for Garrett, even though I don't think his theories are going to work. I make no secret
of this. I'm not saying anything behind his back, but he is, in some sense, Theodore Roosevelt's
man in the arena. He actually is trying to take on the general problem of the cosmos,
and even though I don't think he's succeeding, he has my profound admiration for simply
suiting up and trying. Most people, in fact, almost everyone I know, does not attempt to do
what he is doing. And for that, he has my admiration and respect. Now, with that admiration
and respect comes a desire, not to be mean, but to actually push him on his theory, because I don't
want to see him wasting his time. And I feel that when you're outside of the university system,
there's almost no one who takes your research seriously. So while there's an aspect of tongue
and cheek with respect to us being each other's arch nemeses, there's actually something quite
serious about it. I don't necessarily like the path that he's going down, and I don't know that I
really believe that he's going to get anywhere productive. But I do think that he's an inspiration
to us all simply for trying in an era where everyone else seems to have given up. I hope
you enjoy this episode, and I hope that you understand that it is an experiment. I'm trusting
you guys to listen in on something which is much closer to actual science than what you're usually
presented with. I hope you like it. Stay tuned.
You found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm here today with my arch nemesis,
physicist, Garrett Leasy. Garrett, welcome to the portal. Thanks for having me on, Eric. You're a brave
man. Well, I would say you're a brave man coming into the lion's den. So thank you for coming by.
All right. For those who don't know who you are or what this issue of being arch nemesis is about,
what could you do to inform our listeners and viewers about who you are and what our
relationship might be? All right. Well, we have many disturbing similarities in that we
did fairly well in school. We got our PhDs, but then we left academia,
and maintained an interest in fundamental physics and kept pursuing this on our own.
However, there are some distinctions in that you went into the finance world and I went into
being a surf bomb. Yes, that's not that similar. Also, you have a PhD in physics proper, whereas I
have one in mathematics. So I would say advantage, Leasy, but then I have one from a more typically
powerhouse school. You have one from one that's a little bit off of that main corridor that maybe
got up, caught up in string theory and the fads that propel the field. But I think what's been
very interesting to me is that in all of theoretical physics, which everyone is quite interested in,
you still find people publishing books on quantum theory and all of the spookiness, weirdness,
and beauty that constitutes theoretical physics. It feels to me that almost no one is pursuing
actual theories of everything. We talk about theories of everything all the time,
but that the courage to actually put forward anything that even remotely resembles the theory
of everything, almost nobody's willing to do that. Would you say that that's a fair statement?
Yeah, it's a very fair statement. The main reason for that is because it's such a hard problem
that you pretty much have to be a megalomaniac just to tackle it or to think you have a chance
of succeeding at it. I think that's a weird statement. If you're going to throw away your
life on issues of theoretical physics, what is it that you would imagine people would think that
they were doing? If you're not going for the brass ring, why enter that field?
I think that a lot of people in physics are doing the usual thing where they encounter a
problem and try to solve it and try to proceed incrementally. That's how actually I got wrapped
up in this is I identified a problem with electrons and their description in fundamental
physics. It was something about it that really I didn't like. It just didn't feel right to me
and I got wrapped up in solving that one aspect of this big picture. I didn't go off trying to
think, oh, I'm really going to tackle this problem of coming up with a theory of everything
because you have to be somewhat of a lunatic to take that on. It's like trying to prove some
theorem in mathematics that has been stagnant for hundreds of years. You're probably not going to
succeed and you'd probably just be frustrated with the attempt. You have to have a huge ego to
even think about it. Also, there's a lot of discouragement. Students are actively discouraged
from tackling such problems because the professors who came before them
and know a little bit more about the field know just how hard it is to make progress even on small
problems and that making progress on a huge one is just insurmountable. They try to actively
discourage their students from going into fundamental problems in physics because they
haven't had success themselves. They're trying to be protective of their students that way.
Maybe just to set this up, and I should say to regular listeners and viewers of the portal,
this is intended to be something of a transitional episode so that the entire podcast is an
experiment. Other people have shows and there's a concept of professionalism. I don't think that's
what we're striving for here at the portal. This is really untested. We're going to experiment
with our advertising models. We're going to experiment with what the traffic will bear when
it comes to intellectual discussions without spoon feeding everything to the audience, realizing
that some people may get left behind. In fact, the host may get left behind. We don't know.
No, it's quite possible. What we've done is we've done a series of interviews to begin the podcast
to just establish that we can have conversations that people want to tune into
and get great guests in that chair where people may not have even heard of the person before,
but hopefully walk away feeling enriched. However, that's not really the point of the podcast.
The point of the podcast is to explore new territory intellectually at maybe an academic level
outside of traditional channels. It has to do in part with my belief that
we don't really understand how much idea suppression has been going on for a very long
period of time within the standard institutions. In fact, I've created this thing. I've called
the disk, the distributed idea suppression complex. Its purpose is to make sure that ideas
do not suddenly catch fire and upend and disrupt previous structures. For example,
I would claim that string theory, which has absolutely dominated theoretical physics since
what, 1984? Yeah, since about then. It's about 35 years. It artificially consolidated the field
around a complex of ideas that did not have a huge signal coming from experiment
to try to steal home base. To understand that, you have to understand,
as I'm sure you do, the culture of particle physics at the time when string theory started
to grow, which is up through the 70s, there had been steady experimental results coming in
from particle accelerators where it was like a new particle every week that theorists were
having to really cooperate on as a community to jump in on and try to figure it out and exchange
ideas very rapidly. That was more the 50s and 60s. It was, but it continued all the way through the
70s. From that culture of community working together on information that's coming in a
steady stream, you got this culture of like, yeah, no, don't go do the other thing. It's a waste
of time. You really want to be working on what's hot because there's new information coming in
all the time. This is where the culture of string theory started. I was also more involved in the
culture of general relativity and gravity, which is a very different culture. It's much more slow
paced. You don't have new results coming in all the time. Everything's very, is much more casual.
Do you want to set this up a little bit for our audience? Sure. If I do a poor job. In essence,
the two great idea complexes in fundamental physics, not condensed matter physics or
astrophysics, but like whatever ground reality physics is, is the general relativistic complex
around the ideas of Einstein. Then there's the sort of quantum field theoretic complex,
or the quantum complex around the ideas of Bohr. It's sort of fair enough and plonk. I don't mean
to slight Dirac and others, but just to keep it simple, the children of Einstein and the children
of Bohr. The boring people went into particle physics. The boring people? You said they're
the children of Bohr. They're in this culture that's a very rapid fire, moving things along
as part of a community, whereas general relativity, the people from the Einstein community,
were more exploring different possibilities at their own pace. There is more of an exploratory
culture, and that's the culture that turned into loop quantum gravity.
First of all, I'm just going to begin arguing with you there. To me, the issue was that Einstein
put much more of the general relativistic picture in place, so there was less to do
for the descendants of Einstein. Because the quantum was considerably less tied up,
there was much more work. Through a system of selective pressures,
the more successful community in some sense left fewer descendants and they were less capable
because there was less for them to do. Then you had the quantum community start to attract the
real brains because there was lots of work for a period of time to go back and forth between
theory and experiment. What happened was that when you think about it as a whole,
that gravity has to be quantized. There are two ways of getting there. You can either start from
Bohr's children and quantum field theory and try to get from there to a quantum theory that
encompasses gravity, or you can start from the gravitational side and geometry and try to somehow
get quantum mechanics to play nice with this essentially classical geometric theory.
There were two very different approaches and two very different cultures.
I still have some disagreements, but I don't think I necessarily want to derail us.
All right. So anyway, the point I started with was that the string theory came out
of the particle physics community. When we say string theory, we mean the cultural explosion
that happened in 1984 rather than the original string revolution of, let's say, Veneziano,
which was much earlier. In the mid 1980s, there was a discovery called the anomaly cancellation,
where two very improbable things canceled each other. There was a theory that was given a green
light that was highly restrictive as to what could go in that spot. That result, the anomaly
cancellation, gave birth to a cultural phenomena, which was the sort of takeover of theoretical
physics by string theory. Right. I mean, it looks so promising at the time in the 80s.
I mean, they thought that, yes, it naturally encompasses gravity, and all we need to do
is find the right high dimensional manifold for our strings to vibrate in, and we'll immediately
recover all the properties of the particles of the standard model. We just have to find the right
one. We'll probably get this done by lunchtime wrapped up. I don't believe that story.
It didn't happen. That was what it sounded like. No, no, no, but I don't think that's
even what actually happened. I mean, I was in college during this period, and even though
that's the story that I would agree is told inside of the community, I'm not sure that
I fully believe it. If I go back to my own memories, something very different happened.
Well, it took a while to get everybody on the bandwagon.
I think something still different happened. I think that Ed Whitten showed up,
and that there was one human being. He's his own anomaly.
He was absolutely an anomaly. He came to Penn in, I don't know whether it was 83 or 84.
I left in 85. He started talking about what the world was in a way that none of the physicists
could actually follow because he was using ideas from differential geometry and from higher
mathematics in ways that most of the community couldn't track. He was saying things like,
the reason we have three copies of the kind of matter that makes up our world comes from the
characteristic numbers of a six-dimensional complex manifold found at every point in space and time.
These things were so mind-blowing. I mean, if our listeners can't exactly follow it,
they were in the same shoes as many people in the community. There was a voice that was
clearly coming from another planet, undoubtedly the most brilliant person I've ever met in my life,
the one person who continues to make me tremble when I hear his name or his voice,
and this person signed on big time to string theory in a way that was very coercive and seductive,
so even though the community understood why he was signing on, it was in part Whitten's endorsement
that really started to move the needle in my opinion.
Yeah, and it's stunning just to what degree that failed.
Okay, so say more.
Well, the string theory unification program, the idea that this description of all fundamental
particles and gravity and our entire universe would come from a model based on strings vibrating
in other higher dimensions. I mean, this unification program has failed. The vast majority of the
high-energy physics community has been working on it for over 30 years, and they've utterly failed
to deliver on that promise despite the high hopes and promises.
Well, and this has to do, and again, we can sort of do a small synopsis of the field.
The idea was the original hopes had been built around an idealized point particle concept where
hard little balls were kind of the naive model of particles, and then you had to smear them out
and do waves on waves from that point particle concept called second quantization or quantum
field theory. And string theory said, no, the fundamental unit should never have been a hard
little ball to begin with. It should have been modeled by something that was an as-if string,
obviously, and it wasn't string made out of atoms. It was some sort of mathematical version
abstract mathematical description of a surface inside another surface, essentially.
Right. And so this thing had a peculiar appeal to the children of Bohr that was not that appealing
to the children of Einstein. Would that be a fair description of it?
Yeah, for pretty subtle reasons, specifically anomaly cancellation and also the ability to
produce what appeared to be particle excitations from the string model.
Right. Now, that thing, that sudden shift in the community from regular quantum field theory,
from a plurality of different approaches, whether some of them had names like technicolor or
grand unification or supersymmetry, all of this seemed to get subsumed in this, I don't know,
a fad. It's hard to... It's like a giant rolling, what, catamari demarcy ball,
or it's just collecting everything that it touches and making it a part of itself.
That's right. And in fact, the claim was if we find something that isn't string theory,
we'll just find some way of including it and call it string theory.
So this was a bizarre... It was a sociological phenomena. It was a...
We would say the political economy of science was involved where who could get a job for their
students, whether or not the newspapers were going to challenge this or go along with it.
So you had reporters who had no idea what was going on, publishing these glowing
pieces about the string theorists and how they were going to wrap it all up.
And in essence, we have this concept in evolutionary theory called interference competition,
where one animal will attempt to out-compete the other by keeping it away from a watering hole.
So nobody else could afford to get nourished because the string theorists were saying all
the smart people are in string theory. It's the only game in town was the famous phrase.
I certainly encountered a lack of nourishment when I graduated in the 90s and I wasn't
interested in strings, but I was interested in high-energy physics.
Well, I think almost everybody was in that position. That is really the founding crime
for me in the string revolution. It was the desire to say that everyone who is not part of us is an
idiot. Yeah. Yeah. That's above and beyond normal physicist arrogance.
Above and beyond normal physicist arrogance. And I want to say also why I think I'm so
focused on theoretical physics as the most important endeavor that humans are engaged with.
I think there are three components to it and just see whether it resonates with you.
One is that this is the closest we get responsibly to asking why are we here,
what is it that we're made of? It is the thing that would best substitute for a religion
if you were able to understand what it was. The second thing is that it appears to be
the secret powering our economy that very few people have really fully understood. It gave us
the worldwide web, the semiconductor, the electron shells that generated chemistry.
Nuclear power. Nuclear power, nuclear weapons, communications,
technology, electromagnetic, Wi-Fi, what have you.
If you want it and it invented theoretical physics, more or less created molecular biology.
That's probably a bit of a stretch, but the others certainly aren't.
If you look at the RNA Tie Club, the people in it were Teller, Feynman, Crick, people trained in
physics. In this telling of the tale, its second major feature of importance is that
it sort of created our modern economy. I don't think people have understood the extent to which
all of these things, the web semiconductors and even molecular biology really came out of theoretical
physics because of the third issue, which is I think even though I'm a mathematician or trained
in mathematics, I could make a pretty decent argument that this was the world's most impressive
intellectual community ever. It certainly seems to attract some of the greatest minds.
Well, I would say I would go even farther. I would say that because of the interplay between
the most beautiful mathematics, even according to mathematical standards,
and experimental discipline. You have this thing that's forcing you to go back and forth
between the purest of pure theory and the dirt and intuition and messiness of experiment.
I don't think anything else had that property so that it wasn't necessarily even that it just
attracted the best people, but it actually rewarded human intellectual achievement
like no other subject ever. It's also touching on something
that's a little bit different socially, which is the type of people who are attracted
to really hard problems in fundamental physics and modeling and really trying to get,
as you say, the source code of the universe. These often aren't very skilled people people.
They're not very socially oriented people for the most part.
Some are, some aren't.
But for the real intellectual heavy hitters, you're talking about people who walk among us
as aliens. You're talking about that they're not extremely social. They're not very focused on
issues with other human beings. Physics, this understanding of our universe through mathematics
is really otherworldly pursuit. It's not like law, where laws are made up by humans and discussed
in front of humans and compared in front of humans. That has its own intricacies and difficulties
and puzzles, but theoretical physics, you're working at something that's not related to humans
directly. Any intelligent beings in this universe that advance to a certain state are going to be
involved in studying physics, and it's going to be the same physics with some of the same
mathematics and the same mathematical tools. It's something that exists independent of humanity.
So if you're not a huge fan of human beings, but you really like puzzles and you're good at math,
physics is very attractive because it's the greatest puzzle there is in our universe.
And it exists completely independent of humanity. And yet humans will be able to work on it and
make progress, which is freaking amazing. It's amazing the degree to which humans have
understood our reality. And I think we're getting close to having a complete picture of it.
Three classes of greatest puzzles. I could tell a story that biology is the greatest
puzzle because without something to care about the universe in which it lives,
this is all completely sterile to begin with. And I can also make a different case for mathematics,
which is that physics is but one example of a universe. We don't know if there are other
universes that could be constructed. So biology, I agree, it's intricate and it can be a pure
pursuit, but it's not pure in the sense that so much of the foundations of biology are somewhat
arbitrary. Whether DNA helix is going to spiral to the left or the right and what its chemical
components are precisely, that might vary. Other planets, other civilizations, biology is going
to be different. You could make a decent argument that systems of selective pressures, as described
by Darwin and Wallace, might be conserved even if you didn't have carbon-based life.
There will be convergent evolution, of course, but the details will be slightly different. So
if you're studying biology, by the time you get up to something like cells or animals,
it's going to be wildly different in different places in the galaxy. Whereas physics is the
same everywhere. It's independent of biology and it's independent of humanity. And then when
you go to mathematics, the pursuit of mathematics, like how things get proved
and how structures get built up through axioms that are then proved, it's a larger playing field
than physics. So within that huge arena of possible mathematical structures, we see appear to live in
one mathematical structure. So a physicist only has to focus on the mathematics that
describes reality. By the way, I share your intuition that in a certain sense,
this is the best and most interesting place to play, in part because there's this very weird
feature that we've seemingly unearthed about the physical universe, which is that it unexpectedly
has this bizarrely good taste about what to care about within. It's as if you let it loose in the
mathematical jewelry store and it selects only the finest pieces.
Yeah. And we have to wonder if that's, is that just our human take on it? Because our human
aesthetics have evolved within this beautiful world and universe. So is it that, I mean,
Douglas Adams described the anthropic principle as a puddle of water, right? Thinking it's like,
wow, this hole I'm in is just perfectly formed to my shape, right? Isn't it wonderful how it
just fits me so perfectly and it's so comfortable here, just like it was made for me? Well, it's
like, no, the puddle got there and filled the shape of the hole. I mean, the water got there
and filled that shape. And as humans, we ended up here and we filled this niche and our aesthetic
taste was shaped by what's around us, including the mathematics that underlies the physics of this
universe. And so when we look at the universe, you might say, oh, no, maybe it's just our taste
evolved within this universe. So this is why we find physics aesthetically pleasing.
Do you actually believe what you're saying right now?
No, I think it's wrong.
I mean, I think this is so cowardly.
I know, I agree. And I have to wonder about it. I have to, I mean,
I understand, I have to pay lip service, you know, it's not just lip service. I think about this.
I mean, I think, I mean, is it really my proclivities have been shaped by my environment in order to
think this? Because I have to question everything all the time. Sure. Mostly because I don't talk
to enough other people. But also it's because, you know, when you're questioning things and
you're delving with fundamental building blocks, you want to make sure as you build things up that
you have things right. And in looking at the fundamental pieces of physics, the fundamental
mathematical physics, I really think that the mathematical pieces, as you say, are the ones
that are extraordinarily beautiful. And it's not just my aesthetic taste has been shaped by evolution
that causes me to think that. I really think objectively, these are very pretty mathematical
objects underlying our physical reality. Yeah, I think we just lack the courage to say
what this appears to be, which is there is something that we do not understand about the
universe in which it is selected for the most mysterious, most beautiful stuff
with which to write what we, I mean, the closest thing we have to source code.
We don't, we're not at the source code yet. We're not quite at that layer.
Right. But you can smell it, can't you? Well, I mean, yes and no.
It feels close. I think it's almost provably close. But,
but there's a caveat to that, which is I think we're almost at the end of this chapter.
And it does feel like it could easily be the final chapter. And by the way, we should be,
we should clarify that when we, when we talk about a theory of everything,
we don't mean a theory that once understood could explain everything you see in your daily
universe. Right. Love is still going to be a mystery, of course. Oh God, you really did that?
Of course I did. But yeah, no, but I mean. Ladies file.
Form a single file line. There's, there's, there's evidence. I mean,
there, in our, in our understanding of physics, as we've learned more particles,
yeah, the fundamental particles we've learned about appear to be filling out a complete set.
I mean, we've, you know, when you, when you predict that a tau quark should exist.
Right. Or no, that a tau lepton should exist. Or you, you figure out that, you know,
it completes the set. It's a third generation. It's complete.
Right. So we seem to be completing our set of fundamental particles.
So we have three sets of Lego. Yeah. Right. The first generation,
second generation and third generation of matter. And all the pieces in each generation are mirrored
in the other two generations, just a different mass scales so far. That's what it looks like.
Well, it's not just so far. It's like we have, we have reasons to know that there aren't,
there aren't more. I mean, from, from how the big bang set matter loose in the universe,
we know that there aren't more than three generations up to a certain very high energy.
Well, we've known a lot of things Garrett that have turned out to be wrong.
Well, but this is really filling out a pretty complete pattern.
I don't dispute, but I just, except for this minor point of dark matter still being completely
unknown for the most part. Yeah. I, I mean, I guess my discomfort with this comes from the
fact that knowing the history, I know how we've been wrong. And I also know how we haven't had
the courage of our convictions. And one of the things that really, you know,
occupies my mind is why we're not more definite about things that I think we have very good,
good reason to believe. And we're so definite about things that sort of scare me where we say,
I know that it can't be other than this. And yet it has, we've been, we've been shown up multiple
times that we've got two different directives telling us to be both more confident and more
humble. The thing that has affected both, both you and myself most profoundly is the existence
of something called spinners at the core of our understanding of matter. Do you want to say a
little bit about what that is, why you think it's affected you and me as well and why perhaps it
hasn't had the same emotional and intellectual impact on the community? Right. I mean, when you're
basically, when physicists more or less completed what's called the standard model of particle
physics, right? You have, you have the, the known forces in physics, like the electromagnetic force,
the weak force and the strong force, as well as the force of gravity. And then you have the,
the matter particles, which are electrons and quarks and neutrinos and other generations of
these that, that form, you know, what are called the fermions. Okay. And these are called the
matter particles. And they have mass because of the interaction with the Higgs boson,
right? Which is sort of in between. That's not going to make sense to people. It's not. All right.
But anyway, the, the force particles behave differently as elementary particles under
rotations than the matter particles. All right. So these matter particles, they, you have to
basically rotate them 720 degrees to return them to their original state. All right. Whereas most
objects, you rotate it and you rotate it 360 degrees and you get back to where you started.
All right. But spinners are different. Right. And they, they behave in a very specific way. And
there's a very specific way of describing them mathematically. But it's described in an unusual
way. It's described as a, as a column of complex numbers or a column matrix, if you like, that's
acted on by a rotation matrix that tells you specifically how these particles transform under
rotation. Honestly, that wouldn't make any sense to me. And I don't think I can help all of my
audience to get it. This is the thing. So, so this is the way physicists are introduced to a
description of electrons. Well, look, can I just try to play with something while we're talking
about this in this way? Well, you can. Can I hand it off to you in about 10 seconds? No, you finish
it out. All right. So I found this description to be incredibly unsatisfying. All right. Because
the rest of physics is not described this way. Right. You don't introduce a fundamental field
that transforms a certain way into rotations. That's not how, you know, why would the universe do
that? It's not elegant. It's not, it's not geometric. Right. It seems sort of arbitrary.
Why would the universe have spinners in it? Well, it turns out that because if you, if you
describe general relativity as curving four dimensional space time, describe gravity,
and you describe forces as gauge fields, right? Both of those are very geometric descriptions.
They're very elegant mathematically. And then you describe physics, the fermions as spinners,
it looks like a Cluj. It just, it doesn't fit with the other theories. But that's why I left
physics to solve this problem. I wanted to know why spinners geometrically. And no one else was
interested in the problem. No one else thought it was a problem. They're like, yeah, they, they
transform this way. And, and maybe it comes from strings. And that's all you get. And it's like,
no, that's totally unsatisfying. If, if gravity is described geometrically and are all our other
forces as described geometrically, the universe is just one thing. It's right there in the name.
I mean, you know, is one verse is turning. We have, we have this one turning thing we call the
universe. And it's just one mathematical object. And if this, if we have different particles,
they have to be aspects of this one mathematical object. Why would this mathematical object have
spinners as an aspect of them? It was a huge mystery to me. I wanted to go solve it. No one
else even acknowledged it was a problem. And you, you also tackled this. This also bothered you.
Well, there was a, so this is the very difficult part of what the portal is supposed to be. And I,
I have the feeling that we've probably left a lot of our listeners behind, but I've, I've said that
we're going to have to take some risks. And this is going to be one of them. So the way I see it,
some, some of our listeners are also viewers, right? And we have in studio,
these beautiful Klein bottles from ACME Klein bottle and Cliff Stoll out of Oakland, I guess,
these objects that I'm holding up, or you can look up Klein bottles on the, on the web,
have this very odd property that they are covered, if you will, by the surface of a donut. If the
surface of the donut wraps around this object twice, and we call this a double cover. Now,
the idea that you have some very strange object with no inside and outside called a Klein bottle,
but that it's wrapped twice by some object, which has different properties, namely the surface of
a donut called a torus. The rotations of our three dimensional space bizarrely have some
object that covers them twice, just as a donut covers a Klein bottle twice. So when we talk
this crazy language about, you have to rotate an object more than 360 degrees for it to come back
to itself. This is somewhat of garbage language that we've taught people to understand, where we're
not really showing them what's behind the curtain. We're not showing them that there are the rotations
of a rigid three dimensional space. And then there's this thing that covers those rotations
twice called the spin group. And that spin group is the thing that has the property that it acts
on these things called spinners. So this is a hidden level of structure that you would not
know was there just from three dimensional space. There's some secret trapped in three
dimensional space that is very well hidden. And if we weren't at a very high level of mathematics
or physics, you would never know that spinners even exist to play with. Right. I mean, it comes
out of representation theory, but at that once again, that's a fairly high level of mathematics
you have to get to to even see that these things exist. And for all of the other basic kinds of
symmetries, we don't have these hidden representations. We don't have these hidden spaces
that have these bizarre properties. It's only for these things called orthogonal groups. So it's a
very special property of real Euclidean rigid space that spinners are there to be found.
And not only does nature find them, she bases all of matter around the hidden object that can't
easily be seen or deduced, which is a total mind job. Right. And the math community has in fact
sort of split between people who think, Hey, we can describe these things mathematically. So
our work is done versus other people who believe there's something about spinners that just it
continues to surprise us. We don't understand where they came from. They're a hidden feature of the
universe and they keep giving in this very mysterious fashion. Yeah. And the most of the
general relativists who came at this problem just would not want to touch it because it's too
foreign to them. And the people who came into it from the particle physics side thought it wasn't
a problem. It's this field transforms a certain way. It seems perfectly well described to me.
See, that doesn't, this doesn't make sense to me at all. So it didn't make sense to me either,
Eric. That's why. But let me give you an argument as to why this is a really,
really serious problem. If I take two kinds of thing that one might hope to find in the
universe, an electron and a photon. Okay. So the idea is that I've got stuff that orbits around
atomic nuclei and I've got light and it's relatives that carry the electromagnetic force
in the photon. If I don't know how to measure length and angle, I can still talk about the
objects that are photons. We call them spin one particles. But if I don't have length and angle,
I don't have any way of talking about spinners. In other words, if there isn't a ruler and a
protractor, which is effectively what Einstein used to define space time, I don't have an ability to
talk about spinners. And that's a big problem because if you're going to the problem, it's a
huge clue. It says that spinners have to be intimately related to gravity in general relativity
and gravity. So spinners are over on the quantum side of the equation, right? The
children of Bohr, it's really more their object than the children of Einstein's.
The children of Bohr claim we have to quantize gravity and make everything quantum. So it's
sort of an imperial belief that the people who study the standard model should extend their
techniques to cover gravity so that all can be one. Yet, if it turns out that we don't know
how to measure length and angle between measurements, because in quantum theory,
you get something very different when a field is propagating versus when it's measured,
all of the probabilistic stuff we talk about is happening when there's a quantum measurement.
If you don't know where length and angle are while something is propagating,
then you don't even know where the electrons can be a disturbance. If electrons are waves,
they have to be waves in some kind of a sea. You know with photons that you can't tell exactly
where the wave is, but you know where the sea is. In the case of electrons,
if you don't know where the metric is, you can't even say where the sea is that the electron would
be a wave in. It's a very convoluted thing, but it's a big difference. Yeah. I can almost describe
it in extremely simple terms, which is most physicists who think about it think of gravitational
charge as being mass, but gravitational charge is really spin.
We're getting pretty far afield. All right. So to speak. So to speak. So let's imagine that maybe
our listeners haven't understood exactly what we're saying, but that there is some special
problem about spinners and how they're tied to the structure of spacetime that is different
where you can describe things like photons in some sense without knowing how length and angle
are measured, whereas length and angle are essential if you're ever going to talk about spinners.
Now you and I have two very different points of view. The reason that I consider you an
arch nemesis is that I think your theory based on E8, which is depicted in this crystal block for
those who are viewing on YouTube. Thanks for bringing your kryptonite to the show.
Your approach to this is to say, let's start out with some object that is mathematically
distinguished and very peculiar, effectively like a platypus of the mathematical world.
And let's try to distill from this thing that has to exist for reasons of logical necessity.
And it's maybe the most complicated naturally occurring object arguably that you could pick.
And let's find the richness of our natural world as distilled from this bizarre
freakish occurrence in the laws of mathematical necessity. Is that a fair telling?
From a top-down perspective it is. But the way I got there is by describing spinners and seeing
that spinners is part of this one beautiful mathematical object naturally. And it's unique
to the exceptional E groups, to these small class of objects.
And when you say exceptionally groups, what you mean is continuous symmetries
that only occur once, that they don't fall into some regular pattern.
And spinners are naturally a part of their geometry. And they're intricate beautiful objects.
They have spinners naturally as part of their geometry. And that if you dissect them,
you can see all the other parts necessary to particle physics and gravity.
And this was just stunning to me. And at this point, I'm like, all right, I've built up from the
ground up, from particle physics and from gravity and from spinners. I've built the structure up
and seeing how it's all interconnected. And I found that they're all part of this small class
of mathematical objects that are unique in their intricacy and beauty for finite dimensional objects.
And that's why now I appear to have adopted more of a top down view where it seems like, oh,
I started with this pretty object. And I said, oh, look, it explains everything,
but it's nowhere near like that, how I actually got to there.
The truth is, I'm building up. And the truth is, the next object is going to be higher
dimensional objects that include E8 like this one as a subgroup.
So the way I'm hearing you, Garrett, and again, you know, this is like one of the most obscure
comments. It's going to lose so many listeners, but I'm happy to talk about it.
Well, but I'm trying to, we're trying to describe this. I would like to describe
this a little bit as, as if we were taking somebody to an opera in a foreign language
so that they can follow the plot, even though they can't follow line by line.
Okay. The way I see what you're saying is, is that there is a usual kind of symmetry,
which we would associate with bosons, that is the force particles of the universe.
And what makes these very strange objects that you've, you've referred to as in referring to
exceptional league groups is that you appear to take something from the fermionic universe,
that is the spinorial universe, where the spinners come from, and you adjoin it in some sense to the
bosonic to get more symmetries. Yes. Yeah. That's very clear. Okay. There's a huge problem with the
strategy. Well, wait, but this, but you're forgetting the part where this structure exists as part of
these exceptional objects. Well, no, I'm not, you've correctly described how these objects occur in
nature, that there is some regular kind of typical symmetry, a bosonic symmetry, then you, you take
some of these spinners that are related to that symmetry, and you fuse them together to get an
even more beautiful, weird symmetric object. But the problem with that strategy is, is that
we know that nature has these two very different recipes for how she wants to treat these things
quantum mechanically. Right. One of them goes into the name of bosonic quantization, and the other
sort of goes under the name, sometimes of, you know, bearish in theory. Right. And anti-commuting
numbers. Numbers were a times b equals negative b times a. Completely parallel, totally different
treatment. And the way you've done it, you've really taken the fermions, that is the matter part,
the spinners that we've been discussing. You've lumped them together with the bosons,
and now they're fused in a way that it's going to be almost impossible to treat these spinners
in a manner befitting fermionic quantization. Yeah, no, it's very straightforward though. The,
the fermions just end up being along directions orthogonal to spacetime.
I don't see that that actually works. I mean, this is, this is my great, my criticisms of your
theory, which we've known each other now for 11 years, and this is the basis of our antagonism,
is that on the one hand, you ingeniously saw, and I give you your credit, that E8,
the largest of these objects, a 248 dimensional behemoth, carried some numerology surrounding
three copies of the spinners that are present, which looked in some sense, could be confused for,
may be related to three copies of matter. It was about that hand wavy, yeah. Okay. So
all the honor to you, that's not an obvious feature. Most people who barely know what the
exceptional E groups are, most of them don't know that it has to do with this property called
triality. Okay. That was, that was true. But there really wasn't, in my opinion, enough room
to pack the particles that we currently see into this group structure
with three generations. That was one issue. Second of all, because of the, of the particular way in
which bosons and fermions matter and force were fused together, it really pushed everything towards
the bosonic side, that is the force side of the equation. So you're going to now have to be in
some kind of technical debt where you would have to figure out how to get the fermions back into
a matter framework, because you would actually push them too far through unification into a
union with force. That was another basic concern. And my last concern was that because of the
properties of this object, you didn't have any room for what we call chirality in which the
universe that we've seen so far appears to have a left, right asymmetry to it. It's as if it has a
beauty mark. And these, any object that you derive from E8 is going to be very hard to get it
to have a beauty mark because E8 doesn't have a beauty mark itself. So these were
three things that you were going to have to pay back if you were going to connect this to the
world that we see. And my irritation with you was that I brought this up with you in 2000 and
you remind me 2008, not 2009, when we met at the Perimeter Institute. And I tried to warn you
about these things. I felt like you never took me seriously. No, I did take you seriously. I've
taken all these problems seriously. And they're discussed in subsequent work. And the way I've
been resolving them is by tackling a larger unspoken problem, which is how to have a quantum
description of this sort of geometry, right? Because our universe is a quantum universe.
And E8 is a finite dimensional object. And you have to have multiple states, multiple
numbers of particles able to occupy every state. So if you have a full quantum description of a
theory, you need an infinite dimensional geometry to do it. Well, I always thought your goal was to
take a finite object and then take waves on that finite object to create something that was going
to be infinite dimension. I didn't see that as being its problem. But that's not good enough.
Say more? Because just when you talk about waves on a geometric object, those act as
different representations mathematically, because of the Peter Weill theorem. But when you do that,
that's not enough to give you all the structure you need for quantum field theory. You really need
a fundamentally infinite dimensional geometric object to describe quantum field theory.
And by looking at what sort of objects you need that include exceptional Lie groups, but are
infinite dimensional geometries that can correspond to quantum field theory, that's how you tackle
the three problems you discussed. You can have more space to handle the three generations of
particles. You can have the anti commuting fermions in them so that they behave like fermions should,
like matter particles should. And it's also large enough to give you the sort of dynamics you need
for quantum field theory. So that's why I've in the intervening 10 years since we've had a deep
discussion about this, I've now started looking at generalized infinite dimensional geometries,
which are infinite dimensional generalizations of Lie groups, which solve these problems.
And that's why I've been working. You really believe that you've solved these problems?
I think I have a really good description that goes along with these things.
Here's the thing. If I just think about where we are with the standard model,
you've got four dimensions of space and time, then you've got an extra eight dimensions
coming from something called SU three, three dimensions from something called SU two,
and one extra dimension coming from something called U one. That's the basic data
that occurs and gravity. You could put in six dimensions for something called spin three one.
But the point is I can add those all up and I'm going to get some number probably,
20 some odd dimensions, whatever. That finite thing generates the infinite
dimensional world of quantum field theory. Wait a minute, but quantum field theory,
we have a way of mapping between the base geometry and then going to quantum field theory,
then you have Fox base, and you have occupation numbers for all the different possible states.
My point is you're working on a problem that has certain foreseeable problems as part of the
challenge. Unlike your detractors from the more standard community, I'm not telling you that
you're dead on arrival just because certain problems can be seen. That would be unfair.
By the way, that's what, there are lots of problems that can be seen
from the string theory community where let's say the number of dimensions it wants to play in
is doesn't seem to be the right number or they thought there were only a finite number of theories.
It turns out that there's a continuum of theories, etc. Or the vast majority come out with
right and I get very irritated that somehow the string theory community is entitled to make all
these mistakes and anybody outside, if they say one wrong thing or one seemingly wrong thing,
they're excommunicated. It's a ridiculous standard. That's not what I'm trying to do to you. I'm
trying to say something very different, which is you're going to be up against the fact that if
your initial data comes from this most beautiful and most bizarre of all objects, E8, it doesn't
contain- As I said, I'm now working on its generalizations to infinite dimensions.
But there's an issue of intellectual checkkiting. I don't mind the idea that you recognize the
debts that you're in. And then you say, I think I have a way of getting this thing to close off.
But there is a question of, well, now that you've recognized, am I right?
Am I right that the issues that I raised with you initially
turned out to be really serious problem? Of course.
You didn't know that back then. Yeah, I did. They were in the paper.
They were in the original paper saying that the description of three generations was very
hand-wavy and unsatisfactory. That's in the original paper.
Okay. My recollection was that when I tried to explain to you why
people were going to have the objection about the two different quantization schemes,
that that was not handled correctly. Right. Well, I handled that in a paper in 2010 or so.
Okay. So that was cosmology. All right. That was one of the issues.
Then there was going to be an issue that you weren't able to bring the left, right asymmetry
out of the initial data. There wasn't enough. And that was a fair description. Absolutely.
Okay. And then you're saying that the, I ceded to you that you were making a connection between
the mysterious appearance of three copies of matter and something called triality, which was
not manifest, obviously inside of E8. But to the few people who actually care about this structure,
it definitely is there in a very profound way.
It relates to rotations in eight-dimensional spaces.
Yes. But you also haven't taken an interest in what is E8, if not the wellspring for the
source code of the universe. Like, if it isn't the universe...
I think it's a piece of it, but I'm not religious, Eric. I mean, I'm going to explore whatever seems
most promising to explore. Okay. Well, have you changed your sense of the status of E8 as a candidate
for the unified theory in the fashion that you were originally seeing?
Absolutely. You have changed your... Yes. Can you talk about that?
Right. So it was in tackling quantum field theory and how to describe it geometrically,
as far as I know, nobody is done. I mean, whenever you start with, as you say,
you want an SU2, SU3, and you go through this quantization procedure for its field, so you
get a quantum field theory. Or if you're dealing with strings, you have this model of vibrating
strings in higher dimensions, then you go through this quantization procedure to get a quantum
theory of strings. Physicists have this toolkit for quantizing things, but that's utterly the
wrong way to look at reality. If the universe is just one thing, which it is, then it's one
mathematical object. I mean, you're making a point that is very well understood, I believe,
in the standard theoretical physics community, which is that if the world starts off as quantum,
you should talk about classicalizing pieces of it rather than quantitizing the classical
pieces that appear to exist. Yeah, that's exactly right. So what's a quantum
geometric object look like? It's, you know, with all these infinite dimensional Fox space
and the creation and annihilation of elementary particles possible.
People at home won't know what a Fox space is. A Fox space is effectively where the states of the
system can live when you have multiple particles in a situation and you can change the number of
particles that you have just the way a photon can break into an electron and a positron pair,
that would be possible in a Fox space, not possible in a simpler quantum system. That's
right. So effectively a Fox space is just a large place to play where the number of particles in
the system can change. Up to infinity. Keep going. So in order to describe this as one geometric object,
you're stuck with a generalized Lee group, infinite dimensional generalized Lee group.
Yes. And in order to describe spinners, it's going to be an exceptional generalized Lee group.
Yeah, I don't think I don't think you're adding anything. I think that the problem here is,
is that E eight is an exceptionally beautiful, exceptionally interesting object. It did have
the properties that you were talking about in that it unifies standard symmetries with these
spinners to form new symmetries, but it does what it's not only inadequate, it would push them into
a universe of pure force rather than a universe divided between force and matter. You're actually,
the problem is, is the kind of unification it would create would be completely forced unification
with an absence of matters. You'd be dragging matter, if you will, spinners.
You're focusing on a problem that was, you know, that was solved in a paper in 2010,
but it's very simply that fermions are orthogonal to space time, whereas,
you know, the force fields, the boson fields are a long space time.
But the same way the, the same way if you have two force fields that are a long space time,
but in different directions, they would anti commute, right?
So what you're doing is you're using space time, if you will, which is again, kind of a classical
Einsteinian concept to break apart a unified system, which was the intention in unification to begin
with. And then you're going to try to treat these two things naturally according to two totally
different prescriptions. That's, you're violating, I mean, in some sense, any kind of naturality
that you just picked up in the unification to begin with. In a sense, yeah, but the symmetry
has to break somehow. Does it do it in a natural, I mean, this doesn't feel, this feels like a push.
Yeah, probably not. It allows it. It doesn't seem completely natural, but it does allow it.
Well, but the whole point of the thing I thought was to take the naturality and what we had understood
about the nature of these exceptional objects and to say, hey, these things actually unify
beautifully inside of these very unusual, elegant mathematical structures.
They do, but it was too small. As you said, it was too small because it didn't correctly
contain three generations of matter. And because it can't correctly portray quantum field theory.
But once you go to the larger generalized league groups, it can't.
Well, you know, if this was a startup, what you're saying is that the business is going great,
but it's just run out of money and I need a fresh infusion of cash. No, I'm not kidding.
This is sounding like an intellectual check. It's round B funding.
Series B. I see. Is it cash flow positive? Not yet. I mean, put the paper out yet.
Okay. So there's, I mean, I look, it's not a question that I need to see the paper or that
you're not allowed to take out more loans, but are you getting more? I mean, I know you to be,
look, I hate to say this, but I have defended you to the regular community with some frequency
because I have viewed you as an honest broker for your own stuff.
I don't think you're trying to get away with something. I think what you're trying to do
is you're trying to say, I need to take some advances, which I think, and I hope I can pay
back, which I think is an admirable and honorable way to do physics. Are you worried about your
own theory? Are you worried that you're going to infinite dimensions in the way that you've
been forced to modify on several previous occasions and that in fact this is not going to close?
I am unusually confident that I'm on the right track with this one.
Really? Yeah.
There are too many things matching up in the right way.
This doesn't sound good, Garrett. I gotta be honest with you.
But you see, I will put a paper out. Yeah. Okay. And you know, people may not find it
interesting or they might find it really interesting. Well, I wish you the best of luck,
but I have to tell you that I do think that the problems in this program
again, I should just be honest about it. I thought that the choice of E8 was so natural
that they're really one of two choices that I can see as being the way to go if you're going to
avoid the usual paths in research into fundamental physics. One is that you start with the most
beautiful intricate object you can find and then you find the intricacies of the natural world
somehow living inside of the intricacies which occurred naturally. That would be the E8.
That's the top-down view and it's quite nice to look at it that way.
The bottom up view is that somehow you start with something that's practically lifeless,
which I've analogized to a fertilized egg and somehow it bootstraps itself into this weird
intricate and baroque world that we find ourselves in and the universe autocatalyses from almost
nothing. These are the two basic approaches that I can imagine that would not strain the concept
of a theory of everything. Right. We both engage in both of these, but once you've used this bottom
up approach starting with your fertilized egg and getting up into more and more complexity,
then you start to see a complete object after you've expanded it out. Sorry, you view yourself
as exploring the concept of going from the bottom up. What is it that you've done that has that
character? Starting from gravity and particle physics and how they can be matched up together
in a way that brings spinners about natural. Okay, that's not very simple at all. Well,
I know gravity is already, you're talking about curvature of a space-time manifold.
It's beautiful stuff though. I love it. It's absolutely gorgeous. I don't think we're
divided by that, but when it comes to breaking up this object called the curvature tensor into
three different pieces, throwing one of them away called the vial curvature and then fine-tuning
the other two to be equal to the matter and energy in the universe, there's a lot of stuff that's
going into that story that isn't, that's an intricate story. Then the other story is even
worse and weirder. You're smuggling in a ton of complexity. When I say fertilized egg,
I'm thinking at the level of cytology, but at the level of the actual DNA, that's incredibly
rich. Maybe it's a bad analogy because it's not bootstrapping itself out of nothing.
You're smuggling in a ton of intricacy. But you have to look in both directions. You have to
look from the bottom up and then once you can see the larger picture, then you have to look again
from the top down. If going that way from the top down doesn't match up very well with what
you did to get there, then you have to go further and see if you can get a different bigger picture.
It's the only way forward.
Yeah, but I'm going to be honest. I feel like something has run into a wall
and there's the sense that how could this beautiful structure not be right? It doesn't
feel to me like-
It's insufficient.
Yeah.
Yeah. But there are larger structures that are not finite dimensional, but there are still
lead groups and exceptional lead groups. They're just generalized infinite dimensional lead
groups that contain E8 as a substructure and they're beautiful. They're just as beautiful,
if not more so.
I think that the problem is is that we have this mutual friend Sabine Haasenfelder. Sabine
has this very strange feature of her personality that she needs to tell the truth at scale.
Well, Sabine is a scientist and a scientist, you know, engaging the truth at all costs.
Yes.
But serve our modus operandi.
Well, I find it very interesting that almost no one has followed Sabine's lead.
I think it's Sabine.
Sabine?
Yeah.
Okay. From her perspective, beauty has led theoretical physics astray.
Right.
Now, I've tangled with her. My claim is that the string theory community, which has generally
hoovered up the most brilliant minds, but turned them into kind of almost cult-like members,
which are exploring some structure, but I just don't, it's similar to E8 in the sense that I'm
not positive that it's the structure of our world. It has some beauty and some consistency,
but I'm not positive that that's its reason for being. And because that argument has been so
abusive and it's just been, it's been abused against other people that our work is beautiful.
And then when those outsiders look at it, doesn't look like what you're doing is that beautiful
at all. She's gone against beauty as a means of trying to figure out what's true and what isn't.
I'm concerned that you're falling prey to the siren of beauty where you're not coupling,
you're not, things that are beautiful that, there are many things that are beautiful that
don't exist to do what you think they're there to do.
Right. Well, that's definitely true. I'm definitely inspired by beautiful mathematical
objects. When I start exploring an area of mathematics and I start to see its intricacies
and its connection to fundamental physics, I am led to think that there might be something
there based on aesthetics. And I've also discussed this with Sabina, who I think is great and her
points are wonderful, but I would be lost if I didn't have this aesthetic sense as a guide.
Well, let's take an example like the hydrogen atom. So you've got one proton at the center of a
hydrogen atom and you have all of the electron shells in quantum theory that are generated by
the Coulomb potential that comes off of that nucleus, right? Right. Okay.
Okay. That story of chemistry is just being these perfectly spherical electron shells
works pretty well. Well, you've got the other orbitals, you know, P orbitals, S orbitals,
D orbitals, all these things. Yeah. Yeah. In terms of the representation theory of something we'd
call spin three that gives the symmetries of the system. That story is not, it is absolutely
gorgeous. It's beautiful and it works pretty darn well, but it starts to fall apart. The larger
the atoms are, the more neutrons and protons are stuck together in the nucleus. It gets much
more subtle. Yeah. Well, it's a perfectly beautiful story that isn't the right story. It's not the
true story. It's very close to a true story. It's suggestive. It's indicative, but it isn't actually
the true story itself. So you have to be very careful in my mind that you don't fall into the trap
of thinking that the hydrogen atom sort of generalizes its perfection is simply the story
of chemistry. Right. Of course. They're much more complex elements and then grouped into molecules
and there's all sorts of things that go into that sort of chemistry. Well, but don't you have the
same situation in theoretical physics where you have certain kinds of beauty that are incredibly
pure, that actually kind of fall apart under scrutiny and you have other kinds of beauty that
seem to fall apart, but actually go the distance. I'm thinking about Dirac's
discovery of antimatter as the corresponding solutions to the matter solution. Right. Didn't
you usually think that was that the anti electrons were actually protons? Because they only knew of
those two particles. And then Heisenberg tried to pop his bubble and said, you know. You actually
have a new particle here. Well, no. He said that the proton was way too heavy to be the
anti particle mirror of the electron. And I think Dirac sort of recanted, but Dirac should have
had the courage of his convictions and said, I predict that there will be two new particles,
an anti proton and an anti electron, which was called the positron. And both of those things
turned out to be true. Yeah. And that's considered a victory for the aesthetic of beauty in mathematical
physics. Yes, but there was an intermediate situation in which the beauty led Dirac astray
because he wanted to shoehorn his theory into the preexisting world that was understood.
That's right. So it's important to be cautious and careful, but not too cautious. So if the
mathematics is actually telling you something, you want to listen to it. What's the mathematics
telling you? It's telling me that I think I've got the first handle on a geometric description
of quantum field theory. I say this out of love and I hope not envy. I'm super concerned that
you can see the problems from here and that rather than just going to infinite dimensions
and saying that quantum field theory requires a jump from finite to infinite dimensions,
you can say, look, I am fighting the fact that the beautiful unification that I found
actually is going to be challenged at the quantum level where that beauty becomes my enemy.
I've never put it that way. I know, because what you did is you took a theory, I mean,
to be honest, there's a different set of objects called the exceptional isomorphisms,
which aren't the exceptional E groups that have the exact same property that you found,
where you take something from the force universe. Let's say there's some object called spin six,
which by an exceptional isomorphism is equivalent to some other object, surprisingly,
called SU four. And you can take the spinners of spin six and find out that they are just the
four dimensional object from SU four and smush them together and you get an analog of E eight.
It is also probably not used by the physical universe in any way that we
think of as being important. I don't think that feature is what you think it is.
Right, but they're a vast world of mathematical possibilities out here and I think we need more
people. I totally agree with you that we need more people fanning out and trying things that
look like they won't work. So we need a more exploratory culture. We need a more exploratory
culture and we need to be forgiving. What we don't need to do is to fool ourselves when we start
getting the sense that maybe this stuff doesn't actually work. I mean, it just feels to me like
I can sort of see what the next set of problems are going to be and I would be remiss if I didn't
say them at the beginning. Sure. But you can't really dig into this stuff until you see the
mathematical details of it. And this gets back to an issue of the question of how science should
be organized. So we've talked about how difficult it is to do science inside of the institutions
because there is such a pressure economically to do whatever is fashionable, to get lots of
results, to publish continuously. Can we talk a little bit about what happens when we try to do
science outside of the institutions? Both of us have, and I think people will be very surprised
to hear it, but rather critical of how hard it is to do science when you're not part of the
standard community. Right. I mean, I think in some sense it is essential to stay connected
with the scientific community even when you're exploring out almost entirely on your own.
One thing that has to happen is you have to have an extreme set of internal checks
on your own progress. And because science is extremely frustrating to work on, most of the
pathways you follow end up being dead ends. And it can be really frustrating. So in doing that,
if you're going to work outside academia, you also need an extremely strong support system and a
healthy life independent of the science you're working on. So you need to have good support from
friends and family, good relationships. You need to have confidence in your ability to support
yourself and that frees up your time if you're really going to work on stuff outside of academia
on your own. I've been fortunate enough to build and to have those things. I feel really lucky to
be able to do that. And I think I've had a really good life that way. But if you're going to do
that, you need to be really careful about it. Because if you if you if you just abandon everything
else, because you have this idea in science that you want to pursue, and you abandon everything
else, you'll be totally out of balance in your life. And if you hit some frustrating item and
what you're researching, it'll be crushing. Because the main thing you're working on focused on
stopped working. When really what you want to be able to do is like, Oh, I've got other stuff going
on that's keeping me happy. This thing didn't work out. I just have to wipe the board clean and
start fresh. And that's not devastating to do because the rest of your life is good. You have to
do that. Otherwise, you just won't be healthy as a human being. Okay. And you have created something
that you think might be an intermediate between being in total isolation and being hooked up to
the community that lives within the standard institutional structures.
That's right. I mean, I came to this idea when I was wandering from friend's house to friend's
house. After getting my PhD, I would basically go hang out with a friend I hadn't seen in a while.
And if they had extra space, I'd spend time in their house while I worked on theoretical physics
and enjoyed the local environment. And I thought it was great to be able to do this because you're
not worried about having a roof over your head. You have company to interact with.
And you have a good environment to play in. And I wanted to have a network of such places.
But I had a hard time getting friends to give me their houses to use for this.
So I ended up getting the resources together to buy a house in Maui and to start bringing friends
and visiting scientists in. And I've called this the Pacific Science Institute. And currently,
it's basically my house with delusions of grandeur. Because what I also have is a beautiful piece of
property that's 15 acres that I bought 10 years ago, because I like doing things slowly.
So I've been growing the community of the Pacific Science Institute by having friends come in and
stay at my house, including you and my archana and my sister. I had a great time despite the
obvious antagonism. And for you specifically, I tried to kill you in several different ways.
Was that with the millipedes instead of peeds? Yeah, and shark infested water.
Oh, sure. That's great. Rough corals.
But yeah, basically, I have a scientist visit and take people out to have fun around the island
and really enjoy a good environment where they're free to explore ideas that might be a little bit
on the dangerous side to work on while they're in the confines of academia and among their
normal colleagues. It's a place where you can explore a little bit wilder ideas.
And I'm really excited to grow this community by starting to design things to build on the
15 acres I've got. That's really a nice location. So I've been growing things slowly up here,
and I'm really looking forward to some more progress with it and growing this community.
And it's also been a nice balance against working on physics directly, because it's
guaranteed success. I mean, when you have a place in Maui for scientists to come hang out and have
a good time, that's going to happen. And also, it keeps me entertained to have good people
coming through. That's fantastic. So it works out for yourself. I'm curious from your perspective,
how do you see the two of us as being divided in our approaches to the community? I would
definitely say that I seem to be more connected to the sensibilities of the elite science community.
I know that I can get their noses out of joint, but I track them very carefully.
Yeah, you had a lot of fights with those guys. Okay.
Yeah, whereas I didn't. So our academic lineages are quite different. I went to a smaller school.
I went to UC San Diego. I didn't go to Harvard. But my advisor there in particle physics was
Roger Dashin, but he passed away while I was a graduate student. And I finished up my dissertation
under Henry Barbinal, who also had a background in particle physics, but it changed in nonlinear
dynamics. But in some sense, you were a self-advised PhD. Yeah, so I was very much self-directed.
Henry gave me the freedom to go explore whatever the heck I wanted. I had an extraordinary amount
of freedom as a graduate student. And I hit this problem with spinners. And that's what I wanted
to tackle. I want to figure out what they were geometrically. And no one else was interested
in that problem. But through academia, I was a straight A student. I did really well. I never
had any big conflicts. Was it easy for you? Yeah, it was. I spent a lot of time surfing. I was
living on the beach in La Jolla. It was beautiful. It was the greatest time of my life. Okay.
People talk about being in a small pond, big fish in a small pond, going to a bigger pond,
you feel humbled. I never really had that experience. I was pretty close to the top
of my class and really happy about it, how everything was going. Everything was great.
I got my PhD. But there was no way I was going to get a job trying to understand the geometry
of spinners when everybody else was doing string theory. So you had already accepted
that you were unemployable? Yeah, I was totally unemployable. But I invested in Apple stock in
the 90s. So I had a few money. So I said, see you guys. Let me go surf and Maui and work on
this stuff on my own. Whereas you had a very different experience. So you were in Harvard
in the math department studying mathematical physics. And as far as I know, you were making
some really unusual breakthroughs that were very ahead of their time. But you weren't welcomed by
the head people there. And so you had a conflict from the get-go.
Well, I had a very serious dispute about something in mathematics, which were called the
self-dual equations, self-dual Yang-Mills equations, which were related to the regular
Yang-Mills equations, which are the equations of force in the standard model. But the self-dual
Yang-Mills equations were sort of a square root of those equations. And they were very difficult
to work with and to solve. And I was very confused as to why people were investing in this particular
form of these equations when it felt to me that we hadn't asked what constellation of equations
these new equations belong to. And I'd propose, again, spinners as a means of changing the
equations and was told that, I mean, the exact quote was something like, if spinners had anything
to do with the story Nigel, who was Nigel Hitchin, would have told us. It was just completely,
it was bananas. And then I got into this issue that, well, spinners have to be quantized as
fermions. They have to be treated as if they were matter inside of quantum field theory.
But this was not, we weren't doing quantum field theory. We were just doing classical geometry
of a kind. And so none of the arguments, I put forward the set of equations, which later got
recognized and completely changed the field, which came through Ed Whitton and this guy called Natty
Cyberg, both of them now professors at the Institute. And there was just no room to question
why everybody was struggling with these almost intractable equations and just getting great
results, but with so much effort and work. So that was like a very weird story whereby,
you know, I think that by 1994, the Harvard department had woken up to the fact that it
was not using the right equations. And I'd been actually proposing several sets of different
equations. But that, you know, when this all, you know, came about late 80s, early 90s,
there was just no way to have a productive conversation about it.
Right. So you found yourself at odds with the people you were talking with and you decided
to go into finance instead? Or how'd that happen? No, I mean, I wanted, I was trying to get back
to physics and the, you know, I was proposing, I had proposed three sets of equations,
one of which had turned out to have been done by somebody else in some place that I didn't
know anything about, one of which later gets done by Cyberg and Whitton, and then another set of
equations that I wanted to connect to the actual standard model. And the department was just very
concerned that this didn't really have anything to do with actual physics. It was sort of a
coincidence in their mind that something that was vaguely physics-y was having great topological
results. And so there was this, you know, this fear, and I was sent to a guy named Sydney Coleman,
who was a great quantum theorist, and he was much more encouraging than the Harvard Math Department.
Yeah, Sydney Coleman was a great guy. I mean, an unbelievable human being. I had two memories
of him, one of which was that he had all the time in the world for people who had no idea what they
were doing, and the other was that he didn't suffer fools gladly. And then I realized that
those are two contradictory images. And I unearthed old footage of him. He gave this brilliant
lecture called Quantum Mechanics in Your Face to try to make the quantum... Have you ever seen
this thing? I have not. Oh, it's a work of art. You'd love it. And it turns out both of these
things were really true about him, that he... If you were full of yourself and you were wrong,
he would just cut you up into little pieces. But if you said, I don't quite understand this,
he had all the time in the world to be the greatest of teachers.
No, I mean, one of the marks of a good scientist is humility.
No. One of the marks of a good scientist is a dialectic between arrogance and humility.
If you don't have... I think that's a more subtle and accurate way of putting it.
Yeah. Well, no, I just... I worry about us extolling the virtues of the humble, the meat,
the self-effacing, and it's just like, that's not where the magic happens. The magic happens.
You have to have had the arrogance to tackle hard problems and made some progress,
but then been kicked back by something that didn't work right. And after enough of that,
you develop some humility, but you still have to maintain the arrogance to get anywhere.
So how do you feel currently about the community? Like the professional community,
you have to know that they regard you with very...
Well, I know what's going on. I mean, I got a lot of contempt from
strength theorists for getting attention, for putting forward a mathematical model of
reality that wasn't strengths and it wasn't complete. It was a model that was proposed
that had problems with it and I was forthcoming with the problems in it, but I was still saying,
yeah, this seems like it's making progress towards the description of reality and has
nothing to do with strengths. And that said, alarm bells off all over the place.
It said off alarm bells for either it's a threat or this guy's a complete crackpot,
which is more likely. And I got criticisms for both.
I don't think, if I were to steal me in their perspective, and again, you know that I don't
share it and I'm willing to fight them. And as I did when you first encountered what I called
their immune system in a gentleman known as Jacques Dissler, I'm willing to stand up for
what it is you're trying to do, but I do think that we have to give them their due before we
say what's wrong with their perspective. Their perspective is there are lots of constraints
that one learns are very difficult to evade when you immerse yourself in standard quantum field
theory. Like they know what it is that is demotivating them. It's all the no-go theorems
and the intricacies. And the reason they got crazy about string theory, first of all, I'm
convinced that it was a way of evading the real problems in physics. It gave them something to
do. It's like war games. It's an amazing period of peace. It gives you something to do to keep
your chops up that is different from the thing you're supposed to be doing. And
what they were objecting to is to say, this guy doesn't understand all the things that have to
go right in order to have an improvement on the theory. From our perspective, how dare he
blithely saunter forth if we ignored all the constraints on us, we could have fun proposing
all sorts of things that also won't work. That was really the responsible version of their critique.
Now, the irresponsible version of their critique is, hey, we have something that isn't working very
well. How dare he take something that isn't working very well and get attention and maybe funding
or maybe destroy the sense that there's only one game in town. And I was separately lobbying you
and them for different things. I wanted you to just say the words. I understand these are the
constraints that will have to be satisfied and I don't have answers and I don't know how difficult
they'll be to find, but I don't want to be demotivated from the get-go. So please don't
immediately tell me all the no-go theorems because any successful theory will probably have to have
a period where it's flying in the face of no-go theorem. So that's what I wanted to hear from you.
Right. I believe I said those things scattered over several interviews at the time.
Somewhat, but I think that what they don't intuit is that you understand how significant
the negative results are. The no-go theorems, as they're called, are pretty profound.
Right. I mean, there's a theorem called the Coleman-Mondula theorem that prohibits the
unification of gravity with the other forces. I just blew right through that because it didn't
seem to apply in what I was doing. Well, I mean, really, it prohibits naive unification of
matter and force and there's a way of evading it using this thing called supersymmetry.
Right. And supersymmetry is this very weird thing that doesn't have that much mathematical
beauty behind it so the mathematicians know about it. They study it a little bit,
but they're not bananas over it. Yeah, I'm not either.
The natural world doesn't seem to use it in the expected way, but it does so much for theoretical
physics that despite the fact that math is just kind of ho-hum on it and that the natural world
doesn't seem to be using it, it doesn't stop the theoretical physics community from embracing that
because it evades this dreaded no-go theorem. Right. It stopped me from embracing it.
I never embraced supersymmetry. I never liked it.
But you didn't evade the problem with it either. I mean, in other words-
No, I got around it.
You think you really got around it?
The Coleman-Mondula theorem, yeah. It requires as one of its axioms that you have to have,
it talks about properties of the scattering of particles and you have to have a spacetime
which the scattering occurs. In the theory I put forward, the spacetime comes out after
the symmetry breaking between gravity and forces. So it's only after the symmetry breaking happens
when the unification is no longer there. Yeah, I'm sure that-
That you have spacetime- I don't-
Then in that context, the theorem applies. But before the breaking, it doesn't apply.
But my guess is, and I could be wrong about this because I haven't studied exactly what
you're talking about, that what's going to happen is that even with how you claim this
arises in your theory, they're going to say in whatever approximation is going to be applied
to relatively flat spacetimes close to Minkowski space, that if you've really evaded it in some
super meaningful way, you should be able to tell us some theorem about good old quantum field theory
in relatively flat spacetime. Right. Well, I mean, it evades it by not satisfying the axioms of the
theorem. Do you know what I'm trying to get at? It's not evading it in some fantastic way.
You should be able to tell us something really new if you're underlying theory
truly unifies force and matter. Right. It would be the case that the approximation of it
that is found in ordinary regions that look close to flat, right, where the usual rules of
quantum field theory apply. It should be telling us something wildly new about that. Can you tell
us a new theorem about how it would appear to unify force and matter in a region that looks
close to classical quantum field theory, to standard quantum field theory? Well, I mean,
once the theory is advanced to the stage where you can get to that description,
yeah, then that would happen. But in the initial stages, all you can see for
certain is that it's not violating the theorem. I don't know enough about how we can talk about
it after this. Okay, sure. But anyway, so those were my, I had these wishes for you,
and then I had the wishes for the community, which is that they would stop being pricks
about the whole thing and that they would say, look, we can't keep telling everybody who's not
a string theory, string theorist, that their theory is dead on arrival and keep saying, well,
we know that our theory doesn't appear to be living in four dimensions and appears to have
a bunch of stuff that we don't want and not necessarily all the stuff that we do want. And
maybe there's a huge landscape of different theories that would be at this point. I don't
think string theory is living at all. I think it's an X theory. I think it's pining for the
fjords. I mean, I've seen nothing but decline since I left this train wreck.
Well, this is the thing is it refuses to take stock of itself and it took a lot more minds than one.
I think that's happening. Yeah. Certainly the graduate students who are coming up
are seeing what's going on with string theory and they're taking stock of the field and they're
going in other directions. So where do we go next? I mean, I actually view it as highly
demotivating that in essence, every new theory is dead on arrival because of the number of things.
Can we agree that physics has gotten incredibly difficult? It has. It's difficult by virtue
of being so successful. I mean, the- You can smell that we're almost at the end at least of this
chapter and we've exhausted everything that we know that has worked previously, which is like
to vary the assumptions a little bit on everything. That's been spectacularly successful
and now it doesn't work anymore and it hasn't worked for almost 50 years.
Right. It's incredibly frustrating. I think that's why most people are wise to stay the
hell away from it. I think a lot of the smarter minds are going into machine learning or even
biophysics or just into other fields or even condensed matter.
How do you feel about that? I feel like I'm out in an island in the middle of the Pacific
watching it unfold from afar. Well, I work on the puzzle myself in my own different way.
You're having fun. Yeah. That's my prime directive is have fun.
Is to have fun. And do you think that inducing other people to do this is kind of like maybe
the big programs fall apart and we start just becoming individuals trying crazy strategies
that probably won't work? Yeah. I mean, there are undergraduate textbooks and
undergraduate courses on string theory. Yeah. Okay. And people from undergraduates,
and there's this culture of arrogance saying string theory is the pinnacle of physics.
Right. And people are coming up to that and they're becoming, and if you're really working on
fundamental physics and the whole area of string theory has gotten so large in the
amount of research done that it just takes an enormous amount of intellectual effort to consume
it and to get up to speed to what the current status is of the field. And by the time you're
there, you're so invested that, of course, what you want to do is go and continue a postdoc
in string theory when you graduate. And there are hundreds of students who are coming up this
way. And when they get there, they go to HEP, like I did this morning, and they look at the job.
The high energy physics theory section of this thing called the archive where
all the new papers are found every day. Yeah. And this high energy physics archive also has a
postdoc and job posting board. And just for giggles, I went and say, okay, well, how many
opportunities does a rising string theorist have now? And I went and looked and there are
all these sub fields of physics, the condensed matter is a big party, because it's so incredibly
vibrant and productive right now. And you go into high energy theory and okay, there are 30
positions open in North America. Okay, all right. And some of them are open to string theorists.
But out of those 30 positions, you go, how many of them actually actively want a string
theorist and are looking for a string theorist? There's one, one Eric. So you have these hundreds
of people groomed up saying string theory is the pinnacle of what you can be studying.
And there's nowhere for them to go. Because the field is dying.
Well, because it was a baby boomer phenomenon. We treated it as if it was an intellectual
phenomenon, but it was actually this weird generational phenomenon that this took hold.
You know, there's this very weird feature of 1951 where Frank Wilczek and Ed Whitten,
two great physicists born in the same year, Wilczek is effectively like the last guy to
make the train for real physics. He's an amazing guy. And then Whitten born later that year,
probably more powerful than anyone else alive in terms of his mental abilities,
hasn't had a trip to Stockholm because he hasn't been able to make contact with the physical world.
And almost certainly in any era that wasn't this one, this guy would have been to Stockholm
once or more. Yeah. And it's in my mind, it's a cultural problem. We're starting this culture
of particle physics where we have everybody in the same community studying the same popular
direction in full force as if there was lots of data coming in supporting that and there's not.
So what it is that is they're going full bore, full self supporting force,
a long direction that in my mind just doesn't describe our universe. And what we need is an
exploratory phase with physicists with graduate students coming up and picking up stuff that
they think is interesting and following that direction on their own branching away from the
main herd. And by having more explorers going in different directions, you're more likely to
find something good. And I guess my hope is that, you know, some graduate student will have listened
through this incredibly long and detailed podcast and go look at stuff and say, well, that's kind
of interesting. Maybe I want to learn more about that. Do you have any ideas or the Pacific Science
Institute? Is there any way that our listeners can support it? Yeah. Are you a non-profit?
501c3 non-profit, I'd be very happy to take donations and put those donations to use,
supporting scientists. To diversify, okay. And these aren't just, it's not just supporting physicists.
The idea is that as you said, science has supported our economy to incredible degree and I don't
think scientists have been sufficiently personally rewarded for that. So basically what I want to
do is, you know, give them a nice place to hang out in Maui and enjoy the environment and work
and think on whatever they want undirected while they do it. So it's a place to fight group think
effectively within the field. Well, still having community support. Well, still having community
support. The problem is I've very limited resources right now. I'm basically running this out of my
house. Right. I have a big piece of land. I have dreams for what I want to build on. I've been
there and it's incredibly generous that people can hang out and just actually fulfill the promise
of dreaming about our world and trying things that they wouldn't feel comfortable trying
under the watchful eyes of a departmental chairman who's telling them what they need to do to get
tenure or to win grants. Do you have any sense of what we should be directing people to do if
they're in a position to change the culture of the field? I always want to think like we still
have a few old great people that everybody looks up to and they refuse to say something
really provocative. Like here's the thing that I dream about.
We get all of the negative results. They're incredibly demotivating. Allow your young people
to violate several of them without being string theorists and then insist that they try to pay
that back once they've been exploring a theory that in a previous era would have been dead on
arrival because somewhere we have to go backwards to go forwards. We have to question something
that is rock solid in all of our minds but isn't actually right.
And this sort of cultural inertia that's holding things back is in biology, it's in computer science,
it's in all fields of science. It's almost the best thing to do just to find people who are
really fricking smart and want to work on stuff on their own and give them money and support and
let them do it. Well, I'm on record as saying that we have too much oversight, too much transparency
and too much accountability. It's strangling us. Yeah, it's absolutely true. Well, Garrett,
I really appreciate you sitting down. It's a hell of an experiment to just even try to have
conversations about what might be the path towards final theories of everything. And I'm
actually really worried that we hurt most of your listeners. Well, if we use this at all,
I'll try to say something at the beginning of the program to try to say what it is that people
are listening to. So they'll have an idea. They're not just going to stumble in on a podcast and
hear people talking about bosons, fermions, E8 quantization and have no idea what's going on.
The fact is very few people are invested in this like this, but this is the fabric of reality
ultimately in a question about how we go about trying to probe whatever's next.
I think it's amazing. I think it's the most significant and intricate and difficult puzzle
there is right now for anybody to tackle and to immerse themselves in. And I also think it's
potentially incredibly rewarding, but it's also one of the hardest things you can do.
Probably the hardest thing has never been harder. Yeah, it's almost as hard as learning to surf.
Okay, well, we've been through the portal with Garrett Lisey here from the island of Maui.
My arch nemesis, you're welcome to come back anytime. And if you're interested in the Pacific
Science Institute, it's Garrett's attempt to try to figure out how to move science
outside of direct institutional control. You can find him on Instagram, I think,
is Garrett.Lisey and on Twitter as Garrett Lisey. I'm not hard to find.
All right. Thanks for joining us. Thank you, Eric. Be well.
