Hello, this is Eric with the housekeeping section of this week's release before we
introduce the main section of the episode.
But first things first, we now finally have a website and a mailing list.
So please pause the audio and go to ericwinestein.org, all one word, ericwinestein.org, and sign
up so that we can make sure that you're the first to learn about all things related to
the portal.
We'll wait.
You did it?
Fantastic.
Okay, so now you're signed up and that's great.
But what did you just sign up for?
Well, many shows can brag about having a large audience and while ours may have grown rapidly,
it certainly has zero claim on being the biggest or even having the most regular release schedule.
Sorry about that one, guys.
We are, however, growing nicely as well as it being early days here at the portal.
So that's kind of a sweet spot, but I don't think that's really the main offering to you.
What we do have that is very unique is that we have an actual thriving 24 seven community
based equally around projects and discussion.
Now in a world where everyone is talking about community, why is this unique or even important?
Well, to begin with, community is one of those perfectly fine English words that gets ruined
by corporate usage like content, brand, message, social distribution.
I'm sure you know the list.
So when I say this podcast has a community, I don't mean that at all.
I mean a group of people I increasingly think of as my colleagues and friends who are trying
to actually build the resources to find the real portals for which the podcast is in fact named.
These are quite frankly people with whom I choose to spend my time and people I respect and admire.
So how did this come about?
Well, in part, it is responsive to the unique difficulties presented by the program.
For example, when I have a physicist like the great Sir Roger Penrose on the show,
I know that I am supposed to make sure that the audience can follow along.
Yet I'm convinced that if I do all the handholding required in the mythical podcasters handbook,
we will never get to what makes Roger Penrose unique or interesting.
And that's quite a conundrum.
Well, Portal Nation or whatever you want to call it is unusually project focused and has come together to help solve this problem.
What the community is now doing is reversing the logic of the old line, if you build it, they will come.
Instead, in our reversed community, if episodes come, then they will build it.
In other words, Portalers, not totally sure of the nomenclature here, Portalians, Portaloids,
are doing whatever they have to in order to help each other understand what is happening without burdening the show.
They will transcribe, annotate, make animated shorts, produce graphics, launch websites, organize reading clubs, make artwork,
you name it, whatever is needed to support the episodes in the show, people are actually building it as we speak.
To better see this, check out the portal.wiki or forum.theportal.dev.
Now, if you go to the Penrose episode on the wiki, for example, you will see the beginnings of an effort to create episode aides
to help the general public following the program understand what is being said about our discussion and Roger's work in physics.
There is a thriving 24-7 voice chat discussion around the portal as well on Discord and a separate Discord server for Portal listeners and viewers
dedicated to reading Roger's book together.
You can join us at ericweinstein.org, forum.theportal.dev or the portal.wiki.
Unfortunately, the Discord server where I visit frequently, and for which I give out the invite link periodically on Twitter,
is a little trickier to join as it already has around 7,000 members and it takes a little while for the residents to help new people
understand that it has a rare internet culture, which actually allows us to have up to, let's say, 100 people in an open voice chat room at 4 a.m.
but without chaos. It's bizarre.
It's really quite a thing to be able to do that as a community with minimal moderation.
So we're trying to figure out how to onboard people more rapidly, but it naturally takes some time to communicate culture to others.
And to this end, let me give a huge shout out to even a few of the folks that made this culture happen.
People with screen names like Phil, Tim, the Murthless Swagman, Miss Jo, JT, Ami, Tyler, Cam, Beef Sandwich, Boku,
Winter Flags, Field Theorists, Jacob, Jentrepreneur, JD, Josh, and too many more to name.
These are the people who are actually making this community really meaningful to me and what keeps me coming back day after day.
But beyond that, I want our people to know that while I have felt beyond lucky to be able to build a largeish platform in this new space,
I know that it's very difficult to get heard and I've always intended to use the portal to introduce lesser known folks who might have been looked over.
And I now fully intend to showcase our main contributors and their best work to a worldwide audience.
In short, community is too often a buzzword.
But if you are a regular listener to this program, please come join your world of fellow seekers.
The podcast is fast becoming just the first layer of a much larger community of like-minded individuals who are finding each other through the greater portal ecosystem.
OK, the other topic that I at least wanted to touch on here is this.
I have started to talk about a few different things that are quite important to me, but which I have never discussed openly on audio or video before.
In particular, I recently put up a video of my first ever talk at Oxford University from May of 2013 on Geometric Unity,
a theory which I started thinking about around 1984 or perhaps just before.
It is a bit odd having something which occupies a huge space in your very private life go from private to public with the press of a single button.
And the interested response has been very strong.
It is still too new for me to comment on how I'm reacting to having it out in the outside world or how I'm feeling, so I won't say much more now.
But I at least wanted to thank you all for your many messages of support, and I look forward to discussing this with you all in the future.
Thanks again, and stay tuned.
This week's interview with Jamie Metzel, the author of Hacking Darwin, was recorded in July of 2019 just after the portal was launched.
I was unsure when I wanted to release the episode for a variety of reasons, and so I held on to it for a while.
One of those reasons frankly surrounds US sensitivity towards China.
When Jamie and I start talking about variation in general cultural attitudes towards biohacking, China comes up as the outlier that it is.
Now, the reason that that is such a problem is that the institutions of US science have become thoroughly dependent on the People's Republic of China beginning in the time of Deng Chaoping.
And with such dependence, as you might expect, came a vigorous US culture attempting to defend this unusually high degree of intertwining between two countries with vastly different national cultures and strategic objectives.
For both better and worse, I have been involved off and on in US science policy circles for around 30 years with a peak of activity probably in the mid to late 1990s.
In those circles, at least, I am well known to have become very concerned about the security implications of the United States scientific and technological relationship with China, starting in the early to mid 1980s when I first became aware of it.
At that time, the People's Republic became eager to supply ever increasing amounts of inexpensive and pliant scientific labor to newly cash strapped advanced US STEM research and laboratory programs.
As the potential for conflict with our US scientific mandarins is always great over this issue, I generally try to discuss my deep concerns about differing Chinese and US attitudes towards STEM research as sparingly as possible, as until recently anyway, I felt that this seemed to be a niche issue to the common man rather than the top security threat as I perceive it to be.
In light of the COVID epidemic, however, I am now newly emboldened and in fact eager to fight the self censorship within myself, so I've decided to release the episode.
Let me put this in starker terms.
I believe that social justice is a killer ideology and by that I don't mean that it's frickin awesome.
Instead, I mean that supposedly progressive people who worry endlessly about the delicate feelings and sensibilities of the Chinese Communist Party are now endangering our lives.
Those who had already paid the steep social tax for questioning our elites love affair with China were far earlier to warn about the coronavirus than those who were fretting openly about anyone linking the virus to China where the outbreak appears to have first become severe.
I myself do not love the term Chinese virus as many viruses originate in China and it seems politically charged and also offensive to many people.
I cannot, however, imagine why we are worrying about calling it the Wuhan virus or Wuhan virus one, given that it may well turn out to be the first accidental release from the Wuhan Institute of Virology's biosafety level for laboratory, a first of its kind Chinese facility, which opened only five years ago.
In the event that it's simply spontaneously originated in a seafood market down the road apiece, the Roman numeral one never needs to be increased and the name of the virus will do as little harm to Wuhan as the Spanish flu, Hong Kong flu and Lyme disease did to those fine places in 1918, 1968 and 1975 respectively.
So I will leave you with this final thought.
Our discussions of social justice and the scientific discussion of biology have to be kept separate after COVID and the slow response due in part to fastidious concerns about racism and xenophobia, which were prioritized well above public safety, there can now be no two ways about it among reasonable people.
Biology, more than any other subject, humiliates shallow theories of human beings as apes, such as so-called critical theory, and it does so by revealing those theories to be the incoherent scribblings of fools by comparison with Darwinian theory.
And with lives and national security at stake, I'm done playing nice.
Our scientists and particularly our biologists need to be immunized and protected from concerns about social justice or people will die full stop.
As I have put it starkly before, the response from biology to social justice should not be indifference, but wholesale intolerance, in a phrase, get the hell out of my lab with that social engineering or I'm calling security.
And if that seems a little harsh, we can make it a little bit nicer.
We can add, and while you're at it, kid, do yourself a favor and learn something about the theory of natural and sexual selection.
If you're open to it, it could just change your life for the better and spare you a lifetime of confusion.
Hello, this is Eric Weinstein and you've found the portal today on the show, I'm talking to Jamie Metzel, who is going to describe for us some of his thoughts that come out of his book, Hacking Darwin, about the pursuit of molecular engineering and other biological hacking techniques to unlock the promise of the cell and potentially human potential at a greater scale.
So Jamie, tell me a little bit about how you came to this topic so that we can kind of bring the people at home up to speed on your trajectory and how you came to write this book.
Sure.
So more than 20 years ago, I was working on the National Security Council and my then boss and now very close friend, Richard Clark, was the guy who essentially predicted 9-11.
And unfortunately, he was like all Cassandras, he had a sense of what was going to happen, but because he was ahead of his time, nobody would listen to him.
And when 9-11 happened, Dick's memo, Prussian memo, was on George Bush's desk.
And Dick always used to say, if everyone in Washington was focusing on one thing, you could be sure there was something much more important that was being missed.
And so 20 plus years ago, I saw all these little data points that told me this story that the biotech and genetic revolutions were going to fundamentally transform life and our lives and nobody was talking about it.
So I started, I started reading, taking these little data points and putting them together.
I hadn't taken a science class since high school, started just grabbing every book I could find, every person who I wanted to talk to and just educating myself.
And then when I was ready, I started writing articles on about the national security implications of the genetics revolution.
And a congressman from where we are now, L.A. Brad Sherman, called me up one day a long time ago and said, hey, this is really important.
I read your article. No one's talking about this.
I want to organize hearings around your article.
Will you be the lead witness and help organize the hearings, which I did.
And then I was speaking and talking a lot and I just was frustrated because I felt like this is the story of the future of our species.
And we all need to be educated.
We all need to be part of the conversation about what's next, but it wasn't happening.
So then I wrote two near term sci fi novels, Genesis Code and Eternal Sonata, telling the story of the genetic genetics revolution and life extension.
But as a story, because that's how we're humans, that's how we learn.
But when I was doing book tours for those books and I describe the science the way someone who was self taught, like nobody had given me the lingo for how to talk about science.
I had to figure it out myself and I I could just see in people's eyes that they were suddenly they'd heard these little pieces of the story.
They knew about a little bit about DNA.
They knew a little bit about IVF and they'd heard these words, but they didn't have a story for how the pieces fit together or where they themselves fit into that story.
And that was when I realized that I needed to write a book for everyone, the story of the of the genetics revolution.
Are you familiar by any chance with a remarkable book by Horace Judson called The Eighth Day of Creation?
No.
Well, this so this is a very odd book where I think somebody pointed out that the story of molecular biology could be uniquely told in the present only because all of the major players were still alive.
And so Horace Judson wrote this book about the birth of molecular biology effectively.
And I think he more or less got to all of the top people and wrote the story in a very compelling fashion.
And I guess I was thinking about how profound the role of storytelling is in catalyzing human interest and imagination.
That somehow you could compare the data that we have to the sheet music of science.
But if nobody actually performs it in the form of a symphony, it really leaves most of us cold.
Do you feel that there's some aspect of storytelling which is essential to this?
Essential because every specialized field and certainly science, you have your specialists and they speak a coded language of specialists.
And that's great.
It's a it's a shorthand in a way because you don't have to explain something.
You have common terminology and that's what you use.
But we're talking about here about technologies that are going to change our lives and life itself.
And that's that has to be the interest of everybody.
And if the scientists aren't able to communicate that to the regular people, that's going to cause a huge problem.
So we are humans.
The way we learn is through stories and our ancestors, they didn't have these specialized stories that everybody was around a fire.
And if somebody had something they wanted to tell, they had to find a way to tell it in the language of everybody.
And that's that's what I feel like we've lost a little bit in our in our age of super specialization that we're able to make more progress because we have pioneers heading out in every direction.
But if those pioneers don't bring the stories back or we don't have a way of weaving everybody into these transformational stories, then the pioneers are isolated and society is isolated from the pioneers.
Well, we we frequently tell this this tale about storytelling as something that the non specialists need and that the specialists can communicate in their highly professional lingo.
But I wonder just from what you've been talking about, whether or not there's a sort of back reaction and that the storytelling actually feeds back into the expert community so that when you're talking about this stuff, do you see your gift for storytelling having an effect back on the experts?
Or is it really all one way?
Absolutely.
It's two way and it has to be two way because, like I said, a lot of the scientists have a hard time communicating.
It's not what they do best for most of them.
But when you find the small number of scientists who are able to communicate, it's like opening up this magic world.
And on one hand, I'm I certainly am a translator.
I read just massive amounts of scientific studies and they're all very technical.
And I kind of take them in and then translate that into language that that that hopefully everybody.
And certainly I have high like getting lots of messages from high schoolers and others who are reading the book and getting these these principles.
But it's also going the other way.
I do a lot of speaking alongside George Church, who's kind of the living Charles Darwin.
And what George always says is that he reads science fiction novels like mine and imagines, well, that's really cool.
How could we do that?
And what I always say is I look at papers coming out of labs like George's and say, well, that's really cool.
What does it mean?
What are the big picture implications?
Right now, I'm part of the World Health Organization International Advisory Committee on Human Genome Editing, and we have people like Robin Level Badge or the top geneticists in the world.
But we also need people who are saying, well, this is how we're going to connect this message to the rest of the world.
Because if we have, if the science is dissociated from the public discourse around the science,
it kills the science.
That's what we saw with genetically with GMOs, what we used to call recombinant DNA.
The scientists thought, oh, we understand the science.
We understand its promise and we understand its peril.
We're going to be really responsible.
We're going to go to a Silamar and we're going to establish principles.
And then those which happened in the 1970s and those principles were realized.
But because there wasn't a public engagement from the start, you could the the the science hasn't
realized its potential because there's so much fear.
So it's not that there's science and the context of the science.
Science exists within the context.
Well, I guess I'm of two minds about this.
I think for my read of this, that there are plenty of terrific reasons to be very, very afraid.
What concerns me is whether or not the storytelling leads us when we're talking
about how we manipulate our own genetics, epigenetics, the cells and our body plans.
Are we actually being led to adaptive fears, which would cause us to come up with the right
restrictions on how we do the science and how we do our engineering?
Or do we spend our time worrying about nothing where, in fact, let's say some sort
of genetic modification, which is almost certainly benign because of the way in which it's phrased,
catches the public's imagination and suddenly you've got a panic where
where there shouldn't be one.
Is there a way of figuring out which fears are adaptive, which fears are maladaptive
and getting the storytelling to help aid our intuition?
It's really an important question because both the science and the storytelling are
themselves agnostic.
I mean, you could have science like the science doesn't come with a value system.
Storytelling is a mechanism and storytelling can be used to scare people.
It can be used to excite people.
It can be used for all sorts of reasons.
There's nothing inherent to the storytelling.
But then there's the question of what types of stories do we tell?
And I think about this a lot because right now a big chunk of my life is dedicated
to trying to spark what I'm calling a species-wide dialogue on the future of human genetic
engineering.
And there are some people who say, well, why are you putting this stick in the hornet's
nest?
Because in the near term, the real meaningful applications of genetic technologies aren't
going to be designer babies.
It's going to be curing terrible genetic diseases and helping people.
If designer, quote-unquote designer babies ever happens, that's potentially long in
the future, even though we've begun that process.
What I say to that is let's just say that we're having this conversation and the people
who are behind the barricades on one side or another on the abortion issue will say,
hey, here's another barricade.
I better get behind the no manipulation of human sex cells.
That's a new barricade that I can build and defend.
And so there's a real danger of that.
There is a strong argument to be made.
Like let's just keep this under the radar.
We actually, scientists are by and large really responsible.
Let them do their work and let this issue emerge when it's ready.
And that's what happened with IVF.
I mean, with IVF, it just happened before there was a really big moral debate about IVF.
And so when it got to the point when the pro-life people would say it could have said, hey, wait
a second, your life begins at conception, you're killing embryos in these IVF clinics,
those people were already talking about the miracle of life of these people in their churches
who now had babies.
But I believe that these genetic technologies are so powerful.
They're so transformative.
We can't afford to make the same mistake as was made in the beginning of the era of GMOs.
Like what we're talking about is our future.
It's everybody's business and we have to respect each other enough to try to tell the story.
But we have to do it in a responsible way because I know with this book,
and I've been out on my book tour, and there are lots of people say, just do scaremongering.
I mean, that's the way to get attention.
And when I say, well, wait a second, what's the goal?
And if you do it responsibly, you get a little less attention, but I'd rather do it in the right way.
Well, since you're a storyteller and since you know far more about the subject than I do,
I want to ask you for three separate stories.
I want a responsible story that scares the bejesus out of me.
I want a story that excites me and I want a story that tells me about what would happen
if we really started to block progress out of a misplaced fear and very little happened.
Could I ask for that as a bundle so that I'm not being told one thing or the other?
Yeah, yeah. No, it's great. And that's the only way to think about it.
We're just beginning a journey and there are so many different places that this journey
can take us and we may go to all of them in one version or another.
So certainly a story that is in all these stories, there's the exciting and there's
the terrifying and they are connected. So here's an exciting story is that we have
all of these terrible bugs in humanity and that's why little kids are dying from
deadly genetic diseases and no one says, oh, that's just wonderful nature. I mean,
to hell with that, let's fight it. That's why we have healthcare.
Here's another terrible story, 90-year-old people.
Let's just pick one disease that you think might be easily put into the crosshairs of our
technology in the short term. Let me pick 5,000 diseases. It's a classification of
these single gene mutation disorders. I mean, there's tens of thousands of them,
but there are about 10,000 that have been identified, 5,000 really well characterized.
Most of our traits are complex, genetically complex, meaning that many genes have something to say,
often for a very little amount, but we have a number of diseases and disorders that are what
are called Mendelian disorders, single gene mutation disorder. It's like one letter that's
off, so sickle cell disease and Tay Sacks are Huntington's disease and many, many others.
And so we are now, because we're able to identify those diseases, many of them can be and will
increasingly be identifiable in IVF and embryo selection. So with IVF, you extract the eggs
from the mother, fertilize them with the father's sperm, grow them in the lab in vitro,
and then at around day five, you extract a few cells that otherwise would have grown into the
placenta and you sequence them. And the cost of sequencing has gone down from about a billion
dollars in 2003 to about 600 now, and it's going toward negligibility. And so you have 10
fertilized eggs, and now you know that one of them is going to be a child who, if taken to
term, is going to die of Tay Sacks. So almost everybody will not choose to implant a child
who they know is going to die of a genetic disease. And so that's what I see as a very
positive story, because right now in parts of Europe where the government pays for
non-invasive prenatal screening, NPT, 97% of people who get the diagnosis after three months of
pregnancy for Down syndrome are aborting. So you have to assume that pretty much everybody
who's choosing from among one in 10 is going to choose to not implant the future potential kid
who is going to die of a genetic disease. But there's the dangerous side about that,
is when we get into the business of selecting which of these let's call them 10 fertilized eggs,
early stage embryos to implant. And as we know more and more about genetics, we are going to have
a lot more information when making those choices. So the health choices are going to be relatively
straightforward. I want a kid who's going to not have terrible diseases, who's going to have a good
chance of a long and healthy life. But after that, we're going to have a lot of information about
things like personality style and IQ. And we talk about what are the dangers.
You can just jump in. You brought up Tasex, but you also brought up Sickle cell.
Correct.
And what's fascinating about that is that to me, and admittedly,
this is not necessarily widely shared as an opinion in the public, but I wouldn't consider
Sickle cell as an allele, as a trait to be a disease. It's an adaptation that is a disease in
an American context, given that we rid ourselves of malaria. But it was in fact, a desperate
response of evolutionary adaptation in order to modify hemoglobin so as to make it resistant.
It's a great point, and I write about that specifically in the book. And so I'll have the
broad principle and then the specific application. The broad principle is there is no good and bad
in evolution. We may think, oh, it's better to have a higher IQ. It's better to be taller.
It's better to be extroverted. It's better to not be a recessive carrier of Sickle cell disease.
And in this world, as you create this world that we live in here, that may be true. But in a different
environment, even the things that we value most could be our greatest vulnerabilities. So you're
exactly right. So Sickle cell, if you have Sickle cell disease, you're going to die.
Well, if you have two alleles for Sickle cell, right. But if you are a recessive carrier,
you have increased resistance to malaria, which is why that mutation has survived.
Because it is a small cost in terms of oxygen carrying. But that wasn't where I was going with.
No, but let me just circle back if you don't mind. Because the danger of this story, because when I
talked about a good story with a fear. So the danger is you could say, wow, we could select
our embryos. And people say, well, geez, I'd like to have certain things. I want health,
which is just the simplest one. And that's what people are going to want first. But let's just
say that it's not Sickle cell disease. We have no idea what recessive, sorry, what recessive
mutations we are carrying that could be useful to face some threat that we've never faced as a
species. Or haven't faced it recently. And so it's been driven to a very low frequency.
Yes. And just what I was trying to. Yeah, sure. Yeah. The thing that I'm trying to address here
was that I was actually trying to riff on top of your. Yeah, please. Yeah.
The point would be that just the way somebody with eyeglasses has a misshapen eye. And then
they have a second distortion in the form of a lens. But the coupling of the two distortions is
less distorted as a system. It would seem to me that what you're in some sense saying is
the reason that Sickle cell trait crops up in a U.S. context is that we've added something novel.
That we were bringing people, let's say, from Africa, where Falsiparum malaria is very deadly,
to a place where it's absent. And what we're doing here is in some sense saying the trait
that you have may have been adaptive, although at great cost, but that because of some aspect
of modernity, we actually have to double down on modernity. The first part of it was something
like air travel. And the second part of it is editing and that the two of those distortions
in some sense is less distorted than anything else in the system. And that that was sort of the
feeling that. Well, that's the thing is like once we start changing things, we can't stop. I mean,
you just think of just Columbus arriving in the new world in 1492 and just this chain reaction
that is still going. And so I think that that's right. And that's why we can't imagine that there's
just this fixed thing. There's the world. There's nature. And then we're changing. We're screwing
with nature. Nature is us. Nature is always changing. And that's why you talk about this
genetic diversity. It's been baked into our biology for a billion years. So it's natural to hack.
You know, we are hackers. That's what that's our comparative advantage. Yes. I love that.
All right. So that was the single mutation diseases was a great example of something that's
positive that might be right around the corner because that's simple enough. Yeah, that you
might be able to do it through editing or checking or what we had already in China. The world's first
gene-edited babies were born last year in October. Do you want to say a little bit more about that?
Sure. Yeah. So last November, it was announced at the World Summit on Human Genome Editing
by Chinese biophysicist named Hu Zhongkui announced that the prior month in October 2018,
the world's first gene-edited babies had been born in China to two little girls.
And he was first in China. The government and the people's daily said, this is incredible.
This shows Chinese scientific triumph. And then there was this international condemnation,
myself included. And then they said, all right, then there was a buckling down.
And there's been a huge debate. My World Health Organization Committee was created in the aftermath
that because people would have always said, this is coming. And actually, my book was already in
production then. And I'd already said, we're going to see the world's first gene-edited babies.
It's going to happen in China. And then I called the publisher, say, we have to pull out of
production. I just need to add three little sentences saying this thing that I had predicted
has already happened. But even I would have said it wasn't going to happen in 2018. I would have
guessed 2022. So that already happened. And it was very controversial for a number of reasons.
One, because he was incredibly sloppy. He didn't get approval from the hospital in which he was
operating. The consent of the parents was totally uninformed and misinformed. But on top of that,
the target mutation was a gene called CCR5. It wasn't. So in these kids, their father had HIV
and their mother didn't. And so forgetting genetics, in a case in China or here, if a father has HIV
and the mother doesn't, there are plenty of ways for them to have a child who's not going to have
HIV. But what Hu Zhongkui did was try to edit the CCR5 gene in a way that is similar to a number,
what a number of Northern Europeans have, where they have two disrupted copies,
which gives them increased resistance to HIV. Maybe more susceptibility to West Nile virus,
but increased resistance to HIV. And that's what he was trying to do. He wasn't trying to fix
an existing problem. He was trying to create in many ways an enhancement. And then a few months
later, a report came out that mice who had this same CCR5 mutation were doing better in mazes than
mice without it. So then there were all of these stories coming back to storytelling like, wow,
maybe these kids are engineered to be smarter. And then there were scientists a few months later
who did an analysis based on the UK Biobank, which is probably the world's most useful genetic
database. And they found a correlation between this disrupted CCR5 and lifespan. People were living
shorter lives. So it was premature, and certainly I've publicly called Hu Zhongkui a villain,
which I think he is. But this is a harbinger of where we're going. The age of human genetic
engineering has begun. We have two gene-edited babies that we know of. The third Chinese baby
has probably already been born. There's a Russian scientist, Dennis Rebrokov, who's announced that
he has five parents lined up. And it's going to go one, two, five. And within a decade,
we will have thousands of genetically engineered babies. So I was going to ask you, remember,
I was going to ask you for a positive story, a negative story, and a story about stagnation.
In some sense, maybe you've just given me a negative story, which is that somebody starts
editing children in a way that they're looking for one trait that's positive, but they don't
understand that something is mediating a trade-off. And evolution is a trade-off. And that's why it's
so complicated. Right. I mean, there is the issue that you could be to borrow from finance
at an interior point, so not on an efficient frontier. And you might be able to
take two things that are involved in a trade-off and optimize both of them because you weren't
already at the point where the trade-off starts to bind. It's true. But in finance,
everyone in finance, and I live in New York, is saying, well, we understand some of the variables.
We don't understand all of the variables. And the same is true in genetics, that in the old days,
people used to say, there's a gene for that, the tall gene, the short gene, the smart gene.
And now there's a polygenic hypothesis, meaning lots of genes. And there's even an
omnigenic hypothesis, which is even more complicated. And so to understand those trade-offs,
we would need a much greater knowledge of genetics than we now have, which is why,
for me, when I write about genetic engineering, which I think is a much bigger category than
gene editing, and the mechanism of genetic engineering, I think it's primarily going to be
first embryo selection, IVF and embryo selection, which is why I think we're moving toward the end
of procreative sex. And then it's going to be using stem cells to create a virtually
unlimited number of eggs. It's called in vitro gametogenesis. And so if we do that and you're
selecting from 15 pre-implanted embryos in traditional IVF and PGD, you don't have that
many options, because it's just you're starting with 15. But when you're starting with 10,000
or a million, then you have real options. And that's why I think everyone's focusing
on gene editing and CRISPR. But as I see it, for human genetic engineering, the real story
is embryo selection. Do you want to say what CRISPR is for those who don't know?
So CRISPR is a gene editing tool. I mean, the shorthand that everybody uses,
it's like a word processing. So you think of the genome as a string of letters, which is
how we understand it. You put your cursor. So putting your cursor, you have a guide RNA that
goes to a certain point in the genome, and you use a cutting enzyme. And there's many different
cutting enzymes. The most popular is called Cas9, but there are many others. And traditionally,
you make a double-stranded cut. And so it's not just very much like word processing. You cut
something, and then you can just leave it deleted, or you can add something. Now where this is
this incredible age where pretty much every day there's another story, not just about a new
application of CRISPR, but new types of gene editing tools. So we're moving very, very rapidly
toward a world where we are going to be able to edit all genomes, including our own, increasingly
at will. And so that's a world where we are able not just to read genetics, that's sequencing,
but to write and hack genetics. And that introduces this concept of biological, of induced biological
variability, which is very... Like we're going to be able to screw with nature. And that
people recognize that their information technology is variable. That's why you think your new phone
is going to be better than your old phone. But we somehow feel like we're kind of... That this
biology is our biology. I'm a Homo sapien. My parents are Homo sapiens. My kids are Homo sapiens.
And so this idea that we can rewrite life, it's counterintuitive, even though intellectually
people get that somehow we got from single cell organism state to this over almost four billion
years. And so that's this big change. And that's the kind of the core message.
We've been over... I guess this is a little bit confusing to me. I often shock people by telling
them to Google glow-in-the-dark rabbits. And these transgenic rabbits that have this GFP,
green fluorescent protein, expressed in them. I guess originally came from jellyfish.
You know, that I think it's the Turks who manufactured a whole bunch of bunnies that
you can read by. Now, we could of course create transgenic humans that lit up at night,
almost certainly. And is this something that we should be kind of more playful with,
more excited by? It's hard. So...
How do you think of it? Yeah. So the basic thing is we've been able to do
gene editing for a while. But the new tools are faster, cheaper, and more precise by a long shot.
And so we have this ability to make big, big changes. And we were making in the old days,
we've made genetic changes to crops, not just by selective breeding, but we just would bombard
crops with radiation and then just see what happened. There'd be kind of a gazillion different
options. And then you'd say, oh, these grapes don't have seeds, let's make more of them. And now
we're able in a much more precise and targeted way to do that. So then your question of playfulness.
And in some ways, I mean, science, people think about science as something that's rigid and dry.
But there's a lot of creativity. I mentioned George Church. People like George Church,
these are dreamers. And they're dreamers who are saying, well, now we're dreaming. How do we turn
these dreams into reality? But when we talk about the future of human life, we need to be
really careful. As I said to you before, my father came to the United States, father and grandparents
came to the United States as refugees from Nazism. If you had asked the Nazis what they
were doing, they would have said they were implementing Darwinism. That's the essence
of Nazism. And we have all of these Nuremberg trials about human experimentation.
And so if we are, and I personally think that we will engineer our future children,
and that we must, I mean, we want to survive, our planet is going away. We can't stay on this
planet forever. But we have to do it carefully and thoughtfully and methodically and responsibly.
And so we can't just be playing around with life.
But I want to be both the devil's advocate and the angel's advocate. I'm not actually convinced
that this sobriety makes sense or is possible. I mean, your point is that this is getting cheaper
and more powerful. And what that usually means to me is that it's moving towards a garage that
sooner or later. Already, there's this DIY bio movement, bio hackers, and it's already happening.
So my point is, is that once things become cheap and powerful, they can be done quietly,
even if they're criminalized, even if we have panels on ethics. I think in some weird way,
we haven't been honest. And the only thing that's been allowing us to be so dishonest about biology
has been, in some sense, the cost, the lack of power and our clumsiness. So to get back to this
most dangerous question, so you and I both come from Jewish backgrounds, and we were on the losing
end of a eugenics experiment, writ large, gone mad. Yet the problem that I see is that we are
uncomfortable with the fact that eugenics doesn't really almost mean anything. In other words,
mate selection is a form of genetic selection. And if you decide that dinner in a movie is eugenics,
then you've drawn a line at a super early stage.
Why, you got sex for dinner in a movie? That's a good deal.
Moving right along. On the other hand, if we just decide, hey, it's a free-for-all,
and you should be able to do anything. But the word eugenics, for example, has worked
in some sense because it's not really properly defined. It's not clear where good selection
begins and ends and bad selection. I would say, and tell me if I'm wrong, that we've been lying,
that there is no way, in fact, of drawing a line much the way we have in the pro-life, pro-choice
where both of these camps make no sense. I would say that the pro-editing, pro-hacking position
and the anti-hacking position make no sense at all, and that we're really left with a permanent
struggle on my way off. I agree completely that if we say we can never do it, that's the wrong
answer. We're going to have to do it, and we're going to want to do it. Who wants to have a kid
that's going to die of a terrible genetic disease when we have the technology to change that? Who's
going to want to have their parents get dementia if we can prevent that? I just think it will be
nuts for us to say we have these powerful tools that can do unimaginable good, and we're not going
to do it because these tools also have a dangerous side effect. We wouldn't be in cars,
we wouldn't be using plows, we wouldn't use any technology if that was the case.
In some sense, this is the position of, let's say, the Amish at some level. There's a slippery
slope, and you're suggesting that we move midway onto it. You've called the Chinese guy who's doing
this a villain. We've both talked about the dangers of Nazi Germany, and yet we're both
kind of excited about the idea of freeing people from risk of breast cancer or maybe even enhancing
cognitive capacity. Maybe I don't even have a point or a position. I'm just agreeing with you.
People use this slippery slope like it's a bad thing. First, we started with curing this disease,
and then we cured that disease. Some slippery slopes are great slippery slopes. You talked
about your dinner in the movie. That was a slippery slope toward love and marriage and great for us.
Certainly, the people who say never do it are wrong, and the people who say just no restraints,
no holes barred, let's just let 100 flowers bloom, that also is wrong. What we need to do is to find
someplace in the middle, which brings me to your point about eugenics. Again, with my background,
it's very sensitive to talk about this, but right now the term eugenics is used as a cudgel.
Somebody's doing, say, oh, that's eugenics. It feels like, oh, I'm not in for eugenics.
In some ways, that's appropriate because there's so many horrible things we're done in the name
of eugenics that maybe they've just ruined that word. Let's just imagine some other word
to describe this selection. Again, even using the word selection, and again, I write about this in
the book, you say selection, you think, oh, Mengele. Mengele is selection of who's going to live and
who's going to die. I talked about these 10 embryos in a dish, in a lab, and you're going to have to
pick one. What are the criteria that you're going to use to determine which of those embryos get
implanted? If we say, well, I want one that have a child that's not going to die of a terrible
genetic disease, that's a normative choice that it's not just in some abstract objective world
that's set within the context of us because you can just move one little step closer. I talked
about Down syndrome. I do a lot of speaking and the parents of Down babies and others are saying,
like, wait a second, are you making a normative statement saying that a child with Down syndrome
has less of a right to exist than someone who doesn't? I always say, no, that's not what I'm
saying, but I am saying that if it's a choice, and we already know the answer to this because of the
abortion, if it's a choice, people aren't going to select to implant, in most cases, babies that
have Down syndrome. This goes back to a very dangerous conversation that I had with Jim Watson.
Now, you and I have both encountered Jim Watson, and I find that he somehow went down a bad path
where he got so tired of being told what he could say and what he couldn't say that he decided that
he would start saying the most offensive things possible. I'm on record as saying that the legacy
of Jim Watson is way too important to be left to Jim Watson. Now, with that said, what I learned
in part was that when Jim and his friends between 53 when the double helix structure was elucidated,
and I guess 63 when the genetic code was figured out by somebody else, Marshall Nirenberg,
that group was shocked that we pretended to care about our identity in the form of these letters,
this computer code in ourselves, if you will, but we never really accepted what they found.
And as a result, whenever they started to talk to us about identity or different characteristics,
they found that we were so attached to our pre-genetic understanding of ourselves that
we actually won't give it up, and we will fight anyone tooth and nail who tries to tell us,
you know, this is really a consequence of information technology is developed by
natural and sexual selection. Are we stuck in a culture where we can't actually update to realize
what we figured out, you know, 70 years ago? It's so hard for people because in some ways,
our ability to look under the hood of what it means to be a human being is challenging some of our
most ancient mythologies, our understanding of who and what we are. And so we love to have this
idea of, you know, I can be anything that I want if I put my heart to it. And it's this mystery of
life is unfolding. And even things like parenting is really important, that some people are now
challenging. And it's really, really difficult. I mean, it's just to give a very narrow example.
You know, I talk about this a lot to say like, I'm a runner, and I run marathons. And there is
nothing that I could do to be pretty much nothing to be a world champion, like the top world champion
marathon. Or because when you look at the fastest marathon times in history, a like freakishly
disproportionate number are people from the same valley in Kenya and Ethiopia. And then one tribe,
the Kalengins in Kenya, about 4 million people. And then one sub tribe, the non de sub tribe,
1 million people. It's genetics. And yes, it's great for people to try really hard. And we all
have a genetic range of possibility. And we should aspire to be at the top end, whatever
that means in a given context of our potential. But if I don't have the genetics to be the
world's fastest marathoner or sprinter or abstract mathematician, I'm not going to get there. And
that's really hard because we tell ourselves different different stories.
Well, so let's focus on this as a practice as a warm up and watch where it goes. So my belief
is that between 1897, where we started keeping records of the Boston Marathon and 1987,
there were no winners of the Boston Marathon, I think not one from either Kenya or Ethiopia.
After 1987, it is not exactly total domination. I think there's a Japanese, there's a Korean,
maybe there's an Italian, I've forgotten, but it is almost 100% with a few exceptions that may
happen in years where the weather is a little bit different, that it's won by this very small
group of people in Kenya and Ethiopia. How do we go from a point where this was a very
diverse, and it was up for grabs, it was really athleticism in some sense,
to a point where it just is genetics and we found the special people who are wildly well
adapted. Because the world wasn't connected enough. And so people in Kenya and Ethiopia
weren't competing and there wasn't prize money and all these infrastructure things that have
brought us together didn't exist. Would you say that that would have a negative effect
on the sport that now we don't even feel motivated to enter or we just want to watch?
People ask that question a lot, just in the sense, well, what happens if we have genetically
optimized people fulfilling certain roles in sports? Are we going to care because there's
this kind of unknown mystery? But that's what's already happening. It's just that we didn't
know. I mean, if we just were to go back and sequence people who've been our greatest athletes,
especially in the sports where you can really isolate specific functions.
Like swimming.
Well, swimming, you have to have access to a pool, you have to have great coaching,
but I think like running the 100 meters, it's just kind of this standard human thing,
all kids run. And we're going to find out that people are genetically optimized for certain
functions and we can't lie to ourselves about that. And yes, there's this fear nobody wants to live
in kind of this Plato's Republic society, but you also don't want to live in a society where the
people who are doing mission critical functions aren't the people best suited to do those things.
I mean, there's like the joke about the German chef and the Italian policemen,
if you kind of have the wrong person for the wrong job, that could also hurt a society.
Well, I have to admit that I don't have the same clarity that you do. So for example,
if I go to the next example, so I believe that it has to do in part with the ability to
radiate heat in terms of marathon running, that that's really the limiting factor.
What happens when you look at something freakish like
the number of female chess players in the top 100 chess players in the world and you find that it's
one in 100 is female and you've got a single protein, S R Y, that determines whether or not
some sort of template, the proto human being goes male or goes female. Are you prepared to say
that we should just accept if we find out that there's a genetic component for spatial reasoning,
for example, or that there are, I believe, three grandmasters of African origin. I'm not comfortable
with that conclusion. It may be that that conclusion somehow comes out of the genetics
the way your Boston Marathon example comes out of the genetics. But I don't know what kind of a
society I would be living in if I were comfortable saying, wow, there are really huge disparities.
I'll give you the most dangerous one for you and me. Ashkenazi Jews represent
one quarter of one percent of the world's population, about 25 percent of the physics
Nobel Prize. I was shocked when I spit into a tube for 23 and me that it knew my religion. Now,
I hadn't thought about the idea that Judaism is, among many other things, a breeding protocol.
Yeah. Of having the smartest people like the rabbis for hundreds of years have
as many kids as possible versus the Catholic priests.
Well, that's one story. That's one story. Another story would be that
previously unimportant skills like mathematical ability for money lending might have been
fetishized by a group that was allowed to do that and live else. And lo and behold,
that turned out to be very important in a world dominated by a computer program. I'm not sure
which story we're telling. I'm not sure what's true, but I'm trying to get at a different point.
If I accept the idea that this particular valley sub-tribe in Kenya and Ethiopia actually has
a genetic advantage at marathon running, I'm not terribly disturbed. And as soon as I kick
that over into things like chess and physics, it doesn't feel very good to even be thinking about
these. Yeah. This is really uncomfortable stuff. Yeah. And it exists in the realm of our most
taboo, difficult topics. So let me take your three examples, the women chess players,
the Africans, and the Jews. So for women chess players, it is just a fact that when you just
look at the top grandmasters in the world, it is almost entirely men. That is not because
there aren't enough women who are playing chess. That is because of the brain structure that allows
a person to be great at chess. The male brain on average, and certainly at the level of these
grandmasters, is better suited for that. There could be another game that could be just like
chess with a different rule set where the structure of women's brains could be better
suited. And I would not be at all surprised if in whatever game that was that all of the
grandmasters were women. And I just, so many people have looked at this. But what if such
a game doesn't helpfully materialize? In other words, what you said, which again, I'm not blaming
you, and I'm struggling with this issue. I don't know whether I want these things investigated,
not investigated. I don't know whether I want to tell a sort of a soft story around something
that I suspect is true. I mean, you can't actually back out exactly that this is brain
structure because it could easily be that in order to be at the very top of the chess pile,
you have to be completely obsessive about chess. And it may be that it's an obsessional trait,
rather than an ability trait that discriminates against females. Or it could be, for example,
that Africans dominate speed chess, which would be a different variant of another game.
In all of these circumstances, my claim is there is no good place to stand. And this is the thing
that I don't know how to communicate to the world, which is we now have so much information,
and we have so many social needs that the information we have and the social needs that
we have are at least at risk temporarily of clashing in a profound and destructive way
before we figure this out. Would you agree? 100% agree. And so we talked before we went
live about this kind of podcast knife fight between Sam Harris and his recline. And it was
painful for me. I enjoy both of their podcasts, but it was painful to me to watch for people who
don't know. Yeah, so Sam Harris and as recline are both very successful podcasters among other
things. And so there was Sam Harris, did a podcast in an interview with Charles Murray,
who wrote a book called The Bell Curve in a long, long time ago. And The Bell Curve was a very
challenging book, and it talked about differences between groups. And one of the ways it categorized
group was between blacks and whites. And I, as someone who's read that book, and I write about
it in my book, there are some aspects of that book where they were just trying to present data and
they were attacked for it. There were other aspects of the book I felt where it was wildly
inappropriate and borderline racist. And so I think that part of the attack, and I'm all for
free speech, and certainly when Charles Murray was physically harmed at Middlebury, I mean,
that was an outrage. But there's a need for an important debate. And so Sam Harris had Murray
on his podcast, and it was an excellent podcast interview. And then he came out and he wrote
some things. And basically his view was, let us just be honest about the data. And then Ezra Klein
had the point, which I don't know if it's your view or you were just articulating it,
that we have social norms and we have the goals of the kind of society that we want to live in.
And if we're getting scientific data that is threatening those norms, we should think
of that scientific data as itself threatening. And so that was what was so frustrating.
Well, effectively, the concept of hate data. You know, in my view, there is data.
Well, no, I'm just... Yeah, yeah. But I think that's how that's...
Nobody uses the phrase hate data. But that's how I think Ezra Klein,
that was the essence of his argument. And so the thing that I didn't like about that interview
is I felt like they each pushed each other to become caricatures of their own position.
So everybody just kept repeating their thing. Sam Harris kept saying, well, just follow the data.
And Ezra Klein said, well, this data could lead us into an ugly place and we need to remember
that the science exists within the social context. And both of them were right in some ways.
And that brings me to your second group that you talked about. So on chess,
and it's not like chess means chess is not intelligence, chess is chess. But certainly
all evidence that exists has shown that men and at this highest level, men out with this
super chess playing men, on average, outperform the super chess playing women. And it could be
motivation. There could be other factors that are woven in. But my gut instinct is there's
something about men and women are just physiologically different. And that just exists.
And there's there are certainly people who are on them. I also agree that men and women
are physiologically different. But let me tell you the cautionary tale that has occupied me.
I was a mathematics graduate student at Harvard. And I believe that the department kind of informally
always wanted more women. But there was no track record or not much of a track record of success.
And so I think they would let in one a year. And then one year, a woman deferred,
and then there ended up being two women in the same year. And rather than dropping out,
the two women formed a support group. And then there was a whole cohort that went through and had
relatively successful careers in mathematics. So you could have told the tale that said,
actually, there's an inability to do math, because we're talking about tails and at the
highest level and Larry Summers got in trouble for making that exact argument.
Well, that was the odd part about that that was in a seminar that I actually founded with Richard
Freeman at the National Bureau for Economic Research. And we can go to the details of that.
I'm concerned that we are glibly look, I don't think there's any way of staying away from the
data. And I don't think that that's what happened between Ezra and Sam. I think that what happened
is Sam was having an issue where he was being lambasted for all sorts of responsible things
that he was saying. And then he said to himself, huh, I remember lambasting Charles Murray,
I wonder if I committed the crime that I am accusing others of, I should go back. So he
was doing some kind of internal penance. Ezra came from a completely different perspective,
which is, hey, you're not part of the whole policy wonky club that I'm part of. And let
me tell you, Charles Murray is a very well-known player in this game. And he comes with prejudices
and he may in fact present real data and real stuff, but he has a well-known agenda and he is
presenting the things that fit his agenda. And so that was sort of the weird subtext that they
were in. But I think what it really does is it brings up this question that there are no
dispassionate arbiters. And this is the thing that I don't like to talk about where the sort
of social justice perspective has a point, which is we pretend very often that we are
objective and that we can make these conclusions. And yet relatively minor alterations can reveal
that maybe intelligence is much more multivariate. For example, people talk about IQ where one of
the components of IQ is processing. And lots of people who I think of as being very smart
have terrible processing scores if they have what are called learning differences.
And so my concern has to do with the sort of humility and modesty with which we approach what
may seem at first blush to be extremely disturbing interpretations of the data. So what I would
put to you is it seems to me that we both have to proceed in a scientific fashion and that we
can't afford to always be thinking of the social consequences. And we also have to be thinking
of the social consequences and we can't afford to proceed blithely with the science. And so this
is the sort of, you know, when I asked you before about the three tails, the utopian, the dystopian
and the impasse tail. This is where I see that we're blocked. And in terms of the theme of the show,
is there a portal whereby we can start using our extra power to find a really graceful exit
from what seems to me to be a very powerful conundrum? And we have that portal and we're losing it.
Because it's called conversation. It's called connection. Because there is no doubt, and I
said it before, we can't imagine that our science just exists in some separate realm of pure
objectivity. Our science, like we ourselves, live in a world of context. And so it's because
you're in a context, you see the world through your prism. That's how consciousness works.
But at the same time, we can't just become postmodernists. We can't just be like, oh, this is
your truth. This is my truth. This is your data. This is my data. And we need to have high standards
for data. But we can't just, I mean, we can't just guide our interpretation of data based on our
politics. So I would rather try to be recognizing that that knowledge and scientific knowledge
exists within a context and being aware of that. But I would try to be as honest as we can about
the data. And that was something where I felt where Ezra and Sam kind of got confused. Because
when you're making a classification like Charles Murray did, like white people versus black people,
what is a white person? What is a black person? There's more diversity in Africa than there is
in the whole rest of the world. So just that somebody just by appearance is black,
it kind of doesn't tell you anything. Well, but let me come, I mean, this is why this is so fun
and so horrible. Let's, I want to, I want to devise an experimental setup that I think would be
highly educational and would elucidate a lot. I'm not sure if it's ethical. So let me propose it.
Mm-hmm. More or less, if I understand correctly, whether we are phenotypically male or phenotypically
female comes down to this SRY complex on the white, usually found on the white chromosome,
unless it migrates somehow to the X. Yeah. And some fish can change gender. Well,
but it may have arisen multiple times to get into that. But just let's stay with humans.
Assume that I propose the following experiment. I decide that I want identical twins,
but for an SRY protein. And so I'm going to mangle the SRY protein in one,
and I'm going to preserve it in the other. And I'm going to, or maybe I'll swap out the Y
chromosome for an X chromosome. What have you. Now I've got an identical boy and girl,
which is not usually something not anymore, because you made that identical up to as
identical as is humanly possible. Nobody has ever come up with anyone this, this identical.
Now I can start to run controlled trials, but I'm also sort of in mangle a territory. Yeah.
How is this in some sense different? Is there any way of maintaining this?
You wouldn't do that on a human like that. That's so, let's just say, I mean, that is an
experiment. Let's say I do it on mice. I look at maze running.
Yeah. No, no. So we don't have that ability yet, but because, which is my thesis, that
biology is increasingly readable and writable and hackable, I have no doubt
that at some point in the not distant future, we will be able to try something like that
on mice. So basically you have two identical twin embryos, and then you use a gene editing tool,
and you're able to change gender, which again is not something that's possible now,
but it's the kind of thing it should be possible just as a thought experiment.
And so you could do that with mice. And I think that you could do comparisons,
and we could actually learn a lot. And that's why, I mean, we talked about Sydney Brenner,
who recently died. That was his great insight, is that we're all, we're genetically related to
all of these model organisms. And so we are going to be able to increasingly understand that stuff.
And if we have a story that's our mythology as people that we've developed to our benefit,
in many cases, over thousands of years, and that increasingly runs counter to what we are
learning from our science, that's going to create a lot of vulnerability because either
you have to change the mythology, or people are going to say, hey, like this is what the
science is saying, and maybe it's going to be the racists who are saying that. And so that's why
I think we have to accept this idea of genetic difference. It's not in the category of race.
Race is just a preposterous, ridiculous, stupid, yes. But if you're part of some highly isolated
tribe on an island that you've been left alone for 50,000 years, you are going to be genetically
different from some other tribe that's been on another island for 50,000 years. And so we can't
deny that. And so we can't say, well, we're just going to close our eyes to the science
to protect our politics. I think what we have to do is start from a sense of values. And what are
our core values? Right. But look, one of our core values is hypocrisy. And let me make an argument.
You're familiar with the Ginger Rogers principle in male-female relations? No.
Ginger Rogers principle says that Ginger Rogers could do everything that Fred Astaire could do,
except backwards and in high heels, right? So that's a belief that in some sense,
women are as good or better than men. Which I believe. You do? Yeah. So I'm not saying there's...
No, no, no. But let me continue. Yeah. Then there's another principle that says that men and women
are equal. There's no way to get mathematical distributions to work out so that their means
are equivalent, but one in some sense majorizes the other in every known trait.
But why? Like, I disagree with that. I mean, mathematically, I could write you a...
Well, what I'm saying is that it depends on what we mean by equal. So let's just assume that we
accept. I mean, there are men... No, no. I mean, we have a concept of equal in biology, which would be
the equivalence of Fisher, which Fisher would say that you beautifully pointed out that geographically
separated populations can have extraordinarily different traits. And there's nothing in biology
that keeps those things together, including intelligence. However, the males and the females
in each of those populations at a mathematical level represent an expected value strategy that
is equivalent by Fisher's reasoning. Now, that means that in a weird way, male-female relations
are much better off than relations between separated groups. There is something tying
males and females in a breeding population to each other, and that is common expected value.
The distributions don't have to be the same. I agree with that, but it's your use of the word
equality. So yes. Expected return. Yes. So yes, if you have a penis and the other person has a
vagina, that's like that's chocolate and peanut butter, and you're able to have a kid. And if
your goal is to have a kid, that's a pretty fair trait. Well, I think that doesn't... I mean,
the reason that I'm throwing it back is you're talking about the most interesting
stuff in the world. Arguably, what's happened, and this is an argument that I first heard actually
from my wife, where she said, you're not getting it, Eric. Fisherian equivalence works at the level
of fitness. But what really happened was that cognitive work got wildly fulfilling recently.
And we've been a long time since we've had, let's say, a war that required universal conscription
in the US. Ergo, it's gotten much, much better to be male very recently. And it has stayed about
the same in many ways to be female, that if what you're doing is raising children for which women
may be very much better adapted because maternity is certain and paternity is not, as you know,
then you have a very strange situation in which many people may say, thank you very much, but
I'm not interested in Fisherian equivalence. What I really want to know is who gets the
corner offices, and then we have to have a different discussion. So the concern that I have
is that I actually don't believe us. I think that we're actually up against an incredibly
interesting conundrum where the science that must, that must continue and our social constructs,
which we also feel must continue, have really reached a fork in the road and that very few
of us are able to actually say, you know what, this is where something interesting happens because
it's going to break and it's going to break hard. But I don't think it has to break because,
like I said, there's who knows what equivalence means, who knows what equality means. These are
things that happen in a context that's always changing and all of the pieces are in many ways
in conversation with each other. So just using what you said, so cognitive work, a certain type
of cognitive work. And let's just make it easy. Let's just assume that for the second half of
the 21st century, let's just say that everybody, that the only way to make a lot of money was to
play chess, just to connect. And so like that's the thing. And so the closer you got to being a
Grandmaster, the more wealth that you have. And so then in that model, you would say, well,
men have an advantage if what I said earlier is true, which I believe it to be.
So then you would say, all right, so the value of men at this Grandmaster level is actually
going up because the world is now entirely organized around chess. And if my thesis is
correct, men are more optimized. But in fact, the world isn't organized around chess. There are
infinite number, massive number of different stories that are happening in our complex societies.
And let's just say that we are moving and we haven't talked about AI and this fundamental
transformation in the nature of work. And let's just say we talked about this game of chess where
there's like traditional chess and there's this other chess where women are better at it than men.
And just as a hypothetical, just using a stereotype, which I again think would probably
be true. Like if there was a chess that would form a chess that was more intuition based,
and it was more interactive that you had to understand the other person's emotional state,
maybe poker, I could easily say, well, I could imagine where 99% of the Grandmasters in that
thing would be women. And in this world of AI, where AI is, again, to use the example of chess,
AI is going to play chess better than our Grandmasters, it could be that those very human traits
that whoever has them is going to be rewarded. And so I just think that the model that you
described, it requires a lot of factors being fixed. I understand that. I think what's fascinating,
of course, we do have occupations which are wildly female tilted. So for example, fashion models,
I believe at the top earn about the wage gap, I think is 90 cents in the top 10 male models versus
the top 10 female models. This is an outrage. Well, but the key point is, is that many of us
don't value that trait as men in ourselves. It's like,
yeah, but that exists within the context of society with all of our dysfunction and
superficiality and all that. I think what I've been driving is that
I quite agree with you that we're getting to this hacking point. In fact, one of the
theses behind the podcast is that in the early 50s, we unlocked two nuclei with fusion
and with the cell. And that what's been remarkable is how little these
events have affected our lives as opposed to how much they've affected our lives. We are still,
we resemble our ancestors from thousands of years ago to a remarkable extent. Now,
if I could get a pair of dragon wings and spitfire and stuff, I'm not positive after watching Game
of Thrones, I wouldn't go in for some modifications. Maybe I would, maybe I wouldn't, don't know.
But I don't see anybody who's doing that yet. Now, what you're talking about is we are on the verge
of certain very dramatic changes. And if I could just ask you to kind of, rather than just going
through the morality of it, what do you think the highest likelihood would be for the big changes
over the next 10 to 20 years? Yeah. So in the near term, certainly, we're going to see a transition
of our health care from our current model of generalized health care based on population
averages to personalized or precision health care. And the way you're going to have treatments based
on you as your doctors are going to need to know who you are. And that will require access to your
electronic health and life records, your biometric information, but most importantly, will be your
genetic information. And with the cost of genome sequencing trending towards zero,
everybody is going to be sequenced just as part of being in the health care system.
And so then, again, within this 10 to 20 year model, we are going to move toward this world of
precision medicine. And because of that, we're going to have billions of people whose genotypic
genetic information and phenotypic information, how those genes are expressed over their course
of their lives, are going to be in these same massive big data pools. And we're going to use that
to increasingly demystify biology. And that's going to very quickly move us to this world
of predictive medicine, health care, and life. And that's a really big and fundamental change.
And we talk about our mythologies and our stories. You see a little baby and you say,
oh, the world is open to you. But maybe part of the world is open to you. And maybe there are
things that you could imagine that aren't open to you, because you're not optimized for those
things. I mean, people talk about Gattaca, this movie. So Ethan Hawke is this guy who
was born in the old fashioned way and he wants to get in the space program. And then at the end,
he has to pull all these tricks and he gets into the space program. And in the story, the thing
is, isn't it so great that that guy was so determined? But I think that guy should be arrested
because you don't want non-genetically enhanced people in your space program who aren't going
to be able to survive the radiation in space. And I think we may need to move in this direction.
So there's just that our stories that we are telling ourselves are going to be challenged.
And this idea that we're going to have predictive life and that we're going to know are not just
our disease risks, but maybe there are going to be people who are in refugee camps now who
are going to say, this person has a potential to be a Mozart. Let's make sure that we get resources
to that person. So that's one really big and fundamental change. Our lives are going to be,
it'll never be 100% predictability, but it will be probabilistic and it'll be numerical. And we're
going to have to learn to live with that uncertainty. That's going to be the nature of life. Second,
we're going to see the genetics revolution moving outside of the realm of healthcare. We don't have
a disease genome or a healthcare genome. We have a human genome and we're going to have just a lot
of people giving us information about ourselves. Some of it will be reliable, some of it will
not be, but it'll just be way beyond the realm of healthcare. And then we're going to see this shift
in how we make babies, a shift toward increasing numbers of percentage of babies born in IVF.
U.S. it's about 2%, Japan's 5%, Norway and Denmark are now 10% IVF. And then we're going to see that
trend. And that once we take conception outside of the human body, then we're going to be able to
apply science in all kinds of incredible ways, but in ways that are going to scare a lot of people.
Is there anything that you in particular are terrified of?
Yeah. Oh my God. So I'm afraid that we're going to make decisions about the future of our species
based on what feel like eternal truths, but in fact are transient fashions.
Say more. So right now, you ask most people, people would say, well, I want a child with
low disease risk, optimized to live a long time, maybe high IQ, maybe tall. These are all perfectly
fine things that people who have those traits now actually are thriving. But diversity isn't
just some kind of nice to have thing in our species. It's the sole survival strategy of our
species or of any species. And so this thing, as I mentioned before, this diversity that's just
happened to us for 4 billion years, we're going to have to choose it. We're going to have to
identify what we mean by diversity and celebrate it. And I think that's really,
I mean, there are existential level risks, not just if we make our species less diverse,
but now individual actors. I mean, that was what I talked in the beginning about Dick Clark
and terrorism. And the whole point of terrorism was that individuals now had the capacity to
wreak a level of havoc that previously could only be wreaked by states. Now we're in the age of DIY
bio and biohacking. I was speaking in New York at the World Science Festival about a month ago
alongside Jennifer Doudna. And Jennifer is the co-inventor of the CRISPR-Cas9 system. And what I
said, a little bit tongue-in-cheek, is that if you invent the CRISPR-Cas9 system like Jennifer,
actually she's on my left, like Jennifer did, you will almost certainly win the Nobel Prize.
But if you apply CRISPR to edit a genome, you just get an A in your high school biology class.
And afterwards this woman came down and said, hey, didn't want to interrupt you in your talk,
but I am a high school biology teacher. If you apply CRISPR in my class, you just get a B.
And so this technology, it's not like nuclear weapons where only the state could do it. This
stuff is out. But to that point, there's this story and I should chase it down. So I have it
exactly about somebody scavenging radioactive material from 500 smoke alarms or something like
to build a functioning reactor. It's not clear that it's not clear that nuclear is going to stay
the province of states. I totally agree. I think all of technology is moving along this curve.
But biology, it's just happened so quickly. And I totally agree with that. And so it was a year
and a half ago, a group of Canadian researchers, mostly grad students, they used synthetic
biology tools to create an active form of horsepox, which is a relative of smallpox,
which killed a gazillion people. So that's $100,000. And my guess is you could do that now
for $50,000 and in five years, $5,000 because we're just like this whole thing of biobricks
we are going to have the tools to remake life. And it creates incredible potential with synthetic
biology to do manufacturing differently, to do life differently. And just as we have these tools
to do good, because like I said before, these tools are themselves agnostic, there are capabilities
to do better. Well, let's talk about the way in which this interacts with national culture.
Which are the national cultures that are the most gung-ho to actually try to exploit these
things in the here and now. And how do you feel about those national state-sponsored experiments?
And do we have to worry about geopolitical tensions and biology being the next battlefield,
where we won't even know if war has been declared? Yeah, leading the witness, your honor. So, yes.
And I write about in the book what I called... Well, I should say I'm not really leading the
witness because I was given the book 10 minutes before we started the podcast.
And you were incredible. You absorbed the whole thing so quickly. So, China is the big... And I
would say it's like the big concern. But let me start with the positive story about China. Because
there's a lot to complain about China. I study China and do a lot of work in and around China.
And I have a lot of very deep concerns. I feel like China is in many ways breaking the world
through many of its actions. And certainly, there are privacy advocates in places like
where we are now in California who feel that privacy is just an unadorned good. But China
has very low levels of privacy on an individual level. And so, what they are doing are they're
building just these massive data sets. And these data sets can and are being used to oppress people.
But they also can be used to do a lot of things that we think are good. Like to have a training
set for autonomous insert, whatever it is, insert noun, autonomous vehicles or whatever,
when those big data sets, or for precision personalized medicine. That with it having
these big data sets is going to allow whomever, the Chinese or others, to develop actionable
insights about how cancers form, about predisposition to certain diseases, or responses to certain
treatments. And that's very powerful. And that is something that's going to help China and could
potentially help us. At the same time, China has a lot of things. It has a lot of money. It has
incredibly talented people. It has this gung-ho scientific culture. And it has very few limits.
And it has this national culture that we got screwed by the colonialists, even though China
wasn't officially colonized. And we got screwed by the unequal treaties. And the 21st century
by 2050 is going to be the Chinese century. And we're going to do what it takes to get there.
And that's translating into a lot of very, very aggressive applications of revolutionary science.
And genetics is at the forefront of that. And that's why for all of these kinds of
right at the edge or beyond the edge experiments, they are mostly happening in China. The basic
science in the United States is far superior to the basic science in China. But there are more
self-imposed and rational, in my cases, in some cases, restrictions here in the United States
than they tend to have in China. And that's why Hu Zhongkui, who was this Chinese biophysicist who
genetically engineered these babies last year, that's why it happened in China. That's why it
could happen in China. And that's why he didn't even think that he thought he was going to be
this conquering hero and bring glory to China. And what we're talking about here is the future
of life. And it's a big deal. And we should care what happens to life in China because we are all
part of one species. And so, like you said earlier, there's a race because this technology is moving
so quickly. A little bit. If China won't be restrained, then is it really prudent to hold back
in a way in which China lurches ahead because they don't have the same ethical concerns that we do?
Yeah. So the question... I mean, there's... In other words, does it become ethical to compete
because lack of competition means ceding the game to an actor you think is less ethical?
Yeah. And so that's this whole arms race mentality. And I think that's what we are
entering. And so, I believe that American values, just writ large, that the values that America
has pushed into the world, particularly over the last 70 plus years, with warts and all,
I believe all in all is a net positive set of values that has laid the foundation for this
greatest period of peace, prosperity, and stability in world history.
I also believe that the principles that the Chinese government is pushing out into the
world are, in many cases, toxic and dangerous. That doesn't mean entirely, but in many cases,
and undermining these principles that the greatest generation of Americans, people like
Dean Atchison and George Marshall, pushed out into the world that helped everybody. And so,
I feel like it's really important for the United States to maintain its position in the world.
And the foundation of that is economic competitiveness. And the foundation of that
is that we need to be the world leaders in technology. Having said that, though, and you
could say you could talk about this across technologies and whether it's aggressive
application of genetic technologies, but we could have the exact same argument about autonomous
killer weapons. Because if you are a defense minister of a country and you're not, if you are
developing autonomous killer weapons, you're laying a foundation for maybe humans being wiped out.
But if you're not, you are empowering the other country that is making those investments.
But I think that we can't sacrifice, we need to be competitive. We can't sacrifice our very
humanity in order to do it. And we need to recognize that this is a societal race.
And so, it's not necessarily so. And I don't believe it's so. The first country to have
the first genetically engineered human wins the race. Or the country with the least privacy
wins the race. The country that figures out how to use the resources of the society as a whole
to realize its objectives, whatever those are, that's the country that's going to win the race.
And so, that requires certain kinds of trade-offs. But we should be, and that's certainly I'm
doing this work in Geneva and elsewhere and trying to work with members of Congress on this,
we should be saying we need to have international standards. And we've had international standards
for things like chemical and biological weapons, for even nuclear weapons, even for climate change
imperfectly. And we have to be working in that direction.
Well, are we up for a biological non-proliferation treaty?
Yeah, I wrote, it's funny, I mentioned the article that I wrote many years ago that Brad
Sherman read. And that was what I talked about. And I talked about using the model of the nuclear
non-proliferation treaty. But the thing that changed has changed since then.
I hadn't thought about it, but just the different nucleus.
Yeah, yeah, it's true. The thing that's changed since then is this technology has become so
distributed that in the NPT, the Nuclear Nonproliferation Treaty, you get technology
for restraint. That's kind of the trade-off for people in the world. And right now,
this technology is really accessible. But what I believe we need to do is to have,
every country needs to have reasonable national regulations, which are in those countries'
interests. I mean, the United Kingdom is probably, in my view, the best regulated country in the
world in these areas. It's also extremely advanced in its science, and those things
are connected. I mean, there's a level of confidence, there's a level of public support
and public resource for these kinds of investments that come at that intersection.
But yes, we could have and maybe even will have a genetic arms race because we have
differences within and between societies. People are willing to do all kinds of crazy
things like these dumb people who paid the soccer coach at Yale when it would just been
smarter just to build a building for the same money. So it's just like, I'm against this dumb
corruption. So people will do anything to advance their kid's interest. And if selecting embryos
with higher IQs is one of those things, I think a lot of people are going to do it.
But we are social animals, and it's not that there are no examples of norms
constraining our behaviors. We have lots of examples of that.
Well, we do, but I don't know. I mean, we could go for a Singaporean solution and decide that
we should punish certain kinds of biohacking the way you punish being found with weed
in the wrong country. Well, I'm not sure what does Singapore and Malaysia do now.
Yeah, no, and don't go if you have your weed, go to Oakland, don't go to Singapore.
Well, and then the question of course is what, you know, I know biohackers in Oakland and
they're pretty good too. But my concern is, I mean, let me just be honest about this.
I am not averse to the conclusion that we are now watching an unstoppable force and
an immovable object, and that we have no idea whether this is going to be a disaster
or the best thing that ever happened, whether we're going to be able to, whether China's
going to learn enough to scare the living crap out of themselves. And they're going to be coming
say, look, this is much more profound. We have better data than you do. So you have to listen
to us. That would be a great outcome. I don't hear something that is coherent because I hear
so much that is utopian and I'm excited about the utopian part of it and so much that's dystopian.
But it's unknown. I mean, there is lots that's potentially utopian. There's lots that's
potentially dystopian. There's a middle and it hasn't played out yet. But for me,
the way that we try to have some influence on whether we move the dial a little in the direction
of utopian or a little in the direction of dystopian is values, is how can we infuse a
conversation about values and norms into the development of these very powerful technology.
And there are examples of doing it. And there's the international concept of international law
and the concept of human rights. I mean, these aren't any kind of like inherent principles of
the world. They were created and they became norms, imperfect norms. But we will have,
this story is going to play out in utopian ways, in dystopian ways and everything in between.
It's going to happen. That is it. That is the story. And it's going to increase forever. I mean,
just we're on this J curve. But the technology is going to get more and more and more powerful
forever. And so the complexity of our biology has been roughly the same for millions of years.
The sophistication of our tools is shooting up. So we just look at that graph, at that intersection,
and we are going to be, we are increasingly understandable and hackable.
Well, I mean, this is really the message for me is that you can moralize all you want. But really,
what's going to happen is that this is going to play out relative, ironically, of course,
according to a system of selective pressures. And what we don't know is whether this constitutes a
sort of final paradigm shift, the likes of which, to be honest, we've never seen.
It could well be. And that's why it's like, we don't know the answer to that question. It's not
knowable. But what we do know is that we are beginning a process. And that we do know that
we have principles that we've fought for. I mean, these ideas of equity and diversity,
things that our ancestors probably didn't value, we value for good reasons because we've lived
through and our parents and grandparents have lived through these experiences. We talked about
Nazism of what happens when these terrible values are empowered. So I really think that this is in
some ways a conversation about science, but it's really a conversation about values. And so I think
that we either we have agency or we must believe we have agency until proven otherwise, because
what's the alternative? Well, I think that one way of looking at it is through the lens of selection.
And I've made this comment that there are really, selection is not really about human biology.
It says that anything that has three properties is going to behave in a Darwinian fashion. And that is
diversity, heritability and differential success. Now, the social interpretation, which I think
weirdly almost nobody seems to talk about our mention, is that variability constitutes the
human value of diversity. Heritability has to do with what we would call privilege and differential
success has to do with inequality. And so the really maddening thing about biology and the
reason that it ends up in the crosshairs of social justice is that you take this cherished value of
diversity, you subject it to privilege, and it produces inequality. And then you take that as
the feedback into the system and then just loop it. Now, the one thing that you're talking about
is destroying heritability. In effect, you're giving somebody who is not
blessed with the genetics that they might want, genetics that might be borrowed from somewhere
else. I wouldn't say destroying, it's morphing that you have a certain kind of heritability.
You're adding a new kind of, a new aspect of heritability. Or you could call it facultative
heritability rather than obligate heritability. And so that is the design and designer.
And so in that system, you are effectively breaking something in a very strong way. Now,
it was always the case that we learned how to breed, let's say canines and create very exotic
breeds. But we are that. I mean, our whole species, I mean, our species... Well, that was the point
about dinner and a movie. Yes, it emerges from that thing. That is how evolution works. And that's
why the title of the book is Hacking Darwin. We're hacking that process and it just has
such profound implications. And I started talking about Dick Clark as the Cassandra.
Like I feel that it's like what I'm trying to do is say, look, again, you get it. This is the
biggest issue that we are ever going to... This is an existential issue for our species.
Big decisions are being made and most people don't even know they're being made. They don't
even know what's happening. Well, this is a great segue to one of the last two topics I really want
to get to. That is, if we are going to try to figure out how to guide and steer our own future,
do you see any prospect for tackling these very complicated issues going from geopolitics to
health to our own sense of our own identity, what have you, with the level of knowledge that our
population currently has, like if they had to pass a test, they probably couldn't pass a test
to be minimally competent on some bill that might come up. And yet we have to vote on these
things. What do we do here? Yeah, so we have a big problem. And on issues like science and
certainly foreign affairs, we used to have in this country a more representative democracy.
And that's why when I started out in my early career working in government, I was in the White
House. I had lots of friends who were Republicans and we all agreed that America, that we had these
responsibilities, which grew out of our experience of our understanding of what happened before the
Second World War and the world that was built after the Second World War. And now our decision
making process for foreign affairs, for all sorts of things, like including highly technical
trade agreements, has become democratized. So a bunch of people are making decisions about
complex trade agreements, but like, oh, I just have a feeling that this is bad or people in
Britain, I have a feeling that the EU is making my toast. This is a real thing is making my toast
unevenly toasted. It's because somebody is regulating my toaster. And so the regular people
are being making big decisions, kind of like we're Switzerland. But unlike Switzerland,
that's actually educating its public really well, we're doing a terrible decision of that.
So we have to, we're moving towards a more democratic process. We have to do a much better
job of educating our public. The good news for me is, I speak to a lot, to a lot of different
groups. And I speak to, I do keynote speaks to big groups of doctors and scientists. But a friend
of mine is chairman of the board of the Hebrew Academy and the Solomon Schechter in Bergen
County, New Jersey. And I went and I spoke to their seventh and eighth graders. And when I got to
the point of just kind of laying out the basic axioms of my argument, 50 hands went up because
these kids and granted they were, they were mini Talmudic scholars, they were human and they
understood what's at stake. So I think that there is a technical underpinning to this conversation.
But once people understand the basics, what we're talking about is something that's not technical.
It's personal. This is about what it means to be a human being. And I think that we have to,
we have to bring people into the conversation. It's connected to the point that you made earlier,
like wouldn't it be better just to fly under the radar and not agitate people? And I think people
can take it. And even an example of this is the, the, the debate about abortion in states like
Alabama. In most of these states, IVF is not being restricted. And so like there's, there's like
play and then that's, that's a cause for optimism because they're saying, oh, that's not, you know,
that's not life. That's just some stuff in, in a dish because the people in the evangelical and
other communities are saying, well, we recognize there's this thing which they're calling the
miracle of life. And so we have to find a way to engage each other. We have to be better educated.
I mean, this level of ignorance is dangerous for any democracy. And we see populism,
uninformed populism is just a massive threat because it's just the use, you don't need much
information and people can fly around to different views. So we have to engage people.
I quite agree. Although I would come back at you in a way that you may not like, which is that
having spent a lot of time with leading biologists, I would say that I find that they suffer from a
different problem, which is that this is so cool. This is so unbelievable, unbelievably exciting
that the, the selective pressure there is let's just goddamn try this. And I'm not positive.
And then there's the geopolitical. I actually don't think there's a solution. I think this is
going to develop somewhat haphazardly. And if we, even if we think we can control it and come up
with good protocols around it, my sense of it is, is that it mostly has been very hard to get to
work at a deep level. But when it starts to really work, we're not going to be able to control it.
We're not going to be able to control, but I think we have to start building the infrastructure that
is better than it otherwise might be. I talked about the United Kingdom. Like there are models
that every country can have. We have to start building an international framework, climate
change. You could say, well, it's a bad example because we haven't succeeded. It's a good example
because we've at least built some infrastructure that if, that if and when, probably when things
get a lot worse, we'll at least have done that work. And we haven't even, we haven't even laid
that foundation in this area. We need near-death experiences in order to animate us unless our
storytellers. Yes. And that's the essence of everything is if we wait till the near-death
experience, so many big decisions will have already been made that it's going to be really
impossible to go backwards. And so now when nobody's paying attention,
is when the hard work needs to be done. That's what I'm trying to.
I would love it if you would write two stories which had a fork and one of them went to some
unbelievable place and the other went to some horrible place so that people could see that maybe
how this would play out. Let me ask you my last set of questions.
Sometimes people call cancer a disease and I'm very reluctant to call cancer a disease. And it
has to do with the fact that cancer is strangely sort of a problem of immortality where a cell
line decides it wants to live forever. Exactly. I know. That's the bad live forever.
Yeah. It's the bad, well, but there's sort of two ways to die as an organism. One way to die is
through a memory leak. That is a runaway process that keeps consuming more and more of the resources
and, you know, it's like somebody tells you to divide one by three until you come to the end
of the decimal. You'll take up all of the resources of the computer if you don't set a recursion
limit. And if the recursion limit is the hay flick limit, let's say with the number of times a cell
can divide, then you have a situation where do you wish to die from your recursion limit,
which will introduce imprecision into a floating point calculation, or do you wish to die from
trying to compute it perfectly? And it's a fool's errand. In such a circumstance,
if these are fundamental trade-offs, that nature has never been able to really
figure out, we don't have truly immortal species that can live forever with any kind of state
or structure, which is what our minds are. All of our memories are a buildup of state.
Is there any prospect in the story, no matter how positive, in which we really get
to evade these fundamental trade-offs between the death from resource leaks versus the death from,
how do I have it, a recursion limit? Yeah, so I'll start at the end and then I'll go backwards.
We're all going to die of something. And even if it's just insult.
Let's just say we cracked the code and you can live forever, then the law of probabilities
is going to get you like some wayward pigeon is going to smash through your head.
That's what I meant by insult. Yeah, yeah, yeah.
So, and again, it's all about perspective. You talked about cancer cells being immortal.
We have immortality. It's just the we is the cancer cells and we don't identify as the cancer
cells. We identify as the host organism in which the- Well, our lineage is immortal.
Yes, yes. So, the question of, I have a chapter in the book on the science of human life extension.
I absolutely believe that we are going to continue to be able to push the limits of not just average
health span, but extreme health span. The longest, you know, the longest lived person on record is
Matuzola. It's 122 Jean-Calmon in Arles and Friends. And so, I think we're going to be able to go
beyond average health span and that's in the blue zones that Dan Butner and others talk about
and individual lifespan. And the reason why I believe that is just we look at the variability
of biology. We have these some closely related animals like mice and naked mole rats or hard
clams and co-hog clams and there are lots of examples where one lives a short time and one
much longer time. And there are there we will find and are find that there are these knobs
that can in some ways be turned and we're starting to explore that through either lifestyle things
like calorie restrictions or drugs like metformin and rapamycin and the NAD plus boosters that are
kind of mimicking that experience. So, I think that we will, it's not going to be one magic thing,
but we're never going to get to immortality just because hearts wear out. The only kind of,
I was about two months ago, I was in Kyoto and I went to the visited Hiroshi Ishiguro,
who's this incredible humanoid roboticist and he was saying that he thought the future of humanity
is non-biological. And you could say, well, if we have immortality, we'll just download our
brains into some kind of immortal beings. Yeah. You know, I said, I don't believe that because I
think that when that happens, let's just say, which let's just hypothetically say, you could
download your brain, your brain goes into this robot. Let's just say that at that moment where
you're perfectly paired, that robot is you. But the next second, because you aren't just your brain,
your brain is connected to everything. It's connected to your gut and your body. Like,
it's just that's a different thing. It's like a derivative of you. So, you know, we're not going
to live forever, but the science of human life extension is real. And they're all, it's coming
back to this point of biohacks and whether it's these blood transfusions, the peribiosis,
and there's something there, whether it's embryo selection, because we're going to understand
that we are increasingly understand the genetics of longer health span, whether it's mimicking
the proteins that the people who have the genetics of health span, what their cells,
what their genes would be doing. I mean, there are a lot of things. So, we've been doing it for a
long time. We're going to continue to push the bounds of our mortality.
Well, I've always found it funny that in our tradition, the Jewish tradition, that we ask
that people should live to the age of Moses, which is 100 and Svansik, 120. And it's more or less
the hard stuff for human beings. You know, it's so funny. In the Bible, and again, I write about
this in the book, they write about Methuselah, and he lives to like 969. And then he has a kid
who's in the 900s, and all these guys live in the 900. And then it's like a few chapters later,
it says, but then I decided that the longest that anyone can live is 120. Just don't get any ideas.
Well, the funny part that I was going to bring this up is that I think Hydra have immortal and
non-immortal as a model species with immortal and non-immortal. And I write my last novel,
Eternal Sonata, that's the spirit of immortality. One of them is sexual and one of them is
asexually reproducing. And the immortal one is the asexual. So I always go back to Gershwin's
line, which is, Methuselah lived 900 years, but who calls that living when no gal would give into
no man what 900 years? In essence, an asexual life is not a life worth living. You know, who knows?
Like we are hacking life. Like we have this world that we have known. And we just, it's hard for us
to imagine our evolutionary journey because our personal experience is so stuck in this form.
But we have been asexual in our past. Like when we were bacteria, our sexual reproduction
is only hundreds of millions. Well, our mitochondria are effectively the part of us that's asexually
reproducing for the most part. But sexual reproduction is only about 600 million years old.
So we've been around for 3.2 billion years. So we've been a lot of different things.
We could be a lot of different things. We are not at the end point of our evolutionary journey.
And there are these, these, these quote unquote, traditional evolutionary drivers. And now we're
introducing a whole new set as we've been discussing of evolutionary drivers that are, we don't
understand where it's heading. Do you think there's a portal to a Cambrian explosion of
different successors to humans? Yes, it must be. Right. Yeah. But I mean, it has to be. Well,
I just wanted you to tease it out. That's really what you're talking about. Yes. No, no, this is
like, this is like, and you're getting me all agitated now. No, no, no. This is like, and it's
a turning point. It's 3.8 billion years of evolving by random mutation and natural selection. We are
turning a corner. This is like, yeah, when cells went eukaryotic. It's a huge discontinued thing.
I mean, this is it. And so we cannot, I mean, I'm a science fiction writer. And so I, I spent a
lot of my time trying to, but we cannot accurately imagine where this is going over hundreds and
thousands of years. But what we can say, and what I'm so committed to is saying, we have over at
least many thousands of years, tens of thousands of years, we've developed ethical codes and values
that we have found help us live better lives, help, help us work together with each other.
And at very least, we need to be fighting to make sure that our best values individually and
collectively are woven into our decision-making. Or you could also take a different perspective,
which is that those values were actually protocols that allowed one group to
handily outcompete another that lacked such values. And that, in fact, values, which we've,
we've forgotten this, are a cudgel with which to beat rival groups.
It could be, and it could be that values themselves are evolving. And yet we can't become so
relativistic that even our most cherished principles, we just, we just jettison. I think
we need to look at them. We need to look at them critically. We talked about that in the context
of Sam Harris. So we need to, we need to do that. But we can't just say, oh, now we're in,
I mean, that's what the futurists did 100 years ago in Italy. And it led to fascism. We're coming
from somewhere. We're coming from a culture. We're coming from thousands of years of struggling for
values. And we need to think about them. We need to challenge them. But we need to recognize that
these technological challenges are new. But we've fought hard for these value systems. And we need
to fight for them. Jamie, this is absolutely fascinating. I can't wait to dig into the book.
And I hope that everybody out there in the portal audience will take a look at this book,
Hacking Darwin by Jamie Metzl. And Jamie, it's been a fantastic conversation.
Thanks for coming through the portal. Really my great pleasure. Thank you, Eric.
