Welcome. You've found the portal. I'm your host, Eric Weinstein, and I'm here today with
my guest, David Walpe, who is the rabbi of Sinai Temple here in Los Angeles. David is
often thought to be one of the most influential rabbis currently in the United States. He's
been named so by Newsweek and finds himself in various lists of important rabbis. Welcome
to the portal, David. Thank you. Happy to be here.
You and I improbably met in Belgrade in Serbia, and we shared a bus ride, and that bus ride
has been on my mind in a way that it probably hasn't been playing through your mind. But
I wondered if we might begin this podcast by deciding that we would avoid certain well-worn
tropes. I don't want to get into, does God exist or doesn't He? And the question that I want to
begin with is, for our listeners who have been searching for some kind of spiritual outlet but
are also frustrated with being very analytic, intellectual, in fact oriented, what is that
God versus no God conversation crowding out that needs to be more present in the public
dialogue? That is a wonderful question. And I think that what the public dialogue really
needs very desperately is how do you create community and interdependence that people take
seriously and is lifelong in the absence of some particular kind of transcendent belief?
And I think that that is the most valuable thing that religion gives its adherence,
and it's even more valuable in some ways than personal meaning, because you and I both know
that religion used to think it had a monopoly on the possibility of personal meaning, but a lot of
people live their lives without a religious sense and would not say that their lives are meaningless,
but they do need community. And community, especially in such an atomized age and especially
in modern America, is very hard to create and to find. And this transcendent shared transcendent
idea gives you community, but in that absence, I don't know how you construct it, but that
doesn't mean there isn't a way. We need to learn how to do that, or at least to start talking about
it. And one of the things that I would hope is that people in religious communities and people
outside of religious communities could talk about that and how to do it without letting specific
beliefs wreck the conversation. So this is always tricky for me, because we have these various
concepts to try to keep our religion and our scientific beliefs separate. We have questions
about should I abstract what was previously concrete so that it remains relevant in my
current life. And there always feels to be a bit of a cheat in all of this, yet if we don't make
these kind of cheats or half measures or accommodations, we find a very uncomfortable
outcome, which is that most of these religions had their ancient texts written well before we
had as much detail as we currently do about the scientific world. And we're happiest where they
were abstract and we're most troubled where they were concrete. It's true. Look, there's a lot of
passages that, in my own tradition, that I explain exactly the way you do, which is this is the
creation of an ancient culture. And there are things about it that we have grown beyond. And I
don't have a problem saying that, although many of my co-religionists would hate the idea that a
rap I would say that, but I don't have a problem saying that. However, the result of adherence
to things that I find objectionable, I find admirable. In other words, there are communities
who believe things. Let's forget Judaism for a minute, forget my own community. There are other
communities that believe things that I think are objectively either untrue or just wild or even,
I can't imagine how someone could believe that. And yet they lead admirable lives and have admirable
communities and have values that I think most of us would share. There may be add-ons that we
wouldn't, but they managed to do that. And so the question is, is it possible to create responsible,
interdependent communities without those kinds of beliefs? I don't think we've answered that
question yet, but I think it's becoming more and more urgent. So I think we should just say something
a little bit about our own intellectual backgrounds. Now, I think the last time we were together in
Serbia, I let you know that I really identify as an atheist. And what's more, my family has somehow
been atheistic for four or five generations, yet always with Jews marrying other Jews and
keeping Jewish traditions going. And I shared with you a mystery in my life, which is that of all of
the five or six rabbis that I've gotten to know well enough to ask the question, do you believe
in the God of the Old Testament as is literally talked about? None of them,
reform, conservative, or even orthodox, believe that that character actually exists.
So there are at least two things to say, but I'll start with two. One is, for those of your
listeners who are Christian or who grew up with no belief, but in a Christian, not in a Jewish
context, this may be a mystery that I can unravel, how someone could be a fifth generation Jewish
atheist, because Judaism is not a religion. Christianity is a religion in the sense that
if tomorrow I believe in Jesus, I'm Christian. If the day after I don't, I'm not. But tomorrow,
if I say to you, you know, Eric, all those things I said on the podcast, I don't believe any of them
anymore. I'm still Jewish. And that's because Judaism is a category that doesn't exist in
modern America. I would use the word tribe, but tribe has negative connotations today. So let me
say, choose our podcast. Not on this podcast. No, adaptive tribal behavior is normal. So we
make a distinction between adaptive and maladaptive. I'm going to say nonetheless, to avoid any
misunderstanding that it's a religious family. You're born into a family in the same way that
you're born into Judaism. Unless you choose another family, you're part of that family.
And so Jews have forever, at least for a long time, without leaving and going to another religion,
at which point they're effectively written out of the Jewish, forget what Jewish law says,
they're effectively written out of the Jewish community. They've said, look, I don't believe
this, that or the other thing. And they're still Jewish. So that's why Jewish atheist is not,
in fact, I will tell you a story several years ago, I had to give through someone that I knew,
it doesn't matter how I got there, I was supposed to give a blessing at Carl Reiner's 90th birthday
party. So I get up and I start to give a blessing and somebody calls out from the audience,
why is there a rabbi here? Reiner's an atheist. So he- Is that Mel Brooks? No, it could have been,
but it wasn't actually. He runs up to the stage, stands next to me and says, I'm not an atheist.
I'm a Jewish atheist and that's different. And he's right, because there is a culture to adhere to.
Christianity doesn't have that kind of comprehensive culture, which makes,
and here are the advantages and disadvantages. It makes Christianity much more portable,
because you can keep your culture in every way. So you can go to the Congo, you can have a completely
different culture, but if you believe in Jesus, my work here is done. But Judaism, especially because
of Jewish law, it has many more cultural implications. And therefore, the advantage of Christianity
is that it's portable. The advantage of Judaism is that it's familial. So when the Soviet Union
was persecuting Jews back in the 70s and 80s, they were persecuting Christians too,
but there was no worldwide Christian movement to save Christians. But there was a worldwide
Jewish movement to save Jews, because there was that sense of familial connection.
I've always wondered why we put up with Christian persecution.
Well, I think that part of the reason is because there isn't that, oh my God,
that's my brother or sister being persecuted. On the part of Christians, it's, whereas for Jews,
there is this adaptive tribal behavior. So both systems have their strengths and weaknesses,
but they are different. Well, and then there's the very weird
aspect that I believe that in large measure, what we are as Jews, rides on a Christian substrate
that if you think about Christianity as one of our two main spinoffs,
then American Judaism really, in some sense, benefits by riding on the substrate that its
spinoff developed and being something of a counterweight, but also showing some sort of
relationship to that. I think that's perfectly fair. And I think that look what Christianity
gave to the world that Judaism and Islam could not, and I have an explanation for
why that is, is the invaluable gift among many other things. I mean, I don't mean to restrict
Christianity's cultural contributions to this, but among many other things, it gave the separation
of church and state. Yeah, that was huge. And Jews couldn't have done it, and Muslims couldn't
have done it. And the reason, I believe, this is my theory, but it sounds really sound, is
Christianity arose in the Roman Empire. So civil law. Literally. Yes.
Render under Caesar. Exactly. Civil law was taken care of. But if you're creating a religion,
as Muhammad and Moses did, in the desert, you need civil law and religious law alike.
So Islam and Judaism didn't make that distinction between civil and religious law. Christianity
had to because it grew up in Rome. And so that gift that has been given us has been given us by
Christians. Well, and so you immediately get to a very dangerous and also very interesting area,
which is the unbundling of a religion. So when you ask a question about what is a religion,
and you say, well, it's a certain amount of it is faith, certain amount of it has to do with
technical explanations for the world around you, certain amount of it has to do with law,
and you can break that up into civil and criminal. Another thing that we were dancing around is,
is the Judaism is effectively a breeding protocol. There's a very strange moment when you sign up
for 23andMe, and you spit into the tube, and you get a result that tells you how Jewish you are.
I know. I have Chinese friends who hold up their results and says, look, I'm 128th Jewish.
Likewise, for me, I was almost, I just didn't anticipate being told that I was plus 98%
Jewish as part of my genetic information. So you start to bundle all of these things together,
and then you have this very weird question. This goes back to a little bit of Sam Harris'
struggle where he says, not all religions are created equal. We have a very uncomfortable
treatment of religion where we pretend not to unbundle them because we don't want to be judgmental,
but you can qualitatively say this religion has a legal structure, this one doesn't,
this legal structure is attenuated. In Judaism, the way that we get out of this law,
let's be honest about some problems that we have. Deuteronomy says something like,
if somebody says worship ancestors that are not known to our fathers, set upon them with a stone.
Yeah, there are some harsh things in the Hebrew Bible.
Well, right, and it's been very important, and I struggle with how to say this, I always find a
biological analogy with regulated expression. There are certain portions of the Jewish code
that it's important that we not run in modern times. It's not clear that that ever ran,
so far as I know, the Jewish stonings of apostates. But the way we get out of it, as we say,
as long as the temple isn't built, we can't convene the religious courts that would meet
out the punishment, and therefore nobody's actually going to get prosecuted or something like that.
So yeah, well, when you say we, not you and I, that's the way a very traditional
understanding might get out of it. Some things, by the way, were already
effectively eliminated by the rabbis of the Talmud.
So having an oral Torah as well as a written Torah.
Right, an oral Torah as well as a written Torah.
Let's say what the oral Torah is, because that might not be true.
Right. So, Judy, you can be a Jewish literalist, but you can't be a Jewish fundamentalist,
because a fundamentalist, by definition, thinks all the answers are in a plain reading of the text.
And Judaism never believed in a plain reading of the text.
It always said the Torah means the Torah here being the Hebrew Bible.
The Torah means what the rabbis say the Torah means. And sometimes their readings sound to us
very forced, very creative, very open and expansive, sometimes restrictive, depending.
But no rabbi will ever say when you come to them, just go home, the answer is all in the Torah.
It's in the tradition. So Judaism is an exegetical tradition and therefore a lot of things over time
get interpreted out of the tradition and that's legitimate. That's not considered like,
how could you make that move? That's not okay. It's a legal tradition and therefore
things get changed along the way. Now, like any legal tradition, it has elastic boundaries,
but they snap. Unlike rabbis who would say call themselves on the right wing of Orthodoxy,
what I would say is modernity is a snap with the tradition. And so there are things that I don't
believe intellectually, honestly, I can say that the tradition endorses, but I nonetheless
endorse them. And the example, the best example that I can give is gay marriage.
I know that some of my colleagues have tried to read gay marriage into the sources. I think it's
forced beyond what you can actually legitimately try, no matter how acrobatic your exegetical
skills. My answer is that we see the world differently and we shouldn't deny that we see
the world differently. And the question is, how do you create a modern Judaism that is authentically
modern, not just that is in full fidelity to sources that, as you say, have to be unbundled?
So just because I've never actually uttered the word exegetical, do you want to talk about?
Exegetical is basically interpretive, interpretive. So to do exegesis is to interpret the text. So I
will give you, here's an example. The Torah says that you should not do melacha on Shabbat on the
Sabbath. And then it never tells you what melacha is. So the rabbis had to decide what it is you're
not allowed to do on the Sabbath. And they come up with all sorts of rules, doesn't matter how they
get there. But the point is, no text is self-explanatory. Well, so this is one of the,
geez, there's so many different ways to go from this point. One of the differences that I like
to point to between religions has to do with claims in another spin-off, which is Islam,
that the Quran is its own exegesis. And therefore, interpretation somehow pollutes the purity of
the text. Now, there are different schools within Islam, or I think four schools of,
main schools of jurisprudence, or maybe there are more, I don't know. But is that a major difference
between these two traditions? I would say, I don't want to pronounce on Islam. I would say to the
extent that any tradition says that a text does not have to be interpreted, Judaism would take
issue with that. That there is no way out. There is no way out of interpretation of any text. It
doesn't matter how elaborate, how long. And how literal. And how literal. No. Because even the
most literal text, I mean, the Ten Command, thou shalt not murder. What is murder? How can you
not? How can you say that self-explanatory? It's not. I murder is, you know.
Right. So I guess, for me, one of the problems that I have traditionally had with like the Sam
Harris School of Interpretation is that there is a hidden assumption, which is that the literal
interpretation of text, as if such a thing existed, holds pride of place. Because it is,
in some sense, the minimally distant from the text. Therefore, one should interpret
any organization by its texts with the minimal distortion from interpretation. Whereas my belief
is any structure, and in some ways the US plays this role with the Constitution being akin to our
written Torah and the rabbis being the Supreme Court and constantly having to interpret the
document, I find it very strange that we would be so caught up in the text of the document,
given that we have to have ways of living with things that age.
Well, my argument, among many others, with Sam was always that if you're going to judge a religion,
you have to judge it by how it's lived, not by the literal word in the text, because it's what a
religion produces as opposed to what it says that matters. And therefore, if you want to have an
argument about whether religion is good for the world based on what it produces, okay. If you
want to have an argument about whether this or that verse is objectionable, don't think that
you've actually scored any major points, at least to my way of thinking, against religion if you
find objectionable verses. I can think of a lot of things, for example, that my parents said over
the years that were objectionable, they were wonderful parents. So it depends whether you
want to take a tradition at its best or at its worst. And I understand why if you're arguing
against it, it's advantageous to take it at its worst, but that's not the best way to argue against
it. Yeah, I think that what I get out of it is that we have to look at ways of limiting the damage
that come from the explicit text that these religions have, in some sense, aged out of,
or I would like to think that they had aged out because the desire to return to something pure,
let's just call it the purification impulse where you say, you know, we have problems in the system
and the reason that we have problems is that we've strayed. So let us go back to the actual
literal words and try our best to implement them as literal computer code that it is our
obligation to compile. I always I could not agree with you more. Lots of things came to mind,
as you said, that which is, among other things, that the word revolution has both meanings.
It means to change everything. It also means to come around again in a circle. And what purists
almost always discover is that human structures are much harder to overhaul than they suspected
at the beginning. And also, I thought of a there's a beautiful quote from William Stafford,
who's a poet about about this danger. He said, if you purify the pond, the water lilies die.
And I always thought there are, you know, this was Burke's insight, there are human institutions
grow for lots of reasons, and nobody has a comprehensive enough intellect to understand
if you radically change them with all the implications of that change will be. So you
have to change carefully, not and without, without contempt for everything that has come before you.
Did you know Rabbi Benzion Gold? I knew him a little bit in worship and study in Boston.
So I tried to get married with Shlomo Sternberg, the mathematician in the Harvard Math Department
officiating. But because he was very orthodox, he said, I don't think I can do this. Let me,
let me send you to a friend. Benzion Gold gave us the task of rewriting the marriage contract,
the Katuba. And we, we rewrote it the first time. And he said, what is this? He says,
this is like a poem to each other. This is a marriage contract taken seriously. So we went back
to the original text and we tried to make the minimal number of distortions. And he said,
what? Like you're, you're living thousands of years ago. This, this doesn't have any
of the modernity. So we tried then to do something that was contractual,
but honored modernity says, oh, now you've watered it down. I said,
Rabbi, this is the third time we've put a lot of work into this. And with all due respect,
you're really pissing me off by not appreciating how difficult this task is. And he looked at me
and he said, well, it took you long enough. And I said, what do you mean? And he said,
now you're coming to understand, you wanted to get married in the Orthodox version of the
religion because you as an atheist have no idea how this is done. And so you want to do it right.
What he said to me then was, he said, when you're part of a 5,000 year tradition,
you have to realize that there's no way of being Orthodox. You cannot stay true to the text because
times have changed too much. And that every single version of Judaism is a version of
make your own Judaism because that was the phrase I was using to make fun of the sort of reform
impulse. Do you, do you think he was onto something? Oh, I think there's no question about it. In my
mind, there was a beautiful essay many years ago by Gerson Cohen, who was a historian and was the
Chancellor of the Seminary called The Blessings of Assimilation. And he says, the Rabbi say,
why did the, there's a, there's a comment in rabbinic literature, why did the Jews
deserve to be liberated from Egypt because they didn't change their names, they didn't change
their dress, and they didn't change their language. And, and then Cohen starts to talk about
actually what Jews did throughout history. He said, in terms of names, the names in the
Bible like Moses and Aaron and Pinchas and Khophni, they're all Egyptian names. They're actually not
Jewish names or Hebrew names. He said, in terms of dress, Jews have dressed
in every way that around them, the cultures have dressed, Jews in Arab lands dressed like Arabs,
Jews in European lands dressed like Europeans. He said, and in terms of language, Jews have
written literature in every language, the Talmud, which is the foundational work after the Bible
in Judaism wasn't written in Hebrew, it was written in Aramaic because they lived in Babylonia.
And so, yes, I mean, there is no way to be, the only way to be true to the sources is to change.
The question is how much change, and that's where the real
nub of modern religion comes is how much can you change and still
not only- Flame of continuity. Yes, exactly. And, and also how much can you change and still
transmit it generation to generation? That's a question that the modern world has created.
Can liberal religion transmit itself? And I don't think we've answered that question.
Well, I think I'm very disappointed in the clergy and the Revenant.
I have a crazy theory, and I want to know what you think of it, whether it's-
I like crazy theory.
Well, it could be so commonly known that you think you think that's crazy. Everybody knows that.
At some point, I became convinced that Seinfeld, the show, was one of the greatest innovations
in modern Judaism. And my reasoning was that what it was actually was not Jewish humor played
with ethnically ambiguous people, but it was actually Talmudic humor. It was legal humor.
And each show, you know, there's this discussion of like re-gifting. Is it ethical to re-gift?
So I picked one show at random and I said, I bet I can find whatever this topic is in the Talmud.
And I picked the show where there's an argument about double dipping a chip into some salsa,
because after you take a bite, you've, you've touched it with your mouth and now you're dipping
it again. Sure enough, I go to the Talmud. There's two guys, two rabbis are eating hummus,
one with a leaf and the other with his hands. And the guy who's using the leaf as an implement says,
tell me, Rabbi, when are you going to stop feeding me your saliva? You know, like,
and the other guy says, oh, tell me, Rabbi, you know, Akiva, whatever his name was,
when are you going to stop feeding me your filth with the leaf? Yeah. And this interchange
proved to me that what was really going on was we were mining the more difficult parts of Judaism
and figuring out a way of making this commercially viable to get into mainstream distribution
channels. When the rabbis didn't pick up on how effective this is for exploring the ancient texts
that nobody has time for anymore. I thought it was an amazing missed opportunity. Where are you
guys? Why are you not making technology in these new distribution channels? Why are we not using the
media in particular? Or why aren't we giving more sermons about sign film? Why aren't you
figuring out how to use mass culture as the substrate for transmitting the stuff that is,
what's special about Judaism is lost when you don't have time for it. And I always get irritated
when I go to Shul and they say, like particularly reform synagogues, they say, we Jews do this
and for this reason. What they're really saying is you've forgotten what it means to be Jewish
because you don't have enough time. So let me remind you what we once did when this was a
focus in your life. You guys are not making effective use of mass media to do cutting.
You may well be right. That's why I'm on the podcast, trying to make effective use of mass media.
Come back when we're bigger. Right, exactly. As often as you want. It's very hard. Wait,
wait, are you serious about that? Because I would love to do a Seinfeld episode with you to get this
ball rolling. All right, we'll do it. I'm on board. It's really hard to
grab people's attention. I mean, some people in my congregation will do serious study.
Some of them will relate to Jewish events or whatever. But yes, it is difficult.
Once you've taken away the idea that all of this is a system that God insists that you do,
to bring a counter-cultural religious tradition to people and to have them invest in it,
it takes a lot of work. And I'm perfectly willing to say that part of it is rabbinic failure. But
I also think there's a huge social and cultural tie that we're trying to swim against.
Well, this gets into a very weird topic, but you'd be the right guy to talk about it with.
There are ways in which the absence of overt religious bigotry has, in my opinion,
attenuated at least our group, that somehow the concept of the tiger mom is now much more of an
Asian concept than it is a Jewish concept. But 50 years ago, you had parents pushing their kids
really hard to achieve. And under the surface was always this issue. If you're not 50% better,
at least, than your competition, because of your name, because of your background,
you're going to suffer. Now that we've gotten rid of that, I have the sense that we really don't
have that the same vitality. Well, it's partly a general cultural thing. I don't know how many
years ago Philip Reef wrote about the triumph of the therapeutic. Now parents, many parents don't
feel that they should push their kids. That idea of a parent, that ideal of a parent that somebody
who pushes their child, I think is frowned on in culture generally, that's one thing. The second
is that there are dangers to acceptance, as you point out, as there are dangers to non-acceptance.
And while I would never say, and I think people say this, but if they thought about it more carefully,
I think they wouldn't, I would never say that Judaism has survived because of persecution,
because they're forgetting all those other people that were persecuted and disappeared to history.
So it's not that we're here because we were persecuted, we would be many, many more had we
not been persecuted. There is something about feeling the pressure of you have to prove yourself
because you are a member of this or that group that does absolutely contribute to a drive to
excellence. I think there's no question about that. And Jews don't feel that the way they once did.
But I think that it's part of a larger complex of how much Jews feel themselves
part of an identifiable group that they take pride in and love. So this is in Hebrew, there's a
concept called avat Yisrael, which means love of your people. And that generally is in the world
that, for example, my daughter grows up in, that's frowned upon the idea that you should love your
people. That's thought of as negative. You should love all people and no people especially. And
that's to the detriment, I think, of any minority keeping its special identity.
I don't actually get this. And my sense is that you don't get this either. Maybe that would be
something we could explore. So let me give you my version of this and give me my grade on a report
card. If you love multiculturalism, you have to understand that multiculturalism is built on
culturalism. And culturalism is built on exclusion with some amount of permeability.
So what I always hear when somebody says multiculturalism is painting with a lot of
distinct pigments. And what has come to be the meaning of multiculturalism is let's mix all the
paint together and to get the most beautiful rainbow paint possible. And in fact, it doesn't
look anything like rainbow paint once you do this. And then in part, we are responsible for caring
about our own culture so that there is something special to bring to the potluck. And what concerns
me is when I see somebody who's going abroad, let's say as an American, and they're trying to
be infinitely open to everything, I always think of that as being very selfish, which is you're
not bringing what people want, which is your American background. I travel with a harmonica,
I play American music on it, and it's not because I'm not fascinated by the other cultures. I actually
do this because that's my legitimate introduction to say I came with something that you're interested
and I really want to find out about what's going on with Ganesh or whatever. Am I off?
No, I think that that's, I mean, I would put that on a banner. I think that that's so incredibly
important. What Jonathan Sacks, Rabbi Sacks, calls the dignity of difference, which was the title of
one of his books. I think that all these cultures rise or fall on that. If you don't believe that
your culture doesn't have to be better, that's why I always say when people ask me about Judaism,
I always tell them it's not my job to argue it's superiority, it's my job to argue it's
excellence. If you don't think that your culture is excellent and has things that everyone could
learn from, then I think, first of all, I think that that's sad, but also I think that then you're
left with this indistinguishable stew, as you said, that loses what is unique about all these
cultures. So yes, I believe, however, that what multiculturalism has also become is
only these cultures have the right to be heard and those cultures don't as much because historically
those cultures have been heard more than mine. And so there is that also to contend with because
it is true that some cultures have been heard far more than others.
We are a noisy culture.
Yes, and we are a noisy culture. There's no question about that.
As my friend Joseph Epstein says, Jews don't listen, they wait.
And I know that there is something.
That hurts.
Yes, we're very verbal as a culture, no question about it. But I also think we are part of the
constituent creators of Western civilization and we have something to say.
Well, this is one of the, I do feel that one of the ways we get into trouble as a culture
is that we are seen as an impurity. And going back to this question about what some cultures do well,
some cultures do poorly, like, for example, I would say that Jewish food, not our best.
Not our strongest.
Not our strongest.
We're not the French.
Right.
No, that's true.
We have this tradition in our family where we put two drops of water into the wine,
into the kiddish cup of wine for the Friday night Sabbath meal.
And there's always a question of why this ritual, what I always liked about it was
we have an impulse towards purity that is must be gotten rid of in my opinion,
because life is impure. And if you start to try to purify yourself overly much,
like in an OCD kind of a way, you end up tearing at your own flesh and you do real damage.
Learning that a certain amount of impurity has a strengthening effect
is something that I associate with that ritual.
And I was curious if you have feelings about
teachings like that that we need to export.
Is that an important teaching from our tradition?
I think that it is. I mean, you can make biological analogies to that too about diversity.
Hybrid vigor.
Right, exactly. I also understand that let's change the language of purity for a second.
I hope that this still captures what you mean.
Fanaticism of all varieties carries danger.
I don't want to say it's automatically dangerous.
No, you said it perfectly carries danger.
Because I remember there's a wonderful story about Isaac Stern, the violinist,
who after a concert, a woman came up to him and said,
I would do anything to play like you would.
And he said, really, would you practice 20 years, 12 hours a day to play like I would?
Because that's what I did.
The world does depend on certain kinds of fanaticism.
People who are exceptional athletes and exceptional scholars and exceptional musicians,
many of them have a single-minded devotion.
So I wouldn't want to say, let's wipe out all extremism.
But culturally, it's tremendously dangerous.
Yeah. So let me ask you, assume that I don't have the time budget,
and I don't have the belief budget needed to sustain an older version of my culture and my
tradition. Because one of the things that I want to talk about here is that I'm using religion in
part to stand in for the need to stand up for our traditions, to maintain them,
but not to become sort of jingoistic about it.
So assume that I don't have the same budget, and I'm also living in a very multicultural world.
Uh, what guidance can you give me for the maintenance of a complicated,
beautiful, intricate tradition that needs, that has historically needed more time and
belief than I can afford?
So I, what I, what I want to start off with, and I don't know how much time
this takes is that the indispensable quality to maintain any tradition is knowledge.
You have to know something about it. And, and honestly, knowledge is more easily available now
than it ever was about anything. So I think that if you care about a tradition, at least you
ought to be able to educate yourself to the basics of it. And, um, and having done that,
then you can, I think, like with everything else, you can give it a piece of your time and
attention that is serious and devoted because on like focused attention is our greatest resource.
And if you can give the tradition a little bit of that, so I tell people all the time,
you know, if you say a blessing before you eat, that's a very powerful thing. And if you make
sure you always do that, that becomes part of your life and part of your ability to stop and
think before you put something in your mouth about your place in the universe, your gratitude,
that it's there, all those kinds of things. So there are little things that you can do.
Well, an even more powerful version of that for me is the shahekianu.
Right. Do you want to say a little bit about how that functions in our tradition?
The shahekianu is a prayer that you say when something is new or unprecedented or it's a
special moment in your life, the first time in the yearly cycle that you eat a fruit or wear a
garment or any of those sorts of things. And it's an expression of what it thanks God for
sustaining you and allowing you to reach that moment. And I think expressions of gratitude
are something that religion does very well. Well, the reason I pick that is that we in our tradition
set a bit in our brain that says, if I'm doing something for the first time in the yearly cycle,
make a note of it. And what I find is that if I were to do that without thanking God at all
for this, that would be a tremendous service to remembering like beginner's mindset or I've
made it through another cycle or how sweet is a pomegranate. Can we export this stuff?
So, well, this goes back to the very beginning of the podcast, which is, can you sustain these
kinds of rituals and awarenesses without the belief with which they were created?
That is, can you say the shahekianu if you don't believe that you're thanking God?
I do.
Yeah. Okay. So, maybe that is possible. Maybe it is possible to create a ritual structure
that is not theistic. I suppose that people do that with things like yoga and meditation.
But in a Jewish way, is it possible to do that? Now, there have been secular humanist versions
of Judaism, but I don't think that they've caught on. Well, I don't think they work. I mean, my
family came a bit from this tradition of the workman circle, which was to try to take social
justice and labor and make that the replacement for God, which is kind of a weird idea.
Yes, it is. But I guess what the way I look at it is, I don't think there's anything weird about
going to a movie that is not literally true. Like people talk about Star Wars all the time.
Presumably, they know that there is no Yoda. Well, I don't remember what scholar of myth
gave this definition, but I think of some of the things in the Bible, like the story of Adam and
Eve, I think of them the way this scholar defined myth. He said, a myth is something that is not
factual, but is always true. And I think there's a lot in religion that is not factual, but is always
true. So let's talk about the belief part of this. Why does belief animate this?
Because the sense that you're doing something that is either commanded by or, if you want to
originate it below rather than above, or aligns you with the creator of the universe
is much more powerful than the belief that I'm doing this because it helps my self-awareness.
I'll tell you the part of it that I think we really get wrong. And this is a point of view
that maybe I'll be scolded for. We have this concept in Judaism of intergenerational
transfer. Yes. And we explicitly call it out and we say Lador Vador from generation to generation.
My belief is that it is irrational to be perfectly atheistic for the following reason.
It may be somatically rational. That is, most of the cells in our body are going to die. They
have no infinite future. In fact, if they start to think they have an infinite future, we call it
cancer. Right. The only exception to that is our germ line, our eggs and what creates our sperm.
And these things have an immortality plan. They can pass from generation to generation and carry
the information. My belief about religion is that it solves a very important problem, which is
in biology for every other species, soma and germ are tied together. That is, if I'm thirsty,
I know that I need to get water. But thirst is a proximate. The ultimate is
staving off of dehydration. The great danger in human beings is that hunger and starvation
or arousal and reproduction, you can disconnect all of these things. And then soma starts to take
over and it says, maybe the purpose of life is to be happy. And every time I hear somebody
say, the purpose of life is to be happy, something important in me struggles because I hate,
I just, it's like I'm dying inside. I really feel terrible about it. This idea of caring about
intergenerational transfer is the basis of a society. There's no way one generation could
build this. Right. And this is what religion stops us from doing. It stops us from thinking
that the purpose of life is to be happy. It connects us to intergenerational purpose.
And so rather than just thinking about myself somatically, I think about being part of a lineage
in a history that goes on after my death. There's nothing that stops me from waking up and saying,
wait, if the purpose of life is to be happy, you know, maybe I'm Jonas Salk, but maybe I'm
Jeffrey Dahmer. I could be anything that make, making me happy. This is a way of making sure
that that doesn't happen, that soma doesn't betray germ. Is that really the, like?
I think that's, well, I would say the idea that, that religion's obligation is intergenerational
to past generations and future generations is true and powerful. And the way you described it
is beautiful. The one, I don't want to say caveat, the one addition is that you also have
a vertical as well as a horizontal responsibility. That is to transcendence to, I would say your
soul beyond your cell line, that part of the purpose of life is to grow in soul, that there is
something that you as an individual, you have a responsibility to lead a certain kind of life
because your life is a gift. And that's a responsibility to other human beings, but it's
also just a responsibility by virtue of the fact that you've been given this life to live. So-
From whom?
Well, I would say from God.
But I would say you're cheating.
What if I'm right? Am I still cheating?
Well, no, I just, well, look, I'm happy to get into my own theories about God, but
my point is to be able to work with multiple assumptions.
Without, if you bracket that assumption, then yes, I would say what religion does,
I had talked also about creating community. That is creating community with, but it also
creates community with the past and with the future. You know, look, this is a wonderful
line of Chestertans. He said, tradition is the democracy of the dead, that if everybody who
ever lived got a vote, they would vote for tradition. And you're expressing that in a
different way. That is that we owe a responsibility to all the generations preceding us and also
to transmit to the generations following us as if we're taking and handing the baton because
we don't see ourselves as an isolated creation instead. As you said, we're part of a chain.
Well, so let me go a little bit further with this. My claim is that just as Chomsky has said
that we may have a pre-existing sort of capacity for grammar that allows language,
that this is a facility that we are given with birth as virtue of being human.
I would claim that there's something like a Chomsky and pre-grammar of religious belief
that no matter how atheistic we may claim to be, I mean, there was one time, two times I've prayed
to God, one I don't discuss, but the other, when my wife was pregnant with our first child,
I found myself praying to God that my child would inherit my learning disabilities because
I did not think I would be able to relate to my own child and because I actually believed that
all of those disabilities are the most profound genetic gift that I was given, but it was a gift
in disguise. And I said, why am I praying to something I don't believe in? And this is another
version of there are no atheists in the foxholes. Do I carry in your opinion a biological predisposition
towards religious thought? So I think that that is very likely. I think that's what, and by the
way, people have different gifts in the sense that there are Mozart's of religious predisposition.
They have never doubted God. They feel God constantly fully. And then there are others
who have less of a predisposition. So I would say yes. I also think, by the way,
that your idea that your disability is your gift is a profoundly religious idea. There's a beautiful
poem from, I think it's, oh, God, it talks about God answer sharp and sudden on some prayers. It's
a gauntlet with a gift in it. And I would want to say Elizabeth Barrett Browning, but I don't think
it's Barrett Browning. Somebody in your audience will Google it and know. And that notion that the
challenges that you have are things that are given to you in order to climb higher, I think that that
also is a, I don't know if it's an inbuilt religious notion, but I think in some ways it probably is
because people often recur to that when something bad happens, that I'm going to find a way. One of
my books was called Making Lost Matter, the same thing. So I wouldn't choose this, but having been
given this, now I have to figure out how to use it to climb higher than I would have had I not
been given this disability. So yes, I think that that, I think that it is, let me put it this way,
I think that your theory has a better chance of being right than Chomsky's. That is, it's more
likely that we have a religious, a natural religious inclination than that we have a
natural grammatical inclination. Yeah. My belief is that it would be irrational for me
to deny the fact that my brain is constantly trying to tell magical, supernatural,
non-materialistic stories. All of us. We do. Well, but I'm more disturbed by this than you
probably are. Well, I can. Another time, look, I mean, I'm an internal conflict.
Well, the English essay, as Thomas de Quincey said, not to be a little superstitious is to
lack generosity of mind. So I would say that you're just showing that you have generosity of mind,
but you have also, you have a supervening ability to recognize when your stories are not
rational stories. It's unclear. You know, I look at, well,
all right, let's get in, let's get into more weird stuff. You and I belong to a tradition with,
I think, one quarter, one percent of the world's population. Right. About 25 percent of the
Nobel Prizes in physics or maybe even science. In general, actually. All right. All of them.
Now, assuming that it's not because, and as I said on the Joe Rogan program, that Jews
cheat at physics, would you ask me why this was? Maybe there's a genetic component. Maybe there's
a cultural component. Maybe the fact that we are willing to take our, some of our best people and
not put them in finance and put them in dead end financial jobs in physics and in physiology and
medicine, whatever. It's crazy to me to abandon a completely, assume that we're totally about
superstition, magical thinking in nonsense. Somehow that superstitious magical thinking tradition
produced a complete surplus of reason, creative ability to work within the constraints of the
natural world. Wouldn't it be insane to walk away from that saying it's a bunch of mumbo jumbo
about God? That's why I said when I debate with the people who point to a verse and say, well,
that's stupid and dismiss the religion, that you have to look at the product of what a religion
gives you in the world. And I think that Judaism has a lot, has a pretty strong black ledger balance.
We've given the world an enormous, enormous amount and continue to. And I'm always astonished even
though I know it's true. When I turn to the obituary in the paper and I read about this
remarkable life in this creative life and sure enough, his parents were Jewish and they came
from some small town in Poland and I just think, how does this happen? And it's at least as
rational to say there is some special mission that the Jews have in this world as it is to say,
oh, it's because of the medieval training that they got, where some of the most literate priests
became celibate, but all the most capable rabbis had many children. I had this, by the way, I had
this conversation. I warn you, here comes a major name drop, but I literally had this conversation
with the Dalai Lama because when we went to see him in Dharam Sala, in the middle of the conversation,
he turns to me and points at me and says, what's this about the chosen people anyway?
So apropos of nothing we were talking about. So I said, I don't know. So I said to him,
well, it's true that Jews think they're chosen. I said, but that doesn't mean that other people
aren't chosen for other kinds of missions and things in the world. And he laughed and he said,
yes, the Tibetans think we're chosen too. And so the other part of this is, I think every people
has this sense that they're special, but that's a good thing. That's not a bad thing.
Well, I was just talking with a black acquaintance, comedian, over at the comedy store who sat
high to me in a bar in the bar and he was talking about struggling with being black and the crime
and some of the negative parts of the tradition. And I was able to say, do you realize that I've
always been in awe of your community? And then I went through with some detail, because I've
actually been fascinated by the idea, you know, partially because of our own tradition focuses
so much on slavery and blacks embrace the Jewish idea of Moses and the whole Exodus.
And so I started going into black intellectual achievement. And I think there's something
about being curated by somebody outside of yourself. It's why we value Detokeville as a
commentator on the American scene. We need to be seen by others and not just promoting ourselves.
I think that that's exactly right. So one of the things I wanted to talk about is the loss of
insularity and one of my most dangerous theories, which is the first Shiksa effect.
So I want to tell two jokes. One, the Jews. So these are internal Jewish jokes. One is
negative against the Jews. One is positive for the Jews. So one joke is why did God create the
goyim that is the non-Jews? Because somebody had to pay retail. Oh, come on, you know that you're
pretending that you don't. All right. The other joke is what's the only problem with Jewish cooking?
72 hours later, you're hungry again. Right. So in the first case, the idea is we're the smart
guys who always pay wholesale because we know somebody, we know how to get there. There's also
there's also an anti-Semitic trope about Jews and money buried in that joke. Yep. Yeah. Right.
And then the other, the other one, you know, points out that our food is too heavy because
we always were worried that we had nutritional issues and you might as well get as much fat in
people because you never know if your next meal is going to be interrupted. Now, the first Shiksa
effect has to do with the first time an insular group is visited by somebody bringing in somebody
from outside. And so all of the very potent knowledge, and this could be the Parsis in India,
it could be the Mafia, it could be the Freemasons, that the danger of internally held knowledge
suddenly having some sort of a periscope in starts to attenuate. And so for example, my
my wife's family were Jews of Calcutta. I think the first time there was an intermarriage,
the parent says, oh, I'm going to sit Shiva. That is, I'm going to treat this child as if
she's dead to me. But very quickly that erodes because it's the second person to come into a
family or the third doesn't have the same effect because all of that hyperinsular stuff gets lost
almost instantly. And I think that there's both something super positive about that because
the insularity causes a kind of danger towards jingoism. But there's also something sad about
that, which is that some of that was the most powerful knowledge that the community possessed.
Any thoughts? This is an eternal struggle, and I'm not sure that it is a reconcilable struggle
between the integrity and depth of a community that knows each other, relies on each other,
cares about each other and can transmit for generations and generations. And the community that
at the same time carries that virus of insularity, of superiority, of all that stuff. I mean,
I think sometimes when I talk to students about this exact thing, I don't use the first Shiksa
as an example, but I talk about when I tell them that it has to do all with crest toothpaste.
When I was a kid, I'll tell you, my mother told us that crest was the best toothpaste,
and when I used to go to other kids' houses and they would use like Colgate or one of the really
unserious toothpaste, like Pepsidens, I would think, what's the matter with these people?
Don't they know? Aquafresh, don't give a start. Aquafresh, oh my god, but with a little green
strip. But the day that I realized, and I almost remember it, that you could use
Tom's toothpaste or whatever and you could be as smart and as caring and as intelligent
and as learned as my parents, something changed about my world forever.
With crest toothpaste. With crest toothpaste. Because as soon as you know that actually
everything I do is not the only way to do it or the only right way to do it,
it opens up the possibility that everything you know is wrong. And all of modern culture
is this balance between, what do I know that's really right and worth preserving,
and what have I learned from all these other wonderful people and cultures and exposure
and so on that should change. And it's, for anybody who cares about tradition,
it is a constant daily dilemma that doesn't have any clear resolution.
I felt this way with, who is the Alan Sherman and Tom Lehrer?
Right. Alan Sherman, Tom Lehrer was really important to me. I mean,
those songs and the lyrics and the cleverness and the culture.
I loved Alan Sherman too, but okay. Oh, really?
Yeah, I did. I was with the on crest, anyway. Well, when I first went to India,
I think I was 19 or 20. And it was a profound experience. My first introduction actually
was going through Karachi. And I had to use the restroom and I got shown to a room
that had no resemblance to a restroom that I understood. There was no toilet, there was no paper.
And I progressively, and then went to Bombay and I realized I didn't know how to eat with
my fingers properly. I didn't know any of the customs. I realized I was being sent back to
infant hood. Right. And that the experience that you could do everything differently
was a shock. Yeah, it is a shock. And that people are as happy as, you know, kind as everything
that this, I mean, that's one of the advantages of the modern world, the post imperialist world,
that is really important is that the automatic assumption of the superiority of a culture
can no longer be maintained the way that it was unthinkingly even 50 years ago,
you know, and that's a good thing. Well, it is a good thing, but it's also not a good,
but it's also a problematic. So can we talk about this from our perspective because
one of the things that's driving me crazy at the moment in 2019 is self-hating Jews have been
a thing. It's a very tough road to hoe if you're Jewish and there's always this
temptation to turn on the group. Yes. I am seeing that same thing become self-hating Christians,
self-hating Americans, self-hating Europe. No question about it. And no one can figure out
how to say, you know what, I'm not necessarily against anybody else, but this culture is my
responsibility and it would be a little bit weird if Italians didn't think Italian food was amazing.
Yes. I think that the, we have to learn how to use the but without invalidating everything
that came before it, by which I mean you have to be able to say Western civilization has done,
but Europe, America, so on, terrible things, cruel things, unspeakable things, violence in all sorts
of ways, but it also gave the world its greatest benefits, its greatest blessings. The end of
slavery happened in Western civilization, not in Eastern civilizations, on and on and on and on,
and you have to be able to mean both. The problem is that everybody seems to align on one side of
the butter on the other. That is, they're either entirely devoted to the critique or they're entirely
devoted to the boosterism and you have to be able to hold both ends of the pole. You have to be able
to say, look, America does terrible things sometimes and that's real, but on the other hand,
look at what America brings to the world and has brought to the world. But where did this
polarization come from? I mean, all we do is we struggle and we weigh things and then it's so
I'm about to swear and I'm going to stop myself from doing it. It's so simplistic.
Yes, we do not live in the age of nuance. We live in the age of Twitter debate.
I'm going to disagree with this. I think we do live in the age of nuance. It's not that,
it's that the structures that used to support nuance where you could trust that that structure
could hold a perimeter have broken down. For example, I used to read the economist for nuance.
Institutionally, it seems to be under fire. Now, humans that used to work for the economist
are sipping their cognac saying, wow, this has really gone to hell in a handbasket,
but it's the institutional, the pressures on institutions are different from the pressures
on the autonomous individual. If you're lucky enough to have your own source of income or to
have your own wealth and you don't have to primarily work through things that are incorporated in
some sense, you can have nuance. It's now the sense making channels and I'm going to specifically
single out like the news organs, the political parties, the universities that have seen this
unbelievable crashing and burning going from problematic institutions that probably had
bigotries and prejudices and biases to lost, I mean, just embarrassingly lost structures that
can't remember why they exist. They realize that they're unfair. I feel like they're monks wearing
hair shirts, flagellating themselves for their imperfections.
Well, I think that part of that, I just would be no surprise to you, is in the age of instant
response, people are gun shy about straying from the orthodoxy of their team because it's one thing
if you're going to write an article and you're going to get some letters and some people will
be upset. But it's another thing if you're going to get slammed on Twitter and in social media
and people are going to write Facebook posts about you, you get scared.
Okay, but let's-
And therefore people don't venture out of their circle. And so if you're on one side of the
divide, you don't say anything nice about the people on the other side of the divide.
Yeah, but let's talk about what's really one of our best features as a culture, which is the
courage to stand alone. Now, one of the weird things, I just came from San Francisco where I was
at the kitchen, which is a congregation of kind of experimental Judaism. And one of the things
that I love in Judaism is when you're in the standing prayer, you take your time to say your
standing prayer and you don't necessarily sit down all at once. So you've always got some people
who take longer than everybody else who are just literally standing alone. And I always thought,
what a great aspect to have this be normal to stand alone. Now, I bring that up because I was
thinking recently about the weird fact that I know all of the names of the senators who opposed
the Patriot Act in the wake of 9-11, right? Because they're all named Feingold.
Russ Feingold was the only guy to vote against the Patriot Act when it was passed because
the country was in a fever to do something to take away people's rights. And one guy said,
no, right? I don't remember anybody's name on the other side of that vote, right? There's something
about standing alone, which I think speaks to our best impulses.
Yes. I mean, I certainly understand that the indispensable quality to lead a good life is
courage and that courage is hard. And you'd see it on display every single day when in Twitter,
which is a universe that you and I both inhabit, and Facebook and other places.
I should warn you, apparently, I suck. I'm an idiot and I totally don't get it.
Exactly. There you go.
To say something that is against the orthodoxy of the side that you have up to then identified with
is, you know, probably like you, I get attacked from the left and the right. And I have people
all the time who tell me that I'm clearly a conservative and other people tell me that
I'm clearly a liberal because I actually, I vary in my reaction to different, right,
to different things, exactly, to different things. But it's very hard. It's really very hard.
And I remember after the same-sex marriage thing, I remember saying to my daughter,
something really wonderful that Churchill said after the Boer War, he said,
it's exhilarating to be shot at without result, which I thought was great. And I said,
you see, all these people were angry at me and all of them wrote bad things about me or said
bad things about me. Because you came out for- Because I came out for same-sex marriage. And
then I said I would start to do same-sex marriages. And a lot of members of my congregation and
elsewhere, it was such a big controversy. It was literally on the front page of the New York
and the LA Times. That's how big a deal it was. There were a lot of attacks and some of them were
very vicious, as you can imagine. But I wanted her to see that it was okay to say things that
people- I said the people who loved me still love me and the people who hated me still hate me.
And some of them maybe moved into one category or the other. But in the end, it's not-
How fast is this normalized? I mean, I remember that it was-
It took a while. It took a while.
I think, to be honest-
Oh, you're talking about gay marriage.
Well, I'm incredible.
I don't even call it gay marriage.
Yeah, whatever it is.
Whatever it is.
But like-
The fastest I've ever seen.
Six years ago, I heard the word- a man say the word husband for the first time about
his partner. And I thought, oh, I didn't know how that resolved. How would the words even be
assigned? Now it's the most normal thing in the world. And the other odd part about it,
the other one that went that fast was smoking. I was like, no progress, no progress, no progress.
Yes.
You can't smoke in a bar?
I know.
I mean, like people-
It's true.
Right. Okay.
Those are the two fastest social changes that I-
Well, but it makes me wonder how many of these things really just require one penguin
to jump into the water and find out that there's no leopard seal that can take it
before there's a mass exodus. I think right now, nobody believes in the New York Times
or Fox or CNN. We know that they're all compromised.
And we also know that, for example, the Democratic and Republican parties
are worthless. They are standing in the way of our future. And what we don't know is how to get
out of these- we're in a straight jacket imposed by people we didn't elect, didn't choose,
that are not functioning according to the best aspects of those traditions.
I mean, I haven't- I was a critic of the New York Times in the 80s.
It's something different now. And these things are not wholesome. They're not ours.
And we need to get rid of them. And part of what the portal is, is a search for a way out.
If I don't like either political party, if I don't like any of my sense-making
organs for journalism, how do I escape this?
I don't- look, I have been a registered independent most of my life.
Exactly the reason that you expressed was I didn't think that either one sufficiently
represented what I thought about the world for me to be one or the other. And that is
even truer today than it has ever been in my lifetime. And I would say that the amplification
of this kind of conversation and the kind of conversations that you have with the people in
your world and circle, that's hopefully that will start to spread out. It was in the late 1980s
that the first article was written by Andrew Sullivan about same-sex marriage.
So that's an incredibly fast social- that was the first time it was mentioned.
The very fast social change. This could- I mean, the structures are clearly under stress.
I don't know how fast things collapse. I mean, the night before the Soviet Union went away,
everybody thought it was going to last forever. So maybe there are structures inside of the
states that people think will be ever-enduring, that will transform before our eyes. As a result
of the portal, the portal will give them a new way- Insha'Allah. Exactly, will give them a new
way to be. Or Bezrat Hashem, as we say on our side of the religious, yeah.
Exactly, I think it's good. I like that. I look at half of my congregation, maybe more,
is from Iran. Right. And so Insha'Allah is a very common-
Well, can we talk about our weird similarity with Islam? Because I think both you and I have
commented on this. Aside from the part that is like crazy murderous, anti-feminist, etc., etc.
I just love it. Right? Like, I'm very Islamophilic. The strength of the community, the warmth,
the food, the generosity, the discomfort with direct depictions of the divine.
I mean, there's tremendous homology between Jews and Muslims. And in fact, I think
they opened up a kosher deli in Harvard Square, and all of my Muslim friends were eating at the
kosher because Halal was close enough to Kashrut. Exactly. What do we do with this? I mean,
it's- We're in such a weird place. It is agonizing. It's agonizing because, first of all,
Jews and Christians have reached a rapprochement that would have been unimaginable for previous
generations. And so one can hope that the same thing would happen with Islam and Judaism.
Right now, so much of the focus is political, which is also a problem in general.
You know, when people have nothing, no culture is in common.
All the talk turns to politics, and politics swallows everything. And because America doesn't
have a common culture anymore, nobody watches the same shows or reads the same books or
listens to the same music. Yeah, sort of. That Game of Thrones thing was pretty big.
It was pretty big. But my guess, it was pretty big in- Even there wasn't big like, you know-
Like Walter Cronkite. Exactly. So everything becomes politics. And when politics starts to
swallow everything, including relations between religions, it- I don't want to say it poisons it,
but it poisons it. Well, I've been looking to humor and music. And I don't know. I want you to
check out my favorite band. Okay. My favorite band is a band called the Cominas. All right.
And I think they're out of Boston. And I think the word Comina means like bastards,
like the momsers, you know? Yeah. And they are a bunch of, I think, Muslim graduate students who
formed something like this. And they started off doing Islamo punk. So they had a song called
Suicide Bomb, The Gap. And they had another song called Sharia Law in the USA. And their album
was Wild Nights in Guantanamo Bay. They were so funny and witty. And they were actually doing
super dangerous- It sounds like- Right? Like if you perform this stuff in Lahore or someplace,
you know, it's no joke. But because they were, you know, they were clearly like witty and introspective
and playing with the dangerous stuff and doing it in public, I felt this instant connection. I think
that they've told me that they're not happy with me. I'm sure it's because they don't know me or
because I hang around with Sam Harris. But I'm looking to boost the signal of all of these people
who are willing to struggle in public. Yes. Because that's what, that is what you need. And you,
as you said, you need those lone voices I still have in my head about 10 years ago. We had
a bunch of scholars from around the world, religion scholars. There were graduate students
and some professors who came to a service at the synagogue. And afterwards, a guy from Pakistan
said to me, you know, I've never been in a synagogue. I had no idea what yous were like.
You're completely different from everything I learned growing up. And the service is different
and everything is different. And I said, just do me one favor. When you go home, tell people.
And he said, no one will believe me. And I thought, no one will believe you.
And I mean, what do you do with that? We got to do something better with this. I used to travel in
the Islamic world openly as a Jew. And I can tell you, I was treated so incredibly well. Now,
I always was concerned that this was a stupid way of making a statement. And I would not do this
now. I don't think I would do it today. Only one place I ever encountered open antisemitism
was in Kargil on the border between India and Pakistan, where it said if every Muslim would
simply dump one bucket of water on the state of Israel, it would soon be washed to the sea or
something like this. So I did very often have the experience of somebody saying I'd never met a Jew
before. And I had a completely different idea of who you would be. There is the aspect in return,
which is I don't know what we do about the problem with some portion of Islam having become
cancerous and being spread through this internal network. And so much that is wonderful, wholesome
and decent, co-traveling with this sort of jihadist impulse. You know, look, we have our
own crazies. It's true, but it seems like in terms of a threat to the world, this is right now the
preeminent. Well, we got to be able to talk. Look, we have to be able to discuss this. And the thing
that I found, I would say my friend group has probably at its maximum was about 30% Muslim.
And the thing that changed my thinking about Islam and Judaism, it began with a lunch. And
there were three couples, one Jewish, which I was part of, one Muslim, where we had fixed them up,
and then one mixed where we had also fixed them up, one Jew, one Muslim. So the subject of Islam
and terror came up. And the table split straight down the middle with respect to whether there was
a connection between Islam and terror with Jews on one side and Muslims on the other. And the Jews
were all saying, this is a terrible blood libel that Muslims have been tarred with. And the Muslims
said, what the hell is your problem, Jews? This is a serious problem in our community. And you
better wake up to the fact that this is something you have to be able to talk about. And it was
very strange because we were each doing the work of the other community. Very interesting. Well,
I have not had, I haven't had that problem because as I said, given that so many of my members
grew up in Iran, they have no problem talking about what their perception is. And they consider
Iran in particular to be the great rogue state and the leadership of Iran to be as dangerous as
virtually anything in the world. Although many of them, not all, but many of them have a lot of
confidence in or at least a lot of affection for the people and think that they're very different
from their government. Well, that's certainly that is the case. But the other issue with Iran,
let's be honest, is that Persians are one of the most accomplished people in the face of the
earth. They are excellent game players and they are a force to be reckoned with. And so there's
a certain kind of respect that one has to have for Iran as a major intellectual, cultural
and military powerhouse. And so part of the fear of Iran comes out of a reverence for
Persian culture. What I want to do is to try to get out of this black and white thinking,
so that we are actually able to talk about different problems of these communities and to
say, here's what's good, here's what's bad. For example, one of the things that I think you
and I both struggle with is how to talk about the need that you and I may feel to support Israel
in the context of being somewhat open about Israel's various failings and brutalisms
of a community that it should not and does not wish to be occupying.
Right. It's very hard to talk about Israel these days in any kind of sophisticated way because
the camps are so, as you said, they're so polarized and also the stakes for the sides
are so high. Yeah, it's that kind of political conversation gets overwhelmed by the loudest
voices on each side of the conversation. And it's just, it's very hard and invariably,
it doesn't take place in a vacuum. I mean, look, even the Israel-Palestinian issue doesn't take
place in a vacuum. It's part of a much larger picture of the Middle East in general. I always
want to talk about the Ottoman-Palestinian issue. Yeah, exactly. Jordanian-Palestinian issue.
That's right. I know, which is really important. And also because what people don't realize,
Mati Friedman, who is a journalist in Israel and an author of several really fine books,
talks about this a lot, is that half of Israel's population comes from the Middle East. We think
of it as sort of Europe sitting in the Middle East, but it's not. The culture is from the Middle
East, the music is from the Middle East, the food is from the Middle East. And so it's actually,
in some ways, he says this to be a little provocative, but it's somewhat true. It's partly
a creation of the Arab states who, after all, expelled their Jews who ran to Israel.
And so there's this larger mosaic of a struggle all through the Middle East about what kind of
culture will be created there that makes it not so easy to just talk about, these people are good
and these people are bad. It's, as you said, these conversations require more time and thought
and nuance than we generally give them. Well, but I guess one of the things that really concerns me,
and maybe I can do this first with the U.S. and then take the same lens and put it on Israel,
or let's start with the U.S., Britain, and then Israel. I am a huge fan of all three of these
countries. Part of being attached to these cultures is being able to talk about the actual,
you use the word Peskutsva, the dirty disgusting things that each of these cultures have done.
And including in the U.S. context, my family was not treated well by our country during the
McCarthy era. For the Jews, we're going for far-left stuff. Some of it dipped into communism
and the anti-communism, I'm weirdly against communism and against anti-communism. I view them as twin
scourges. With all my knowledge of this country and all of its crimes and all of its lapses and
its failure to live up to its own ideals and the transgressions of the Dulles brothers, all this
stuff, I love this country. And it's not the love of a child for a perfect idealized parent before
teenage years set that straight. It's a mature love saying, I know what a nation is and I know
that they have to lie and I know that they have terrible periods in their histories and all told,
this is really an important and fantastic place. That's how I feel about England. I mean,
God knows those people were brutal in the colonial eras to all sorts of people. But
you see these people in Hong Kong waving British flags with Chinese faces and you realize it's
a much more complicated situation. In Bombay, where my wife is from, you get into conversations with
people and it's very like, here's the good stuff we got from the British, here's the bad stuff.
This is the same for me with Israel. I don't want to have to say, hey, we're so moral, we're so
wonderful, we've done everything perfectly because we have it. But it doesn't negate the need to
support this state. I don't understand why it is that I'm in some situation where people say,
well, don't you realize that they've done this, that and the other horrible thing? So you should
be against it. Right. Yes. Well, I mean, I would say if there's one underlying theme that has run
through the, I don't know how long we've been podcasting, but it seems like it is. But just
like in the desert, every single day has been meaningful. But if there's one theme, it is the
rejection of absolutism and simplicity for complexity and the willingness to hold two sides
and say they're both valid. And that's what I think we have lost increasingly in this
culture is that everybody is a crusader for the black and the white and not for all the shades
in between, which is really where all of us live for most of our lives. We just don't apply it to
the great issues, but we need to. All right, I've got two more topics and then I'll let you out.
Okay. Okay. First one is kind of a dangerous one, which is that I'm watching the Holocaust
survivors in my life dwindle to a handful and mostly they were child children during the period.
I am increasingly convinced that we are wasting the twilight of living memory of the Holocaust
by not approaching Germany and offering a much deeper reconciliation than we have to date.
That in some sense, we got bound up, we Jews got bound up in German culture. Obviously,
Yiddish language is middle-high German of some infused with. Yes. We benefited a great deal
from Germanic and Teutonic things and they benefited a great deal from having us as a
community attached to them. No question. We were in some sense may have been too similar
and caused some problem because if you think about the German contribution, 1700s, 1800s,
yeah, incomparable. Yes. Should we be using this time before the last
who remember this period to come up with a deeper reconciliation between the two cultures?
I'm not sure what that would look like if you would.
Well, for example, you know, Klezmer, the Jewish jazz, died out pretty much has a tiny canon on
recorded material and it got revitalized because Germans were willing to pay for
modern. Right. But what would it mean? I mean, what are we not doing that we should do? We should
encourage Jews to travel to Germany. We should, I mean, there's a pretty
close relationship of Germany and Israel, for example. Yeah, I'm talking a more personal
relationship. I feel very weird about the connection. I still don't feel, I drive a
Volkswagen. I don't feel really comfortable with it. I mean, there's some sort of ceremonial
ritualistic thing of letting young German, I worried about the German guilt and the whole
migration crisis where Germans are still saying we are not Nazis. And I'm looking at these people
and saying, you know, you're maybe something problematic in the cultural lineage, but don't
overdo the guilt because that's going to snap back on. I do remember years ago, I went to Germany
as part of a delegation of Jewish leaders from the Conrad Adenauer Foundation. And it was an
amazing trip. And I don't know if they still do that. But I just, I think that you're up against
a deeper problem, which is that Americans in general and American Jews also don't
connect to any foreign country, particularly. We are so, I had a group of this past about,
I don't know, three, four months ago, Frank Luntz brought a group from NYU Abu Dhabi. So if there
were students from all over the world, and most of them from the Middle East, they brought them
to the synagogue and I spoke to them about a range of issues. And one of them said to me,
what makes America, what's America's greatest blessing or its greatest gift? And I said,
that's easy. Canada, Mexico, ocean, ocean. I said, more than anything else, because think
of where you live and how you have all these different, you know, competing cultures around
you. I said, we have two really, I mean, yes, we once had a war with Mexico, but we have two
countries on our border that pose absolutely no threat to us. Immigration aside, I'm talking
about threat, threat, military threat, massed right on the border. And the oceans have never
attacked us, except once in JAWS. That was it. So the isolation, that's why Americans don't speak
foreign languages. That's why we don't generally know foreign countries very well. And that,
I think, is part of the reason why we haven't come to know Germany better. I think it's more to do
with that even than with a cultural reluctance to do it. I'm convinced that if we don't get to
know Germany better, as you say, we will not come to understand ourselves, because a lot of our
history was bound up. And I also believe that a guilty Germany is a danger to the planet. And that
we are, it is up to us to release modern Germans from some of the horror of the guilt, because
it wasn't them. No modern Germany is guilty. I mean, unless maybe they're in their 90s,
that's what I'm saying, the last of them. But anybody under, I guess, 80, I don't know that,
I have to do the exact... The reason it's on my mind is I just spoke... I had thought that I might
open the podcast with a cousin I had never met, Eva Kor, who was a Mengele twin who forgave Mengele.
And I just spoke to her and she said, yeah, I'll do it when I come back. And then she went to Auschwitz
for her annual pilgrimage and she died in Poland on the trip. So I'm, it's very much on my mind.
Right. I will be there actually this year. I'm doing the March of the Living in March or April
right after Passover. I'm going to do it this year. I've never done it. So, and what's the second
issue? The last question. The last, yes. Let me imagine that we were able to learn
our own source code in physics. So that after this, whatever this final theory
might be, there was no reason to keep searching mathematically for a more complete theory.
How would that affect potentially your relationship to Judaism? And can you conceive
of what the kind of shape and nature of such a theory would be scientifically so that
we stopped asking for further refinements and to push further?
So I think, first of all, for me to talk to you about what a final theory in physics would look
like is, is a presumption that all your listeners just must be cracking up at.
No, we're both in the transcendence business, sir.
But I mean, I like, I always liked the Robert Jastrow image, which you may know that he said,
when physicists, you know, climb that final mountain, they're going to find
God looking at them from the other side. I know you're rolling your eyes. I don't
know if people listening can see that. I always liked it. I liked the image.
Come on, a little poetry in your physics. I am sure you can. I have no doubt about that.
I think that the I have, I don't believe that it's possible. And I'll tell you why I say that.
I have a deep and abiding faith in the limitations of the human mind. And by that,
I don't mean that we can't do astonishing things. But part when I ask people sometimes,
this is how you can tell if you're religious. Is there a mystery at the heart of the world?
Not a puzzle, but a mystery, because a puzzle you can figure out, but a mystery is,
in principle, unfigureoutable. And I really believe that there is a mystery at the heart
of the universe, not a puzzle, so that we won't ever have the kind of final theory that you're
talking about, because the world is created by something infinitely greater than anything we
can imagine. When I have to talk about God to high school kids, for example, and I tell them,
look, I have no idea what God is. I have no idea. I said, think of it this way,
when you were two years old, could you have imagined what a 14-year-old is? Not only could
you not have imagined it, you couldn't have imagined what it is that you can't imagine.
So I assume that whatever is out there, that whatever is ultimate, is so far beyond anything
or any human being can conceive of, that I think our fate is to always search and be more and more
more comprehensive, but never to achieve the kind of finality that is suggested by your question.
See, that's really weird to me. I'll give you two examples of why it doesn't work.
For me, I'm not saying you're wrong. The first is the number of different phenomena
that were encompassed by Maxwell's equations. I can really write Maxwell's equations in a
modern context in one line. It doesn't require four different equations. And all of that stuff
about x-rays and UV and visible light and magnetism and electricity, it's all subsumed in this one
damn equation. So there are these condensations where you realize that it's much simpler than
you ever imagined. So one, I think you're discounting the amount of unification, the idea that every
living thing is predicated on 20 amino acids and four nucleotides so far as we know, or that everything
that you see out there is just up quarks, down quarks, electrons, and whatever we use to stick
them together. It looks very varied, but the set is very small. The other thing I might say is imagine
that you begin in a neighborhood and you're exploring the planet, and every time
you walk in a direction, you find new, wondrous, magical things you've never seen before.
You will incorrectly infer that if you keep walking, it will always be thus. And you won't see
the age of intercontinental exploration come to a close. I think you've discounted both of those
things. Well, and what I would say to you is 500 years ago, you were in the position of that
two-year-old. You couldn't imagine what you couldn't imagine the Maxwell's equations would answer or
that... I mean, look, I think about when I was a kid and we used to think we're going to travel
around on jetpacks. If I had said to you, no, you won't travel around on jetpacks, but you will hold
all of human knowledge in your pocket. I would have said, you're crazy. That couldn't be. And yet
now we do. I have a great deal of faith in the unfathomable. I think that you're making the opposite
mistake because we have figured out so much as compared to 1,000 years ago, we are therefore
close to the end. And what I think is with every discovery, you will discover vast realms of
ignorance that you haven't yet even begun to tap that will make the idea of a final theory
a comprehensive theory. You're mistaken what a final theory is. There's a question about going
down towards the foundations. There's a question about going up towards the consequences. I will
agree that if we go down towards the foundations, that tells us nothing about all the different
ways we might arrange what we learn at the foundations to create emergence. So what are you
asking me about how I envision a final theory? That it would be mathematical, that it would be
religious. Presumably you know we've been trying to come up with the theory of everything.
When you hear the words theory of everything, I mean, I always think that the physicists who
traffic in that have never thought through the question of, assume that you actually,
you know, that the dog caught the car. Do you have any idea of what that would even look like?
Because to say this is complete, does it have no beginning? You say unmoved mover,
like there's no boundary condition. I mean, you give me an idea of how crazy this is. Let me give
you my version of God since you've given me some indication of yours. Okay, go ahead.
I believe that God starts off being a boundary condition, being a design constraint, completely
inanimate, non-sentient. And the reason that I don't like the thing about get to the highest peak
and you reach the end and God is there is that it mistakes the magic that I think might happen,
which is we're worrying right now about artificial intelligence. We don't realize that we are the
artificial intelligence that arose in the system. And if Darwinian theory is true,
right, this bubbled up emergently, and that when we learn our own source code,
is that what effectively creates a meaningful version of God? Because it started out inanimate
and that we are that which will animate it because we are that which arose emergently within the
system. So I don't know. I mean, I'm tempted to repair to the Asimov story where the supreme
intelligence, you know, after it reaches its culmination, spits out a message and the message
says, let there be light. I don't remember the name of the story. I remember reading it as a kid.
But I think when the dog catches the car, it will discover that it doesn't entirely understand
what the car is. But I don't know. I mean, it's so far beyond what I am capable of understanding
about the shape of the theory, as it exists now, never mind what the final theory would be,
that I can only take refuge in theological speculations. I don't have physics or mathematical
speculation. And the theological speculation is, as in, to quote, one of the great churchfathers
Aquinas, that we're like that we're emptying the ocean with a teaspoon.
Well, you know, the part that I can agree with you is when people ask me, what's your best guess
is to the meaning of life? I always think it's a trap. But the sentence I come up with that makes
sure you don't spill out into any easy answer is the meaning of life for me is the struggle to impart
meaning to meaning. And that way, if you decide that life is meaningless, or you say that you
really know what the meaning of life absolutely is, you fail because you're no longer struggling.
Right. And so everything that you're talking about speaks of the struggle which animates us
and keeps us vital. That is a beautiful sentence on which to end. Well, Rabbi Wolpe, thank you for
joining us here. Thank you. And we return you now back through the portal. You've been enjoying it
with Rabbi Wolpe of Temple Sinai in Los Angeles. Be well.
