Hello, this is Eric with Two Pieces of Housekeeping before we get to today's episode with Sir Roger Penrose.
Now, in the first place, we released episode 19 on the biomedical implications of Brett's evolutionary prediction from first principles of elongated telomeres and laboratory rodents.
I think it's a significant enough episode and we've had so much feedback around it that before we continue any kind of line of thinking surrounding that episode,
I'm going to wait for my brother and his wife Heather Hying to return from the Amazon where they're currently in Communicado.
So thanks for all the feedback. It's been very interesting to process.
The second piece of Housekeeping surrounds today's episode with Roger Penrose.
Now, I know what I'm supposed to do. I'm supposed to talk about quantum consciousness and the emperor's new mind,
maybe ask Roger about the many worlds interpretation of quantum mechanics or the weirdness of quantum entanglement.
I'm actually not that interested.
I also don't want to go back to his earliest work on singularities and general relativity with Stephen Hawking.
What I instead want to do is to remind you what Roger is in fact famous for.
He's one of the greatest geometric physicists now living.
He's perhaps the best descendant of Albert Einstein, currently still working in theoretical physics in this particular line of thought.
I also think he's a great example of what the UK does well.
He has a very idiosyncratic approach to trying to solve the deepest problems in theoretical physics called twister theory.
I'm not expert in it, and I can't always follow it.
So if you're not following everything in today's episode, instead of deciding that the episode has somehow failed you,
try to remember that people who are working in mathematics and theoretical physics spend most of their time listening to colleagues completely lost as to what their colleagues are saying.
So if you start to feel that you are being left behind by some line of thinking,
what we do is in general wait to see if another line of thinking opens up that we can try to catch.
You're not going to get all of the waves, and in fact the same thing is happening to me while I'm interviewing Roger.
He's not understanding everything I'm saying, I'm not understanding everything he's saying, and in fact this is normal.
So what I would like to do is to instead present you guys with an idea of what science actually sounds like when people are talking from two slightly different perspectives.
We spend an awful lot of time simply trying to understand each other.
And if that feels a little bit uncomfortable, well, then in fact you're getting a true scientific experience which is often very different than what you're getting when everything is pre-chewed and spoon-fed.
Hope you enjoy it. Without further ado, Sir Roger Penrose.
Hello, you've found the portal. I'm your host Eric Weinstein, and I'm here today with none other than Sir Roger Penrose.
Roger, welcome.
Hello, good to be here.
Good to have you. I'm extremely excited about having you here.
There are lots of questions that you typically get asked these days, many of them about consciousness, some of them about art objects that come out of your thinking.
But I know you in a professional capacity as one of the most important people at the nexus of geometry and physics in our time.
Of course, you can't say that, you can make all sorts of faces, but I can assure you that it's true.
You know, there's a Leonard Cohen quote from a song called The Future where he says,
you don't know me from the wind, you never will, you never did, but I'm the little Jew that wrote the Bible.
And I have what I consider to be the Bible right here, which is a book you wrote called The Road to Reality,
which there's no getting away from, maybe in my opinion, the most important modern book of our time,
because what it tries to do is to summarize what we know about the nature of all of this at the deepest level.
And I think what I want to do is to introduce you to our audience, which has been habituated over perhaps 16 or so interviews,
not to expect to understand everything.
They want to work, they want to hear conversations unlike any they've heard.
And so we'll do some combination of explaining things, but some combination of allowing them to look up things in their own free time.
If you're a game, shall we talk about The Road to Reality?
You can talk about that if you like it.
It'd be great.
So where are we in the history of coming to understand what this place is in which we find ourselves,
what we are made out of, and what we know about our own context?
It's a very tough question that.
I mean, when I wrote that book, it was more or less the state of the world at the time.
I now feel I should rewrite part of it because things have changed in one important way in particular,
as far as I'm concerned, whether other people agree with me is another question.
But I don't think I'm going to rewrite it because it was such an effort.
And I don't think I would be likely to live long enough to do a good job out of it.
Has that much really changed since you wrote the book at a deep level?
A lot has not changed.
The thing that has changed, in my view, you see, whether people agree with me on this is another question,
is to do with cosmology.
You see, I have a proposal which I didn't have.
I mean, it's new since the book.
It's not all that new because it's about 15 years old, but it's new since I wrote that book.
And in our time scales, that's quite new.
That's pretty new.
Let's just get some context.
You were born in the early 1930s.
You got a chance to live through, if not the original general relativistic and quantum revolutions,
their consequences.
In particular, you were able to take classes from people like Paul Dirac,
who scarcely seems like a human being, sometimes more like a god.
Oh, yeah, that was an experience.
Yes, when I was at Cambridge as a graduate student.
So I did my undergraduate work at London University, University College,
and then I went to Cambridge as a graduate student.
And I went to do algebraic geometry, so I wasn't trying to do physics at all.
And I'd encountered a friend of my brother's, Dennis Sharma,
when I think I was at University College as an undergraduate.
And he, given a series of talks on cosmology,
well, it started with the Earth and then he sort of worked his way out
and then talked about what was then referred to as the steady state theory,
where the universe expands and expands and expands,
but it doesn't change because all the time there is new matter created, hydrogen,
and the universe expands and then you get new material and it keeps replenishing what's got sloshed.
And I thought it was quite an intriguing...
I mean, Dennis was a great fan of this model and so I was really taken by it.
So the story was that I was in Cambridge visiting my brother,
my older brother Oliver, who did statistical mechanics,
and he was actually much more precocious than I was.
He was two years ahead and he was, I think, finishing his research there.
But I had been listening to these talks by Fred Hoyle
and he was talking, I think, in his last talk about how in the steady state model
the galaxies expanded away, expanded away,
and then when they reached the speed of light they disappear.
And I thought that can't be quite right
and I started drawing pictures with light cones and things like this
and I thought, well, they would fade, gradually fade, but they wouldn't just disappear.
And when I visited Cambridge, visiting my brother,
and we were at the Kingswood restaurant in Cambridge,
and I said to my brother,
I said, well, look, I don't understand what Fred was saying,
it doesn't sort of make sense to me.
And he said, well, I don't know about cosmology,
but sitting over there on the table is a friend of mine,
he knows all the answers to these things.
And that was Dennis Sharma.
And so I explained this problem I had to Dennis and he was pretty impressed
because he said he didn't know the answer,
but he would ask Fred, Fred Hoyle.
And the main thing was that when I did come up to do graduate work
in algebraic geometry, Dennis decided to take me under his wing
and try to persuade me to change my subject and do cosmology.
So you were simultaneously under the great geometer, Hajj, as well as Dennis Sharma?
Well, Hajj was my supervisor.
See, Dennis was just a friend.
Hajj was my supervisor originally until he threw me out
and Todd became my supervisor.
That's another little story.
But Dennis just wanted to get me interested, do work in cosmology.
He wanted me to change my subject.
I learned an awful lot from Dennis about physics
because Dennis sort of knew everything and everybody.
And he had a real knack of getting,
if he thought two people should meet each other,
he made sure they did meet each other.
In one case, it was Stephen Hawking.
But Dennis was actually, when you mentioned Dirac,
Dennis was actually the last graduate.
At the time, he was the only graduate student of Dirac's.
Is that right?
Yes, Dennis was Dirac's.
That was famously sort of difficult.
I think that in recent years, this book came out of Graham Formella,
the strangest man that puts Dirac's bizarreness in line with it.
He was difficult to get to know.
But there's a bit of an irony here.
I mean, certainly he was hard for physicists to get to know him.
Now, there were two people.
And actually, maybe I could just say one thing to our listeners.
Yes.
In my estimation, if not yours,
Dirac would be neck and neck with Einstein
for the greatest of 20th century physicists.
I think I wouldn't be far off that description.
For some reason, his press wasn't nearly as good,
maybe because of his hair, I don't know.
Well, he didn't talk much.
This is one of the problems.
No, I agree.
I think he was, I mean, you think about all the quantum mechanics people
who developed that amazing subject.
And Dirac was really the one who put it all in order and so on.
And this gets to a very odd issue,
which is that you have wielded taste and beauty as a weapon your entire life.
Your drawings are among the most compelling.
I remember the first time, one of the things I've done
using our friend Joe Rogan's program
is to push out discussion of the hop vibration
because it's the only non-trivial principle bundle
that can be visually seen.
And since the world seems to be about principle bundles,
it's a bit odd that the general population
doesn't know that stuff of which we are.
Yes.
Well, the hop vibration or the Clifford parallels
was instrumental in the subject of Twister theory.
Well, but the first time I ever saw a diagram,
it was somebody reproducing a diagram they had seen of yours.
So the way in which you have used art and sketches
has been transformative.
The picture was drawn by hand.
I mean, there were, I think, some circles involved,
which I use a compass for.
But basically, I drew it by hand.
There were two versions of it.
The first one was more...
I sort of threaded...
The first one had more circles in it,
and I thought I'd draw a little more simply in the second version.
Well, actually, I had three versions.
The third version is in the road to reality.
But I'm not sure it's the best.
I think the second version perhaps is the best.
So Dirac, getting back to it, had this elegance of mind
that was unrelenting.
Yes.
And he famously brought in these bizarre objects
with which some of us are obsessed,
others of us don't understand the obsession called spinners,
which sort of a prerequisite to getting to twister theory,
which you've popularized.
Well, when I went to the...
You see, Dirac gave a course of lectures in quantum mechanics,
and the first course was sort of basic quantum mechanics.
And the second course was on quantum field theory,
but also spinners.
And there's an interesting story about that,
which I don't know the answer to.
In the second course, he deviated from his normal course of lectures.
Now, I understood when I talked to Graham Farmalo,
who wrote this biography of Dirac,
I understood from Graham Farmalo that when I described
that Dirac deviated from his normal course
to give two or three lectures on two-component spinners,
which for me were absolutely what I needed.
You see, I learned from my work on algebraic geometry,
which ended up by trying to understand tensor systems
as abstract systems and things which you can't represent in terms of components.
And I should just say that in terms of these two-component spinners you're talking about,
for the lay audience,
all of the matter that they think about,
whether it's bound up in electrons or the quarks that make up protons and neutrons,
if you think of these things as waves,
which many people in our audience will be familiar with that concept,
the question is, what medium are they waves in?
And the medium would be a medium of spinners,
which is not something that's easy for people to understand.
Yeah, well, it's they're not.
And certainly the formalism, you see, Dennis,
I told him I need to understand about spinners,
and particularly the simplest ones are these two-component spinners.
And he suggested I read this book by Corson.
So I got the book by Corson, and I found it completely incomprehensible.
Just, I mean, it was a fascinating book because it was very comprehensive.
It described all these different spins, fields, and different things like that.
And using a lot of two-component spinners, which is the right way to do it.
But to introduce what these objects were was almost incomprehensible, I found.
Mainly because you have these translation symbols all over the place,
and they mess up the appearance of the formulae.
So I just found this thing very complicated and incomprehensible.
But then I went to Dirac's second course.
It may have been not the same year.
I think he went one year, I did the first,
and maybe the second course was when I was a research fellow,
rather than when I was a graduate student.
I can't quite remember.
I think it must have been when I was a research fellow.
Anyway, this was a course on quantum field theory and things like that.
But he sort of deviated from his normal course in one week
to talk about two-component spinners.
And for me, this was exactly what I needed.
It made the whole subject clear from this complete confusion that I had before.
Now then you see, many years later, I talked to Graham Farmerlow,
and I told him the story.
And he said, that's very strange.
Dirac would never deviate from his course.
He thought when he got his course perfect, it was perfect.
He would never change.
And this was true of his first year course, the initial course,
which people often said to me,
well, it's not such a great course, it's exactly like his book.
Well, I hadn't read his book.
So to me, this was, sure, the book is amazing too.
But not having read the book, I found this course absolutely stunning.
It made things up.
Do you think Dirac actually understood these objects, these most mysterious objects?
Two-component spinners.
Spinners in general.
I mean, he brought them into physics.
They'd been previously found inside of mathematics.
I think by people like Killing and Lee, I'm not sure who.
Yes.
Cartan perhaps.
I don't think, I mean, let me throw out a really dangerous idea.
I don't think any of us understand them at all.
And the part of the problem was that he understood very well what could be said about them.
Yeah.
But I asked you before about your favorite film, you said 2001.
You could make an argument that spinners in mathematics and physics,
like the monolith, it's always encountered.
Nobody ever understands exactly what it means, but it always grabs your attention
because it seems so absolutely bizarre and highly conserved.
Well, I always like to think of things geometrically.
And at least for the two-component ones, you see, when you go up to higher dimensions,
you still have spinners.
But the spinners, the dimension of the spinners goes up exponentially.
So each time you add two to the dimension of the space and the dimension of the spinners,
it's multiplied by two.
So a dimension 2D, for example, you'd get spinners of dimension 2 to the D over 2.
Yeah, that's the sort of thing.
That's right.
And so the, well, usually one talks about the Dirac spinners, which are the four-dimension,
the four-dimension spinners.
The full, right, right, right.
But they split into these two, two and two.
In even dimensions.
Yes, that's right.
In even dimensions.
And I like to understand these things geometrically.
So you could see what the two components have been represented.
And I had this picture of a flag.
So you have the flag pole goes along the light cone.
So that's a...
That's the vector-like piece of it.
Yeah, it's a...
And then you have an extra piece of data.
An extra piece, which is this flag plane.
And you get a pretty good geometrical understanding.
The one little catch to it is that if you rotate it through 360 degrees, so you might
think just to where it started, it's not the same as it was before.
It's changed its sign.
And then you rotate it again.
So...
Well, that won't make any sense to anyone.
But if, I mean, one way of looking at that is if you have a Klein bottle, and for those
of...
Some people will be listening to this in audio, some watching it in video.
A Klein bottle, in a certain sense, that can be made precise, has a square root that would
be a torus.
That is a double cover.
So it seems like a very weird thing to take a square root of a strange topological mobius-like
object.
But there you are.
Yeah.
So it's really the square root of the rotations that has this double effect.
But we say it linguistically in a way that makes it almost impossible for anyone to understand.
Well, I think this was a mystery.
I mean, I understood that the spinner was the square root of a vector, you see.
And I couldn't make out a tale of that idea.
And it was...
When I went to Dirac's course, it did become clear.
And he made...
He gave this very impressive illustration, which I thought was due to Dirac.
I learned later it was due to Hermann Weill.
But you imagine a cone, circular cone, some space like that, circular cross-section.
And another equal cone, which rolls on it.
So one is fixed, and the other one rolls around on it.
Now, you see, when you imagine initially the cone is almost just a little spike.
I mean, you've got a tiny circle at the end.
And when you roll one on the other, it's like rolling one coin on the other coin.
And you can see, when you roll one coin, another coin, it goes around twice.
It goes 720 degrees to go around.
Now, when you imagine gradually increasing the angle, the semi-angle of the cone,
and you do it again, you keep thinking of that motion, until it becomes almost flat.
And then what's the other one?
It's just a little wobble.
So when it becomes flat, this motion goes to nothing.
So this illustrates how a rotation through four pi, two complete rotations,
gradually can be deformed into no rotation at all.
However, with single rotation, it doesn't disappear.
Well, I think with a pulley system and a wheel, we don't have any trouble imagining a wheel
that rotates twice as fast, half as fast, not at all, hooked up to one particular crank wheel.
The problem comes when that that's not the generic case.
The generic case is usually encountered one dimension higher.
Three and up has a familiar, because something called the fundamental group,
as it's structured in Zmod 2, rather Z in dimension two.
So there is something where in the place where you can see this most easily,
it's slightly misleading.
And then in higher dimensions, you have to learn how to tutor your intuition,
which is this problem that all of us who try to think about higher dimensional objects
encounter is that we have to use the visual cortex we're handed,
and then we have to trick it into imagining worlds beyond where we've seen.
But you see, Dirac has another thing that I'd...
There's a thing called the Dirac-Cises problem.
So you imagine a chair which has the pieces of wood going out like this,
and you have a pair of scissors.
I think this is Dirac's joke that it was a pair of scissors.
And through the...
where you put your fingers, you have a piece of string which goes through these
and then goes around the chair and then comes back through the other one and goes back again.
Now the problem is you take the scissors and you rotate them through...
360.
360 degrees, and the strings all tangled up.
Whatever you do, you can't untangle it.
You're allowed to move the scissors around parallel, not rotate them,
and you can move the string around it and you can't undo it.
But you do twice, 470 degrees, two complete rotations,
and then you find you can untangle it.
So this was the Dirac-Cises problem.
And I think the joke was it's a pair of scissors,
so if you get so frustrated you just cut the string.
You just cut things where you're not.
And he wrote a paper explaining...
I think Max Newman wrote a paper.
Dirac did... this is an illustration of how you can undo it when it's 4 pi.
470 degrees.
But to prove that you couldn't do it with...
This is, I think Max Newman had a...
Have you seen this video called Air on the Dirac String,
which illustrates this in video form?
I haven't seen the...
I would highly recommend it because it shows this off as the similarity to the belt trick,
the Philippine wine glass dance, all of these different versions.
I find I could do that one actually.
I had Joe Rogan try it.
I think he got almost all the way around.
Yeah, no, I've done it with a glass of water.
Yes, you go like that and it comes back.
Very stylish.
Yes.
So you can do two complete rotations.
Two complete rotations.
Yes.
So this is a very fundamental property of the world that is somehow not discussed.
I think I find it very interesting that people want to talk to me about the multiverse.
Sometimes they want to talk to me about quantum measurement problem.
But the idea that we are somehow based on a square root,
and I would disagree with you slightly if you would permit it.
Go ahead.
It's not just a question of the square root of the vectors.
It's a square root of the algebra generated by the vectors that really the spinners are,
this exterior or Clifford algebra.
Oh, yeah.
This object has fascinated me my entire life.
And it's very strange that all of the stability of matter and matter's strange properties
with electron shells are all coming out of this weird knot
that appears everywhere in the universe.
And it's not universally known that it's even there.
Yeah, it's the difference between the fermions and the bosons.
So the particles which have a spin, which is half an odd number.
Right.
Which have this curious property that you rotate them and they get back to manage themselves.
And it's crucial for matter, because the Pali exclusion principle depends on the Fermi statistics,
which is to do with the exactest property.
So without this knottedness and the scissor trick or whatever you want to call it,
we wouldn't have a periodic table and chemical elements.
You wouldn't have anything.
We wouldn't have anything.
Yeah, you wouldn't have fermions.
In other words, you wouldn't have things which have an exclusion principle.
And the bosons, which are the opposite, they like to be on...
If you have two bosons, you can have them in the same state.
They'd rather like to be in the same state.
So you get these things called bosons and condensates where if you get them very cold,
they all flop together into the same state.
But for the fermions, it's completely the opposite.
They hate to be in the same state, or they can't be.
And this is what sort of pushes them apart.
So you get the fermi principle.
So you have this strange thing called the spin statistics theorem
that says that if things have a knottedness of a particular kind,
then they either are highly individualistic or highly communistic,
whatever you want to call it.
My question would be, there's another aspect of that that I've been very curious about,
which is when we have to treat these objects quantum mechanically,
and you've of course thought a great deal about quantum theory,
we have two totally different prescriptions for how to make these different objects quantum mechanical,
but there's a one-to-one correspondence between these two utterly different treatments
that matter and force get quantum mechanically.
It's the darndest thing.
When you get these two kinds of particles, two kinds of atoms,
the bosons and the fermions,
and it has to do with the...
Make a complete rotation.
Do they come back to themselves or do they come back to minus themselves?
That's the topological bit.
But then there's this whole thing that might go under,
like bear is in integration, which is no integration at all.
I mean, you're effectively almost lying about what you're doing to the fermions
to make them look like bosons.
And yet, what we seem to get out of this is that nobody...
I don't think anyone could have anticipated that there would be a dictionary
of two totally different structures, which seems to be almost word-for-word.
Yes, because they're not totally different in the sense that you take a two-fermion system
and you get a boson, so you're all part of the same way.
Yes, that's right.
Now, maybe I could ask you a little bit about that.
So I want to get to supersymmetry, but before I do...
Yes, okay, go on.
We're going to make you work this morning, sir.
I can understand that.
So here's my question.
Am I correct that you've lived through two eras,
an era of fairly rapid development in testable fundamental physics coming from theory?
I've tried to be very careful about setting that up so I don't walk into a trap.
And a stagnant era in which theoretical predictions coming at the level of fundamental theory
have not been rapidly confirmed by experiment.
You're thinking of things like string theory?
I'm thinking about a regime before the early 70s and a regime following the early 70s.
Supersymmetry, is that what you meant?
Well, it could be grand unified theory, supersymmetry, technicolor.
It could be asymptotic safety.
It could be any one of a number of speculative theories from loop quantum gravity, regi-calculus, string theory.
It's like the kitchen sink.
We've tried a million different things that don't...
They didn't really pan out.
Well, it seems like if you'll permit an American metaphor,
we've been waved into third base and we've been waiting for the signal to come home for about 50 years
and we're not even sure that anyone's still there at home plate.
Well, you see, you might be playing the wrong game, that's the trouble.
You think rounders would do it?
Well, I mean, there's a lot of intriguing ideas.
You mentioned, basically, I think you were hinting at supersymmetry is one of them, which...
Maybe I've thrown off close to 10.
I could do it pretty easily.
But I guess you had...
There's nothing new about that.
People were playing around with knots and things.
I mean, Kelvin was the idea that knots might be...
At the basis of particle identity.
Yeah.
I mean, these ideas come back again in a different form,
but certainly in the, I guess, the 19th century, people were playing with...
Well, I guess you can go back further than that.
It's logiston.
Well, that's true.
But I would say that Maxwell was the first great condensation of theoretical ideas
where an enormous amount of theory surrounding magnetism, electricity, visible light, invisible light...
Well, that was a huge, huge revolution.
And that all of those things now can be unpacked from a single geometric equation.
But that's the thing.
I mean, people know about Galileo.
They know about Newton.
They know about Kepler.
They know about Einstein.
And they also may know about the modern quantum field theory, Heisenberg's, Roehlinger people.
How many people know about Maxwell?
Not enough.
Not enough.
Although people do have Maxwell's equations tattooed on their backsides.
Well, some people do.
Yes.
But the general public don't know about Maxwell.
But Maxwell's equations completely changed our way of looking at the world.
And we live off it without thinking.
You know, you've got these lights here.
Well, these are visible lights.
So we know you knew about visible light, but we didn't know anything about X-rays.
X-rays, X-rays, radio waves, they're all part of the same scheme.
Electromagnetism.
Well, some of this goes back to Faraday just before Maxwell.
Sure.
So Faraday had a lot of the influential ideas.
Electromagnetism.
Well, a little bit of that was known before Ersted knew that if you had an electric current,
then you get a magnetic field.
But it was the other way around with Maxwell.
Now, if you have a varying magnetic field, you get a current.
And you combine these ideas, you can make a dynamo.
So these things go to Faraday.
And he had sort of clues that there might be some connection with light.
But he didn't have the equations.
But even Max, you know, I'm very partial to this book on orchids that followed Darwin's origin of species.
Oh, yeah.
That was the book he wrote.
The title is, and I love reciting it.
It's on the various contrivances by which British and foreign orchids are fertilized by insects.
And so you think, well, why would he write a damn fool book like that after origin of species?
And the answer is he wanted to test whether he understood his own theory.
And in fact, it's revealed that he didn't understand the full implications.
I would say that the same thing is true of Maxwell's equations,
which is this is perhaps the best dress rehearsal for unification we've ever seen.
Oh, yeah.
You know, full unification.
And on the other hand, it's not until the late fifties that we actually unpack the last trivial consequence of the theory
with this bizarre effect of passing an electron beam around an insulated wire.
Aronoff.
Yeah.
In fact, we had dinner last night.
We asked Yakker Aronoff if he wanted to come, but he's in Israel and he sends his regards.
Oh, you know, send mine back.
Oh, we'll do.
I don't know.
He's great fun.
I always...
But that was a very weird thing where we learned that if you have an insulated solenoid,
that the phase of the electron beam going in a circle around it would be shifted despite the fact that the electromagnetic field
could be treated as zero because the electromagnetic potential, this precursor,
turned out to carry the actual content.
Before that, it had been thought that that was just a sort of a convenience product to recover electromagnetism,
and it turned out that that geometric object was more important.
And, you know, in part, the reason I bring this up is that we would have no way of visualizing this effect
if it were not for your interaction with M.C. Escher.
Now, you have to explain that one.
Well, you know, this etching called ascending and descending,
which is sometimes referred to as the penrose stairs.
Yes.
Well, you want that story?
Well, I do, but what I was going to say about why I'm asking for it
is that the photon is really best represented in some sense as the angles of a set of stairs like that
with this very mysterious property that what you're really talking about is what we would call horizontal subspaces,
pictured as stairs, and the fact that there's a paradox of going around,
and you seem to be going up all the time, but you're back to where you came,
is the same thing as saying, I never go up and yet I come back higher or lower,
and that's called holinomy, and we don't have a means of visualizing that
except for like either rock, paper, scissors, or your work with Escher.
Is that a fair comment?
Well, I had...
Is this the first time you've ever heard somebody say this?
Well, let me...
I mean, there's a quite complicated story here.
All right.
You see, when I was a graduate student in Cambridge,
I think it was in my second year when the International Congress of Mathematicians took place in Amsterdam,
and so I and a few friends decided we would go to this meeting,
and I remember, I think I was just about to get on a bus or a tram or something,
and Sean Wiley, who was a lecturer in algebraic topology,
was just about to get off the bus, I was getting on,
and he had this catalog in his hand of an exhibition in the Van Gogh Museum,
and this was a picture of the one called Night and Day, with birds flying off into the day and the night,
and the birds change into the spaces between the birds,
and I was looking at this and I thought, well, that's amazing.
What is that?
Where did nothing come from?
I said, oh, well, you'd be very interested, this is this.
In the Van Gogh Museum, there is this exhibition by an artist called Escher,
so I'd never heard of him before,
and I went to this exhibition and I was absolutely blown away.
I thought it was most amazing thing.
I remember particularly one called Relativity,
where people walk up the stairs and gravity directions are two different ways,
and I thought this was hugely impressive,
and I went away thinking, well, I'd like to do something impossible, you see,
and I had an idea about an impossible structure with bridges and roads and things like that,
so locally it makes sense, but as a whole, it was inconsistent,
and I didn't think I'd seen anything quite like that in his exhibition,
so I played around with this and then I sort of whittled it down to the triangle,
which people refer to as a tri-bar,
so it's a triangle which is locally completely consistent picture,
but as a whole, it's impossible, and I showed this to my father,
and then he started drawing impossible buildings, and then he came up with this staircase,
so we decided we'd like to write a paper together on this,
and we had no idea what the subject was.
I mean, who would you send a paper like this to? What journal?
So he decided, since he knew the editor of the British Journal of Psychology,
and he thought he'd be able to get it through, we decided the subject was psychology.
Of course, as you say, it's more in a way mathematics,
because it illustrates ideas, well, of cohomology and other things like that,
which I didn't quite know I was illustrating at the time,
but anyway, we wrote this paper, and we gave some reference to Escher,
I think, reference to the catalogue,
and my father sent a copy to a Dutch friend that says he managed to get it to Escher,
and then my father and Escher had a correspondence, so that was...
This is Lionel Penrose.
Lionel, my father Lionel Penrose, yes.
But I actually visited Escher then,
and he had sent a print to my father with a dedication to it,
and he gave me another, and I have this in the Bodleian...
But in some sense...
So the Eschmeralian Museum.
You see, I'm very indebted to you for this reason,
because when I have to describe what general relativity is,
and I don't wish to lie the way everyone else lies,
if I'm going to lie, I'm going to do it differently,
I say that you have to begin with four degrees of freedom,
and then you have to put rulers and protractors into that system
so that you can measure length and angle.
That gives rise miraculously to a derivative operator that measures rise over run.
That rise is measured from a reference level.
Those reference levels don't knit together,
and they form Penrose stares,
and the degree of Escher-ness, or Penrose-ness,
is what is measured by the curvature tensor,
which breaks into three pieces.
You throw one of them away called the vial curvature,
and you readjust the proportions of the other two,
and you set that equal to the amount of stuff.
Now, that's a very long causal chain,
but it is linguistically an accurate description
of what general relativity actually is.
Yeah, well, it illustrates that.
It illustrates comology, which I was being interviewed ages ago
by, I don't know whether it's BBC, I can't remember what it was.
There was an interview, but for some reason,
they were interested in Twister theory now.
They think they're interested.
Well, they thought they were. I guess they'd heard the word or something.
Right.
And at one point they say,
well, surprisingly not at the beginning,
they asked me what good it was, you see,
what can you use it for?
So I said, oh, you can use it to solve Maxwell's equations,
you see, and that's equations of electricity, magnetism, and light,
and so they got a bit interested.
And they said, oh, how do you do that?
Well, it actually involves an idea that I couldn't really explain here.
It's not possible to, in a sort of popular talk like this.
No, no, what is it exactly?
No, no, no, I couldn't do it.
No, what's the, it's an idea, it's a thing called comology.
No, I could explain that.
So then I went back home and I was lying my bed,
and I thought, I think I can't, you know it's this and possible,
trying, that's exactly an illustration of comology.
So I went back the next day and told them that they weren't interested.
They didn't use it.
I think I may have tried to explain, yes,
where you have something which is locally consistent,
but with an ambiguity about it.
So here the ambiguity is you're not quite sure,
you draw a picture of it.
The ambiguity is that you don't know how far away it is.
It could be bigger and further away or smaller and closer.
And the picture is consistent,
but you get an inconsistency if you go around.
Right.
And locally, because you have a freedom.
Yes.
And you misuse this freedom in a sense.
So the glitch in it is this impossible structure.
Well, I had this, so this is actually my son,
my 14 year old son's copy of the book.
I see, yes.
And I was having to describe this to him,
what comology was.
He said that one forms, which is a piece of technology
in mathematics, that you can analogize to radar guns
so that while you're driving and the policeman shoots
your car with a radar gun,
he's measuring the component of speed in the direction of his gun.
And so that's something that eats the vector of speed
and spits out a number.
And you could imagine a racetrack
that wanted to have a circular series of radar guns
to measure the speed of cars going around it.
Now, the question is,
you also recognize that you could build
a poor man's version of a speed system
by heating the track to some temperature
and measuring how quickly the temperature changes
the car went over.
I see, yes.
But you can't actually have the one thing that you want,
the series of radar guns that are always measuring
the speed going around the track
because at some point if the temperature is going down,
down, down, down, down, down, down,
then it's going to be 10 degrees below wherever it started,
which is your paradox again.
Yes, but there's a nice example,
somebody may not remember who,
where you have a ball going up the stairs or down it,
whichever it is,
and you accompany that with a note going up or down
and you can make it sound as though it keeps on going
all the way up and all the way up all the time
but it's by the harmonics.
You bring a new harmonic in as you go around.
Below and it's sub perceptual.
So there's this auditory illusion that captures these.
Yes, you have an auditory version of the same thing
and somebody had this ball bouncing around with that.
That's a bit of a cheat.
I mean, my point would be that your Escher stairs
or your Penrose stairs
are, the cheat is that it appears to be flat.
In other words, it's very easy to achieve that
on a curved object,
but that what you did was to create the illusion
as taking place in a plane or...
Well, you can draw it in a plane.
Indirect the linear system.
You have an interpretation of a three-dimensional thing,
which is ambiguous.
So you saw the movie Inception, of course,
where they realized this action.
Yes, they have an illustration of that.
But that effect is the soul
of the Aronof Bohm effect,
which surprised the world in the late 50s
because it was discovered so late into the game.
It is a same sort of thing, that's right.
Well, of course, like so many things,
people point out that this...
Oscar Reutersfald, who's a Swedish artist,
had drawn things like this before.
I think round about the year I was born,
he had a picture, which is all with cubes going around.
It wasn't exactly the same, but it was...
I think I've seen these floating.
Yes, the one with the cubes, yes.
And then he had versions with staircases, too.
He never put any perspective in it,
which seemed to me that was something he missed.
Missed opportunity.
Yes, in my triangle, I did put some perspective in it.
So it's slightly...
But you can do it with a perspective, and it still works.
So what I want to get at is,
I think also that we have this very funny thing
that happened recently, starting from the early 70s,
where we started mis-telling our own physics history
because of the needs of the community
to look like we were succeeding when we weren't,
or we were succeeding at something different
than we were trying to succeed at.
And in part, one of the reasons that I want to use
this podcast to discuss science
is to give alternate versions of what's happened.
And I want to explore one or two of them with you.
Now, you and I have a very funny relationship,
which we don't really know each other,
but you were quite close to Michael Atia at various points.
Oh, yeah.
And I was...
Well, we were graduate students together in the same group.
In the same year.
Absolutely, same year, yes, with the same supervisor.
Incredible.
Yes, that's right.
And then you continued to cross-pollinate ideas
through the years.
Yes, absolutely.
Now, for listeners who don't know,
Michael Atia was one of the absolutely most dominant
and generative...
I don't even know what to call him.
He's like beyond genius, a seer of type.
Well, he has such a broad understanding of mathematics.
It's partly...
And geometry more generally and analysis.
It was just incredible.
And algebra.
I mean, he wrote a book on commutative algebra.
Now, he had a partner for much of his career,
Isidore Singer, who I was quite close to for a period of time.
Sure, yeah, yeah.
And is was, again, another one of these figures
that if I'd never met one,
I wouldn't know that the human mind was capable
of that level of repeated insight.
Yeah.
And they came up with something called
the Atia Singer Index Theorem,
which governs worlds in which there are no time dimensions,
but only space dimensions or no space dimensions
and only time dimensions.
But there's no...
Just equations without any differential equations.
Well, differential equations,
if you think about differential equations
as coming very often in three main fields of study,
elliptic hyperbolic and parabolic,
then the idea is that wave equations would be hyperbolic,
the type that you're worried about in physics.
But things like soap films look like elliptic equations
and Atia and Singer had this incredible insight
into the nature of elliptic equations.
Do you...
Yeah.
Go ahead.
Sorry, no, I was going to say it's an extremely general theorem
which covers, goes over all sorts of different areas
of mathematics and has applications.
Well, it sort of tells you that the knottedness
of some beautiful space that you might be exploring,
like some kind of high dimensional donut
is knotted many times around itself, whatever you want,
that that topological knottedness tells you something
about the kinds of waves that can dance on that space.
Yeah.
No, I say it's a very remarkable theorem, certainly.
Does that theorem in the so-called elliptic category,
a world of space in no time, let's say,
relate strongly in your estimation
to the most important hyperbolic equations
that govern the waves that make up our physical world
due to the constraints of relativity in a world
with one time and three spatial dimensions?
Well, all I can say if I use the theorem,
and at least two different contexts, yes, maybe more.
So, I mean, I'm not an expert in that area at all.
And it was mainly when I was trying to solve a particular problem.
I don't know how much detail you want to go into these things.
It had to do with how to make twist the theory work
in curved spaces.
But I ran up into a question which had to do,
it has to do with complex geometry.
So you've got geometry in which instead of using real numbers
to use, you think of measuring with rulers, say,
and the ruler is one-dimensional.
The numbers go along one dimension, if you like.
And complex numbers, where you have the square root of minus one
incorporated into the number system, they're really two-dimensional.
So the geometry of complex numbers has twice as many as the real numbers.
But the geometry of complex numbers is particularly fascinating,
or unless the algebra, you might say the analysis or whatever it is,
it's particularly fascinating.
And I was sort of, when I learned about this,
when I was an undergraduate doing mathematics,
and I thought it was incredibly beautiful.
Because when you talk about real numbers,
you can have a draw curve, which is a function.
So this curve has some shape.
And you might want to see, is it a smooth curve?
That means you have a tangent direction as you go around it.
Maybe it jumps.
So it's not even continuous, or maybe it's smooth.
Or maybe you have to have a curvature of this curve,
and you might not be smooth enough to have curvature.
So if there's one degree of smoothness, or two degrees,
or you can have three degrees, or four degrees,
and they're all different, or an infinite number of degrees,
or that you can expand your function in the power series.
They're all different.
And then when you learn about complex,
you say, oh, we now do it all over again,
and you've got your analysis on algebra, if you like,
or geometry, where it uses complex numbers.
And then suddenly you find that if it's smooth,
everything comes with it.
You can differentiate as many times as you like.
You can expand as the power series.
And I thought that's incredibly magic.
You just have to do it once.
Rather than there's all these different kinds.
I should say that mathematicians quite often view the complex case,
the case of complex numbers as the natural case,
and the case of real numbers as artificially tortured,
which is a complete reversal from how most engineers are physicists.
And US actually have been quite instrumental in making the case
for the fundamentally complex nature.
It's not just a convenience that we use complex numbers in physics,
but that nature appears to be essentially complex.
I think you see, by just hearing the nature of complex analysis,
and how beautiful it struck me as being,
and I had this sort of feeling,
wouldn't it be wonderful if these numbers were somehow the basis of way
physical world operates?
I have no reason to think that.
And then I learned about quantum mechanics.
And I was amazed to find, yeah, there they are.
They're not just useful convenience.
You can use them to simplify ideas in mathematics.
You can, you know, might have an integral.
You'd have to work awfully hard to get rid of them.
Yes.
But there are things you find a little trick to do.
We come with contour integrals and they drop out in an amazing way.
And I thought, well, that's a piece of magic,
but it doesn't tell you anything about the world.
It just tells you this is a neat way of doing things.
And then I learned about quantum mechanics.
And suddenly these numbers are right there at the basis of the whole subject.
And I thought that was an amazing thing.
Maybe these complex numbers are really there at the root of everything.
I mean, I think you wanted to talk about twisters.
Well, that was good.
Maybe I can intro that and then try to fit that into this history
that I'm claiming we don't tell.
Now, one of the ways of describing what twister theory is,
and of course it's a bit of a tall order for a podcast,
is that you are replacing Einstein's space time
with a larger structure that in some sense implies space time,
where you can take all the data that roams around on space time,
the waves, the force, the matter, what have you.
And you can, as mathematicians might say,
pull it upstairs to this larger twister space
where you might have a couple of extra tricks up your sleeve
because the extra space that you've created to augment space time with
has this kind of complex number aspect baked into it.
Yes, well, it was something.
Just to go back for a moment,
it was to explain the Atea Singer theorem.
That's why it was useful.
I could come to that in a minute because it's a very interesting story.
The way these things sort of come together
and take many, many years sometimes before they come together.
But I was really intrigued by these complex numbers.
And there is, well, something, let me tell you,
sort of the origin of the twister idea.
I was struck by the fact that, you see,
people know that when things travel with a great speed,
and in, according to Einstein's special relativity,
they get sort of flattened in the direction of motion.
Now, this is a way of talking about it,
and you get this Lorentz contraction, as it's called.
Now, I was playing around with relativity
and thinking about, it was this two-component spinners
and thinking about the geometry of it worked.
And I realized if you think of the sky,
you see, the sky is where you have vectors in four dimensions.
Think of a vector as something which has a magnitude
and a direction to it as well.
And in ordinary three-space,
you've got this idea of a vector,
which is quite common to people know about.
But when you're in four dimensions,
then you have space and time together.
But you have particular vectors,
which are called null,
and these are the ones along the light cone.
So this is, you see, an ordinary vector
might represent a velocity.
So you have a particle moving along with a certain speed,
and your four-dimensional vector
would point along the velocity
or the momentum of that particle.
Weirdly, in the space-time metric of Einstein,
these are vectors that are not zero,
but if you used Einstein's special rulers and protractors,
what would the length of these vectors be?
The vector is zero.
So it's linguistically tricky to talk about these things
because they're non-zero things that would be measured
to be of zero length
if that concept of length was, in fact,
extended from your normal concept of length.
Yes, the idea that something of length zero
means it's two points,
the distance between them is zero,
you think of them right on top of each other,
or if the distance is very, very small,
they're pretty close to each other.
But in the kind of geometry,
we'll call it Minkowski geometry,
because although it's describing Einstein's special relativity,
the geometry was not Einstein.
People often say,
oh, Einstein introduced his four-dimensional space-time.
That's not true.
It was Minkowski.
And Einstein, when you have...
I thought that this is real,
and this is not just a sort of a weird artifact
of the description of various processes
that we're being entertained.
Yes, but it's a kind of geometry.
And Minkowski showed that the space of special relativity
is really four-dimensional,
and it's this kind of geometry
in which you can have distances which are zero,
although the points are a sort of long way away from each other.
And this represents a light ray.
So you have one event, say,
and then the light through that vent reaches another event.
When I say event,
I mean not just a spatial position,
but the time as well.
You mean a position in space-time.
In space-time.
There's four coordinates, three space and one time coordinate.
So that's what we call an event.
And so you have a point or an event in space-time,
and imagine a particle moving the speed of light to another such event.
Now, the distance between those two
in this kind of geometry that Minkowski introduced is zero.
And Minkowski played around with different kinds of geometry,
and he realized that special relativity
is really best described by this kind of,
what we call Minkowski in geometry.
So you can have zero distances,
and yet the points are not on top of each other.
So your idea was to take all the points
that are bizarrely zero-distance away,
and then make those the new points in a new space?
Well, it wasn't quite that.
I had to come up to this slowly,
because it took years.
But the initial idea isn't so hard to understand, really.
You see, if you look out at the sky, what do you see?
Well, you're seeing light rays,
or you're seeing photons coming to your eye,
which have traveled with the speed of light.
So the world line in four dimensions of that photon
is tilted over at what represents the speed of light.
Now, in this Minkowski geometry,
that distance, well, it has a clear meaning,
so let me give that.
Suppose the photon is emitted at one point, one event,
and received at another event.
Now, to that photon,
the time between one and the other is zero.
And that time measure is exactly
the distance measure in Minkowski geometry.
Suppose the particle was not traveling with speed of light.
Suppose it traveled with half the speed of light,
and some other speed.
Then its time, experience of time,
is exactly the distance according to Minkowski's geometry.
So you say, if it traveled with very, very, very great speed,
suppose you traveled to a planet which is four light years away,
and you travel with...
I won't do the calculation right here,
but with half the speed of light,
then you would...
the experience that you would...
of time you experience is less
than the time that somebody here on Earth
would think that it took you to get there.
So as you travel faster,
your experience of the passage of time
slows down in a sense.
You don't think it's as long.
And if you actually traveled with speed of light,
that experience would be zero.
So this is the experience of the length of time.
Well, you could have a very, very good clock you carry with you,
and you see how...
The clock made of pure light,
it's pretty, pretty heavy out here.
Well, you don't make enough...
You can imagine a clock, say a nuclear clock or something,
and you're not traveling with the speed of light
because you can't get to the speed of light.
But the time measured by that nuclear clock
would be the distance in Minkowski's geometry.
I should point out, just for our listeners,
that even people who do this field of differential geometry,
morning, noon, and night in math departments,
almost never choose to work
in worlds with some temporal and some spatial dimension
because it just... It breaks your head.
It's a very different intuition.
Very different intuition.
And when you go back and you think about the puzzles that people had
when Einstein introduced his special and then most particularly
general relativity,
they found it very puzzling.
You could look at the arguments people had.
Well, we keep using these words like time and length
and all of these things that have become...
We don't recognize that in that one innocent decision
to break off one degree of freedom and treat it differently...
That's right.
...that all of our linguistic intuition goes out the window.
You have to start all over again.
Well, it was a curious experience I had
because I was giving a series of lectures in Seattle.
These were the Bataille Lectures,
given in what was at the...
I forget exactly what the dates were.
Maybe it was around about 1970 or something like that.
And there was a collection of mathematicians
and a collection of physicists.
John Wheeler and Cecil DeWitt had organized this.
It was a very interesting meeting
where people from both areas of expertise were brought together.
And at that time, it's hard to believe now,
but at that time mathematicians and physicists
were barely talking to each other.
And they got me to give a series of lectures.
This is before Jim Simons and C. N. Yang get together.
There is a good question.
When was that?
That was 75, 76.
It was before that.
Wow.
It must have been before that.
Is that right?
I think so, yes.
I really have to...
My memory of dates is not really clear.
I know you're hot on the trail of this,
but just to leaven something in.
Roman Jacob at MIT once beautifully said,
and I don't think you wrote it down, he said,
we didn't understand the partnership that was possible
between mathematics and physics
because we, the physicists, used to talk to the analysts.
And he said, the analysts either told us things
that were absolutely trivial and irrelevant
or things that we already understood.
He said, when we talked to the geometers,
we started to learn new things that we'd never considered.
Yes.
Well, there was very much cross-fertilization there.
But I was going to say, I gave these lectures,
I think it was 12 lectures,
and I wasted my time on some things that weren't going to...
And so I left myself only three lectures
to describe the singularities, the black hole idea,
which wasn't...
The term black hole wasn't used just then,
but the collapse.
It was just called the Schwarzschild Singularity?
Well, it was called the Singularity when it...
That was the thing.
People called it the Schwarzschild Singularity.
It's what we now call a horizon.
And I remember in my third lecture from the end
describing basically what we call a black hole.
I was talking about the Schwarzschild Singularity.
And I was explaining that it was basically to do
with the zero-length business.
And Steenrod was a very distinguished mathematician.
From Princeton, Norman Steenrod.
Yeah.
And he'd written this book on five bundles,
which is absolutely...
Impenetrable.
Well, impenetrable, but also fundamental to the subject.
Yes, but it's so impenetrable that I never got to the point
of being impenetrable.
But anyway, he was there at the back of the room,
and I remember telling him about it,
and he was absolutely dumbfounded.
And he said, here's somebody who's a real expert
at this kind of geometry,
Riemannian geometry or whatever you call it,
where you have the notion of when the distance is small
then the points are close together.
And here you have this other kind of geometry,
and the intuition you need for that geometry
was completely foreign.
That's the point you were just making.
Well, because we do have this weird way
of talking about something that sounds like this.
We might call it like non-Hausdorff topology,
but it is a Hausdorff topology.
Yes, this is a Hausdorff topology.
So the problem is, is it's pulling apart
two different notions of the word close.
That's right, exactly.
Because you think of close means a small distance.
So you imagine a little tiny ball
where the distance from that point is small.
Mathematics makes you pay for every attempt
to sort of intuitively encode something that isn't precise.
We've been discussing the fact
that this intuition is very, very strange
involving how to think about spaces of the type
that Einstein and Minkowski and Poincare were considering.
How does that begin to lead us
towards these more speculative ideas
of yours surrounding complex numbers
and the Twister program?
I don't think many people, many of them may have heard of it,
but even in mathematics, you have to know
that you were sort of seen as leading a cult.
It had its own newsletter, its own bizarre drawings.
It was very difficult to communicate to members
of the Twister cult because they didn't speak like other people.
Well, we had this Twister newsletter,
which started off just in handwriting,
and it was duplicated.
Let's not go into that for the moment.
Talk about the origin of Twisters here, if you like.
Where did it come from?
Is this, in fact, your big bet in physics, do you think?
Yeah, I think so.
Well, you see, it's between that and the cosmology.
The cosmology is a bit different because it's not such a...
Look, it's a wild idea,
but it's not a whole body of wild ideas,
which Twister theory more is.
But it has lots of connections with mathematics,
as pure mathematics and connections with physics.
Let me describe the basis of it
because I think we've got most of the things we need.
You see, the light cone describes how,
from one point or one event in spacetime,
all the different points of zero distance from it,
or in other words, all the light rays from that point.
Now, let me think of it the other way around.
That is my past light cone.
So I'm sitting at a certain point in spacetime,
and I look out at the universe,
and all the light rays that get to me
at a particular instant moment of my time
come along this past light cone.
You imagine this cone stretching out into the past
and getting bigger and bigger as it goes back in time.
And that's all the events which are...
At one moment of my time, I see those events.
So I see a lot of stars in the sky.
Now, let's suppose that...
I mean, the stars in the sky look like points, you see,
so that you have this sphere, the celestial sphere,
which is my field of vision,
if I'm imagining myself out in space.
So imagine that the Earth was transparent,
so you weren't...
That's one way, or just let's go out into space
and I can be looking at the world all around me.
Now, let's imagine that another astronaut
comes whizzing past me at nearly the speed of light,
and just as we pass each other,
he or she looks out at the sky at the same moment as I do.
Now, because of a phenomenon known as aberration,
the stars will be slightly...
not in the same place with regard to that astronaut as me.
This guy is somewhat distorted.
But it's distorted in a very particular way,
which is what's called conformal.
To say this in a simple way,
suppose I happen to see a configuration of stars
that happen to be on a circle.
Suppose they were concentric.
And then this astronaut passing by me
would also see these in a circle.
Even though the transformation would not be a rotation of the sky,
it would be squashed up more on one end
and stretched out at the other end.
But the thing about that transformation,
it's something which I knew about from my complex analysis days.
Do you think of what's called the Riemann Sphere?
This is the plane of points.
The complex plane or the vessel plane
are the points that represent the complex numbers.
So zero is in the middle, if you like,
and then you've got one, and then you've got minus one,
and i and minus i, they're all on the circle,
and you go out and infinity is way out to infinity.
But the Riemann Sphere folds all this up into a sphere.
So infinity is now a point.
So it's a little bit like if you have a caramel coating around an apple,
you're folding that disc.
You fold it around, that's right.
And at the point where the stick would go into the apple,
all of the boundary of that candy would come together.
Yes.
And it's what's called a stereographic projection.
You can project from the north pole,
and all the other points flatten out into the plane.
So you can see all the points on the sphere,
except for the point from which you're projecting.
Exactly.
And that's called a stereographic projection.
It's a remarkable property that it sends circles to circles.
Or you could say it's conformal, that is, angles are preserved.
And it's a very beautiful transformation.
I used to play around with these things just for fun, often.
Now, the thing is that the transformations of this sphere to itself,
which preserve the angles,
it's also transformation which is what's called analytic or holomorphic.
It's the most smooth transformation you can have.
So just the analog of smooth, but for complex objects,
rather than real objects.
Real and complex means the types of numbers.
Yes, that's right.
So it's what smooth is in complex analysis.
And those transformations which send the sphere to the sphere
are exactly those in relativity.
So the different observers passing me at different speeds,
looking at the same sky,
the map from my sky to their skies
is exactly these complex transformations of the sphere.
And this actually is what you exactly get when you use two component spinners.
And you see the description,
when you move from one observer to another,
is exactly those ones which transform the sky
in this conformal way to itself.
And often people find this puzzling.
Because suppose you had a sphere which is whizzing
from an alien spaceship, which is a sphere,
shooting past you at nearly a speed of light.
Well, you see the direction of motion,
it will be contracted by the Lorentz contraction.
So when you look at it, you should see it sort of flattened out.
You don't.
Because a circle goes to a circle,
if you see it as a circle when it's not moving,
you'll still see it as a circle,
the boundary of the thing will look like a circle when it is moving.
And you work away and think about it,
well, you see where the light ways go
and the front of it and the back of it and all that.
And you really don't see the flattening.
It really does look like a circle.
It's boundary looks like a circle.
So I wrote a paper on this.
Almost simultaneously there was somebody else wrote a paper
on mainly thinking of the small circles and spheres.
But this transformation, that's really what started me off.
If I understand correctly, maybe I don't.
We have another mutual acquaintance or friend, Raoul Botte.
He showed us that the world seems to repeat every eight dimensions in a certain way.
But during the first cycle of what you might call Botte periodicity
from zero to seven or one to eight, depending upon how you like to count,
you get these things called low dimensional coincidences.
Oh, yes.
And so they don't recur because of your point earlier about spinners,
that spinners grow exponentially, whereas vectors grow linearly.
That's right.
But during the first period where these things are of comparable strength,
you get all of these objects where depending upon,
you define in two different contexts, you turn out to be the same object.
That's right.
Are you making use of that here?
It is that.
It's the Lorentz group.
The rotations of space and time, which we might call SO13 or SO13 double cover,
would be equal to something else called SL2C,
which would mention complex numbers,
even though there's no complex numbers to be seen in space and time.
Yeah, it depends on that one of those coincidences.
Well, it's triple coincidence, I think.
You certainly get the coincidence there, which one is depending upon in this description.
But the point I'm making here is that in a certain sense,
relativity is described when you do it in the two-spinner form,
which is really expressed in this fact that it's the transformation of the Riemann sphere to itself,
which is a complex transformation.
This is the most general transformation of the sphere to itself
when you think of that sphere as a Riemann sphere.
It's a complex one-dimensional space.
You might say, surely it's two-dimensional.
Well, it's two-dimensional in real numbers, but one-dimensional in complex numbers
because each complex number carries the information of two real numbers.
For example, mathematicians would call what most people call the complex plane.
They might call it a complex line.
It's a complex line, that's right.
And so the language, again, is intended to make things very hostile to the newbie.
Yes, well, that's true.
But you have to get used to the idea that when you're thinking complex,
when you think of it concretely in the real terms,
you have to double the number of real dimensions to get the number of complexes.
I want my audience to work, but I don't want them to feel stupid for making the mistake
that every single person makes.
You have the number, of course.
Here we have the complex numbers playing a fundamental role in relativity.
That's the really point I want to make.
And it's the complex sphere.
Sorry, the Riemann sphere, which is this one-dimensional in complex sense,
two-dimensional in the real sense, object, which is fundamental.
Now, this Riemann sphere appears in the most basic way in quantum mechanics, too.
You think of a spin.
Now, that's practically the most direct, complex, the most direct quantum mechanical thing,
in a certain sense, where you see quantum mechanics playing a real role as quantum mechanics,
which is hard to grasp normally, but you can see it here.
The geometry really works.
You see, if you have an object of a spin-half, that's the smallest non-zero spin you can have,
such as an electron.
So think of an electron. It has spin-half.
Now, what that means is that it's basically two states of spin,
which people call spin-up and spin-down.
Well, what does that mean?
Put your thumb up like that.
Right-handed spin is where your fingers go,
and that's spin-up means right-handed about up.
Spin-down is right-handed about down.
It's left-handed about up.
And those are the two basic states.
But what's special about up and down? Nothing.
So you think of what about right, left, forwards, backwards.
All those are combinations of up and down.
And they're combinations through these complex numbers,
which lie at the basis of quantum mechanics.
But here you can see, in a visual way, what they're doing.
You see, you can say, up, down, what's left and right?
Well, these are combinations of up and down.
So you add this much of up to that much of down,
and you get to the right.
Right.
And you minus it, you get to the left,
or i times, you get forwards or back, whatever it is.
And the complex numbers come in to describe
these possible directions of spin.
And it's the Riemann sphere, again.
But you are relating these complex numbers of quantum mechanics
to the directions in space.
So you have a connection between these rather abstract numbers,
which are fundamental to quantum mechanics,
and the much more concrete picture of the directions in space.
Well, but Roger, I think you're both...
Well, let me challenge you slightly.
Go on, yes.
What you're really talking about is a very important fork in the road for physics.
Do you wed yourself to the world that we're actually given,
and you know, Mach was famous for having said this phrase,
the world is given only once.
And so we happen to know that there does exist a world
that appears to be well modeled by three spatial and one temporal dimension.
And then the key question is,
do you wish to have a more general theory,
which works in all dimensions,
or which works for all different divisions
between how many spatial and how many temporal dimensions?
And what I see you as having done,
which I think is incredibly noble, brave, and scientifically valid,
is to work with mathematics
that are really particularizing themselves to the world we're given,
rather than sort of keeping some kind of...
I mean, like, you're getting married to the world we live in
in a way that other people are just dating it
and wishing to keep their options open.
I think you've hit on a very crucial point.
Absolutely right.
I mean, for example, with string theory and all that,
people talk about 26 dimensions or 10 spatial dimensions,
or 11 or 12 and things like that.
And sure, the mathematics,
we've got mathematics to handle these things,
and maybe that's important to the way the world works.
But I was never attracted by that for basically two reasons.
One was the reason I'm just trying to subscribe here,
and it's exactly what you're saying,
that I'm looking for a way in which you find a mathematics
to describe the world which is very particular to the dimensionality we see.
So the three space dimensions and one time dimension
is described in this formalism very directly.
And if you're going to try and talk about other numbers of dimensions
of space and time, it doesn't work.
Well, as much as I really like to stick it to the string theorists,
that's not exactly their problem either,
because 26 is really, because it's two more than 24
and 10 is really because it's two more than eight,
and in eight you have something special called triality.
And so what they were really doing was figuring out
how to build different theories around different highly specific targets.
But you see there, it's the beauty in the mathematics,
which sure is a good guide,
but it has to be...
Well, they play with point theories
and they never grow up to playing with reality.
That's the sort of thing.
I mean, it's perfectly good to explore all these different things,
and it's very valuable.
But I'm trying to follow a route which is viewed,
I think in many quarters, is very narrow.
I'm looking for a route which works specifically
for the number of space-time dimensions that we have.
I mean, there are aspects of twisted theory
which do work in other dimensions,
but they run out very quickly.
And you can see analogs of these things,
but they're kind of...
This is sort of a strong version of the anthropic principle,
which is that if there weren't a beautiful mathematics to catch you,
I mean, in some sense, despite the fact that you're in your late 80s,
it's like you're stage diving at a punk concert
where you're kind of hoping that the mathematics catches you
because you're willing to actually marry at a very deep level
the world that we do observe.
And I find that what's very disturbing to me
is that the political economy of science
means that fewer people are willing to make strong speculations,
strong predictions to explore things
that don't give them the flexibility
in case things that don't work out to say,
well, it could be like this, it could be like that.
And so, in part,
I see you as part of a dying breed of people
who are willing to go down with a ship
for the privilege of commanding it as its captain.
Well, you can view it that way if you like.
My claim is that the ship isn't actually sinking.
No, no, no, I'm not claiming...
I think that one of the things that's happened
is that yours has been one of the most important idiosyncratic programs
that in fact got a huge lease on life
from the fact that it has positive externalities
because it was absolutely solid mathematics.
It turned out that even if it doesn't give us
a fundamental description of the world,
it is at least a deep insight
into how to transform one problem into another
to allow solutions that wouldn't have been easily gleaned
in the original formulation.
Yeah.
And I'm not saying that it's knocked out of the park
for a fundamental theory,
but I don't actually know whether...
Do you believe twisters are a more fundamental description of the world?
Well, I do, yes.
I mean, I don't normally say that loud,
but now you've put me in a position, yes.
No, I do think so.
I think that's fucking great.
I mean, in other words,
it's like you have to say this, I believe,
and in general, people won't say it.
I think the thing is that I have been driven in directions,
just as you're pointing out,
in directions which are picking out the particular
rather than the general.
Right.
So, sure, you have mathematics,
which one of the huge aims in mathematics
is to be more and more general.
And you mentioned the Atea Singer theorem.
That's a beautiful example of that,
where it simply generalizes over areas
which you would never thought.
But it also particularizes.
So, for example,
it is only in low dimensions
where you get to play the game
with what are called deformation complexes,
where the first term is the symmetries in the problem,
the second term is the fields or the waves in the problem,
and the third term is the equations in the problem,
and then you get to cut it off at that point
and have that be this magical concept of an elliptic complex.
So, for example, in dimension four,
we glean something bizarre,
which is that there are an infinite number
of different ways to do calculus
in four-dimensional space,
and only one way to do it in every other dimension.
Yes, yes.
Well, there's something special there about four.
Certainly, that's true.
And the connections may be not that clear at the moment,
but maybe we will see that this isn't...
Maybe differentiable structures are part of physics.
It's quite possible, yeah.
But how amazing that...
I'll give you another very bizarre one.
I don't know whether this has ever come up.
If you have two sets of symmetries known as Lie groups
that act transitively on the same sphere in usual position,
then either their intersection acts transitively on that sphere,
or the dimension of that sphere is 15.
And I believe that the intersection of the groups
looks like the electrostrong group.
So, it's very close to the particle spectrum
of theoretical physics pulled out of nowhere
just from talking about sphere transitive group actions.
Well, it's clear that one...
I mean, in particle physics...
I mean, I've never really been somebody
who studied particle physics closely.
Is that right? I didn't know.
Well, I mean, in general way, I have.
But I suppose I thought we may be a long way
from really understanding what's going on there.
I don't know.
I mean, I hope that...
I didn't know that.
Well, you know, we have...
No, it's a completely...
I often have a load of different views from people
on these things.
I think we're almost at the end.
Well, that's an interesting situation.
So, how do you come to the idea that we may be quite far?
I'm not saying that we're necessarily far.
I think it's understanding why the groups
are the groups that we see.
And people have different theories about these.
Well, let me ask you then a couple of questions.
Go on.
So, very early in this new stagnation
post the standard model,
people like Glashow and Georgiai
and Petit and Salam
put forward these unifying symmetries
that remain very odd
because they're so attractive and powerful.
The prettiest of them being something called
Spin10, which physicists persist in calling
SO10 for reasons that escape me.
Yeah.
This is the one which doesn't exist or is that not that one?
Well, the original SU5,
which sits inside of Spin10,
was disproven in its most basic form.
And at that point,
Georgiai and Glashow had been trained
in the previous culture of physics,
which is that you fell on your sword
when you predicted something and it wasn't true.
And I think that they sort of rushed to commit
ritual suicide far too quickly.
Yeah.
Maybe if I'd worked in the subject
in a form of clear review,
it's just that from the outside,
I'm not convinced that...
Clearly there are things which people have discovered
which are absolutely fundamental
in particle physics.
But somehow it hasn't got to the basic level
which I feel I can see why these groups
are what they are and so on.
Let me not talk about it
because I'm not an expert at that
and I'm only giving an impression.
And I suspect there will be,
maybe not too long from now,
a better understanding.
I'm hoping that Twister theory
might have something to say about it.
But at the moment,
the area which needs to be explored here
hasn't been explored.
The things we did at one time,
I'm sort of deviating a bit from the general trend,
but there was a question of how we treat
massive particles in Twister theory.
And naturally,
Twister theory describes massless things.
Things go along the light cone
and that sort of thing.
Because you privileged the light cones,
then the treatment of particles
that were massless got a privileged treatment.
They have a privileged treatment.
And not just that,
you find transformations.
There is a way of representing the Maxwell equations.
This is the thing I was mentioning
about the TV program.
We're describing the Maxwell equations,
which you get out of Twister theory
and it comes directly out.
What about the Dirac equation?
You want to talk about massive particles.
Well, the way it seems to lead you
is you think of the...
Well, you see a massive particle has a momentum vector,
which is time-like.
So it points within the cone.
And one way you can describe a time-like one
is think of two null ones or two light-like ones.
So you think of a zigzag.
So it's got a zig and a zag.
And that's one convenient way of doing it.
Well, you might have one which is made of three.
Zigzag, dog, something like that.
And you can get the time-like line out of...
So you can build it up from different primitives.
That's right.
So the argument is that you have a Twister
for each of these zigs and zags.
And so you might have two of them.
You might have three of them.
And you see how many of them give you the same amount.
And then you get these groups in Twister theory.
And these groups look like the particle physics groups.
So you've got SU2 and SU3.
And the idea we have is,
oh, well, that's the basis for these particle physics.
So SU2 doesn't impress me much because it's ubiquitous.
But SU3 is a very...
There's another reason.
This is the group that represents the strong force
that holds our...
Well, you see, there's the thing that SU3
gives you this...
You can gauge it.
So you have...
There is a difference between the SU2 and the SU3
that the quantum chromatinomics, if you like,
which is the theory which comes from gauging SU3,
is a genuine gauge theory.
But when you try and do it for the SU2,
for the electrons and...
We gauge the spin.
The gauging, it doesn't really work
because you've got a special...
It's not the full group and so on.
So there's something funny about it.
And there are other theories which might be
a more promising way to go.
Let's not go into that because this is all guessing.
But the idea is that you could develop
a particle physics using many Twisters.
We're going to have it, in other words,
if I'm not misunderstanding you.
The idea is that the extra data...
I mean, we have a problem in the standard model
in that we have effectively an origin story with two gods.
There's the god of Einstein that gives us space and time.
And then there's this other god that gives us
SU3 cross SU2 cross U1,
which gives us the non-gravitational forces
and all of these particle properties we call quantum numbers.
And this has no connection to the space and time data.
Well, that's the sort of thing.
It looks as though it's quite separate.
I mean, they must be tied up at some stage,
but we haven't got to that.
But the idea here was to try and do it via Twisters.
Well, I'm just trying to say that we had...
We got very excited about this for a while.
And then it was a long time ago
because when people discovered Charm,
I think it was Charm and then suddenly this didn't fit
and so we gave up the model.
And so by Charm you mean the addition
of the entirely separate versions
of the familiar family of matter.
So we now think we have three copies of matter
where the second two are repeated at higher mass scale.
That sort of thing, yes. Yeah, that's right.
And so people got...
I mean, it didn't seem so simple at that point.
And various things didn't seem to fit so well.
But I think we should go back to that.
From the insights that...
going from general relativity,
I mean, there's a long story
which should be probably hard to describe here.
But the construction...
You see, Twisters theory starts off as a theory
about space, flat space-time.
That's what bothers me about it.
Exactly.
And it was what bothered a lot of people when you see...
I mean, good company then.
I was at the time at the University of Texas
for a year.
And this Alfred Schild had put a lot of people together
who were relative general relativity experts
hoping that something would come out of it, I guess.
And I had an office next to Engelbert Shooking,
whom I learned a lot from.
And on the other side, I had an office
that was Roy Kerr's office.
And Ray Sacks was a little way down.
And I have to backtrack
because the question is where did...
where did Twister theory come from?
Now, I had lots and lots of ideas that I was trying to fit together.
Part of these were trying to combine the Riemann sphere of relativity
with the Riemann sphere of quantum mechanics.
And various other mathematical ideas
which come into quantum field theory.
And I...
they were sort of floating around,
and I remember drawing a big piece of paper with all these ideas,
which were, roughly speaking of the nature
that the world we see is described by real numbers.
But sort of hiding behind it is a world of complex numbers.
And they somehow control this world of real numbers
so that the dynamics is somehow controlled
by the way the complex numbers work.
And this was a sort of vague thought I had.
And I couldn't think of a picture in which you added...
you see, space-time has four dimensions.
And I needed to add basically one more dimension
because I wanted to incorporate an idea.
Again, it's difficult to describe these things on a sort of popular program.
But it was an idea fundamental to quantum field theory,
which has to do with splitting your field amplitudes
into positive and negative frequencies.
And it's a...
Engelbert's had impressed upon me
that this was very fundamental to quantum field theory.
Most people weren't stressing it at that time.
And the way to think about this is to think of the Riemann sphere again.
And you have the equator of the Riemann sphere
describing the real numbers together with infinity.
And you've got this complex numbers on one side,
one hemisphere and also on the other hemisphere.
And the ones which are positive frequency,
which is the fundamental thing for quantum field theory,
extend into one half.
So this, to me, was a very beautiful way of thinking about it
rather than splitting everything into Fourier components
and taking half of them, and that seemed to me beautiful.
Do you have four degrees of freedom with one extra real degree of freedom?
I just wanted one extra dimension like the Riemann sphere
going from the curve to the whole sphere.
And I wanted it to divide it into two halves.
And that was the picture I wanted.
And you try to do the spacetime, it doesn't work.
The spacetime is four-dimensional.
And if you complex if I say it's eight-dimensional,
that doesn't divide into two, that's just something else.
I knew that wasn't right.
Okay.
Now, I was in Austin, Texas.
I had friends in Dallas.
Now, this was the year in which Kennedy was assassinated.
And my friends in Dallas were at a dinner.
And it was the next place that Kennedy was to go to
and he was going to give a speech.
And they all got worried because he didn't turn up.
And they were generally quite right to be worried
because he'd been shot.
And this was a great shock to us all.
And so we decided we wanted to calm ourselves down
and we went to a trip from Austin where I was
and Dallas where the others were.
And we went off in a few cars to San Antonio
and maybe to the coast.
And this was to try and recover from the shock.
And coming back, all the women wanted to gossip and so on.
And I was with Pishta Asvat,
who was a nice fellow, I like him a lot, Hungarian.
But he didn't speak much.
So all the others wanted to gossip and I was sort of left over
and the two of us went in the car driving back to Austin.
And so I had a nice silent drive coming back
and I started to think about these constructions
that Ivor Robinson, he was in Dallas at the time,
an English fellow who lived in Dallas.
And he constructed these solutions of the Maxwell Equations
which had this curious twist to them.
And I had understood these things
and I realized that they were described by, as you talked about,
the Hopf map or the Clifford parallels.
You can think of a sphere in four dimensions,
three-dimensions sphere of four dimensions
and you have these circles which fill the whole space,
no two intersect and every two link.
Beautiful configuration.
And I realized that this was the thing
that geometrically described these solutions
that Ivor had found.
And I tried to think about this and I thought,
well, okay, these sort of describe...
Well, the way Ivor had thought about it,
think of a light ray.
And then you think of all the light rays
which meet that light ray.
So you've got one light ray
and all the other light rays which meet it.
And that family of light rays,
solutions of Maxwell which point along those rays.
So what he did, this was his trick,
you move that light ray into the complex.
So you add a complex number to the...
So two extra dimensions.
Well, it pushes the light ray into the complex.
And then you construct this twisting.
You don't see the light ray anymore,
it's pushed into the complex,
but you've still got the complex family of light rays
which meet it in a certain sense.
So I try to understand what that looks like.
And I thought, this is...
You're pushing something into the complex
and you describe it by means of this
complicated twisting family of light rays.
So in the drive back,
I thought, well, let's count the number of dimensions.
There are these, as I call them later,
Robinson Conquerences.
And I was gratified or startled
or whatever the right word is
to find that the number of dimensions
of these family of light rays was six,
six-dimensional family.
What's the dimension of the family of light rays?
Five.
So the ones you actually see directly in the light rays,
that's the real thing.
And the thing which governing in the mysterious,
complex world,
add one dimension.
They can twist right-handed, that's one way,
left-handed, that's the other way,
devise the thing into exactly what I was looking for.
Fantastic.
And that additionally had this structure
of three complex dimensions?
Yes.
Well, I had to go back and get hold of my blackboard
and try to work it out.
And I'm very quickly...
So it was a complex, projective three-space.
You have these two twisters
and I, well, pretty chuffed
with myself to realize what this was.
You have a five-dimensional space
which divides this six real-dimensional space,
which is really a three-complex
dimensional space into two-halves.
So if I'm understanding,
you would start out off with a
seven-dimensional sphere.
You'd take an action by a circle
to get the complex
projective three-space
and then you could further quotient that out
by two spheres to get the four-dimensional sphere.
Well, you have to have a...
You can think of it as a sphere and...
Maybe I'm not seeing it correctly.
You can think of it as a sphere and...
But you had a complex projective three-space.
Yeah, you can think of a seven-sphere.
Now, let me just tell you what I find fascinating
about this story is that
you're talking about a
period traveling between two cities
where you realize something is the hop-fibration.
Well, I knew it was the hop-fibration,
but I hadn't actually thought of it.
You may not know the following.
Oh, go ahead. Yes, yes.
Isidore Singer
took the work of Jim Simons
and his father
and took the work of Jim Simons
and
Frank Yang.
Oh, really? Yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
And on the trip to Oxford where you and Michael
were, he said,
oh, my God, this is the quaternionic
rather than the complex hop-fibration.
He said it was that was the instance
when he realized that the self-dual
instanton equations were going to be a revolution.
And so it was the exact moment
of the relationship to something
non-trivial, in his case,
as the quaternionic rather
than the complex hop-fibration.
So this is almost an exact parallel
between two stories because I've never heard yours before.
I see. That's very interesting.
It also has relevance, direct relevance.
Direct? Yes.
I think as you were just saying,
because you think of the vector space
for which the complex three-spaces,
and of course that's four
complex dimensions.
And then that means
three real dimensions.
Look, I want to tie this into a bigger thread,
which I think is fascinating.
I am not
a devotee
of string theory,
nor am I of loop quantum gravity.
I think that most of what has been said
about supersymmetry has been overbearing
and wrong. I completely agree
with all those things you're saying.
And I think that the intellectual
carnage
from these adventures
in political
economy or public relations
or whatever you want to call it
are not being born by the people who benefited
from them, but by those who have to clean up after them.
Something to be said for that.
Well, you don't have to say it. I can say it
because I'm not inside of the university.
Now, what I would claim is that
while these people, I think,
did a tremendous disservice for all of us
taking what I consider to be our most accomplished
intellectual community in the history of academics,
theoretical physics,
it is
not the case that these people did
nothing
for 45 plus years,
but what they did do has never been
told properly. So I
claimed to you at dinner the other night.
If you just look at
the role of curvature
in our understanding
of not only general
relativity where it's been for over 100 years,
but now in particle
theory. So we had a first revolution
around the mid-1970s
with what's called the Wu Yang Dictionary
where
a particular geometer who becomes the most
successful hedge fund manager
in human history meets
arguably the most accomplished
theoretical
physicist, if it's not Weinberg, it might be Yang
in terms of
what has been proven as contributions.
They have
an unbelievable
interaction which shows
that the classical theory
underneath particle physics is as
or more geometric than the theory of Einstein
using Stienrod's
fiber bundles
and Eris Mann's connections
or vector potentials or what have you.
Then you have a second revolution
again involving, so
that was the first one that his singer takes
from Stony Brook to Oxford.
You have another one which is
the geometric quantization revolution
with your colleague
Nick Woodhouse writing the Bible there
in which
Heisenberg's uncertainty relations
strangely come out of
curvature rather than
there just being some sort of weird
curve at you looking connection
in the bundle. Well, there's this thing called
the pre-quantum line bundle where
line is against one of these planes
so the terminology is all screwed up.
Nevertheless, the key point
is that what we had previously treated
as the annoyance
of the Heisenberg
uncertainty principle
became the beauty
of a geometric quantum.
So now you had the underlying classical theory
is geometric.
The underlying quantum theory
is now geometric.
And then again with your
English group
particularly Graham Siegel's
is a real hero with Michael Latia
pointing the way.
Sure.
So you guys figure out
that this weird grab bag
that was called quantum field theory
which is this thing above quantum mechanics
that is needed for if you're going to have
particles that change
regimes in which the number of particles
changes like something emits a photon
you need quantum field theory you can't do it
quantum mechanics. So that world
was a grab bag that made
absolutely no effing sense pedagogically
to anybody coming from outside
of the discipline.
And this is coming from the 1980s
on
is that quantum field theory
would have been discovered by
topologists and geometers
even if the physical world had never used
it because it was actually
a naturally occurring augmentation
of what's called boredism theory
which is an enhancement of what you
previously referred to as co-homology.
So these are three separate
revolutions with people
that almost nobody's ever heard of
Louise Alvarez-Gaumay
and
Dan Quillen
who I think is the world's greatest accidental
quantum field theorist
for some reason the physics community
is still telling us stories
about entanglement
and about multiverses
and many worlds
and this actual thing that happened
which is as gorgeous as anything
I've ever seen has been a revolution
plowing through mathematics and physics
is covered up because
they want to tell a story about
quantum gravity which
just doesn't hang together. What the F?
Yeah, well I think
I mean...
First of all, am I wildly off?
No, I don't think you are you see
I mean a lot of these things
I wish I knew more about you see
for example Quillen theory and so on
which
life is too short
but these are...
This comes out of the Atheist singer theory
where he finds
these determinant lines
which are coming out of
non-local spectral information
and
building the basis maybe for
pre-quantum line bundles in which
the functions in that world
become the waves that give us the theory.
I think the trouble here
you see mathematics is full
of all sorts of beautiful
theory and
most of
mathematics as it exists now
in the sense of what's written in journals
and so on has almost no
bearing on the physical world.
Now you see I feel
totally convinced and I think you're
expressing something similar that if you
find the right route through this stuff
you will really
find the key to what we're seeing
in the physical world. Now we've found
many such keys and
general relativity
to the Laurentian
version of Riemannian
Semi-Riemannian or pseudo-Riemannian?
Yes, pseudo-Riemannian geometry.
So that's picked up
a beautiful area of mathematics and turned it
into physics and
then in reverse
has
given a lot back to mathematics
and also with quantum... with quantum
theory clearly and quantum
theory but I think there are things they're
hiding there
which are very beautiful mathematics
and which will reveal themselves
as important
in the physics we haven't got to it yet.
What do you make of the fact that we now have
three separate
geometries?
You have Riemannian geometry
as the parent of general relativity.
Yes.
You have Erismannian geometry
which is based on sort of these penrose
coming from fiber bundle theory
which is the parent
of the Maxwell classical
theory but also the
classical theory that would be underneath the
strong force holding protons
together which want to repel and the weak force
which causes beta decay.
Alright.
And then you've got this other geometric theory
which is the geometric quantum
and
they're not the same geometry.
So for example, the geometry
that Jim Simons
and
C. N. Yang find
has this property called gauge symmetry.
You have
the opportunity for gauge symmetry
in the Einstein theory
but
because Einstein
takes curvature
and uses something called
linear algebra
to project all of the curvature information
into a smaller subset killing off
the soil curvature.
If you gauge,
symmetrize and then project
it's not the same as projecting
and then gauge symmetrizing.
So the opportunity to use gauge theory
is lost
by the specific genius of Einstein.
Well, you see, there's a good example
because he did this amazing thing
by producing general relativity
but then in his later years
he tried to develop the theory
in these unified field theories
and the particle point of view was not really
a very
was not likely to give much
new insights.
But he was right to think you should find
a unified scheme and so on
and bring the...
One trouble is he didn't really
he considered electromagnetism
but the particle
physics didn't play much of a role
in what he was doing.
Well, he died before quarks were understood.
Well, that's true.
I think the thing is there's
huge
beautiful things in mathematics and
we like to think
and I like to think that they do have a role
in a fundamental role
roles that we've not yet discovered
in operating
where the way the world works
is dependent on
very deep mathematics.
The trouble is that there's so many wrong
steps in the sense that
many beautiful things in mathematics
which are guided in certain directions
which from the point of view of mathematics
are great
and they can be generalizing ideas
and
revealing all sorts of previously unknown
beauties
but the proportion of these
which we find has relevance to physics
is very small at the moment.
I think that in some ways
maybe the most powerful, the most
sure.
I mean, complex numbers
and the analysis
of complex numbers is one example
where one does seem to see
a role
in operating the way the world works
and I'm sure that we will find other things.
It's just there are so many temptations
in directions which are not particularly
to do with physics. I understand that
but what I don't understand and what I'm absolutely
unsympathetic with
is that we
have a lot of people who once
upon a time had a lot of different ideas.
Now most of the ideas
at the moment, if we're brutally honest
we are so constrained
by this point in our story
in theoretical physics that almost every
new idea is
dead on arrival unless you specifically
keep it from predicting things
that we don't see.
Oh yeah.
What I see is that you've got
different, and this is a sociological
and economic critique
is that you have a class
of naughty boys
who are very badly behaved, who get
to make all sorts of
claims
who talk to the press incessantly over
decades about all the wonderful things
they're going to do which they don't do
and then you have got another group of people
whose feet are held to the fire where
the instant they start to consider
something that might for example violate
a no-go theorem
they're roundly humiliated.
Now what I see you as having
done is to carve out a very unusual
niche.
Twister theory is at a minimum
an incredibly
valuable tool
for generating solutions
on one space from solutions
on another let's say.
However
it's also somewhat
tolerated within the system. It's a
minority point of view, it's a minority
community
but it is allowed to play
a parallel game to the string world
where the string theorists
have lived for years in my estimation
on externalities.
There are lots of positive
externalities of having, and I do think
that's the smartest community out there
I do think that in general
they're smarter than the relativists, they're
even smarter than most of the geometers
they're insufferable.
Yeah, very clever people, very
insufferable.
And the problem
with that community is that
it's actually
accomplished a great deal
that isn't of a stringy nature.
That's true.
And I do think that what they've
done is instead of
quantizing geometry, which is what quantum
gravity was supposed to be, it backfired
and they had the geometry
geometrize the quantum.
And that's the main legacy
of these people.
They
took off
for Paris
and landed in Tokyo, which is very impressive
as a feat, but it wasn't what they were setting out to do.
No, I think basically I agree with that.
And certainly string theorists
had a big influence in various
areas of mathematics.
But the influence directly in physics
is being pretty minimal, I think.
What do you think about the legacy of something
like supersymmetry?
That's an interesting question.
Isn't it? Yes.
Well, it's very interesting partly
from a personal point of view, because when I first heard
about it, and a lot of it was
on conformal supersymmetry.
Right. And I could see there was a lot
of connection with Twister theory.
The only thing I didn't like was you were
led to these algebras which
didn't commute and
they were all
the square of something
was zero or something, whatever.
I mean, there weren't the kind of algeba
that you needed in Twister theory. You needed
complex analysis. But anyway,
I visited
Zumino at one point
and I was most intrigued because I could
This is half of the duo that came up
with the sort of original
deep supersymmetric model.
Absolutely, yes.
And so I thought there's enough connections here.
I'd like to understand it better.
And, yeah, I think I understood a bit
more. But one thing I remember
particularly, this is a little bit of a side point,
but I was talking to him about two
component spinners and I realized
he was somebody who understood
it perfectly well.
And he told me this story. He said he
once written a paper
in which he used two component
spinners and it worked out very well.
A few
months later, Abdus Salam
did the same thing but using
four component spinners.
And he said everybody referred to Abdus Salam's
paper and nobody referred to his paper.
And he said, well, from then on
he vowed never to write
a paper using the two-spinner formalism
which I thought was pretty ironic.
Particularly since
Dirac himself.
Intriguing.
There were a lot of people in the early days
of looking at generalizing the Dirac equation
for higher spins and so on.
And there were, you know,
Duff and Kamar and
all the ones I forget what they were all called.
Different names for all the different spins.
And they were all in Corson's book, I remember.
And Dirac
wrote this, had written this, I think earlier
I can't remember the history of Which Is Which
but I think earlier this paper where he did
a whole lot using two spinners.
I mean Dirac using two spinners
where you see clearly he knew about them
as far as I was concerned because he'd lectured on them.
But this was much earlier than that.
He had this paper in the Royal Society
describing all the different spins with two spinners.
Much more
much clearer
much more general
systematic.
And again nobody seemed to refer to Dirac's paper
which is quite curious
because he, I mean there's a huge irony there
because he wrote his initial paper
using these four spinners
and didn't realize until maybe pointed out by
Van de Verlander, I have no idea where he got it from
he realized that you could write all this
in two spinners.
And in some ways it was simpler
and used this to generalize to all the spins.
But for some curious reason
nobody or very few people
seemed to refer to Dirac's paper.
You know about this famous
situation where Feynman found
effectively
the path integral formalism
in some paper that Dirac had published
in the Soviet Union.
That's right.
And Feynman
was trembling I think
and asked Dirac, do you realize
when you said that these two things were analogous
that they're in fact proportional
and Dirac said, are they?
You had to be careful with Dirac
because I had a
when I'd first written things
in two spinners and I'd written general relativity
with just two spinners and I found
certain things came out
very beautifully and this thing
that everybody was worrying about calling
at that time called
spinners and tensor.
And you could, it's dropped out of use
two spinners and the
principal null directions and all sorts of things.
And the thing is you have this equation
which is the Bianchi
identities written in two spinners.
And you can see it's just the same equation
that you write for master's fields
Maxwell's equations are the same
neutrino if it had no mass just the same.
They're just the same you have it
the higher the spin the more indices.
But it's the same equation.
It's conformally invariant.
Part of the problem that you're going to get into
with all these things is I would
venture to argue
that even the lowly Bianchi identity
which is at the heart of how Einstein
figured out how to do his equations
to make sure that
effectively his vectors
pointed perpendicular to the orbits
of the symmetries that he was considering
that
we don't really even understand
the things that are given to us for
free fully.
There's an old paper of Jerry Kasdan
I believe in which he actually
rededuces the Bianchi identity
for much more fundamental principles
and the same thing is true with
the sudden appearance of a
version of the calculus due to
Levy Chavita
for merely choosing
rulers and protractors.
I really
worry that we never actually grounded
these fields properly.
I think it's Chekhov who said
that if a gun
is placed above the mantle place
in the first act
it must be fired by scene four.
Well
for example we have this thing called
the torsion tensor
that everybody's introduced to on the first day
of Ramonian geometry and then
they properly are encouraged to forget about
thereafter. Never
really seems to show up in any meaningful
way anywhere. Well it's always a puzzle
I know. And I've never quite made
up my mind about it. Let's not go
into that story though. Yes
I don't use it
though I once wrote a paper.
To ask you just in terms of the path forward
it strikes me
that what we have learned
about our physical world
and what comes up in this book
is of a very
frightening nature
Einstein's equations when you really
understand them through Hilbert's
insight come from
the simplest possible thing
we could minimize.
Oh yes. Same thing
for Maxwell's equations
they spread from the electromagnetism
to the weak force and to the strong force
because it was the simplest
possible thing that could
be optimized. I think he had the Lagrangian.
The Lagrangian. I'm trying to avoid saying those
words. Yes I know. And then
Dirac's
Yes. Third equation
to complete this triptych
is
the equation for matter
which generates all of something called
k-theory
which is absolutely fundamental.
So I could make an excellent argument
that the three
major equations to be supplemented by one
for the Higgs field now that we found it
are
the simplest and
best possible equations of
their type not that we've found
so far but provably so.
Yes. I think
the trouble with simplicity
arguments which I agree with
is that it's simple in one context
and what's simple in another context
it may be. But nature has shown
such I mean the thing that I
can't get over
is that her taste in mathematics
you know I've analogized
this to rating a jewelry store
with
millions of pieces and
in under half a minute finding
all the best stuff.
Yes.
I wanted to finish a story though you see
which I didn't quite finish it relates to something
you were saying earlier which I
at one point
you see Dirac was at the same college as I
was, St. John's College in Cambridge
where I was a fellow and I happened to be
opposite him at one point and
I had been working on these
two-spinner ways of looking at general
relativity and so I said to him
I thought you know I thought something he might be interested
in could he have
opportunities to talk me about it so
he reserved a room
and I had a little discussion with him and then I wrote down
this equation which is this wave equation
which
represents the Bianchi identities
and I wrote this thing down
in Dirac. I thought he
would instantly recognize it because it's
basically the same equation
that he had in his paper with all these
different spins and
he asked me
I wrote down the equation and he said where does
that equation come from?
So I said it comes from the Bianchi identities
and he said
what are the Bianchi identities?
Holy cow.
And I thought well he's been writing all these
papers in general relativity and he must
know perfectly what they are
the explanation presumably is
he simply rediscovered them himself
he just didn't know who they were called the Bianchi identities
I don't know
it's a very curious story
and this was in the form that the derivative
of the curvature
in terms of
the natural derivative is equal to zero that's
in vacuum say
and you take the
the vial curvature which is all
that's left of the Riemann curvature
and you write that in spinners
and it's a spinner with four
indices
completely symmetrical
and then when you write the derivative
it's the derivative acting on those four things
and one contraction the derivative's got two indices
and you contract one of those
and that's the equation that's vanishes
that's the equation same as the Maxwell equation
same as neutrino if you had one index
and no mass
and
it's the way I think about these things
and the conformal invariance is very crucial
to all sorts of ideas that
I wouldn't have thought of otherwise
and
it was clearly the sort of thing
Durak would have played with himself because his equation
all the higher spin equations
although and curiously in his paper
he did the massless case a different way
which I never quite understood why
but anyway
there are clearly things that he understood
completely
and somehow
maybe never connected I don't know what it was
did you read his
1963 article in Scientific American
where he makes a very interesting
case against
naive
application of the scientific method
no I don't that's Durak
absolutely
I should have seen that
he makes the point in the case of Schrodinger
and he says
Schrodinger would not have been led into
error if he had not been pressed for agreement
with experiment
because Schrodinger then
after publishing there was a period of time
where it wasn't understood that spin somehow
entered the picture
and complicated the theoretical prediction
with its experimental verification
but I think secretly
he was actually talking about himself
where he had introduced
the Durak equation
there had to be positively and negatively charged particles
and at that time the electron
and the proton were known
but the positron and the antiproton
were not
and so he linked those two and Heisenberg
immediately dinged him and said
wouldn't those be of the same mass
and you're obviously making an error
and he didn't stick to his guns or have the courage of his convictions
to predict the new particle
and I think that that 1963
paper from Scientific American
is Durak trying to give us a gift
from Mount Olympus to say
stop with the
incessant
on the naive scientific method
give yourself more room to imagine
more room to play
more room to be wrong
I think that's a crucial thing
that was the thing about Durak
he just didn't want to be wrong
he was very worried
about saying things that were wrong
and so often he would say nothing
rather than anything
so this is a big thing with him
and I think he was disturbed by
yeah you're right
he picked it instantly
I think he needed more freedom
and he didn't have it
and he tried to give that freedom
in a way being too timid yes
what
let me ask you a harder question
right
because we haven't asked you any hard questions to begin with
you're going to be
in your 90s soon
hope to make it yes
if you were to point
to younger people
there seems to be a failure
to pass torches that I've noticed
and
you don't seem to be the sort of person
I would imagine to have that problem
who would you be pointing to
a human being
individuals
you don't have to push anyone down
but who would you build
up
who's young and vital
you might say look
if anyone's got the scent
what would you look at
I think I'm not going to take you up on that one
I'll decline to push further
yes it's just
it's not so obvious
I mean I've certainly had people
clearly good
in
inspirational ways and think of things I've never thought of
but it's a bit hard
I don't know enough people I think
it's probably somebody I don't know
do you
worry that the glory
of the Oxford
school
of geometry and physics
may not continue
I do worry a bit about that
there was an unbelievable
nucleus of people
you're absolutely right it's very remarkable
and I worry that the UK doesn't value itself
enough I think that you guys are so idiosyncratic
and so
weird
badly behave I don't know what to call it
but the UK has punched
the way above its weight
by tolerating
and encouraging personalities idiosyncrasies
I think
there is a point there
I wouldn't know
how to generalize across countries
because maybe
but I think you were right to some degree
there is
tolerance of eccentricity
which is specifically
a kind of
tolerance which is specifically English
British
I don't know
I'm nervous about saying things like that
because you can find somebody who springs up somewhere else
somebody will hate you for it
but quite honestly what are they going to do
make you pay with your career I don't think it's going to happen
but I think
I think what you say about the
geometry developed in Oxford
was pretty distinctive
but then
the people moved out too
Michael went back to Cambridge
but the Oxford system
I mean I don't have to
make it so peculiar to Oxford
but even if I think about
Nigel Hitchin
or
Mason I guess has been in
that system
yes no they grew up with very
very agile people
no doubt about that
but you're asking me to
a bigger thing then
let me just
one final thing
have you been to the
courtyard
of the Simon Center for Geometry and Physics
at Stony Brook which is
tiled with Penrose tiles
I've not been there I've seen photographs of the tiling
may I recommend
a pilgrimage they have a wall
there as well
the so-called iconic wall
which because Jim Simons
made so much money
he was able to chisel
some of the world's
most important equations and principles
that
you and I probably think of as being
the hallmarks of
being alive
just contact with these things
they're actually in a place that can be visited with a key
and I always think about
in a fantastic world
unlocking that wall and seeing whether it's
in fact a gateway to something else
yeah it's a long time since I've been there
and I haven't been there since the war
over pavings
I recommend it
let me ask you one final question
to close out
we all worry
when we've gotten this far
along
your road to reality if you will
that we're not going to live
to see
the final chapter
or completion that this is a mystery
like none other
but probably in some sense
does have
an explanation and a kind of end
is that something
that occupies you
I mean I find you absolutely
vital and
sharp as a tech
I'm worried about this at age
54
what if I don't get a chance to see the end
is that something that animates
there's a huge amount of chance involved in these things
so it's a ola
I think
to see a real end to all this
is too remote for that
but on the other hand
you see we didn't
really discuss
where Twister theory is stuck
or has stuck for 40 years
and where
I think it's got somewhat unstuck
you think it will be the answer
well I'm not sure how far it'll take us
you see that's another question
but the main problem
I saw it in Twister theory
it did sort of
surprisingly
things which worked surprisingly well
and one of these is to construct solutions
of the Einstein equations
or the Richey-Flat
four-dimensional space times
which were
completely generic
provided they were anti-self-deal
now what that means is you've got a complex
solution of Einstein's vacuum equations
which
are left-handed in some sense
now why do we want complex solutions anyway
you want the real solutions
well you say I thought at one point
well one useful way of thinking about the complex ones
is these are wave functions
because wave functions are naturally complex
so I thought well this is a wave function
but it's a non-linear wave function
so I called it the non-linear graviton
and it seemed to be
a big step forward in understanding how quantum mechanics
and gravity fits in together
but it got stuck
with what I call the googly problem
now you have to
if you're not a member
of the former British Empire you probably
won't know what a googly is
it's a ball
in the game of cricket
in cricket unlike baseball
you like to spin the ball about its axis
the direction
it spins about the direction which is moving
because it bounces, that's the key thing
so it bounces one way or the other
and to make it spin left-handed
has a certain action with your hand
and
there's a clever thing that people do
who are really good at this
who looks as though they're using the same action
but it's very cleverly done
that the ball spins the other way
and you throw occasional one of these in
and it gets the batsman completely bamboozled
and that's called a googly
so using the same action
that spins the ball left-handed
you spin it right-handed
so I use that term because he's very enact
the twist of framework
which naturally gives you the left-handed
graviton, make it do the right-handed one
and I struggled
and struggled and struggled
and had all sorts of wild ideas
for how to do this
and I came up with one which I was very proud of
but it needed a cosmological
constant to be zero
and so I thought there is no cosmological constant
and then I had a discussion
with Jerry Ostreicher
who was a very distinguished
astrophysicist
and I was talking about the observations
that there seemed to be
an exponential
expansion of the universe
which seemed to indicate
the presence of a positive cosmological constant
so I said well you know
surely that's not really there, it's dust or something
and he looked at me and said
that's not the point
there are so many things in cosmology
which work so much better
if you put this cosmological constant in
so I had to retract my view
I threw out my construction
but it took me many years
to see when you
have a cosmological constant you can do something
that didn't work without it
and this enables you to have a construction
which I think
solves this googly problem
the trouble is from my point of view
it translates into algebra rather than geometry
although you can get back to geometry
by thinking of a connection on the bundle
so that is a geometrical thing
these are connections
and then you talk about this algebra
and then instead of patching spaces together
to make a curved manifold you patch the algebras together
then they have to be non-commutative
a point that made clear to me
by Michael Atte at one point
and this is the proposal
you just construct these algebras
and they are connections on bundles
and this enables you
at least in principle to find a generic solution
of the Einstein vacuum equations
with cosmological constant
when I say find
so you mean
what would be called an Einstein manifold
the Ricci scalar is constant and non-zero
constant and non-zero, that's right
that's right, exactly what people call
an Einstein space
but this is Lorentzian and not positive
definitely
but it's not a construction attempt
that you sort of write this for me down
you construct this algebra
and then you look for sub-algebras and the algebra
and that's not the thing I'm good at doing
but still it needs to be worked out
sounds like you need to collaborate
oh absolutely
but I got distracted by cosmology and other things
stay away from that consciousness stuff
it'll suck all your time
well that is a problem actually
but you see other people are doing that
I'm not really doing that
they get me to give lectures on it
I give the same old lecture which I've given
many many
well I have to say that
if you stick with what you've
done in physics
and keep trying to push that ball forward
I can't imagine a better use of your time
you are invited
anytime you want to come back and return
to this program this has been an extremely
heavy load for our
listener
we don't apologize for that
we have to start doing something different
because people are hungry to know
what does it actually sound like to hear people
talking about where things are
rather than some spoon-fed, prettified
version that's like pre-tuned
as if it were baby food
I don't think they want that anymore
no I quite agree
and I think even if you don't understand
all the things that get some feeling
for some of the things people are trying to do
is really important
as important as the details or perhaps more
part of it is just respecting our listeners
they know that we don't know how to get this to them
in exactly the right way
and so I think we have the best listenership
of any program out there because they've been habituated
to recognize that not every program
and not every sentence is going to make sense
so Roger
thank you for coming
through we'll come back anytime
and would love to continue the conversation about
twisters or anything else you'd like to talk about
I've really enjoyed it thank you very much
alright you've been through the portal with
Sir Roger Penrose hope you've enjoyed it
please subscribe to us
wherever you listen to podcasts
and if you are the sort
of person who views podcasts
navigate over to our YouTube channel
make sure that you subscribe and click the bell
so you'll be informed the next time
our next episode drops
be well
