Hello. I'm Tom Rawlings, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers series. They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Philosophy. The lecturer is
Professor Daniel Robinson. Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University
since 1971. He earned his doctorate in neuropsychology at the City University of New York. His scholarly
books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology, philosophy
of psychology, as well as in psychology and law. He holds the position of Professor of
Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University, and, since 1991, has
lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford in England.
Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological Association's Division
of History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological
Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Linacre College, Oxford.
Lecture one, From the Aponoshods to Homer.
When Sir Arthur Evans excavated the great court at Knossos on the island of Crete, the court
of King Minos, he discovered extraordinary mural paintings that featured young athletes,
young Greek boys, hurtling over bulls in tasks that were at once ritualistic and dangerous.
And, in fact, the bull features significantly in ancient mythology. It was only after King
Minos' exacted tribute against the Greeks, a tribute that called for young Greek boys
and girls to be sacrificed annually at Crete, that Theseus was sent to kill the Minotaur,
to kill the bull, who was indeed consuming these young Athenians, and, in fact, in the
process of killing the bull, to free Athens from a burden it had borne all so long. Now,
Theseus, in order to get to the Minotaur, of course, had to solve the puzzle of the
great, great labyrinth, this extraordinary maze that no one who ever entered it could
find his way out of. And he was able to do this because the daughter of King Minos, Ariadne,
gave him a golden cord that he could bring down into the depths, into the very bowels
of the labyrinth, and, having killed the Minotaur, could work his way back up into the light.
Now, of course, all mythology is laden with metaphor, and I submit that the golden cord
provided by Ariadne is something of the metaphor of history itself. You find your way out of
a bind, you find your way out of a great, perplexing dilemma by retracing the steps
that got you there.
Well, I'm about to embark on a journey into a great, great labyrinth. 50 lectures devoted
to great ideas in philosophy, covering a period of time from remote antiquity to late in
the 20th century. And I am going to need something of Ariadne's cord to do this. The guide here
really will have to be the history of ideas, the great ideas in philosophy, though not
cumulative in the sense of science being cumulative in its discoveries. Nonetheless, is a set
of ideas that builds on precedent, on the past, on past mistakes, past understandings,
and the like.
Now what about these great myths? The myth of Theseus liberating Athens. Theseus is a
great hero in the ancient world of the Athenians. They see him as something of the founder of
Athens in the sense of providing it with a political independence it otherwise lacked,
certainly during the time of King Minas, which is circa 1400 or 1500 B.C.
Well, myth sets out to answer questions, puzzling questions. For example, if you are sending
young boys and girls to the island of Crete, and they are going there as sacrifices, well
everybody knows that bulls don't eat children. Only human beings seem to be meat-eaters among
the larger, domesticable animals.
Well, of course, the Minotaur is not a bull. It's a kind of beast. It's a kind of monster.
It's half human and half bull. And of course, the human part answers the question why these
sacrifices would be consumed by something otherwise. This, of course, is going to be a fixture
in the history of philosophy. It's an attempt to answer puzzling questions, and to answer
them in a way, to answer them in a way that, in fact, myth is incapable of answering.
Why is it the young children were sent to the island of Crete? Well, King Minas had
lost a son, and as a result of his deep grieving and resentment according to one myth, he exacted
this penalty on the Athenians. Oh, I see. How is it that no one was ever able to get out
of that labyrinth until Theseus? And what was it about Theseus that allowed him to get
out of the labyrinth? Ah, well, Theseus had solved the problem. He was given this golden
cord by Ariadne, and as a result of that cord, he was able to retrace his steps. Ah, I see.
Well, the myth answers questions, perplexing questions, but it answers them in a special
kind of way. It answers them in such a way as to create and preserve a kind of civic
coherence. The mythology of a people is the basis upon which they recognize themselves
as a people and have a coherent relationship not only to each other, but with their own
past. To some extent, philosophy is disruptive in this regard. The enterprise is not an essentially
civic one. It's an essentially epistemological one. The search, as we shall discover, is
the search for truth. Wherever that search might lead us, we are morally obliged to go,
and I say this does not always have the effect of a kind of cementing influence on communities,
which is why philosophers throughout the ages have often found themselves in trouble
with the authorities being exiled and the like.
Nonetheless, the questions that mythology must set out to answer are not unlike the
questions that philosophy itself sets out to answer, and at the risk of being economical
to the point of libel, I would say there are three overarching questions that consume much,
if not all, of the subject matter of philosophy. Three central problem areas, which I would
denominate the problem of knowledge, the problem of conduct, and the problem of governance.
And how do I want these problems to be understood? Well, the problem of knowledge is a straightforward
problem. How is it we come to know anything? And on what basis do we undertake the search
for answers to questions? I submit that initially, before the rise of great civilizations, and
particularly philosophically enlightened civilizations, the search for knowledge is undertaken by
people who are afraid of the world in which they live, a world that is unpredictable and
dangerous, has lethal consequences, presents challenges that are often fatal, and certainly
always fatal, if not dealt with correctly. The problem of knowledge surfaces as a real,
practical imposition on life itself. To get from here to there, there are things we must
know. To rescue ourselves from certain dangers, there are things we must know. To be able
to vanquish an enemy, there are things we must be able to do, problems we must be able
to solve. To engage in trade, there are routes that have to be discovered, and maps that
have to be drawn up, and ships that must be sea-worthy. So the problem of knowledge
is co-extensive, not only with human life, it's co-extensive with the life of the entire
animal economy. Creatures must know things in order to survive. Some are fitted out instinctually
to know what they have to know. For those of us mere homo sapiens, we have to work out
many of these things as best we can as we go along. The problem of conduct. How are
children to be raised in such a way as to preserve the coherence and prosperity of the
tribe? What's the nature of the obligation that parents have to children or children
have to parents? How should I conduct myself in such a way that my life is a satisfying
one? How is it that I'm able to act in such a way as to maximize pleasures and minimize
pain and suffering? What sort of being should I be? What's the nature of the relationship
I actually have to others? These are fundamental questions. Every human being has to wrestle
with these questions. They do not presuppose a developed philosophy. In fact, these questions
were addressed since a time out of memory, and surely long before anything that would
satisfy the definition of philosophical inquiry. And the problem of governance. Every tribal
community, every known significant enclave, human enclave of any size at all, includes
leaders, kings, chiefs, tyrants, presidents, senators and the like. What's the basis upon
which modes of leadership are chosen? What's the basis upon which leaders are resisted?
Revolution staged. Radical upheavals take place. What's the basis upon which territorial
boundaries can be established? What's the basis upon which a people comes to understand
itself as a people in virtue of the form of government or the. So these are central questions.
What is it I'm able to know? How should I conduct my life? What are the political realities
facing me? Is this the sort of Paulus? Is this the sort of community? Is this the sort
of tribe capable of sustaining, nurturing and otherwise furthering what human beings
take to be their best interests? Those best interests often specified in the form of myth
and tradition. So I say long before philosophy, issues of this sort are wrestled with heroically
by human beings. And indeed philosophy comes about as a very late stage in the development
of this engagement and the development of this daily encounter with the problem of knowledge,
the problem of conduct and the problem of governance. Now we find these engagements in the mythology
of every civilization and every culture and every tribe that has a recorded mythos. We
find that indeed the problem of knowledge is being dealt with in a fairly direct way
where questions are being asked of a master. If we take a look at the period from 800 to
600 B.C. in which there are so many remarkable developments throughout the populated world,
developments in the Celtic world, developments in the Nile Valley, developments in India and
in the Mediterranean, developments that are pre philosophical, but obviously are on the
move toward a kind of philosophical inquiry. I say if we look at these periods we see that
very often the epic or the saga or the myth involves a voyage of some kind. Smith is trying
to get from A to B. To get from A to B there are obstacles that have to be overcome. To
overcome these obstacles a kind of wisdom or knowledge is necessary. This might be born
in by birds or by animals, omens and the like. There might be oracles who explain the
right way to go. Very often it's the wise man. One sits in the presence of the wise man.
One sits next to the wise man and addresses questions to the wise man. The etymology of
the term Upanishad is to sit next to the master and to learn what the master has to say. And
between 800 BC and 300 BC the Hindus would develop these extraordinary Upanishads which
do address questions of knowledge and questions of conduct and questions of governance. This
is part of the quasi-mythical and at the same time pre philosophical thought of a highly
developed culture, a highly developed civilization. Well what sorts of questions does one address
to the wise man? Well there are going to be questions like where do we come from? How
do you explain that some things live and other things don't? How do you explain the origin
of everything there is? How did this great globe come about? And what are we to make
of the objects in the sky? And do they portend certain things? And what's the primary difference
between us and other kinds of living things? And what is it about dead things such that
they never seem to come to life? Although we hear that sometimes they do come to life.
And what kind of life should I be living? And why is there so much domestic intranquility?
Why is it that we have wars? Et cetera, et cetera. Now these are questions that would
flush out contemporary magazines for goodness sake and Dear Abbey columns and all that.
Why does Jack not love Jill? Or why does he love Jill? And so forth. What we find in
the Upanishads is not anything that I would be inclined at least in the course of the
lectures to identify as a philosophical mode of address. But we do see nonetheless a questioning
interrogating frame of mind. Aristotle will begin perhaps his deepest philosophical treatise,
the one later dubbed the metaphysics, with the statement all men by nature desire to
know. And indeed what Aristotle is recording here is the fact that there's no evidence
of a human community anywhere where there isn't a quest for knowledge. And when these
questions are addressed to the wise man, as they are in the Upanishads, they're addressed
to the wise man because people are satisfied with the kinds of answers they've been getting.
That's why they denominate such persons wise men. Well what answers do we get in the Upanishads?
And of course these are highly variegated, these are highly variegated writings or sayings
over a long period of time. Again, I risk libel by reducing them to a set of convenient
and trendy one-liners. But central to the Upanishads is the notion that the universe itself and
everything that is in it exists in virtue of some fundamental power or force or fire,
a kind of cosmic soul, atman, which in virtue of its presence gives reality to things. It
gives reality to us too. We share something very fundamentally in common with the universe
itself. We have the breath of fire within us. We have soul within us. It is an imperishable
feature of our very nature. Everything that there is participates on. And there is this
sense then in the Hindu Upanishads that there is something fundamentally identical between
the life of the person and the life of the cosmos, that indeed one is the microcosmic
expression of the macrocosm itself. Now these are teachings that come to equate atman not
only with fire and life and creativity, but also through Brahman, a form of knowledge,
knowledge as the manifestation of this spirit. And indeed the quest for knowledge then becomes
quite a natural undertaking for those invested with atman. And Brahman then becomes the search
that renders life meaningful. But what is Brahman? It is a kind of introspective activity.
It is deep, and it is ponderous, and it is meaningful, but it has an initiatory quality.
You have got to be the representative of a certain kind of culture with a certain set
of religious values, certain overarching precepts that remain unchallenged in order
for these teachings, which are very moving teachings, to make sense and indeed to be
incorporated into nothing less than a form of life. This is not to say that the children
of the West cannot easily be won over to the great teachings of the Hindus, the great teachings
of Confucius, the great teachings of the ancient Nile Valley. It is to say, however, that in
order to be won over to that, one will have to attach oneself to certain cosmological
and mythic precepts that must be granted as a precondition for accepting the teachings
of the wise themselves. I go into this all too briefly, but chiefly
to establish a certain comparison between the Upanishads and those famous epics composed
by the blind poet Homer. And I am not going to answer the question, who was Homer, who
was she, how many were there, exactly on what date did these songs get sung. What we do
know is that the Homer of history is operating out of an epic tradition that is already very
long in place. The early dating of Homer is in the early 800s BC, the late dating, the
recent dating would have him composing Iliad and later Odyssey, circa 750 BC. The Homer
questions are always very interesting questions and scholars, I say, even as we meet today,
are busy addressing the Homer question. I want to go to the epics themselves, however, and
draw a certain comparison between Atman and what moves the heroes in Homer's epics. And
of course what moves the heroes in Homer's epics are generally found not in the cosmos,
but in their chests, in Thumos and in places in the viscera. The reason the hero steals
himself for battle is because on the basis of Thumos he is impelled to do certain things.
When Diomedes turns around and does something as rash as is imaginable, namely takes his
sword and strikes out against one of the Olympian goddesses, strikes out against Aphrodite herself,
what does it Homer tells us? Well, Diomedes was overcome by something called LUSSA, L-Y-S-S-A
in the modern orthography, and what is LUSSA? Well, LUSSA is a wolf's rage. Do you see?
Diomedes now, in the fever pitch of battle, is simply overcome by something. But what
he's overcome by is something that is at least quasi-natural. It's something occupying
him at a corporeal level, at the level of his very body and being. There's something
utterly earthly about the Homeric epics. The gods themselves have a very earthly, and
I'm inclined to say a very earthly quality. They have this penchant for mating with human
beings. You never know when one of them is going to show up on somebody's doorstep and
find your daughter or your son particularly attractive, and of course the offspring of
these pairings will include, it is said by the way on one legend, it is said that the
great great king of Crete, Minos, was the direct offspring of Zeus. So in the pedigree
of the great figures of the ancient world, one will find Olympian gods. Nonetheless the
gods thus found are rummaging around in the oceans and up in the clouds and they're pulling
celestial bodies across the heavens. Zeus is often Africa at a party that's being thrown
in his honor. Thetis is up there kneeling down when he finally comes back asking him
to give her son her quasi-mortal, quasi-divine son Achilles a break. We know he's going
to die young, so give him something so that he goes. There's something terribly immediate,
terribly proximate, awesomely human and portentous and real in the Homeric epics. We can find
ourselves in those pages. We find the same perplexity. There are no final answers when
Homer sets out to tell us the causes of the Trojan War. What are these causes? Is it the
curse on the house of Atreus? Is that the cause? Is it because that at a wedding ceremony
to which discordia had not been invited, she throws a golden apple into the setting and
the apple is to go to one judge to be most beautiful? And Aphrodite, when she is chosen
by Paris as the most beautiful, says that she will grant any wish he has and what is
his wish? His wish is to be trolled the most beautiful woman in the world, who turns out
to be Helen of Troy. Did this whole thing take place because of some divine resentment
occurring at a wedding party? Did it take place because something that the house of
Atreus, that Atreus himself had done, brought shame down on that family and created a cosmic
disharmony that had to be redressed and it will be redressed this way? Homer does not
give us a final answer. Is Zeus king of kings, king of Olympus? Yes, Zeus is the primus into
Paris, but Zeus' expectations can be thwarted. Zeus' plans can be subverted. And when Zeus
wants to know for once and for all precisely what's going to happen, he must turn to the
fates. He must turn to the destinies. He must turn to Moira. He understands the chance
operates at every turn in the world. So there are no lasting and final settled answers to
the questions, the problems, the problems of knowledge and conduct and governance served
up by Iliad and Odyssey. This is an entirely open textured epic at the level of epistemology,
at the level of ethics, at the level of political science. What we learn in these epics is that
it's very, very easy to get oneself in trouble and never to be able to get oneself out of
trouble. And the way you do this is by failing to pay attention to what we might take to
be the wishes and will and whim of the gods, by failing in the duties that befall the hero,
by engaging in a hubristic pretension to divine status oneself, indeed by failing to recognize
your mortality and the unbridgeable gap that that establishes between you and everything
divine. The Upanishads have merged us with the eternal cosmic divinity. And Iliad and
Odyssey say not a bit of it. That's not our fate. That's not our place of being. Our place
of being is earth. It's a place of war. It's a place of love. It's a place of failed aspirations.
A place of heroic gestures that sometimes succeed and often fail. The best laid schemes
of mice and man gang after glee and leave us not but grief and pain for promise promised
joy, said Robbie Buttons. And he might as well have been Homer. There's a connection
between Homer and Buttons, at least at that level. The first word in Iliad is Menin, anger.
This is an epic about anger. It's about the anger of Achilles, the prideful anger of Achilles.
Achilles sulking in his tent, Achilles who has to give up the booty of victory to Agamemnon,
because Agamemnon, in order to propitiate Apollo, has to return the young woman that
he had chosen for himself and taken to be his prize for valor in battle. And if Agamemnon
has to give up Bryce S, then of course Achilles is going to have to give up the young woman
he's got. And this whole enterprise begins with the two of them at almost at swords point.
And indeed it's Athena in disguise who comes and tells Achilles, no, no, this is no time
for the two of you to engage in sword play. But Achilles is angry beyond consolation.
He retires to his tents. He not only will not participate in the battle, he pleads with
the gods that his people, the Achaeans, the Greek speakers, lose infamously and completely
in this battle. He's praying for a defeat of his own countrymen. So prideful is he,
so angry is he, so possessed is he in the chest by an anger that terrible things are
going to happen when passion so controls reason. And this is going to be thematic in Plato's
dialogues. This will be thematic in the teachings of Socrates. It will be thematic in the developed
psychology, philosophical psychology of Aristotle, this tension between reason and passion, this
grip that the emotional side of life can have on the cognitive side of life so that in fact
we discover ourselves being beside ourselves, not understanding what our mission and the
point of our life is. You know, later in Iliad when the two are finally to be reconciled,
let's just set the stage for this. Achilles says, if I have been angry, I put my anger
beside. He's now going to join the fray and behave heroically. And he will indeed kill
Hector. And it is written that the one who kills Hector shall then die. So we know Achilles
in this act, he even has this discussion with his mother. And he says, I know what's going
to happen and I'm going to do it and that's that. He kills Hector. He drags the body of
Hector around the walls of Troy. The body is being torn asunder. It's royal garments
are being shredded. And you know how this, how Iliad ends, do you see? It ends with Hector
being carted around by these horses. The death of Hector, quote, breaker of horses.
Do you see? Do you see? One of the things that identifies this person is one of the things
that signals his undoing. There's a kind of matching here between what you're greatest
at and how you fail. But I say, when there is this reconciliation, Achilles says, all
right, I put my anger, Agamemnon gets up and says, what does Agamemnon say? True to charity.
He says, oh, that early time when he and I had this frock car, we were, oh, well, I didn't
do that. You see, the, the Orignes invaded me and I was made mad by the gods. And when
you are made insane, you very, he's pleading the insanity defense, do you see? An early
version of the insanity defense. Now Homer gives us all this on the great shield of Achilles
is sketched a trial, a kind of jury trial. There are two judges who are separated from
each other by a polished marble stool. There's a money prize there for the one that serves
up the best verdict, the straightest verdict in the case. And there's a throng behind these
judges who by applause or some other sign will signal which of the judgments is the
better and more just, the straighter judgment so that we, we see depicted here in the time
of Homer, this sense of justice as part of the common heritage of a people who are able
to decide which juridical outcome, which verdict is the right verdict. And again, the focus
is on earth and on the problems of earth on the beginning and middle and end of human
life and, and the unpredictability of it, the need for a kind of conservative approach
to it, the recognition that we are part rational and part passionate and that there is a kind
of internal war that takes place within us only under the most favoring circumstances
in times of peace and tranquility. And through the sufferance of the gods, through a kind
of cosmic process that's only hinted at in our mythologies but cannot be fully penetrated,
we might in fact come to have worthy and acceptable forms of life. But all bets are off with
respect to matters of certainty. There is no way of telling our priory even if you are
Zeus, how things are going to come out. Even if you are Apollo, Apollo himself, how things
are going to come out. I say it's open texture. One character given to us in Homer, described
as the most deplorable of all, the person in the worst imaginable situation, is a character
described as the heartless, lawless, stateless man. What Homer is telling us quite different
from the Yopanishads, which is a kind of introspective and indeed isolating form of
contemplative life. What Homer is telling us is nothing is worse than to be outside
the civic order of things, to be separated from people of one's own, to be separated
from the laws and customs and habitats of the people who are your people. There is something
wonderfully civic and in the fullest sense civilizing about this depiction of the worst
possible fate that can befall us, to be heartless and lawless and stateless. So there are already
intimations of how one deals with the problem of knowledge and the problem of conduct and
the problem of governance. All the heroes are presented in their full glory. All of the
heroes are also presented in their full humanity. They are moved around by the gods. They are
moved around by forces within them. They cannot understand these fully. The most you can hope
for is a kind of patient and systematic approach to a disciplined life, trying as best as you
can to stay out of trouble. And you do this by inquiring ever more systematically and
deeply into the problems of daily life, the modes of conduct that pay off, and the forms
of government that turn out to be consistent with one's nature. The myth here is a guide
to the philosophy that follows. The myth, like the dance, like the cave paintings, the wall
paintings, like the drama, features dialogues, wise men, long journeys, frustrated hopes,
ritual dances. When Theseus gets back to Greece, he does the dance of the cranes and in that
dance he paces out the steps that were involved in getting out of the labyrinth. In the 20th
century, we discover the dance of the bees. They come back to the hive and they perform
aerodynamic movements that tell their hive mates where the flowers with the greatest
amount of pollen can be found. Nature is the guide, and everywhere in Homer, nature is the
guide. And in philosophy, we will see, at least in its earliest stages, nature as a guide.
Thank you.
