Lecture 3 Pythagoras and the Divinity of Number
I've titled this lecture Pythagoras and the Divinity of Number, and I do so to put into
quite vivid contrast a transcendentalist or abstract philosophy and the naturalistic
philosophy that's going to become rather more common in in Hellenic philosophy at large
and of course quite common in the philosophy of Aristotle. Pythagoras is a figure shrouded
in mystery. He's one of the great, great figures of the history of ideas. He's flourishing
circa 570 BC. He has a cult or a sect forming around him from quite an early time. Nonetheless,
he's a politically active person. He becomes for a short period of time the governor of
Crotona, which is a Greek settlement in Italy. It's a settlement that's almost constantly
at variance and sometimes at war with Cybarus, which hosts those people whose form of life
and conduct comes down to us in the form of the word Siborite. In Cybarus we find youth
all decked out in finery. They're all powdered and they wear purple tunics and their sandals
are of the best sort. They make themselves up and they are bejeweled. You won't believe
this, but some of them actually wear earrings, do you say? Of course, whoever heard of such
a thing. Whereas in Crotona, under the tutelage and the directorship of the great, great Pythagoras
himself, we find a sect of ascetic people paying very, very little attention to the
needs of the body, to the day-to-day and mundane affairs of their own materiality and material
life, and committed instead to the deepest and most sustained inquiry into the ultimate
nature of things. Now, of course, an old school of philosophy before Socrates is among
the pre-Socratic schools. It's the school of philosophy known as the cynics, and one
of the leading cynics was Diogenes. I just offer you this as a perhaps apocryphal story,
but it's perfect for Diogenes. It is said that when Diogenes would attend theatre in
Athens, and for major dramatic productions, when the Sibarites, when the young men of
Cybarus came in, all decked out and perfumed and walking past Diogenes to take their seats
in the theatre, Diogenes would lean back and as they walked by, he would say in the Greek,
affectation, and they'd go take their seats. And then some minutes later, the Crotonian
youngsters would come in and their tattered sandals and their stained tunics and their
hair unkempt and they'd be all smelly and all that, and as they would walk by, Diogenes
would say, more affectation, and in this, recording not only one of the precepts of
the school of the cynics, but that almost constant theme in Hellenic thought. Maison
Ariston. The middle course is the best. Nothing to excess. Do you see? Finding that happy
medium, that harmonic point. I offer that as an aside.
Pythagoras we know, or are fairly confident in claiming, did log a fair amount of time
traveling and particularly in Egypt. And we know that in his Egyptian travels, which
lasted for a period of years, he became well acquainted with the technical achievements
of the Egyptian civilization and with certain of their accomplishments in what today we
would call applied mathematics. The Egyptians had worked out very good techniques, for example,
for calculating acreage, for calculating large areas, a kind of planometric mathematics
in which you could tell how large fields were, even though very uneven in shape and
there's less evidence to support the proposition that Pythagoras traveled in India. One of
the things that might incline one in that direction is this. In that same sixth century
in India, the great religious figure, Gina surfaces. Gina had come from a very well to
do family. His mother and father, this was not an uncommon practice. Actually, in old
age, starve themselves to death. That is, they adopted an essentially ascetic mode
of exit, abandoning the materiality of earthly life. He was very much taken by this. I think
he was in his early thirties at the time, but he devoted his own life to ascetic teaching
and to an attempt to absorb himself into the great cosmic life of reality. He understood
at a fundamental level that every living thing has the same class membership, the same familial
membership. With so many of his contemporaries and as part of Hindu belief, he accepted the
transmigration of souls, the fact that at death something in us is liberated. I mentioned
Atman in an early election. Something in us is liberated and is able to reclaim its transcendent
life as it were. And so his teachings consistently oppose all forms of destruction, all forms
of death, intentionally caused death to any living animal. This is vegetarianism with
a passion. His followers would take to walking down the streets and they do this to this
day, they're called Jains, will walk down the street with brooms to sweep out of the
way insects they otherwise might step on, will consume liquids through a filter lest
some small organism enter their body and thus be destroyed. And Jainism is a great ethical
school. It's one of the exemplary schools for the celebration of all that lives. I say
because Pythagoras' teaching includes so much on just that theme, it has been surmised
that he may very well have been influenced by teachings of that sort, which were then
becoming quite prominent in India. But I say any direct evidence of his travels in India
is lacking. Now when I say I want to juxtapose the Pythagorean attention to transcendental
and abstract considerations, I want to contrast that with the naturalistic perspective that
is so dominant in so much of ancient Greek philosophy. I want to do that for two reasons.
He is also a source and an important source for what we will come to understand to be
Platonic thought, at least one phase of Platonic thought, which has deep Pythagorean resonances.
And I think the easiest way to pick up on this is with the Pythagorean view that reality
as we know it is created out of something that is itself not material, but is architectonic
for all that can be material, something that is the abstract plan, the abstract template
on which reality might be constructed. And that abstract template just is the realm of
number, hence the divinity of number, the creative power of number itself, the creative
power of the cosmic soul, the cosmic soul, the ultimate creative force in the universe,
what it uses to create the material and physical reality that is now all around us and accessible
to the senses. The Pythagoreans placed great stress on the first four positive integers
in the Greek, the tetractus. One, two, three, four. Just four positive integers. What are
they going to do with this? One, two, three, four. What kind of numerology is going to
get you very far with just the first four positive integers? Ah well. What is one? One
is a point. That is the abstract character of the number one is the basis upon which
there can be a point. Two, constitutes the basis upon which there can be a line. Three,
constitutes the abstract primordium of the plane. And four, the abstract grounding of
the solid of the tetrahedron, which always had a special place in Pythagorean teaching.
The cosmic soul makes use of number to fabricate a material reality and needs very little
with which to do this. And that is why we call it the abstract primordium of the plane.
And of course as you arrange the one, two, three, four, the sum is ten. The number ten
will take on a very special value in Pythagorean thought and teaching as well. Now when I say
the divinity of number, I'm referring to something that is not quantitative as such.
One, two, three, and four are not... Pythagoras is probably best known to students today for
the theorem that we were all beat over the head with when we took geometry as pre-college
students, the Pythagorean theorem, A squared plus B squared equals C squared. And many
also understand Pythagoras, who was the first to call himself a philosopher as the discoverer
of the musical scale and musical harmonies, the arithmetic or shall we say the mathematical
principles of harmony. There is some controversy as to whether Pythagoras actually discovered
this, but certainly the Pythagorean school was known for this, and Pythagoras himself
was credited with this. Now just as for Pythagoras one, two, three, and four, the tetractors are
not mere numbers, that the musical scale and the scale of harmonies should have the effect
on our auditory system, that is that harmony should be heard as it is, and discord heard
as it is heard, is not a mere coincidence. Why is it that the perfect fifth sounds the
way it does? Why is it that right through to the medieval period, moving from C to F
sharp was considered a sinful maneuver? It wasn't simply something discordant, it was
something violative of what is profoundly important, something violative of a precept,
a harmonic precept. Now this is spanning centuries and centuries, do you see, between the time
of Pythagoras and early Christian music, and not so early Christian, I should say early
medieval music. Now what's underneath this, what's underneath this is the view that creation
is itself an essentially harmonic and mathematical undertaking, that it is in the formal relationship
between and among abstract entities, that the lawfulness of the cosmos itself comes about,
and the lawfulness of our own bodily processes comes about, and the lawfulness with which
we enter into lives together will come about. Number is at the bottom of it all. The reason
why chords are harmonious is because we are constituted in such a way as to resonate with
certain combinations of numbers and to find discordant other combinations of numbers. There's
a deep, deep truth to this. The Pythagoreans thought that there was an ultimate truth to
this. It's not accidental that Pythagorean medicine and therapy would include music centrally.
Why? Well, what's the disorder? The disorder, at a certain superficial level, is a corporeal
disorder. Smith has indigestion, or he's got facial tics, or he drags his left leg, well
that's at the level of the body, but of course the body is just the material manifestation
of something that is itself and ultimately and fundamentally not material. Well, if it's
not material, what is it? Well, it's relational. Well, now, how do we illustrate that? What
do we mean by something being fundamentally relational? Ah, let's get back to high school
or pre-college geometry. What is a rectilinear triangle anyway? When we're told that a right
angle triangle, like all triangles, contains 180 degrees, one of those angles being 90
degrees, how does one know that? Now you might say, well, you take out some sort of measuring
instrument and you draw a right angle triangle with it and you measure things up and make
sure that you've got two acute angles and that one angle is 90 degrees. You'll never
do it. You'll never do it. Try as you may. You'll never do it. You might kid yourself
into thinking that you've done it. In fact, if your measuring instruments are crude enough,
you'll be absolutely satisfied that you've done it. But the better and better the measuring
instrument, the more obvious it becomes that you did not hit 90 degrees plus or minus nothing.
And certainly anything you draw is an utterly impermanent thing. Put it on a blackboard.
Ultimately, planet Earth suffers the heat death. There will be no blackboards. There'll
be none of us. There'll be no classrooms. I don't want to hear any loud applause when
I say that. There'll be no classrooms or textbooks or midterms or anything like that. But there
will be rectilinear triangles. Oh, they won't be drawn rectilinear triangles. They won't
be chalk on slate. They won't be graphite on paper. What will they be? They will be
the eternal immutable relationship a square plus b square equals c square. What a rectilinear
triangle is. Is that which answers to the Pythagorean theorem? It is not something. Now,
nonetheless, I don't want you to think that at this point Pythagoras and his chums are going up
in a balloon. They are living on planet Earth. They're putting their tunics on. They're having
their not meat or beans, but they're having sustaining foods and the like. No, they're
persons of the world, but not necessarily committed and tied merely to the terms of this
world. Now, just as the harmonic musical scale matches up with something in the soul with
which it resonates, so the rectilinear triangle, as given by the Pythagorean theorem, certainly
matches up with what? Well, it matches up with three-sided figures that have one angle
at 90 degrees. There is this wonderful correspondence, not perfect, mind you. There's this wonderful
correspondence between the realm of mathematical abstraction and that realm of material reality
that is so incredibly well described by mathematical abstractions. Now, I should say that this
is a feature. I mean, this is an aspect of truth, as it were, that continues to excite
and perplex. Ask yourself this question. There have been mathematical discoveries at the level
of pure abstraction that predate by decades and sometimes by centuries what science with
technological advances comes to discover to be the case. That is, the mathematics predates
by decades or even centuries an actual physical reality. It actually describes, it lays out
the central characteristics with great, great precision of something actually found in the
universe or in the shell of the conch or in the snowflake. How is it that abstract mathematics,
initially utterly uninterested in the things of this world, nonetheless ends up providing
the best, most accurate, most precise, and most revealing characterization of the things
of this world. You can actually generate things of this world starting off with a mathematical
equation whose discoverer was simply thinking. Now, what we are inclined to say is, my goodness,
what a happy coincidence this is, isn't it just quite remarkable that every now and then
some sort of furrow-browed mathematician comes out of the room, takes the green shades off,
coughs a bit and says, I've got this multi-term equation here. It doesn't match up with anything.
It's entirely meaningless. It came to me in a dream and, by the way, I'm going to die now
and he keels over. Then, 175 years later, somebody studying arachnids or platey helminthes or some
distant galaxy or quarks or something else says, goodness gracious. We actually have an equation
that describes this. How is it that basic mathematical equations describe everything
physics knows about the physical world? How is it that the cosmos is regulated? I'm using
regulated within quotation marks that the cosmos is dictated to. It is authorized, as it were,
by differential equations, which have nothing to do with this, the answer. Well, let me not get
too excited by this, but I do think it's one of the exciting moments in the history of thought
when we discover that something at the level of pure and abstract mathematical thought corresponds
almost perfectly, hip and thigh, chapter and verse, to the nth place after the decimal with some
brute material fact of creation. Pythagoras was not a man who thought first that such connections
were accidental or coincidental. He was prepared in a philosophically reflective way to test the
implications of that kind of agreement, and he was satisfied that the result of the test led
inevitably to an essentially transcendentalist and abstract view as regards the foundation of all
there is. And thus, if we take the creative force behind all existing things to be a divine force,
then we can only conclude that number is a kind of divinity, that number in its abstract transcendental
nature, number now, do you see, not one set of spectacles, but one, one, not one finger, just
one. Let me give you, you all know them, let me give you some numbers that we can't hold up anything
and represent. Pi, a transcendental number, square root of minus one. E, I mean mathematicians have
posted these things. Show me an E. Well, it's two point, no, no, no, you're never going to get to
the end of that. Show me pi, 3.1416, where does it end? It doesn't end. And we have series like this.
Imaginary numbers, transcendental numbers, they have no physical manifestation at all.
There's no physical manifestation of pi. Nonetheless, if you want to calculate the
circumference of a circle, you use pi. If you want to calculate the area of a circle,
it's pi r squared, do you see? Now, how does that work? Von Euler's theorem, where E raised to the
pi i is, do you see, it works. And it works at the level of physical reality. Again, for the
Pythagoreans, there are no coincidences to account for this. Pythagoras is alive long before
probability theory, needless to say, which is largely a 17th and 18th century invention. Not
that the ancients didn't play dice and all that, but probability as a mathematical theory of
frequencies and so forth is long and coming. But certainly, we always had an intuitive sense of
what might be called long shots or long odds. What do you think the probability would be?
That someone speculating abstractly in the domain of mathematics would come up with a
complex equation, which two or 300 years later perfectly described some brute physical fact
available accessible to the senses. If you were asked to bet the mortgage on something like this,
do you see, or to lay odds on something like this, you know the odds that you would expect to
bet on that being the case would be astronomical odds. Well, Pythagoras intuitively, like the rest
of us, understood that that kind of match is not an accident. It's not an accident, so it must be
part of a plan. And so the ultimate plan must be itself, abstract, but capable of generating
reality. And the abstract plan is a plan of relationship, because the salient facts of
the physical world are the relational facts. What is the harmonic scale except relationships
among sounds, do you see? You can recognize a familiar melody played in any key, can't you?
Yet as you move from key to key, the actual frequencies of the notes change. So what creates
the melody is not the frequency of the notes. It's not the physics of the sound. It's the
relationship among the participating elements. Some of them work perfectly. Some of them are
highly discordant. The ones that work perfectly match up with something in you that is capable
of discerning that degree of harmonious perfection. And that's something within you is a rational
principle that it is the principle on which any philosophy worth having must be erected. And
that is the Pythagorean bequest. That's the debt Platonism will have to Pythagoras.
Now, what sort of a governor was he? I've told you something about how his followers and disciples
showed up for the theater. I've always thought when I read these accounts, and they tend to be
rather late accounts, but I've always thought it was quite remarkable they went to the theater at all.
Well, what kind of governor was he? The people finally staged riots and rebellions and drove
the Pythagoreans from Kratona. That old time religion wasn't wearing very well as the
sixth century BC moved inexorably toward the fifth century BC. But how was it that Pythagoras
could be found to be a man of affairs at all? I mean, is this the sort of thing philosophers do?
You do know that a little later on, Socrates is going to be arguing that there'll be nothing but
strife and misery within the polis until philosophers become kings and kings philosophers.
Well, I wonder what Socrates would have had to say if someone said, well, what sort of a job did
Pythagoras do? And here I think it's important to point out that you can't judge the philosophical
dimensions of a body of knowledge in terms of how it works practically in the political arena.
This will become clearer as Plato and especially Aristotle start making distinctions between custom,
manmade law, and the laws that we regard as the laws of the physical universe, the difference
between nature as in fuses, Namos as in custom, Namos as in legislated custom. As Aristotle will
teach, we seek precision only insofar as the subject allows it. And there is not to be a
Pythagorean theorem for political life. So the answer to the question, how did Kratona fare
under the guidance of Pythagoras and his followers? I think the right answer to the question is,
is not too well at all. And it's not quite clear that a philosophically guided state
is likely to survive the reality in which it finds itself. Now, what about the, the sense in which
Pythagoras, aggregated to himself the title philosopher, he may well have been the ancients
declare that he was the first one to call himself a philosopher was I say,
irrigate to himself. Did he make the claim arrogantly as in, I'm a philosopher and you are
not. Well, what is a philosopher? Well, it's someone who loves something. It's someone who has
befriended something. Do you see? Phyllos, Philea. Aristotle will tell us later on that, that the
property the law has that attracts us to it is a kind of friendliness toward us. Philecon,
Philadelphia, Phyllos, Sophos, Sophia, Sophia is wisdom, wisdom. The Greeks had several words for,
for what we try to get out with notions of intelligence or knowledge and the like.
A scientific knowledge, which is a knowledge of the principles that govern things, a knowledge of
the causes of things, tended to be described by the Greeks in the word episteme. The practical
knowledge by which one deals with day to day affairs and makes prudential and correct choices
consistent with the kind of life worth living is, is something the Greeks chose to, to reach with
the term phronesis. I'll be getting to these terms here and again in, in late elections.
But Sophia is something else. Sophia is what the wise person has. Sophia is the one you consult
when you finally are taking yourself seriously enough to ask core questions about the meaning of
life and the meaning of, of the relationships that you have. So-called existential questions
and then also questions of, of transcendental importance and transcendental reach.
Pythagoras non-arrogantly, and I think quite aptly, called himself a philosopher because he
had devoted himself to an inquiry, an inquiry serving the purposes of wisdom itself. He wanted to
know the truth of things, not so that. He wanted to know the truth of things because he had
befriended wisdom itself. He saw the realization of his own humanity as inextricably bound up
with a form of life that was a critical and inquiring form of life. He understood that he
could only come to know the kind of thing he was by coming to know what it is that makes anything
possible. Now of course we can dispute into the late hours and over strong coffee whether what makes
anything possible is ultimately and fundamentally number. We have friends in particle physics who
will say that it's ultimately quarks held together by gluons and if we ask what it is that allows
a gluon to hold together a quark and in what combination must gluons hold quarks together
in order for there to be a cosmos or a sailboat or a cuttlefish we're likely to be regaled with a
series of anybody what is it we're likely to be regaled with we're likely to be regaled with a
series of equations and what we're told is that this theory this flavor of the month in particle
physics this is the theory worth having and the answer to the question why should I accept this
theory given all of the alternatives from genesis on down is because this theory matches up with of
all things a set of equations i s the divinity of number but with the divinity removed for a time
anyway thank you
