Lecture 4 What is There? The Pre-Socratics and the Ultimate Stuff of the Universe
In titling this lecture of what is there, I realize I'm playing into the well-established
prejudices of the many against philosophy, prejudices according to which philosophers
spend most of their time raising questions that everybody has already answered to,
and nobody ever would have thought about asking anyway, unless one were simply unemployed
or at least not engaged in the serious labors of life.
What is there is answered by as many things as we can point to.
There are carpets and doors and floors and people and pussycats and Hershey bars and all the rest of it.
So the answer to the question, what is there, is look around.
Of course, philosophers do look around, and philosophers live their lives as everybody else lives life.
They do look around, and they want to know whether they can trust what it is they're seeing,
or whether behind what they're seeing there might be something more fundamental,
more ultimate, more generative.
An ancient man engaged in spear fishing learns pretty early that where you think the fish is in the water
is not quite where the fish is, and you've got to learn to adjust to the fact that your senses might deceive you.
Might they always deceive you?
And might all these things we take for granted as having real being be just apparitions
or manifestations of a peculiar sort behind which we can find a reality worth the title and worthy of the title, reality?
What is there is what's sometimes referred to as a metaphysical question.
And in the course of these lectures on great ideas in philosophy, I'm going to use the term metaphysics.
I've used it in earlier lectures already.
I'm not quite sure dictionary definitions are particularly helpful here.
Well, first let's come to grips with how the term began.
Aristotle, just after he wrote or had written, had recorded a major treatise on nature,
on the nature of the physical world, a treatise titled Physis, which just is nature, took up another set of issues.
That is to say, just chronologically, this other set of issues was taken up after the issues associated with Physis were taken up.
So in the first and second century AD, long after Aristotle died, commentators on Aristotle, preparing these texts,
identified the text following the text on the Physis as the treatise that came after the physics,
and in the Greek after the physics would just be metataphysica.
So metaphysics then initially was simply the chronological designation of when a particular set of philosophical issues was undertaken.
But of course the issues undertaken now flesh out the domain that we refer to as metaphysics,
not just something that comes after Aristotle deals with physics, but something that has this subject matter unto itself.
Now what is the subject matter of metaphysics?
A vast subject on which of course different accounts can be offered, but I think a fairly settled and stable account is this,
that metaphysics has two primary sets of questions that constitute its subject matter.
And one of those questions, as Willard Van Orman Quine, the great Harvard logician, put it,
one of those questions can be answered with three monosyllabic English words.
The question is, what is there?
And those three monosyllabic English words answer a question, what is one of the primary domains of metaphysics?
That is ontology.
The subject of ontology from the ancient Greek ons, which just means something,
the subject of ontology is the subject of what has real existence.
What is there?
To ask the question, what is there fundamentally, is to ask an ontological question.
Are there minds and thoughts, for example, do they really exist?
Or are they just particular states of the brain that we describe in a mentalistic language?
Do thoughts really exist, which is to say, are thoughts bona fide ontological entities,
or are they merely terms of art, harkening to a period of superstition and ignorance,
whereas now we know better by thought we just mean something coming out of the brain?
So that would be an ontological question.
How do you answer questions like, what is there?
Well, presumably through some mode of inquiry.
Now, what is the right mode of inquiry?
Should we answer the question, what is there by making observations?
That is, what there is, is anything I can see, hear, taste or smell?
Well, if we do that, then surely there can't be quarks, and there can't be neutrons,
and there can't be protons, and there can't be electrons.
Because we can't see anything at the subatomic level.
We can't see anything really at the atomic level.
So it will turn out that the only thing that has real existence is what can make contact with our sense organs.
But as we know, the maximum visual sensitivity of the honeybee is in a region of the spectrum that is called ultraviolet,
where we can't see anything.
So the ontology of the honeybee is radically different from the ontology of Homo sapiens.
Well, what a strange turn of events if it turns out that the right answer to the question,
what is there, is it depends on what your sense organs are.
We surely don't want to think that things come into being and go out of being,
depending upon which particular sensory apparatus is being brought to bear on them.
So we want to step back from the question, what is there, and the conventional folk answer to it,
well, there is whatever you can see, and take a rather more sober position,
respecting the full, deep implications of the question itself.
The deep implication of the question, what is there, is there may be well more than meets the eye.
That's why we're raising the question.
If it were obvious that all there is is what I see, the question would never arise.
But it must be because I often am deceived by what I see,
or often discover that something was going on, though I couldn't sense it at all,
that other people sense things, that there's a certain intuitive wisdom that people have
that seem to transcend the realm of mere experience,
and yet reach truths that are nonetheless stable and fertile truths.
So what is there is a philosophical question,
and I submit to you that like all worthy philosophical questions, it's anything but idle.
And when we address that question at the temple dedicated to Apollo, at Delphi,
no they say outone, no thyself, well, of course, that means know what kind of thing you are.
That's an ontological question.
What kind of entity am I?
What am I made of?
What am I about?
Now, I say, if the method of observation is insufficient, are there other methods?
Well, of course, Pythagoras was fairly confident he had a method.
He was an essentially abstract mathematical method by which you create,
discover, and create coherent relationships constitutive of all possible realities.
That's not an observational method.
That's an abstract, we might call it an abstract rationalistic method.
So how do we broker the competing claims of the observer and the abstract theorizer?
Who's right?
What scheme do we bring to bear on claims like that to determine who's right?
If the senses deceive us, that must be the only way we can make the argument that our senses deceive us
is if we have some non-deceptive mode of discovery against which we can weigh the claims of the senses
and say, aha, senses got it wrong.
Now, the only way we can say the senses are deceiving us is if we have some veridical mode of registering
the truth or the facts of the world.
What would that be?
Is it logic?
Is it mathematics?
Is it science?
Is it religion?
Is it authority?
Is it scripture, text, revelation, custom?
These questions at the root constitute the second part of the subject of metaphysics,
and that is the part we call epistemology.
And by epistemology, from epistemi, a kind of systematic or scientific knowledge,
by epistemology, we mean the study of our very modes of knowing,
the study of our knowledge claims, a critical perspective on what we take to be the right forms of inquiry,
the sound forms of inquiry, the inquiries by which we avoid deception and confusion and error.
Now, of course, these two branches of metaphysics are inextricably bound together
because to answer the question what is there is already to adopt a method.
To adopt a method is already to take a position on the sorts of things that method might reach.
So there's an endless dialectic between the ontological and the epistemological aspects of metaphysics.
And the metaphysician might be sitting cross-legged or late at night in a coffee shop and all that.
Humorists, certainly from the time of Aristophanes, have had a wonderful time of it with philosophers.
I mean, philosophy does lend itself to parody and caricature.
But I should say in daily life, the ordinary citizen is plagued
and recognizes himself and herself as plagued by ontological and epistemological questions.
Can I trust rumors? Can I believe what politicians are telling me?
What do we really mean by poverty? Is there such a thing as vice? I mean, really?
How do we know that the Council of the Wise is wisdom itself?
What standard do we use against which to weigh those things that prevail on us for our allegiance and our belief and our convictions?
Do I die with my body or might there be a life after this one?
Is there some transcendental realm above the realm of materiality in which one meets the saints of the world?
Is there such a thing as goodness, really?
Or is this simply a habit and a certain form of speech that a particular tribe uses to describe what it likes?
Whereas villainy is...
We're asking questions about whether there is, for example, a moral reality.
Is there moral objectivity? When we use moral language, are we referring to something that has bona fide ontological standing?
And if we are saying that much, it must be because we have accepted a method that leads to that conclusion,
and we're satisfied that that's the right method, juicy.
So this is not a game that anybody can play, but it is a game that everybody does try to play seven days a week,
and we have every reason to be thankful for those metaphysicians who've devoted themselves in a quite systematic way
to helping us get our way out of the labyrinth.
The metaphysicians are one of the people who spin that golden cord that Ariadne gave to Thesias so that he could find his way back out.
The metaphysicians are helping with the problem of knowledge, the problem of conduct, the problem of governance,
because it's the metaphysical analysis that helps us with the problem of epistemology itself, methods and modes of inquiry,
what constitutes evidence, what can I take as a fact, etc., etc.
Now, I've already mentioned good old Democratus and his atomism.
His answer to the question, what is there, as I mentioned, is there are atoms and spaces between atoms, atoms and a void.
That's all there is. There can't be anything else.
Now, if you come to Democratus and say, well, look, Democratus, I have dreams.
Now, are you telling me that there's something atomic going on?
Madmen have hallucinations. Are they seeing atomic things?
Now, the position the ancient anatomists took was a firm position.
What exists? What has real existence?
Has real existence in virtue of its atomic composition?
So then, things like phantoms, or what in the Greek were called etola, E-I-D-O-L-A, the phantom is the etolan,
things like that must be atomic emanations from material objects that have some access to the organs of sense.
In other words, nothing transcends the level of physical materiality.
What there is finally is material, atomic. Everything is ultimately reducible to that level.
What varies, of course, are the patterns and relationships among the atomic constituents.
So some of these take a form of what?
Human life, animal life, lecterns, carpets, clocks, and so forth.
But these are just different configurations of what is ultimately atomic
and is ultimately and analytically decomposable into the atomic.
Now, what's the ultimate fate of the body?
Well, the ultimate fate of the body is the ultimate fate of all atomic entities
when the forces that hold it together become weakened through injury or disease
and the other processes of change, the atomic structure now breaks down,
dust thou art to dust returneth.
Now, the poets tell us that dust thou art to dust returneth was not spoken of the soul.
You know, tell me not in mournful numbers life is but an empty dream.
Well, what's the atomistic position on the soul?
It is a finer kind of atomic structure.
That is what we refer to as the spiritual or spiritist domain is itself particulate.
But the entities here, the ontologically real entities, are just a finer stuff.
Note, stuff, still stuff.
The fundamental ontological question is what is there?
You can rephrase it this way.
The fundamental ontological question is this.
How many kinds of stuff must I take recourse to to account for everything there really is?
And the materialist answer is you only have to refer to one kind of stuff and that kind of stuff is matter.
What it means to be a materialist here, as I've said in other lectures,
I'm not referring to the buying habits of the middle class.
I'm referring to a philosophical position on an ontological question.
One is ontologically a materialist when one says the answer to the question,
what kind of stuff is there really is material.
And if you then say to the ontological materialist,
how do you know that?
That is epistemologically now defend that claim.
Well, usually what you'll find is a motive inquiry, that what?
A motive inquiry that presupposes that the ultimate stuff of reality is material.
I say yes, but I've got all sorts of things I can think of that have no moving parts,
no matter what.
Well, they don't exist.
Now, how do I know they don't exist?
Well, my methods don't turn up any such thing.
Well, there's a certain circularity, even a viciousness,
between the ontological position we take and the methodology that we adopt to vindicate or confirm
or, as we like to say objectively, test it.
More on that as these course of lectures moves along.
Now, if it is the case that what there is goes beyond, as it were,
goes beyond the senses and involves particles so small that no one can see them,
how do we come to grips with the fact that they are?
Well, obviously, they have to come together in large enough bundles to be accessible to the senses.
So the atomists were realists, as we might use that term.
The atomists are not skeptical about there being chairs and carpets and people and birthday cakes.
What the atomist is referring to is the ultimate constituents of any such thing.
Obviously, things take on defining properties in virtue of their atomic organization
so that the next-door neighbor is different from a birthday cake,
not in that a next-door neighbor is made up of something other than atomic entities,
but the next-door neighbor is made up of atomic entities of a radically different configuration
and complexity versus what one would find in a birthday cake.
So, atomism has about it a certain concreteness, a kind of brute common sense materiality.
It doesn't pay homage to the man in the street because it says to the man in the street,
the ultimate constituents of the universe are things you cannot perceive,
but it does say to the man in the street that what you perceive is really there in so far as it has
an atomic configuration agreeable to your essentially empirical or sensory modes of knowing.
There is that naturalistic element in atomism which I say plays off very nicely against,
for example, a Pythagorean worldview.
Now, suppose we raise the question what is there in what might be called the domain of morals
or judgment or society in general.
Here's a question for you.
Is there in fact right and wrong?
Is there in fact beauty and ugliness?
Is there in fact truth and falsity?
Now, you might say, well, of course, and then you're asked methodologically now
on what you ground the reply, of course.
Some have argued today, some argued thousands of years ago,
that the ultimate grounding is just a kind of folk wisdom.
It's sort of the ethos.
It's the way you were brought up.
Of course, you know that there's right and wrong,
and all your friends and neighbors know that there's right and wrong.
Why, all red-blooded Americans know there's right and wrong,
and all red-blooded this, that, and the other thing know there's right and wrong.
But what happens as you move from tribe to tribe and enclave to enclave and nation to nation
and historical epic to historical epic?
There seems to be quite wide disagreement on questions of right and wrong,
truth and falsity, beauty and ugliness.
Certainly what the Greeks revered as sublimely beautiful
in their commitment to harmony and proportion, balance and measure,
is not what the quacutal might regard as beautiful,
with feathers sticking out and plumage of all sorts
and facial distortions and distortions of the body.
Certainly the medieval depiction of human forms
would have struck Renaissance painters and sculptors
as hopelessly deformed and simply not truthful.
Now, the ancient pre-socratic world raised this question
and supplied answers of a quite modern ring.
Of course, the chap who comes to mind immediately is Protagoras,
because he is going to figure in two of the main Platonic dialogues,
the one named after him, Protagoras, and then he doesn't figure it,
but where he's mentioned centrally in the Theotetus.
Protagoras is famous for that maxim.
If philosophers ever came to grips with the fact
that they're probably going to be remembered according to one sentence
or utterance that would live forever.
No matter how many qualifications they wrote,
they might strike themselves silent.
David Hume, for example, in a footnote,
talks about a passion having the rule of reason as it should.
It's a footnote in the treatise.
He's sorry I ever wrote the thing.
Go to the Philosophy 101 student and ask about Hume,
and the first thing you hear is that Hume said that
reason is the slave of passion as it should be.
So very often we're saddled to an epigram
that might have been more a sign of distraction or indigestion
than deep thought.
Well, Protagoras, of course, we have two gems from Protagoras,
two gems from Protagoras, and we all wish we had much more,
but one of them is man.
Now, Protagoras is one of the great, great figures in Sophist thought,
and we can tell from the dialogue Protagoras,
which he's having with a still, youthful, and somewhat green Socrates,
that Protagoras is a formidable figure.
We will meet him again.
There's certainly more to Protagoras than a chap running up and down the street
saying, man is the measure of all things.
What Protagoras is getting at in that utterance is this.
When we go about making judgments of right or wrong,
truth or falsity, beauty or ugliness,
what are these judgments grounded in?
Well, they're finally grounded in the experiences that we've had.
They're grounded in considerations of upbringing and culture and perspective,
where we stand in relation to what it is we're judging.
So obviously, there isn't going to be some non-human standard
that's available to us.
In virtue of its being extra human, we can't make contact with it anyway.
So the standard is going to be the shifting standard of taste and culture
and society and belief and education, child rearing and so forth.
To that extent, then, each man does turn out to be the measure of all things.
It's you who will decide whether this is sweet or sour,
and what sweet to one person might be sour to others, do you say?
Now, this relativizes epistemology.
It says that epistemology, properly understood, to use contemporary parlance,
is really a fit subject for sociology.
We do have a flourishing field of inquiry called the sociology of knowledge,
and it's applied even to the most developed branches of science,
the extent to which social values, cultural values and the like,
dominate our metaphysical speculations.
So, Protagoras' answer to the question, what is there, is going to be,
well, of course, that's relative to the vantage point of the person
making the observations and the judgments.
And this means that if philosophical inquiry is a search after the truth,
well, this is probably a rather misguided undertaking from the first.
The truth is going to turn out to be one of those elusive entities
that really records more the perceptions and perspective of the individual
than some trans-personal or non-personal or transcendent eternally true utterance.
Not that there aren't such things, but that we are scarcely equipped
to figure out what they are.
The other Beaumont from Protagoras,
so much of what we have in the pre-socratic world is lost, do you see?
If you take everything we know for sure to be taught and written by the pre-socratic philosophers
and put it between the pages of a book,
the book is going to be less than a thousand pages,
and yet we know that this was one of the most fertile and productive periods
in ancient Greek thought.
So it's very, very easy to libel or trivialize the pre-socratics
because our knowledge of what they said and wrote and taught is so fragmentary.
But the fragments themselves reveal the depth of their inquiries and insights.
Well, we know that Protagoras wrote a treatise on the gods.
And in that treatise, he says something that always reminds me
of what it is the Homeric epics are depicting.
Do you see, as we deal with the problem of knowledge,
what we can know and the problem of conduct and the problem of governance,
Protagoras says, about the gods,
I cannot say either that they are or that they are not,
nor how they are constituted in shape.
There's so much that prevents knowledge of this kind.
The unclarity of the subject and the shortness of human life.
Close quote.
The unclarity of the subject and the shortness of human life.
We are mortal.
We do not live on Olympus.
Our life is measured in hours and this sets a limit on what we can know.
And with respect to the gods, the ultimate source of all there is and all there could be,
these are questions beyond the human can.
These are matters we cannot reach.
I cannot write to you about the gods.
I can write to you about what I can see and hear and taste and touch.
I can write to you about where I've lived and where I've visited.
And what I discover, Protagoras seems to be saying,
and what I discover in these travels, in these journeys,
in journeys of thought and journeys of body is that opinions vary widely.
And what one person is prepared to die for in virtue of what he takes to be its truth
in other regards as just another example of the ridiculousness of the human imagination.
So each one in his way becomes the measure of all things
and the possibility of a coherent transpersonal body of knowledge is ever more remote.
Indeed, remote, almost remote from the...
Well, this really is, to use a contemporary term, this is what we'd have to call a downer.
I mean, this says, put the books away, put away the pens and pencils
and, you know, let's go to Blockbuster and rent a movie and just wait till Planet Earth goes belly up
or we do or whatever.
Because if each person is the measure of all things, then we can't even have an argument.
I mean, I'm going to say, you know, it really looks this way to me, George,
and George is going to say, well, obviously it looks that way to you,
but it doesn't look that way to me, and that's the end of it.
So one of the tasks that Socrates is going to take on for himself
is to address skeptical claims of that kind.
One of the great contributions that Socrates makes to all subsequent thought
is this robust skepticism, this deeply inquiring, skeptical, tough, durable,
stepping back from the customary beliefs, practices and the like, and saying, look,
I'm looking at what ultimately people are going to be calling metaphysics
and I'm telling you this much, ontologically?
Well, that's up for grabs. I don't know what exists. I know this.
I know that what people are prepared to claim exists is going to depend very much on their unique experiences.
And what's the right method for doing this sort of thing?
Try to find a method that can be removed from your own customary and habitual practices and beliefs.
Now, even the methodology, so to speak, is going to be doled out by those who have a certain perspective on things
and will be unintelligible to those with a radically different perspective.
Now, one characteristic of Presocratic thought that Aristotle himself records
is that by and large it can find itself to what we would call cosmological issues,
issues regarding the origin of the universe, the ultimate constituents of reality,
the material and physical constituents of things.
Oh, there is Protagoras. There is Parmenides.
There's talk about the transmigration of souls and transcendentalism.
There's Pythagoras and all that.
But by and large what we find in the Presocratics is an overweening interest
in what might be called root ontological questions with respect to the cosmos itself, the world itself.
Socrates, we learned from Aristotle and others, begins, not a brand new tradition, but a new emphasis,
and the emphasis is on us.
Not a cosmological but an anthropological inquiry.
Oh, in the Timaeus there's plenty of cosmology, but some across the dialogues,
the root questions that Socrates and his friends and students of disciples raise
are root questions about what kinds of beings we are, what we are capable of knowing,
how we should conduct our lives, and what a worthy form of government would be.
And philosophy now, as an utterly humanizing and humanistic enterprise,
is very much on the map of thought, and there will be no retreating.
Thank you.
Thank you.
