Lecture 6, Know Thyself, Herodotus and the Lamp of History
Herodotus is usually accepted as the first historian in the modern sense or the kneeling
modern sense of the term, and this is not because Herodotus was the first one to chronicle
major events or to establish dates for occurrences of interest to his contemporaries.
Herodotus' treatise on the Persian Wars is a genuinely historical treatise.
It's the first item, the first entry in the genre, and in many respects it's paradigmatic
for historical scholarship that would follow over the course of years.
Now one might ask oneself why anybody would undertake a project of that kind, particularly
since precedents for it were not ample.
And you might say that, well, don't chroniclers do these things.
After all, those who are fans of the New York Yankees want to pick up the newspaper every
day and check out that particular chronicle to see whether they won or lost.
It's quite understood that nobody except a Yankee fan is going to care much about this
kind of thing, nor will anybody two or three weeks later remember what yesterday's score
was anyway, but this is what the news is all about.
When Herodotus' Persian Wars is not a species of news reporting, news gathering, this is
not the network news, it's not the evening show with the weathermen trying to be humorous
and people asking each other, do they have a nice weekend.
This is an historical work, and I again want to refer to the metaphor of Ariadne's Golden
Cord.
This is an historical work in much the sense that Theseus getting out of the labyrinth is
retracing steps in order to extricate himself from a bind.
Herodotus tells us in the first sentence that I am going to review this so that the
deeds of these brave men not be forgotten.
Do you see, he wants people to know that we can rise to truly heroic levels of behavior,
and he also wants us to recognize the multiplicity of factors that participate in any genuinely
historical event.
The number of vantage points one would have to occupy in order to understand that historical
event, and in the lecture today I'm going to touch upon just those features in Herodotus
that turn out to be so very important and in their own way deeply philosophical, not
extra philosophical, but philosophical in their own right.
Now one engages in an enterprise like Herodotus's Persian Wars because one is addressing, wrestling
with what I've referred to as the problem of knowledge.
What could be a more burning question at least at the level of daily life than the causes
of war?
War and chaos and mayhem, the death that is produced, the deep suffering, the rift between
and among peoples, the collapse of trade, the creation of hostile attitudes that might
take generations to get over, the redrawing of boundaries, political boundaries, alterations
in the economy, the sudden increase in a class of slaves now won victoriously by the winning
side.
This is an extraordinary happening, and one has to understand the causes of something
like this.
The problem of knowledge presents itself most vividly when we ask the question, why are
we like this?
Now Freud of course, as we know so very well, will tie this in with certain instinctual
aggressive tendencies that are outgrowths of our evolutionary animalistic heritage, etc.,
etc., etc.
We are the way we are because at the instinctual level we have deeper aggressions and murderous
tendencies and self-protective reflexes.
Herodotus, I think I can say knows better than this.
When you actually look at men at war, they don't hate each other.
The source of movement, the drive, the impulse and the motive, it's not aggression that
moves armies, it's devotion.
And what brings about these conflagrations at the most fundamental level are irreconcilable
values, perceptions of a radically different nature.
What brings these things about actually is a form of discourse.
Sometimes we call it propaganda.
But whatever it is, the legions are moved by words, they're moved by symbols, and in
a way that I think Freud, with all due respect, missed, Herodotus recognizes this.
This is why he spends so much time on who the participants are in this world war, it's
a kind of world war, the Persian wars, it's not just Greek-speaking people and people
from Persia, it's every clan and sect and the petty province being dragged into this
thing.
Why is Herodotus telling us about their dress, about the particular weapons that they're
using, how they decorate them, what they say as a battle cry, what they eat and dine on,
what their economies are all about, who had trade relations with whom.
He is recognizing that if you're going to offer a sensible account of nothing less than
a world war, you're going to have to rely on something rather more complex than the
devil made me do it, or instinctually I'm like that, or I'm descended from a class
of hominids or, no, that isn't quite going to work.
People don't go to war because of their evolutionary history.
They go to war for stateable, discoverable reasons that are inextricably bound up with
politics and culture, civilization, religious values, ethical values, precepts and the like.
So with Herodotus comes this recognition that sociology of knowledge is a subject that
is inescapable, not just one worth pursuing, but that in fact, to account for any event
of historic proportions is to engage in what finally is not merely a chronicling of the
events, but a sociology of those events, and a psychology, and a social psychology of the
participants.
So this is a very important contribution.
Well there's something else I think that's involved in historical scholarship and I think
we can say that Herodotus certainly recognized this.
Why is it you would want posterity not to forget the brave deeds of these men?
Why is that?
Unless such a history teaches and inclines.
Now how can history teach?
I want to give you a vexed question here.
We've already got an historian, we've got a scholar, a writer, Herodotus, who if nothing
else recognizes the great, great variety of factors that incline whole peoples toward
warfare, that these factors are deeply embedded in culture and that cultural differences are
going to create yet other differences and there are language differences, so he's already
sensitive to all this.
And yet he thinks that this account can teach.
Well can teach whom?
Can it teach Persians the way it teaches Hellenes?
Can it teach Assyrians the way it teaches Egyptians?
And can it teach Phoenicians the way it might teach Spartans or those from Magara or Argos?
Well of course the answer is there is a level at which it teaches and that's the level
of our common humanity.
So one thing I would note in referring to Herodotus and historical scholarship as the
lamp of history is that through the study of history, through the lamp of history, we
illuminate the commonalities that simply constitute human nature, that wherever you
find human beings, these lessons are lessons worth learning and no matter how differently
the language or the culture or the costumes or the diet, there is a root humanity that
is reached by the events in the world and that allows us to predict how we're likely
to behave under certain conditions and how those conditions therefore should either be
promoted or shunned depending upon whether our behavior is to be laudable or reprehensible.
Now at the same time you might say well if you're going to go into the causes of things,
I mean Homer, Homer is supposed to be our guide at all times, if you're going into the causes
of things, well what about Zeus and Apollo and Artemis and Hephaestus and that crowd
of Olympians?
Weren't they behind this fracar between the Hellenes and the Persians?
I mean when Homer has to tell us what got the Trojan War going, for goodness sake you
can't get the Trojan War without the shenanigans on Olympus and when we consult Herodotus,
he says in chapter 64 of book 2 where he's speaking about Egyptian religious prohibitions
and rituals, he says I'm not going to attempt an explanation when it comes to this sort
of thing.
Now this is going to remind you I think of Protagoras on the Gods, what do we hear Herodotus
say?
He says I'm not going to do this at all.
Quote, to do so I should be led to speak of religious matters which I particularly shrink
from mentioning.
Now of course this is the sort of sentence that can be subjected to a variety of interpretations
I want to tell you, the interpretation that I think is soundest.
If I didn't I'd then tell you the other one that I thought was soundest.
I think this is not just Protagoras recording the evanescent nature of things divine, the
sort of transcendent, I can't see them, I can't hear them.
Now I think this is Herodotus saying the Persian wars were caused by us.
And I can give you an account of this without dilating on questions of religious belief
in Egypt, etc., etc., all these beliefs are going to count for something as regards the
causes of the war and the outcome of the war, but they're not going to account for it because
the actual gods referred to in that religion are doing it, it's because the beliefs are
doing it.
There's something utterly humanizing and humanistic about this, shall I say, this philosophical
perspective on human nature, it's a philosophical perspective presented in the form of a history.
And history of course is not only one of the humanities and a form of humanistic study,
it is a humanizing study because in fact it is an account of what we do and therefore
it helps answer the question, who am I?
It helps us address the command, know thyself, to know thyself is among other things, to
know what we've done.
Now I say what we've done.
We as Persians, we as Egyptians, we as Assyrians, we as Athenians, no.
We as human beings, what we have done, what we believe, what moves us, how we move each
other, and what Herodotus' history of the Persian wars all about is a kind of descriptive
social psychology of human nature under conditions of stress and strain, a misguided human nature,
a self-deceiving human nature, an ambitious and overarching human nature.
It's an extraordinary work.
Now of course it's also a pretty bad history and scholars the world over still publish papers
establishing their own celebrity by showing how Herodotus obviously got this wrong and
that wrong and the numbers couldn't possibly be the case and he's staging encounters between
people who couldn't possibly have met each other.
Now and some of that criticism is well earned by the text itself though I don't think all
of the criticism is earned by the text and that for several reasons.
First, Herodotus never tires of pointing out where in his praesy he is expressing what are
merely his own opinions.
This is just an opinion of mine.
I can't back this up with anything.
Secondly, in as many or even more places he points out that what he's about to relate
are the opinions he's heard from others and he does not have eyewitness testimony and
he certainly wasn't an eyewitness and he doesn't have any way of corroborating this but he
thinks it's worth passing on anyway.
He's the good historian here as well in saying look, you're never wrong providing all the
data.
There'll always be the problem of sifting and judging and analyzing and establishing
the validity etc. etc.
But let's not start out with the assumption that I should deny you access to information
that I have that's clearly affecting my thinking though I come to think of it as not very important.
No.
Here's the record.
Let me give it to you straight out entirely.
Well of course once you do that you're going to fill pages with gossip and innuendo and
guesses and hunches, out and out propaganda and all that and there's plenty of that of
course in Herodotus' great Persian wars.
One encounter that always amuses scholars of the period, he has Solon having a colloquy
with Cresus, you know rich as Cresus, that sort of thing.
And Cresus is all puffed up with his own success and wealth and power.
And he's looking forward to meeting Solon.
He knows Solon is a great and wise man.
And the reason Cresus is looking forward to meeting Solon, and by the way given the dates
they never could possibly have met each other, but the reason Cresus is really quite eager
to meet Solon is so that Solon can put the wise man's seal of approval.
So the encounter finds Cresus welcoming Solon, very happy to meet you, you're a wise man.
And the conversation doesn't go very far before Solon says, he asks a question, he says who
would you say is the happiest of men?
You know the answer he's expecting, who would you describe as the most fortunate of all
human beings, of your acquaintance?
And personally here, mind you, just you know sort of tell me here in this royal setting
in which you find me with a smile on my face, this temple of opulence and good health and
strong children and loyal and obedient subjects and all that, ships that float and horses
that run fast, who would you say is the most fortunate of people?
Who would you say is the happiest of men?
Solon mentioned somebody, somebody no one ever heard of.
Cresus wants to know who that is, oh he's just someone very admired by his people.
Now, well who would you say is the second most fortunate man you've ever known?
You should say this is the top ten now, we've got Cresus wanting to finish it high in the
league tables.
So Solon says, well the happiest of men, he says, well Cleobas and Bito perhaps would
be the happiest of men, huh, who, what, yeah, Cleobas and Bito.
Who are Cleobas and Bito, oh Cleobas and Bito, well these were fine young chaps, loyal and
faithful sons, paragons of virtue, decent in every respect, beautiful in all relevant
ways, and their mother, the good woman that she was, so fearful of being late in showing
up at the temple of Hera for devotional exercises, found her sons strapping themselves to the
yoke because the servants had not yoked the oxen and carting their mother over rocky terrain
for five miles in a sweat to get her to the Hera festival on time.
As they come into town, you know, people applaud these wonderful sons, Cleobas and Bito, and
they're exhausted, do you see, what they've done, this, and this is just characteristic
of what they do, of course these lads in their total exhaustion just lay down to take a nap.
And when their mother is inside the temple, she supplicates Hera, and she thanks the gods
for the sons that she was given, and she prays that they die the happiest of men, and Cleobas
and Bito never awaken.
They were the happiest of men, because the happiest of men, the happiest of us all,
are those who die in a life that could be reflected on by others as a worthy life.
So say of no man that he has eudaimonia, say of no man that he has that form of flourishing,
not just happiness as in lots of fun at the bar.
Say of no man that he has achieved eudaimonia until his days are over.
The answer to the question, what was your life like, is to be rendered in that tense.
I can't tell you, Cresus, where you stand in the league tables right now, because right
now is right now, and the future may be a long way off.
Let us see what you do with the balance of your life, and more importantly, let us see
how you are remembered.
The Latin for memory is very good here.
Monumentum, let us see what your monument is.
Now Herodotus is constructing a monument, a monument.
He is constructing a memory of events participated in by the great and the small, by the hero
and the villain, all operating under different and straining conditions and the like.
And he thinks that in doing this, he can sketch out the kind of life worth living, that history
is in its own right, a kind of ethics, not just in ethos, not just what people do, but
positive teaching about the wages of cowardice, about what we earn through heroism, what we
earn through commitment and devotion and decency.
So in its way, the Persian wars addresses that second core problem, the problem of conduct.
How should one live one's life?
Now this is a treatise that includes kings and warriors, people, some people of nearly
Homeric proportion.
And here's Herodotus pausing to give us this little vignette on cleavus and bito.
Would we ever have heard of these chaps had it not been for these few sentences in encounter
between two people who historically could not possibly have met each other.
Why does Herodotus put this in?
Now look, with all due respect to contemporary scholars who say ha ha Herodotus' story and
how about that creases Solon colloquy, is he kidding, Herodotus is writing this for,
he's born in 484 BC, he's writing this for contemporaries who very well know that creases
and Solon were not having conversations with each other.
So this is not something put in by an historian who thinks he can gull the future, gull us
because we're so far removed from the period that we don't know.
No, Herodotus is conveniently including a little morality tale within this elaborate
history.
He's already told us what's merely his opinion, he's told us what the opinion of others might
be, the difference between an opinion and a fact.
This is inserted as a comment on our aspirations because after all the cause of war, the calcest
belly is somebody's aspiration.
Someone is trying to achieve something, some group or people is trying to achieve something
and prepared to risk life and limb to do it and to have others die for it.
Well now let's rehearse the discussion, the conversation between Solon and creases.
What is worth dying for?
What should the aspiration be?
Here's creases, just about anything you could imagine an upper middle class or petty aristocrat
are seeking, creases has in spades, well he's rich as creases.
And Solon is the, he's almost the Jungian archetype of the wise man, I mean the wisdom
of Solon.
We used to have comic books when I was a youngster in which Shazam, you know the Captain Marvel
saying Shazam, the S in Shazam was the wisdom of Solon, H was Hercules as I recall, A was
Atlas, Z was Zeus or some such thing, I forgot, it's quite a long time ago.
But I mean when Solon figures in 1940s comic books you understand that if he's not a Jungian
archetype, he's some sort of archetype for wisdom.
And of course Herodotus understands Solon to be just this kind of figure.
So Solon is put in there emblematically, he's put in there to provide appraisee on the nature
of happiness.
And creases is put in there for the same reason, here's somebody who's got everything, everything.
Princess Diana for example, young, lovely, married to a future king, comes from an ancestral
family of great estate, school teacher, loved by all, what a tragic life.
Do we want to say of this now dead princess that she is the happiest of women?
Not a bit of it, not a bit of it, you see.
This is, imagine that young woman meeting Solon and in a lapse of some kind, I don't
think this would have been at all characteristic of that woman.
But saying, let's say after the second child was born and the palace is set up and so forth,
saying to Solon, who would you regard as the most fortunate of women?
And of course the answer would be, I don't know who Solon would have picked out, but
he certainly could not have picked her out because he would have said she was 30 years
old.
I don't know, I can't even count you until your days are over.
The state of Eudaimonia is almost a retrospective.
It's what others will come to regard the life you lived as having amounted to.
You're living that life as best as you can and it is posterity that will pass judgment
on whether or not all things considered.
It was the life others of us wished we could live.
It's not something the actor himself is ever going to know because the actor himself has
not been told by Clotho just how much time he's got, do you see?
So it's destiny and fate and these other factors that answer.
But in the encounter between Cresus and Solon, we are given an ethics.
We're given a kind of emblem book as to what it is we should aspire to and what it is which
in aspiring to will cost us much of our very humanity, cost us precisely that eudaimonic
form of life that otherwise is the goal behind all of our consequential actions.
What we should aspire to is what Cleobas and Baido attained, which is the admiration of
good people and an admiration based on virtuous conduct, not celebrity per se, not really
heroism per se.
What we want to say about Cleobas and Baido is not that in taking their mother five miles
to Hera's temple, they behaved heroically.
There isn't anything Homeric about this.
There's something fundamentally decent about it and more to the point, it tells us something
about the kind of men they were and what Herodotus's history does is give us these very sharply
defined characters.
We think we know Cresus when we hear him asking these questions.
We're sure we are in the company of Solon when we hear the answers.
We can almost picture those two boys lugging that damn wagon along to get their mother
to the temple on time.
There's something very, very neighborly about this account even as it is spread out on the
canvas, world war size in dimension.
Now I dilate on this approach to the problem of knowledge and the problem of conduct to
raise a point or two about the problem of governance.
We hear much about the ancient Athenian democracy and we know that the ancient Athenian democracy
had to save itself from what would have been the tyrannical rule of the Persians.
But it turns out that the ancient Athenian democracy is not saved by the Athenians.
If it's saved by any part of the Greek-speaking world more than by the rest, it's saved by
Sparta, Leonidas and the Battle of Thermopylae, you know, that sort of thing.
In Plato's Republic, we're going to see this again.
We're going to see this reflection on whether at the end of the day it is an infantry trained
for hand-to-hand combat that finally carries with it the core precepts on which governments
finally depend, or whether it's an Athenian navy striking an enemy at a distance being
remote not only from the scene of battle but from battle's most imminent threats.
And we're going to discover that Plato, like Herodotus, and in an interesting way like Aristotle
himself, sees in the conflagration and the immediacy of Ornzone mortality something so
richly character-forming as perhaps to have no substitute.
Thus we find Aristotle much later saying that truth be told, the virtues to be developed
fully probably will only be developed in warfare.
What a daunting and chilling thought that is, and how awful if it's true.
Thank you.
