Who was Socrates? What is the Socratic method? What's so special about Socrates anyway, since
we don't have so much as a sentence ever written by him. And in fact, everything we know about
him comes from two contemporary sources, his faithful student Plato, and his friend and
neighbor Xenophon, who in the memorabilia gives us sort of the neighbors and fellow soldiers'
view of Socrates the man. If we're to believe Plato, and in this I think we have no right
to believe Plato, in one of Plato's epistles, he says, look as regards the philosophical
writings, none of this is really Plato's. Anything in here that really says anything
is to be attributed to Socrates and all I did was write it down. Well, as I've noted
that that can't possibly be the case, but surely what is the case is that Socrates profoundly
influenced the people who were most closely associated with him. And more to the point,
those he profoundly influenced turn out to be among the most estimable of figures in the
ancient Greek world, and of course chiefly Plato himself. Plato is not the family name,
Plato was a fellow with quite broad shoulders, and so the nickname Platon was given to him.
Now, Socrates' dates are 469 to 399. I think the first social fact that I would want to bring to
the attention of students of Socrates is that he begins his discussions. He undertakes his
Socratic method in anathens that has lost a devastating and long war against Sparta. What
one must understand is that the Socratic dialogues are composed by the losing side, and I think
it's vitally important to keep that in mind. First of all, it achieves several things. It
lets us know why so much in the political part of the Socratic program looks very much like the
Spartan regiment for raising children and putting together armies and the like. To some extent,
then, we find Socrates saying, look, not in so many words, but by innuendo, the picture we get
is a picture of Socrates saying, look, the winning side excelled in certain respects in which the
Athenians found themselves unable to measure up. Where is it we went wrong? Where is it we went
wrong in our childrearing, in our military strategies, in our economics, in our social life?
So there are practical questions that are animating these discussions that Socrates is
having. Obviously, the man who says that the whole point of philosophy is to prepare us to die is
not one with an overweening interest in the practical affairs of daily life, but he's not
indifferent to these. So I say one point I'd want to make about Socrates is that he is a loyal and
faithful soldier, a defender of Athens, who has seen his Paulus defeated by Sparta, and this clearly
summons him to a deep consideration of what Athenian life has been all about and where things went
wrong and how this can be prevented in the future. Now, what about the fact that he doesn't write
things down and that everything we know about his philosophy comes through these these dialogues?
Well, Socrates described himself as a gadfly. He thought that his unique mission in life was to
approach those most confident in their knowledge and ask embarrassing questions, not intended to be
embarrassing, but questions that would have us address the grounds on which we adopted the
positions we adopted for the express purpose of showing that we what we thought were legitimate
grounds are groundless, or based on self deception, or an entirely misapprehending vocabulary, a
failure at the level of words, a failure at the level of definitions, a failure to appreciate even
the importance of definition as you begin to talk about something. Now, obviously, gadflies are
very pesty. One of them knocked a chap off his horse who actually had been trying to fly all the
way up to heaven and and and engage hubristically and aggregating to himself the the powers of the
divine. It was a it was a gadfly that stung that horse and and unhorst its rider. And Socrates is a
gadfly in just that sense of unhorcing the confident rider who believes he's so we see in in
Socrates a quite whimsical side. We see the whimsical and deft conversationalist who really
can catch you up short if you're not very, very wary. And Socrates was well trained in this art
because he was well trained by the great Sophist teachings of his time. So he knows a good
Sophistical argument when he hears one, and he can put one together himself if the case requires
it. And so we might ask ourselves, Well, what's the difference then between what Socrates was up
to and what the Sophists were famous for? The Sophists were famous for developing arguments
that would have you defeat any adversary, no matter how worthy, catching them up in logical
contradictions, catching them up in definitional failures and the like. Well, I should think and
one has to be careful here more than one scholar has noted that that that the philosophy of the
Sophists is a rich and variegated philosophy. And any attempt to reduce it to a sentence or two is
likely to lead to nothing less than unintended humor. So I don't want to libel or trivialize
Sophistical teaching. That teaching includes among its ranks, Protagoras himself. But there is,
I think, a defensible sense in which one of the central aims of Sophistical teaching is a rhetorical
aim. It has as its goal, an argumentative form that is likely to be successful, not in quite the
trite way that later schools of rhetoric will will will practice. But but to some extent,
the aim of the Sophists is to expose the ignorance of his interlocutor. Socrates is going
beyond that. It's not just to expose the ignorance of an interlocutor. It's to find the truth.
Erasmus, who I think probably comes as close to being a thoroughly civilized human being as
anybody could ever claim to be, used to refer to his quote, Saint Socrates. Augustine, who knew
much philosophy, much ancient Greek philosophy, and was quite wary about the teachings and
philosophizing of those pagans, Saint Augustine, however, was fully prepared to reserve almost
exclusively to Socrates, the title philosopher. And why was that? Because in Socrates, he found
someone who was prepared to die for what he believed. And Augustine here is establishing a
very stern standard, a very exacting standard. And that is, the first obligation of a philosopher
is a willingness to live according to the terms of his own philosophy. Of course, if we if we impose
that standard on all the major figures in the history of philosophy, I think we would find any
number of them leaving the field pretty quickly. I think most of the skeptics, for example,
would be out of town before sundown. It is said that one of the great fathers of skeptical thought
was Pyrrho of Elea, so-called Pyranism being an early form of skepticism. And it is said that
Pyrrho's friends used to accompany him everywhere because Pyrrho, in his skepticism, refused to
accept that fire really burns and that you can drown in water and so forth. So it is said that in
their solicitude, Pyrrho's chums would would keep him out of self-destructive modes of behavior.
Nonetheless, the story does come down to us that Pyrrho on one occasion was found chasing his cook
down the streets of Athens with a frying pan in his hand for having served his friends a bad meal.
So even the great Pyranist skeptic Pyrrho himself drew a certain line under skepticism below which
he would not go. That line apparently having much to do with the cuisine. Now Socrates was prepared
to live, and I should say more importantly, maybe for him surely more importantly, to die
for what it was that was developed within his own philosophy as true. I won't dilate on the well-known
tale of Socrates' trial and self-execution just to say these few things.
The trial was to some extent trumped up. The charges were that Socrates had failed to respect
the gods of Athens and had corrupted Athenian youth. Socrates, the one given to us by Xenophon,
is a deeply religious and reverential man. There is nothing in the record to suggest that Socrates
was at all skeptical at the level we would be inclined to call the spiritual level. That he
was less than obeisant to the customary devotional beliefs and practices of his contemporary Athenians,
there is no doubt. But this is just to say that he regarded some of these customs as nothing but
that he corrupted the youth of Athens, I think is a rather different charge. The youth of Athens
had any number of ways of corrupting themselves. In the one dialogue in which you might find
debauchery and the corruption of the young taking place, I refer of course to the symposium,
it's Alcibiades who's complaining that in attempting to be Socrates' lover you just don't
get anywhere. The fellow simply will not participate at that rich, lusty, corporeal level.
And it's quite interesting the way the symposium ends. This is this all-night drinking party and
discussions of love and everything else. It's Socrates, Plato has, it's Socrates who leaves
early in the morning and goes home alone, you see. It's an extraordinarily vivid picture of how the
man was perceived. This social gadfly, this skillful conversationalist, given his very wisdom and the
depth of his thought must have been among the loneliest people who ever lived in any society,
including that one. That is at the level of empathy and mutual understandings and the like.
Well, that, as Herodotus might say, is my opinion for which I have no direct evidence.
I do talk to Socrates, but he does not talk back.
Now, nonetheless, the charges were trumped up. Perjured testimony was given. He was found guilty as
charged. And he was given a choice. And the choice was the choice between poison hemlock or exiling
himself from Athens. A sentence which in the ancient Greek world was a customary sentence for
offenses of this kind. It was called ostracism. And it usually carried with it a term of exile,
not less than 10 years. In fact, moves in that direction were made against pericles when
plague broke out in the city and the war was going badly and all that.
Well, Socrates was told by his friends, and he was told truthfully by his friends,
look, everybody knows these charges are trumped up. Nobody, with any sense, expects you to die.
If you walk out of this prison, the guard will turn the other way.
Go someplace else. Go up to Corinth or Argos or something. Come back a little while later.
Good to say you'll return to a triumph, you know, be like Voltaire coming back into Paris.
Do you see? Go ahead. Good chap shouldn't kill himself because a bunch of liars got together
and made mischief. And Socrates listens to all this. He knows that his friends want him to live,
do you say? Of course, nobody knows more thoroughly than Socrates himself, but that
the charges against him were indeed lies, perjured testimony, coming from highly predictable sources.
But he's not going to hightail it out of Athens. He is not going to escape from prison.
He is not going to break the law. And why isn't he going to do this? He isn't going to do this
because he recognizes that the rule of law is the corporate or public expression of human
rationality itself. It is the one way the rational power of corruptible man gets itself expressed
in such a way as to minimize the degree of self-corruption. The law. Decades later, in attempting
to define the law at the end of his treatise on politics, Aristotle will say,
The law, therefore, is reason without passion. It's disinterested reason. It's the application
of reason not in such a way as to benefit this person or that person. Rather, it is to be to
the benefit of justice itself. And Socrates has to alert his friends to this, what he would have
taken to be this obvious fact. Here, he says, I've devoted my entire life to the cause of reason.
And now, just because my particular situation is compromised, you know, I'm facing a rather
severe sentence, I'm supposed to chuck all that, everything I stood for, everything I taught,
everything I believed to the very quick of my nature, I'm supposed to turn around and run out
of here. And then what would my life have meant? No, he drinks the poison headlock,
and his final words have to do with some sacrifice he owes. And will his friends see to
what that is done in his name as custom requires? Quite interestingly, the dialogue ends with Socrates,
entirely faithful to custom, whereas the charge against him was that he had violated custom.
He did. Now, the unexamined life is not worth living. Here's a stock Socratic teaching,
the unexamined life is not worth living. Why is that? I mean, after all, what's wrong with Smith
finding himself a supplier of very effective narcotics or mind altering substances? Let's
take it a century or a thousand years. Hence, we don't even have to consume the stuff. What's
wrong with Smith? Now, listen, this has been proposed by philosophers, contemporary philosophers.
What's wrong with Smith allowing surgeons to remove his brain, put his brain in a vat,
and through the proper application of electrical stimulation or chemical stimulation, or what
a thousand years from now might be focused ultrasound or whatever, some magnetic field
of resonance, play out into that brain. Everything Smith could possibly desire.
He can be stolen or the Socrates of the dialogues. He can be Napoleon, this time
victorious at Waterloo. He can bat 450 for the New York Yankees and hit 90 home runs and have a
ticker tape parade down Broadway. All of this played out directly into the brain. These are
experiences Smith now has. Smith as a brain in a vat. What is wrong with that? After all,
people do aspire to success and achievement and the like. Remember the discussion that
Croesus has with Solon. Would Smith not be the happiest of men where every one of life's desires
is realized seven days a week? Do you see 60 minutes an hour, 60 seconds a minute?
Nobody in the room would accept this. I suspect nobody in the audience would accept this. If you
find in yourself inclined to accept this, you might want to take counsel with the wise and
think about it again. What's wrong with this is that quite apart from the question of the
particular experiences being good or bad, what's wrong with this is that it's not life. It's not
a lived life. It is simply a screen on which events are played out. It can't be anybody's life that's
lived because none of these experiences are the consequence of anything the actor is doing,
which is to say he is not a participant in the very life in that particular life that in some
dramatic sense happens to be played out before whatever kind of screen he has to look at when
his brain is being stimulated. Socrates did not live in the high tech world we live in,
so when we get to Plato's Republic and the allegory of the caves, we will find Socrates
not giving us brains in vats but giving us persons in the bowels of a cave who have objects and
events projected on some parapet in front of them and they think this is reality whereas it's merely
shadows. I say we will come to this. What Socrates is at pains to make clear
is that behind every experience there is room for an interpretation of the
meaning of that experience and it's in the interpretation of what our life is amounting
to that in fact our life becomes worth living. It's not the sequences of experiences. It's
the integration of those experiences into some intelligible whole that constitutes a worthy
life and for it to be a worthy life the experiences themselves have to have a validity,
they have to have a truthfulness about them, otherwise we are living the life of one in a
drunken stupor or one in the bowels of a cave or a brain in a vat. Now this takes me again to the
the temple dedicated to Apollo at Delphi and that wonderful inscription that that figures in every
introductory philosophy course not to mention I notice now in fortune cookies in Chinese restaurants
let's say that very famous Chinese restaurant advice that we know ourselves,
know they say our tone, know thyself. How are we to understand that? Is this the sort of thing
that Socrates was up to and was Socrates up to this in a kind of introspective sort of west
coast who am I way? Was it a kind of was it a kind of I have such good friends in California
they will forgive me for this I'm sure but I said was it a very sort of Los Angeles suburb kind of
who am I and what's life's meaning and maybe what I really need is some more surfing and
so forth coming to grips with the big waves. I think if anyone ever had a deep understanding
into his own nature any any philosopher it truly would have had to be Socrates. Now it's not so
much knowing thyself that way it's it's knowing what it means in the fullest sense what it means to
be a certain kind of being and in this particular case what it means to be a human being this has
to be something other than our mere biology because we have a common biology there are human beings
covering the face of the earth known to Socrates time nonetheless take any one of those beings
and compare them with any other being and do this systematically and you will find such a riot
of beliefs convictions superstitions mystical cultish orientations forms of debauchery forms of
virtue forms of genius forms of self-degradation this all taking place in beings who at just a
biological level are of the same kind they're all human beings they all began as babies they'll
you see they they all bleed when they're cut they all eat during the day biology can't be
the way one goes about knowing oneself biology may be the way you go about knowing about a
particular species or genus of things what it means to be a human being qua homo sapiens
but that certainly can't answer the question what kind of being am i essentially that's
just the kind of being i am biologically but there's got to be more to it than that and Socrates
life is devoted to the question what kinds of beings are we and until you answer that question
you'll never have a sound answer to the question how should i live my life what is the right form
of government what's the relationship between the individual and the polis etc etc the questions that
flesh out political philosophy and political science ethics and moral philosophy and the like
to know thyself is among other things to have the capacity to know anything now you may know many
things and not know thyself in that sense but to know thyself is minimally to know and so Socrates
begins with that core question that core problem the problem of knowledge how do we know anything
and if the skeptics are right if the skeptics are right in in being skeptical about any and
every knowledge claim then they're going to be right in spades about a claim of knowing oneself
if you can't really know anything for certain then you certainly cannot know thyself in any
certain way and that means that your life is uselessly examined what could the examined life
be it simply it it simply would be a constellation of prejudices and self-deceptions you might as
well get into the bat so what has to be defeated here is skepticism it has to be defeated at least
in so far as one can establish a good philosophical basis on which to claim that there is something
we can know Descartes going to do the same thing centuries later we're going to have to come up
with at least one kernel of truth that we can settle on as true and that will settle the root
epistemological question is it possible to know anything do you see is it possible to know anything
and if we can answer that yes it is possible to know something and to know that you know it
and to know the method you used such that you came to know it then maybe we've got a method to
inquire into yet other things so you begin to see that the Socratic agenda is a fairly broad one
first one has to do legitimate battle philosophical battle gentle battle with skepticism and cynicism
these are all abundant they're in place at the time Socrates own philosophical flourishing
takes place he's he's going to have to handle this he's going to have dialogues with Protagoras
there's going to be a platonic dialogue titled the Sophist etc he's going to have to wrestle with
the problem of conduct what kind of life is right for beings such as ourselves should we be out for
pleasure should we be out for pain should we be in pursuit of virtue in pursuit of happiness
are we all the same in this regard does it differ from place to place in time to time culture to
culture so that in fact our values are simply reflections of our own prejudices and we have
no right or reason to impose them on anybody else or expect anybody else to share them is that
problem of governance Greece has a wanted democracy now I don't want to overdo ancient
Greek democracy it's nothing anyone in this room would be likely to want to buy into tomorrow I mean
it's not the sort of democracy that that Americans routinely describe as their democratic form of
government but by ancient standards it is it is it is first of its kind and it is extraordinary
it's a fully participatory sort of thing everybody goes to the assembly even if crop
failures make you too poor the polis pays you to attend the the assembly Aristotle at one point
will say you can't create a polis with one person and with a hundred thousand you don't have one
anymore so you you already see that what the ancient world understands to be a politically
recognizable community is of is of modest size the Athenian version was a democratic version
well you get yourself in a lot of trouble questioning the most deeply held convictions of
your contemporaries is that a good form of government finally is that actually the way we
should be governed should it be by way of participation let's suppose for argument's
sake that the polis contains eleven thousand people of whom ten thousand nine hundred and ninety four
are certifiable fools and six are wise men now do you want to take a vote on things well every
vote is going to turn out ten thousand nine hundred and ninety four in favor and six opposed
now of course Aristotle I keep wanting to jump ahead to Aristotle because he is a favorite
and for a very good reason of course Aristotle will will defend democratic precepts on the grounds
that all other things being equal you're likely to get more sheer cleverness intelligence and
perspicuity out of out of a hundred people than out of one that is their their strengths are likely
to be additive and their weaknesses might be self-canceling but nonetheless Socrates reserves to
himself the right at least to raise the question how should we be governed and you cannot answer a
question like that in the abstract you can't answer the question of how we should be governed
unless you've already established what kind of life is the right kind of life for us to live
and you can't answer that question until you've settled the question what kinds of beings are we
and how is it we can come to know anything so until you've successfully defeated a skeptical
position on all knowledge you can't have much of a position on ethics and until you've handled the
ethical dimensions of life you can't have much of a handle on what the political organization of the
polis should be it's to Socrates blasting genius that he understands the interconnectedness of
these questions that the problem of knowledge the problem of conduct the problem of governance
are various faces of the same kind of problem and that problem is how we come to know ourselves
and realize our humanity in the course of a lifetime this of course will be the central agenda of the
program of philosophy for all the centuries to come now there's an exception to this i don't think
we find many contemporary philosophers writing with that breath of perspective philosophy as with
all of the learned subjects has become a set of specialized subjects with within a within a general
field and it is the case that the contemporary logician may spend an entire lifetime without
addressing a question recognizable as a question in ethics or or or even as a or even as a question
in in epistemology nonetheless even today there are philosophers who step outside those
specialties long enough to recognize that the broad philosophical questions have to be kept in view
even as these subsidiary issues and more technical issues are dealt with so we always look back on
the long shadow cast by Socrates who wrote not a line as we proceed to write volumes thanks very
