Lecture 8 – Plato's Search for Truth
The search for truth is a search that can only be undertaken once one has defeated or
at least neutralized the most cogent of the softest and skeptical claims against the very
possibility of truth.
And in any number of the dialogues composed by Plato, we see the skeptical position being
taken head on and an attempt made to refute it.
Of course, the history of skepticism is one of the most formidable in the history of philosophy,
and there is no final telling defeat of skepticism in every form, but there are fairly good counters
to the skeptical claims.
And some of these are developed as early as Plato's dialogue titled Meno, which is named
after the young Athenian aristocrat Meno, who confronts Socrates and bids him hello.
He's back in town.
Meno is.
He's been traveling, perhaps to Thessaly, which has a great school of Sophist teaching.
He greets Socrates morning, how are you, Socrates?
How's everything going?
What are you up to?
Socrates replies, genuinely, you know, same old business, search for truth, that sort
of thing.
And of course, at that point, Meno is quite satisfied that he's got the old boy exactly
where he wants him.
The search for truth.
Well, look, Socrates, if you know what it is you're looking for, then indeed there's
no need to undertake a search.
And if you don't know what it is you're looking for, well, really, there's no basis upon which
to conduct a search.
So there we are.
The search for truth becomes an idle activity, and we can get on with the serious business
of life.
Now, Meno is attended by a servant boy, a young servant, and some translations a slave
of Hulus, a young servant described by Meno himself as a barbarian.
And we want to recall this, the sense to be attached to the term barbarian when the ancient
Greek writers refer to persons as barbarians.
They're not referring, inevitably, to someone in a loincloth with straggly hair and grunting
away with no known form of language and the like.
They're referring rather to a non-Greek speaker, to someone who is not part of the Hellenic
culture, to someone outside the bounds of Hellenic Pythia.
And the Greeks did have a rather, shall we say, a rather uppity attitude about the non-Hellene.
This based on their own judgment that non-Hellenic cultures had not achieved anything on the order
of what the Hellenes had achieved, and therefore they should enjoy some pride of place when
it comes to things like philosophy and sculpture and the idea of beauty and the idea of political
organization and so forth.
So we will see this elitist position in a number of the dialogues.
We'll see it developed and defended by Aristotle.
Nonetheless, there was a full appreciation of the fact that these different cultures
produced persons of great, great power and ability.
The Greeks had been beat up often enough by alien cultures not to underestimate the abilities
of their adversaries or the abilities of their friendly neighbors, whether those were in
Egypt or Persia or elsewhere in the known world.
Well, Socrates asks Mino if it's all right for him to talk to this young servant boy.
Has he had any education, the question is, and of course Mino says, no, he's not had
any education.
Well, does he know mathematics?
Well, of course he doesn't know mathematics.
This is a barbarian.
His native language is one that sounds to us like ba, ba, ba, which is the basis upon
which the term barbarian apparently came into currency.
And with that, Socrates calls the boy over and he engages him in a kind of colloquy.
I'm low even to call it a colloquy.
Socrates starts sketching some figures in the sand and he asks the boy whether he realizes
that if this is the case, then that's the case, and if this is so, then that's the case.
And as this interrogation goes on, it becomes quite apparent that the boy recognizes certain
quite basic relationships of a mathematical nature.
And in the culminating series of questions, depending on how one interprets just what
it was that Socrates was drawing in the sand, we're led toward the conclusion that the
boy appreciates the fact that the area of a square is uniquely determined by the length
of the diagonal drawn through it, which is to say the boy comprehends the truth.
Well, this is a very, very interesting discovery that Socrates has made, although Socrates
knew all along what the outcome was going to be.
And he says to Mino, he says, well, now, did I give him the answer to this problem?
Did I solve it for him?
No, no, you didn't solve it for him.
Well, is this something you know he learned in school?
Is this a course of studies?
Or did he send away to the teaching company for something on geometry?
No, it wasn't anything like that at all.
So then the question that naturally arises, well, how does he know it?
What's the source of this knowledge?
And Socrates has to answer his own question.
The answer to the question, how does Mino's servant know the Pythagorean theorem, is that
in a certain sense, Mino's servant always knew this, that what was called for here was
not for Mino's servant to learn something, but for Mino's servant to recall something.
And here in the dialogue, we get a particularly vivid version, a clear version, of that famous
aspect of the Platonic solution to the problem of knowledge, knowledge as a form of reminiscence.
It is indeed a reminiscence theory regarding what is true.
Now at this point, I think it's vitally important to distinguish between knowledge as an awareness
of certain facts of the world, and we have no evidence that Plato or anybody else in
the ancient world thought that people knew this natively, that if you want to know about
the facts of the world, you have to open your eyes and listen and walk around the world,
and that's how you find out where the yogurt stand is and all that.
But truth is something rather different from the facts of the world.
Recall the Pythagorean position.
Truth is that which does not change.
It's not part of the ephemera of daily experience.
It's something that abideth.
What is true must always have been true, and it always will be true.
Therefore it is removed from the domain of purely sensory experience.
It's removed from the domain of mere materiality.
Now knowledge of that obviously cannot come about by way of experience.
Why do I say obviously?
Well everything that comes about by way of experience comes about as a result of the
world making contact with the sense organs.
Well the world is a collection of material objects, and the sense organs are themselves
material objects, so at the experiential level what one has is an interaction between matter
and matter.
But of course everything that's material is constantly in a state of flux.
Heraclitus put it very well, you know, Nemo descentsibis and idem fluminum.
No one descends twice into the same river.
The Heraclitian theory of the fluxes is a theory about the constant changing nature
of what we would call the real, the real world.
And of course this will conduce to a certain kind of skepticism as well.
If everything is in a state of flux, any knowledge claim we make can only be good for
the moment.
Yes, but that would be a knowledge claim about the facts of the world.
It can't be a knowledge claim about the truths, the ultimate truths.
Well if this can't be gleaned at the level of experience, this kind of knowledge of truth,
if it can't be gained as a result of sensory processes, then how does one have it?
One has it as it were intuitively.
That is the soul possesses a certain power of comprehension.
The soul possesses a certain reservoir of root understandings about the ultimate reality,
about the ultimate truths.
Now it's very well known, and this is one of the Platonic debts or Socratic debts to
Pythagorean teaching, that Platonic philosophy accepts the transmigration of souls, it accepts
the proposition that there is some animating principle within us, some feature of Suke,
which we translate as soul, that is immaterial, that is abiding, that predates the birth of
the corporeal being, that in fact animates this corporeal being as it were by invading
it or moving into it, from a place that is outside the body, do you see, and with the
death of the body this same principle is able to be liberated from the body.
We find several times in the dialogues in the Greek now a play on words, soma, sema,
soma is the body, sema is a kind of prison cell, and the idea of the body now, in one
dialogue it's referred to as a desmoterion, a kind of penitentiary, the body as a place
that has sort of shackled the soul during earthly life, and with death there is the
liberation of the soul, and therefore the possibility of the soul recovering the clear
truths that are its proper inheritance and its proper character, its proper, well much
of this is at work in the dialogue, Meno, what Meno's servant is doing is by way of
philosophical guidance, he is reaching into a level of intuitive knowledge that is otherwise
clouded by sensory experience, distorted by the mere facts of the world.
So we have then this answer as it were to the skepticism that is inherent in much of
Sophist teaching and inherent in much of the teaching of the cynics, inherent in much
of pre-socratic philosophy, it's inherent in theories of fluxes, the constant change
in the world, the changeable character of all things that exist, leaving us in a lurch
with respect to knowing anything definite about it.
Now of course the other obvious debt to Pythagoras is in the very example that Socrates chooses
when he brings the servant boy over and starts drawing figures in the sand, and what he wants
this to lead to is a recognition on the part of Meno that what this boy understands is
the Pythagorean theorem. Now what is it about the Pythagorean theorem that feeds right into
that supports and nurtures this view of a knowledge of the truth as a form of reminiscence?
Well you might recall from an earlier lecture that the true rectilinear triangle is not
something drawn, it's not something physical or material. The true rectilinear triangle
is what is instantiated by a mathematical relationship, by that which undergoes and
can undergo no change whatever because there isn't anything material about it. A square
plus b square equals c square is the relational statement that just is the rectilinear triangle.
Now drawn figures, drawn in sand or drawn on papyrus or drawn on paper, these are changeable
sorts of things. These are things that enter the world of flux. These are things that can
distract the soul, that can remove it from the realm in which it should be operating,
which would be the realm of what is true and unchanging and eternal. So now we can make
a distinction between a drawn triangle and the true form of the rectilinear triangle.
The drawn triangle is an empirical thing accessible to the senses inevitably undergoing change
and degeneration and disappearance. The true form of the rectilinear triangle suffers no
such fate. A square plus b square equals c square was a truth that predates human history.
It is a truth that will remain so when the last human being has disappeared from the
face of the earth and the cosmos has suffered the heat death depending on which of the cosmological
theories you find most appealing. I don't happen to find that a particularly appealing
theory and I reassure myself with the fact that in case it is true it is billions of
years in the future which means arm mortgage will be paid for by then and so forth. But
I say even on the understanding that everything finally is going to approach that maximally
entropic state in which we have the infinite distribution of little tiny particles homogeneously
spread throughout a spaceless universe, even on that understanding, a square plus b square
equals c square remains true. Now what is it about the soul that can make contact with
a truth of that kind? What is it about our rationality that can make contact with something
like that? Well you begin to see immediately that it can't be something about the psychology
of the individual that is perceptual that's going to do this. Surely Pythagoras did not
arrive at that theorem by running around with a ruler and putting it along right angle triangles
happily and luckily finding the first one being a three four five triangle where this
works out three square plus four square does equal five square but the party gets very
very rough you know if the altitude of the triangle happens to be 6.37 inches and the
base happens to be 2.4436 inches this turns out to be a rather difficult thing if you're
trying to arrive at a theorem like that empirically. Similarly with pi you don't come up with 3.1416
forever and ever and ever as a result of some experiential undertaking because that is an
experience that would have to go on for all eternity. So you can't come up with transcendental
numbers or unreal numbers or imaginary numbers and the like experientially. Nothing in the
realm of fact is the square root of minus one. You can't say I'll be back in an hour
George and when I come back I want you to have right in front of me something that is
the square root of minus one. George will be bereft of all possibilities in that regard.
Now where do these notions come from? Well obviously they must be there in a sense in
the a priori way which doesn't necessarily mean temporally prior to experience but logically
prior to experience as there is nothing in experience that will convey something like
this and as rational beings are clearly in possession of ideas like this they must be
in possession of these ideas independently of experience. Again this is an intuitionist
as it were an intuitionist theory of knowledge, a theory of knowledge based on the proposition
that what is firmly known and known to be true and that which could not possibly be
known as a result of experience must be part of the very gift of rationality itself. It
must be something co-extensive with the life and thought of a rational being.
Now on the platonic account and here let me pause for a moment when I and clarify what
I mean by the platonic account and I'm sure it will be important to say this more than
once in the course of these lectures. The dialogues have been categorized by scholars
of Plato into three periods, early, middle and late dialogues and it is the case that
ideas firmly espoused in the early dialogue sometimes are jettisoned in the late middle
and the late dialogue so to refer to a platonic position generally requires us to say whether
this is early Plato or middle Plato or late Plato. Aristotle commenting on platonic teaching
and he had been exposed to it for 20 years insists that it was not Socrates but Socrates
students it was Socrates disciples not Socrates himself who conferred ontological standing
on the true forms that it was never Socrates view that there is some really existing true
form of the right angle triangle over and against actual three sided figures that have
one angle that's 90 degrees. So Aristotle is of the mind that the original Socratic
teaching was that something like the rectilinear triangle is the formal representation of what
actually exists in the concrete but that the formal mathematical representation doesn't
have some independent kind of floating cosmic existence. Now I don't want to broker the
claims of Aristotle and writers in the Platonist tradition as to just what Socrates last word
on this subject was but I say as early as Aristotle's own writings we see the controversial
claim that teachings of Socrates were transformed by his students and may not inevitably be
reliable guides the dialogues themselves may not be reliable guides as to precisely what
Socrates own position was. Now the reason I don't plan to make these fine distinctions
quite apart from the fact that much time would be devoted to making such distinctions is that
from the point of view of what constitutes one of the great ideas in the history of ideas
of one of the great ideas in philosophy it's far less important to determine what Socrates
really believed than it is to determine whether a belief of that kind is a valid and defensible
belief whatever Socrates position might have been on whether or not true forms have bonafide
ontological standing or whether true form simply refers to an abstract representation
of that which can only exist in experience that that's something for the for Xenophon
or some later biographer of Socrates to figure out but whether or not true forms in that
platonic sense can legitimately be regarded as having some kind of ontological standing
some immaterial but nonetheless real standing in the domain of actual things is a philosophical
proposition a philosophical or metaphysical possibility that is worth our attention again
whether Socrates finally subscribed to the view. Now if we take the position that mathematics
is just the right model for for getting at the truth capital T that is that the truth
inevitably refers to that which is unchanging which is abiding which is relational and that
ready to hand is an abstract mathematics that vindicates that very belief do you see if
the skeptic says how can you possibly stand behind the proposition that there is such
a thing as unchanging truth well one thing we can say to the skeptic is how about mathematics
there's a set of unchanging truth how about geometry do you see how about the Pythagorean
theorem how about the scale of harmonies now now of course there are rebuttals to this
and we will be confronting these and in the course of lectures one can turn around and
in the spirit of David humans say oh yes these are truths these are truths about words these
are not truths about anything having having real existence and I say we will we will get
into revived forms of skepticism and and firm defenses of an empiricistic alternative
an experientialist alternative to this view of what knowledge is all about but but Plato
was satisfied that the truths of mathematics sufficiently responded to an extreme skepticism
to put skepticism itself on notice they really do seem to be things that can be known certainly
and mathematics has established that these things can be known certainly so the problem
of knowledge now becomes understood as a search for the kind of truths that will match up
with mathematical certainties we should be looking for these relational truths of the
sort instantiated by for example the Pythagorean theorem now if you're not going to reach these
by experience what's left well of course what's left is an essentially rational enterprise
not an experiential enterprise but a rational enterprise and what form must this rational
enterprise take well it's going to take a form which in the Greek is referred to as
the electicos a dialectical or argumentative approach but not an argumentative approach
merely at the level of rhetoric not an approach that sets out simply to show your adversary
is is it done sort of dullard or didn't quite get it right or can't hold up his end of the
argument no no it's a bona fide search for truth not a search for victory now I should
say as I said in an earlier lecture that it's quite easy to libel the sophists they're
worse members of the sophist teaching fraternity of course one who comes to mind and who figures
in Plato's republic is Thrasymachus who taught for pay and and who who seemed to be engaged
in a in a set of argumentative ploys that were rather showy and I should think intended
chiefly to make mincemeat of one's interlocutor but the original sophist school and and and
including those who were contemporaries of Socrates included men of great intellectual
integrity who were not indifferent or hostile to the idea of truth but were very very cautious
about any claim to the effect that it's within our reach so so Socrates is very often respectful
of for example persons like like Protagoras well so the argumentative or dialectical approach
is not simply a rhetorical device it's an investigative device and what's being consulted
here well what's being consulted is whatever is contained within the rational resources
of the soul itself we're going to have to talk our way into access to this domain it's
the only thing we've got because experience is not going to count for anything here the
truths we're looking for can't be held up and shown to anybody so we're going to have
to discover them how well we're probably going to have to discover them the way Pythagoras
must have discovered the Pythagorean theorem surely not by running around and measuring
three-sided figures but by engaging in a kind of internal discourse with his own soul a
kind of introspective and deep and yes indeed spiritually guided form of inquiry and inquiry
into what Aristotle will call first things or the things that are most important the
philosopher has committed himself to an inquiry of that kind and what it means to be a disciple
of a philosopher or a student of a philosopher is just to be one who's prepared to cast oneself
as a good listener a good conversationalist on a journey the end of which is the end the
end being not so much a discovery of what had never been known but the uncovering of
what had always been possessed but lost in the curly burly in the flotsam and distraction
of daily perceptual sensory sensual life so we have at once if not a solution to the
problem of knowledge a recognition of just what it is that that that that that that makes
knowledge problematical one of the things that makes knowledge problematical is this
slavish reliance on experience as if experience is going to teach us things like this goodness
sake every man woman and child the creatures of the animal kingdom have experiences minute
by minute seven days a week three hundred and sixty five days a year and yet the world
noticeably is filled with villains and fools a few wise men distracted people those drinking
those drinking too much wine those with sunstroke the mad the barmy the mentally defective there's
a whole panoply of of of human types and types of lives and you can never discriminate between
or within groups like that on the basis of experience they've all got experiences the
villains of history are rich in in in their experiential backgrounds the few saints we've
ever known rich in their experiential back or perhaps not very rich at all in their
experiential background well the point is this you do you you can't make distinctions
between the wise and the foolish on the basis of who's had more experience and if you can't
make distinctions between the wise and the foolish on the basis of who has had more experience
then the fact that three people have had more experiences than one person counts for nothing
that is to say to add up that which itself never reaches the fundamental truth is to
engage in an enterprise that's entirely nugatory well then the experiences of eleven people
would not amount to anything versus the experiences of one person nor would the experiences of
eleven thousand people amount to much in relation to the experiences of one person you begin
to see that in the solution to the problem of knowledge there is already a skepticism
about democratic approaches to questions of conduct and governance about about soliciting
a show of hands to determine what kind of life is the right life to live a show of hands
to determine who should be the autocrator or the leader of the civic or political community
why this skepticism well for the most obvious of reasons the state itself should be organized
around principles that themselves are true and abiding well those truths are available
only through philosophical modes of inquiry dialectical modes of inquiry these dialectical
modes of inquiry are in the very nature of things rational not experiential very few
people engage in this majorities except in some sort of sainted realm the likelihood
that a majority is going to include just the philosophically inclined those who have been
able to resist the temptations and distractions of the sense this is simply pie in the sky
it's Pollyanna so once one recognizes that the philosophical wisdom the socratics or
Plato himself is going to be arguing for the form of wisdom argued for is an intuitive
form reachable only through a kind of philosophical guidance a systematic argumentative inquiry
of a give and take at the level of rational discourse not something discoverable by sight
or sound once one realizes that then the ethical dimensions of this philosophy and the political
dimensions really begin to write themselves once the problem of knowledge has been dealt
with and dealt with in this way we begin to see how the problem of conduct is going to
be dealt with as well and then how the problem of governance is going to be dealt with as
well
