Well, what is the problem of conduct? What makes conduct problematical? Why, after all,
we just solve the problem of conduct by saying, well, let's act in such a way as to maximize
the pleasures of the moment, minimize the pains of the moment, and if that means suffering
or otherwise tolerating or putting up with others, well, we can do that, and we can do
that for the sole instrumental purpose of personal gain, keeping out of trouble, and
making sure that at the end of the day things went better for us than they did for anybody
else, or at least we weren't caught trying. There's one solution to the problem of conduct,
and of course, many people would regard that approach as the approach taken by the CAD or
even the highwaymen. One might say something else. Well, the problem of conduct is solved
by just finding a community that is willing to tolerate one's eccentricities where they
can flourish if one wants to be a member of the mafia. Well, this is probably not going
to go down very well in a community of saints, but surely you should be able to find some
community where killing your adversaries and trafficking in narcotics and earning great
profit, whereupon supporting worthy political leaders and the like is just the order of
the day and be done with it. After all, these things vary from place to place. Nobody's
got to handle on how I should live my life. It's going to be tough enough for such a person
to figure out how he or she should be living that life, let alone dictating to me how I
should be living my life. And in any case, when one starts talking about a form of life
that's good or bad, virtuous or vicious, these are inevitably expressions of personal
taste and preference. They certainly aren't grounded in anything as firm and permanent
as what the philosophers are prepared to call the truth. There might be truths of mathematics,
but there scarcely are truths of ethics and morality. This is not the domain of objective
knowledge. It's the domain of feeling and opinion. Now, that's a framework, a skeptical
framework regarding the claims of what we might call moral philosophy. That's the skeptical
framework within which any number of arguments can be developed. And again, the Socratic
or Platonic school is going to have to deal with skepticism at that level. It's going
to have to try to make out a case for the proposition that the problem of conduct is
solvable. It's addressable with just the resources that prove to be so successful in the domain
of knowledge itself. That indeed, if we can have certain knowledge at all, there isn't
any reason on our priority to assume that that kind of certainty can't be brought to
bear on how I should live my life, what kind of life is right for a being such as myself,
such as ourselves. Now, this is addressed in any number of Plato's dialogues. The one
I would choose for today's lecture is the one named after one of the central characters
in the dialogue, the famous, and now already frequently cited, Protagoras. Now, the dialogue
opens up. It is a kind of theater piece. Many of the dialogues are theater pieces. The dialogue
opens up with young Hippocrates going to Socrates' place and knocking on the doors at war, waking
up Hippocrates. Hippocrates here is not the father of Greek medicine, more on that, Hippocrates
of Kos later. Hippocrates is frequently enough occurring name in ancient Greece, like Jack
or Jill and the like. So this is just young Hippocrates who wants to get Socrates up out
of bed because something quite momentous is taking place, namely, Protagoras is in town,
do you see? Now, this is big news. I don't know what quite would match up with that these
days. It, I guess, maybe an Elvis sighting or something like that. Well, here's Protagoras
in town. Now, Socrates is given the witty line, he turns around and says to Hippocrates
who's so urgent about all this. Why are you getting me? Do I owe money or something? In
other words, do I have to get up now and take it on the lamb? I mean, are we supposed to
run or something? No, no, Protagoras is in town. He'll answer all our questions. Well,
I should think very few things short of a fire would get Socrates out of bed more quickly
than somebody claiming that a chap has arrived in town who's going to answer all our questions.
I mean, this is a form of baiting if ever there was. So Socrates as well. Indeed, we
better go off and get all these. Let's go to where Protagoras is staying. I think Hippocrates
is quite taken by the fact that Socrates can sort of amble over and address the great Protagoras
directly rather than waiting around in the Agora where a crowd is assembled and autograph
seekers and the paparazzi and all that business. So off they go. And and as the dialogue proceeds,
we find Socrates in a kind of mock, a kind of mock, reverential bowing and scraping. He's
saying to Protagoras, Look, I, I do have some questions that I'd like answered. You know,
this young Hippocrates here whom whom I love as if he were my own son. You know, I mean,
the only reason I'm pestering you with these interrogatives is because of my concern for
this young lad. I want to make sure everything goes right with him. So you do want to stay
and Protagoras is is courteous and patient enough. But it's fairly clear that Protagoras
wants to get on with this, you know, what what just what is the question? What what is it
you want me to to talk about? Socrates makes something else fairly clear. And he makes
it clear early on as this dialogue is going to get going. This. This is a Socrates who's
just getting his philosophical sea legs. Now he knows he's dealing with one of the most
formidable intelligences in the ancient Greek world. And he wants to make sure that he,
Socrates, is not going to get caught up in those very well known sophistical devices that
have you blubbering and slobbering away and walking home wondering what hit you. So he
gets Protagoras to commit himself to Socrates own method, that dialectical method. I will
ask the questions and your replies will be to the questions. Let's not engage in these
digressions and similes and metaphors and all that answer the question. Protagoras here
is really quite obliging. I mean, initially he he he does start to go off a bit and Socrates
pulls him up short and says, look, I said what the ground rules were going to be. You
agreed. And if you don't abide by them, I'm leaving. So you get an almost petulant and I
think rather nervous Socrates in this dialogue. This is a much analyzed dialogue. I surely
don't think anyone would declare Socrates the clear winner by the time this one is over. Though
in the later dialogue, Socrates revisits these issues and I think turns in a more consistent
and impressive performance. But that that's that's the atmosphere of this dialogue. So what are
these questions going to be? Well, well, we can begin this way. We let's let's ask this question.
Suppose this Hippocrates here, this boy I love as if he were my own son, and you know,
I'm very concerned about his future, etc, etc. Suppose he wanted to excel in medicine. Now,
with whom would you suggest that he study? And Protagoras says, Well, you know,
the Asculapian school is our great medical school. I'd have him. I would have him study there.
Just so you know, Socrates has said, but just what I would have said, what a what a straightforward
answer to a to a question, you know, there you are. I mean, this is here's a chap who does answer
all our questions. Do you see them? No, I've got this other question. This is another question.
Um, this boy Hippocrates here, you know, and I've got this fatherly affection for him.
Suppose he wanted to excel as a sculptor. With whom would you have him study?
And again, Protagoras, you know, just addresses the question directly. We've got Polyclitus and
Phidias and great, great sculptors. Phidias was Pericles Chum, you know, they got together and
designed that little place. What's it called again? Oh, yes, the Acropolis and so forth. So I,
well, that's, oh, yes, well, that's exactly the person he should study with the school he should
study in these great sculptors who bring to life what was once inert stone. And you wonder for
a moment, where is this headed? These are almost banal questions. But they're set up questions
so that Socrates now can say, look, what is it this young man would want to have to excel at
for it to make any sense for him to study with you?
And Protagoras answers in a word, he would have to want to excel in virtual
Arete, kind of moral excellence, do you see? And that then gives Socrates the interrogative
that actually opens the dialogue. Yes, he says, but convert. Now, I want to
parse that interrogative because, you know, it does have the sort of cafe metaphysics ring to
which, you know, ah, well, convert should be taught. He mumbled over his shoulder as he strolled
down the street into the sunset, you know, the retreating, lonely philosopher with resignation,
ah, convert should be taught. That's not the burden of the question. This is a very serious
question that is going to provide the context for a rigorous philosophical analysis of the nature
of virtue itself and questions about what is teachable. Now, why then I say understood the
question understood that way. Why would Socrates raise this question about the teachability
of Arete of this kind of excellence, this kind of this kind of virtue.
And here, so many thoughts cloud the imagination as as you become a participant in this dialogue,
if not a participant, a witness to it, you're standing there in its Athens and it's
the fifth century BC and Sparta has won this Peloponnesian war and Socrates and his friends are
coming to grips with a certain political reality that is far from reassuring.
What do we know about Sparta? Well, we know all these things about Sparta. We know that
that Sparta had the laws of Lycurgus, but refused to reduce these laws to writing, whereas Athens,
a century earlier, had had written law. And the word is that that Sparta does not reduce its laws
to writing, because any man who learns his duty by reading about it can't be trusted. You've got
so so so here's a Socrates who who already appreciates that there's something about moral
excellence that defies merely academic exercises or pedagogical
undertakings that there seems to be something in the being himself that that reflects,
generates, expresses virtue. And how could you go about teaching something like this?
There's more to it than that. We don't find ourselves saying, you know, Bill tends to be
virtuous between 10 and 11 o'clock in the morning. And earlier than that and later than that,
he's a felon, bank robber, a child molester, and she's on his income tax. But find him during
that hour and you've got a man of virtue. No, nobody thinks that. We tend to think
we tend to think that a person is virtuous when the when there is a quality about the person that
expresses itself in just about every context. And for that to be the case, it must be because the
actions of the person are guided by a principle or precept that is universally applicable. It's not
just that you do something 11 or you do something on Thursdays. It's rather you make yourself into
a certain kind of person. And that kind of person is a person whose conduct is in the
thrall of a regulative maximum or principle. Now, if this is a universal principle, if it is a guide
to life in all of the theaters of life and all of the stages of life, if it's a universal in that
sense, well, then guess what? It is not accessible to the senses. The senses can only pick up
particulars. They cannot pick up universals. So if, in fact, behind the man of virtue, and it would
be called a man of virtue in that culture, behind persons of virtue, there stands a universal principle,
an impelling principle applicable in all contexts, and known in some non-sensory way. This again is
where hearkening to the mean oh again, do you see? This is very much like the Pythagorean theorem.
It's true of all rectilinear triangles, not just that one or that one. Now, as it is universally
the case, it is not accessible to the senses because the senses pick up only what is particular.
Well, here's the bind. How do we teach anybody anything? Well, in most contexts, we teach people
by saying, this is a sheet of paper. This is a set of spectacles. This is a lectern. This is a shoe.
That is, when we take a look at how parents teach children, they teach children by providing sensible,
visible, or audible exemplar of what it is they're trying to convey. Teaching, as it's generally
engaged in, is teaching by showing. It's defining things ostensibly. This is a wall. This is a floor.
This is a person. This is a tie. Well, anything that can be taught by showing cannot itself be
universal. You can't point to that which is universal. You can't point to anything that is
always the case. Well, then, convert should be taught. How could you possibly teach it?
What is it you would show somebody? What is it you would point to? Now, I wanted to be understood
that that's the burden of the question. The burden of the question is, if we are dealing with something,
if this truth we're after, if this principle we're after is universally operative, then it cannot be
the subject of ostensive definitions. It can't possibly be something that you hold up or sound out.
And if it can't be dealt with that way, how can you teach it? What would you say to Billy?
So, this is a serious question. This is not just one of these sort of existential,
angsty sorts of questions. Oh, convert should be taught. Gee, I think not. Let's go home or
Bill, pour me another one. Now, this is a serious question about the teachable. And it's a serious
question raised by one of the greatest teachers of all time. Because you can quite understand that
for someone like Socrates, if you can't teach virtue, then why bother teaching anything else?
I mean, what else would there be? Just a kind of training, as now I'll show you how to weld,
and now I'll show you how to use the Bunsen burner, and now I'll show you how to make nylon in the
chemistry laboratory, the exercises in what the Greeks would take to be arts and crafts of species
of technique, as opposed to Sophia, a kind of wisdom that guides one all the days of one's life,
and prepares one's soul for an eternal life that is undertaken with the death of the body.
No, virtue better be teachable, because if virtue isn't teachable, Socrates is wasting his time,
do you see? So again and again, this is not an idle question. This is a central question.
Now, you might say, well, all right, can virtue be taught as a central question, and it's made
difficult by the fact that defined in a certain way, virtue may refer to something that can't be
held up or shown. But for goodness sake, you can hold up and show rectilinear triangles. You can
draw them on a piece of paper and say, here's a three sided figure, and as best as I could do it,
I've tried to make one of the angles 90 degrees, and that's what we mean by a right angle triangle,
and now I'm going to teach you something about Euclidean geometry. Oh, well, in other words,
although you can't show the universal, you can show an instance of the universal, as it is a
particular instance, it's not going to be entirely faithful to the universal, but what, but, but,
but are so. Well, the turn the dialogue takes then is this turn. Perhaps we can't teach virtue in
the empirical sense of pointing to virtue, but we certainly can point to virtuous acts. We can point
to persons who act in a virtuous way. We can point to the morally excellent person, the person
reflecting arete. We can point to that person. Now look, here's another problem. Suppose we take a
one year old and we sort of hold the one year old erect enough, there's the one year old wobbling
around, and we take the one year old to Thermopylae during the Persian wars, and what we're going to
show the one year old is Leonidas at the past, Leonidas knowing that he and all of his men are
going to be wiped out. They are sacrificing themselves for the liberty of the Hellenic world.
One of the great heroic acts, one of the great acts of bravery of all time, self-sacrificing,
great courage, not heedlessness now, but a principled act of courage that must end in one's own
death and the death of one's brothers. Now we've got the one year old looking at this. The one year
old is not going to see anything by way of virtue at all. The one year old is going to be, as it
were, looking at a video game or something and probably enjoying the shiny helmets and the
winning of the horses and the great, great clouds that are set up by men in conflict.
Well, the one year old might just take a few more sips of the bottle and go to sleep.
So it isn't enough to say that perhaps we can present a person of virtue or someone behaving
virtuously, and that's the way you do it. That isn't going to work unless the audience for this
has already been prepared, is of the right nature, is at the right
then indeed you might find within that person something that will resonate
when a virtuous act presents itself to the organs of sense. You cannot teach the Pythagorean
theorem to a one year old either, nor can you teach the Pythagorean theorem to an entity
whose rational resources are simply not up to the task. And so you cannot present as the emblem
of virtue actions that indeed are understood to be virtuous actions, but presented to a person
whose soul has been so corrupted or is so incompletely developed, so impoverished as not
to be able to resonate to or in some way enter into a kind of sympathetic relationship with
the exemplum. Now we have here at once the foundations for a kind of elitist position
on who shall be virtuous. We're going to confront this again famously in Plato's Republic in which
Socrates refers to the convenient fiction, it's developed first in Hesiod's writings,
the convenient fiction of men of gold, men of silver, men of brass, and men of iron,
so I say we already have the position being laid now according to which the life of virtue is not
just available to anybody and everybody, it takes a certain kind of person. We also see
the foundations here being laid for an essentially developmental theory. If you're ever going to
be in a position where the lessons of virtue make some impact on you, it's going to be because from
the earliest time in your childhood your soul is conditioned in such a way as to be receptive
to lessons of this kind. And again in Plato's Republic which is the subject of the next lecture,
we begin to see what kind of preparation is necessary if one is ever to be accessible
to instruction by the virtuous. Now, Protagoras is mentioned centrally in another
dialogue called the Theotetus in which that famous maxim of Protagoras is considered,
man the measure of all things. And this gets back to the point that I raised at the very
beginning of today's lecture. Well look on this question of conduct, why not just say
I will act according to my caprice, I will do the things that please me, and the reason I'm
going to pay any attention to you at all is because you might be in a position to undo me or to thwart
me in my achieving the pleasures that I want. So I'll play the game in such a way as to keep
you distracted or keep you at arm's length, but I say at the end of the day it's my game that
counts and if that means you lose so much the worse for you. Is there going to be an argument
against that? After all, if man is the measure of all things, then that becomes one acceptable
answer to the problem of conduct. The way we solve the problem of conduct is one at a time.
Now this is what in the Theotetus Socrates says when he's asked, well what have you to say about
Protagoras's position that to, you know, man the measure of all things. And I take this from the
Jalatranslation from the Theotetus. This is what Socrates says. He says,
I'm charmed with his doctrine, to say, but I wonder that he did not begin his book with a
declaration that a pig or a dog-faced baboon or some yet stranger monster which has sensation
is the measure of all things. Then might he have shown a magnificent contempt for our opinion of
him by informing us at the outset that while we were revering him like a god for his wisdom,
he was no better than a tadpole. Now look, you can't have it both ways. You can't stand there
as a very paragon of philosophical wisdom, namely Protagoras, and say that everybody one at a time
is the measure of all things. Why would anybody, Socrates is saying, why would anybody take that
kind of lesson from Protagoras or anybody else? If each one is the measure of all things, then
Protagoras has no authority beyond that. Any other sensing creature has, if each sensing creature
is the measure of each and everything for itself and himself and herself. There's something entirely
self-contradictory in this. To stand up and say in a manner of speaking, take it from me, my opinion
counts for nothing. I mean, it's almost like the liar's paradox, do you see? Everything I saw.
Now that's the paradox. This is what Socrates finds to be paradoxical in Sophistic teaching
at the level of ethics. It can't possibly be the case that whatever Smith says goes. Smith may be a
madman. Smith may be mentally retarded. Smith may be intoxicated. He might be in some drug-induced
stupor. He might be the product of some penetrating head wound. He might be a monster. He might be
a dog-faced baboon. He could be a pig. The world of the animate includes a wide variety of types.
And we can't say that the right form of life for any one of us is just what any one of us chooses
until we've established the kind of entity that one of us really is. Is this a sane person? Is it
one who has his wits about him? Is it one who has been given sufficient philosophical guidance
and a proper enough early development to be able to weigh the possibilities for a life
conducted according to certain terms? Does one even know what choices one is making?
Socrates famously will argue that vice is a species of ignorance, that actions committed
in ignorance are really involuntary, and that what the person does that is wrong and wrongful.
He doesn't do because he actually sets out to do what's wrong. He does it because he
fails to understand that indeed what we mean by a kind of moral evil is a species of ignorance.
And what we mean by virtue is a species of knowledge. There is an equating here of virtue
and knowledge. Knowledge in the sense of a philosophical recognition of universal precepts
known to be true in all instances. Mathematics illustrates this quite conveniently and suggestively
and it is indeed possible to address the problem of conduct with those same resources
and to recognize that once that problem has been addressed that way, we will discover that virtue,
just like the Pythagorean theorem, virtue is a matter of relationships. It's the proper relationship
between and among the various dispositions and powers of the soul. And the right relationship is
one in which the rational power rules, the passions and the will follow. The contrary
relationship is one in which the passions rule and reason is simply given the task of finding
clever ways of satisfying these passionate and sensual desires. That's the life of the slave
and it is a life entered into because one fails to appreciate what the nature and purpose of human
life is. The nature and purpose of life is to prepare us, as Socrates says, for death because
with death there is the liberation of the soul. And the state we put it in during earthly life
determines what in the next incarnation will be its fate and the possibilities available to it.
Well, the main points then is virtue teachable. Well, virtue is expressed by virtuous persons in
their conduct. And if we are of the right sort and have had the right kind of guidance, watching
them tells us what the nature of virtue is and imitating them puts us on a course of virtuous
living. Each person cannot be a separate rule in the ethical domain. We have to have a standard
external to the eccentricities of individuals. Virtue indeed can be taught, but it can't be
taught to everybody and it can't be enjoyed by everybody. It can't be Lake Wobegon where everybody
is not only above average, but abundant in virtue. This is something for the few and it remains to
be seen how those few are discovered and chosen and nurtured. And that will be the subject of the
next lecture.
