Lecture 10. Plato's Republic. Man writ large.
Plato's Republic is surely one of the most discussed treatises in the whole history
of philosophy, and it has been subjected to a praise almost without limit and scorn
almost without limit. No less a figure than Bertrand Russell writing the first edition
of his history of Western philosophy, and writing this at a time when German bombs were
falling on London, tells us that many people have attempted to praise Socrates without
quite understanding him, but he, Bertrand Russell, will understand the Socratic program
and will find in it nothing but a kind of fascistic and imperious political scheme that
freedom-loving people should reject out of hand. Now, I don't think that that was finally
Russell's settled position on Plato's Republic, and I do think that the environment of the
Second World War may have had something to do with a judgment like that, but I say Plato's
Republic pulls no punches as regards the way the state should be constituted and what the
function of the state is, what the entire purpose of political life is all about. So
it's an extremely influential and very revealing dialogue. Plato's Republic gives us any number
of insights into the entire epistemological and ethical dimensions of Platonic thought.
It's said to be the foundational work in political science, and I think if you ask any professor
of political science, what's the book that launched the field? Plato's Republic, along
with Aristotle's treatise in politics, would certainly be there, and Plato's Republic comes
first. And so, at the risk of being playfully controversial, let me say that the political
scientists can have Plato's Republic, but I do think that we should take Socrates'
own word for it. The point of this dialogue is psychological. That is, the whole point
of studying the state is to address the question, what is it that makes a man a good man? Now,
this dialogue begins with Socrates showing up in the residence where the dialogue is
going to take place. The owner of the house is now aging Cephalus, quite rich, well off,
very upper middle class, and Socrates and Cephalus have a brief encounter, itself in
a way a rather revealing one. He says to Cephalus, well, you know now that you are more or less
at the end of your days, or the prime of life has passed you, what was so good about being
rich? And Cephalus has an interesting reply to that, among other things. Well, you know,
he says, one thing about being quite well off is I haven't had to spend a lot of time
tricking and being duplicitous with other people. I'm reminded of this comment of Cephalus's
because one of my students actually was studying moral reasoning in very young children, and
one of the questions that she was to ask the young child is what the importance is of rules
in a game. There's quite young children, and the child said, well, what's so important
about rules is that they tell me when I'm cheating. Now, you know, Cephalus says, well,
you know, good thing about having a few dollars in your pocket is that you don't have to be
scurrilous in your dealings with others. Well, this is something that Plato uses very effectively.
The dialogue is set up in a more or less light way. People are assembling. It brings you into
the atmosphere of this world of deep, scholarly thought, but at the same time showing that
this is a world participated in by friends, people who know each other, have very much
in common. They are living lives quite apart from discourse of this sort. They're showing
up at each other's houses. They're pouring a little wine and mixing it with water and
exchanging greetings and asking how the family is going. And they're sort of warming to the
task. Now, when the question arises, well, look, what is it that qualifies someone as
a good man? Do you see a Colossanthropus? What is it that makes for the good man? Socrates
says, this is an extremely difficult question. It's a complex question. The subject has a
certain obscurity about it. And he says, just as when we confront things in the visual world
that are obscure, we sometimes get a much better reckoning. Let's enlarge man as much
as we can. Let's enlarge man to the level of the police itself, the level of the state
itself, the political community itself. And let's ask ourselves, what makes a good police?
And once we've come to grips with what it is that makes the state good, we'll have a
better, a fuller access and a clearer picture of what it is in the person that makes the
person good. Well, I say I'm only being playfully controversial when I refer to Republic as
a foundational treatise in psychology. In fact, Plato would probably be the first to
reject the claim that there can be a political science that is not fundamentally a psychological
science. Indeed, the dialogues do reject that claim, insisting that you can make no progress
with respect to politics unless you understand the nature of human nature. And Aristotle
will make the same claim, and quite systematically, that the study of politics first is the study
of the soul, the study of Suke. If you don't know what makes us tick, you can't say much
about how we should be governed. Now, the problem of knowledge was dealt with in earlier dialogues.
The Republic is a late-middle dialogue. The problem of knowledge is returned to here.
It's in the nature of the dialogues as they develop chronologically, that they will take
a step back and pick up a strand that a kind of Ariadne point on the Golden Chain where
they had left off earlier, and with newer insights and more sustained discussions and
the like, revisit the issue, have somewhat modified thoughts about it, and then press
on. There is this definite sense of the dialogues being presented as forms of progressive knowledge,
getting things better, the more one deals with them, and the more obstacles they are
required to overcome. The problem of knowledge is illustrated in Republic famously in the
allegory of the caves, and of course, every introductory philosophy student has to know
all about the allegory of the caves. What is offered here allegorically is something
quite akin to the daunting task that faced Theseus. There he is in the vows of the labyrinth.
But in the allegory of the caves, we actually have chaps who are in something like a labyrinth.
They are down in a darkened cave, and they are shackled, so that they can't really turn
around. There is no exit available to them. They are sort of locked in place. They are
locked in place because their bodies are locked in place. They are tied to their bodies, and
their bodies are tied. And there is a parapet of the kind of wall in front of them, and
from behind them objects are being projected onto that wall.
Shadowy forms. Things that seem to be real to them, because they have no standard. The
only standard available to them is that sort of Protagoras standard. Each man is the measure
of all things. Well, all right, what I see then is real. I have no standard external
to, superior to, the standard of my own mere puny experience, my own mere limited self
deceiving materially bound sense organs. So for me, reality is whatever anybody projects
on that wall. There isn't anything, there isn't anything beyond that wall. There's nothing
above it. There's nothing beneath it. All I will ever know. I'm like a puppet in this
regard. I'm simply going to be worked in my knowledge claims by whatever the projectionist
is doing. Of course, one of them breaks loose and starts the long climb up toward the light,
long and arduous. There's no mention of Ariadne here. And as this now liberated chap gets
into the light, this bright light, this blinding light, and finally adjusts to it, he begins
to see what never here to for had been seen and begins to recognize that everything he
had taken as true was just some shadowy illusion, some nearly hallucinatory experience, not
unlike what a madman might experience or a drunk. And of course, in case he should
go back to inform cave mates that they are being victimized in some horrific way by being
shackled and having a spurious reality projected before them. Of course, the reaction to that
is he's been blinded by the light. This poor fellow is pathetic. He doesn't realize that
everything that's true is right there on the screen in front of his eyes. I wonder what
must have happened to him when he climbed up out of this thing and then came back down.
Something terrible must. There's so much in the allegory of the caves. This is a well
worked allegory. I mean, the Plato's Republic is one of the most well worked treatises as
I say in the history of philosophy. Well, what's in it? Well, first being shackled, being tied
down because one is, at least in some sense, a material object. This creates vulnerabilities.
It is the fact that gravity keeps our feet on the ground, that gives us a very limited
possibility of transcendence, of an elevation above the plane of materiality. Secondly,
darkness, ignorance. It's the same thing. It's not seeing the truth. It is like being
in a cave. You can be in the Waldorf Towers. You can be in Buckingham Palace. Being in
a cave means being blind to the truth. The actual surroundings are entirely irrelevant.
The physical surroundings are entirely irrelevant. You'll recall from the previous lecture my
example of a one year old child brought to the Battle of Thermopylae and looking at the
great and brave Leonidas and seeing nothing great or brave because not being in a position
to see such things. Well, one's surroundings count for nothing except insofar as one has
become the sort of person who can see what is truly there and can read through the purely
delusional or distracting elements of the scene, penetrate through these clouds of shadowy
and projected forms, and see behind them to some reality. So it isn't enough to be rich.
It isn't enough to be famous. It isn't enough to be in the right place at the right time
if you're the wrong person. To be toned deaf at the Metropolitan Opera is not to hear Loboeng.
It's to hear sound and to hear Loboeng presupposes certain capacities that have been then developed
and not atrophied as a result of disuse. So you have at once the shackling of a corporeal
being, resisting the very possibility of transcendence rising above the plane of mere materiality.
You've got ignorance and darkness being synonyms for each other. And then you've got that special
vulnerability endured by the sensualist, the special vulnerability of one who believes
whatever he sees and only believes what he sees. That sort of entity is vulnerable to
all of the artifices, the devices, the tricks of the trade, whether it be at the hands of
the soft, softest or the unscrupulous, be at the hands of one's own self-delusional tendencies.
That person's situation is hopeless because the eyes and ears will never pick up the truth
and what they do pick up will never be parlayed into the truth. And so what you've got is
simply an experientialist going from bumping into one wall and then the other and regarding
contact of that kind as the sort of contact right for a rational being. Just missing the
very point of life, not even understanding that life has a point. So you've got that.
You've got the self-victimization of the sensualist.
Now what is the light? When this character finally breaks loose and gets up out of the
bowels of the cave and sees other things, well the allegory here, the metaphor here of light
and knowledge is transparent, no pun intended. It is transparent in that there are some things
that can only be seen under the light of philosophical examination, under the light of the wise man's
guidance.
So then we begin to recognize that the problem of knowledge is going to get us back always
to a search for what is universally true, for a search for relationships, because it
is the relationship that constitutes the truth of the thing, the true form of the thing and
that when we're going to ask what is it that makes a government a good government, it's
going to be answered in terms of certain relationships that obtain between the governing body and
those governed between the laws and those who become fit for the rule of law, etc. It's
going to be in that pattern of relationships. It's going to be, the question of the right
form of government is going to be in terms of where authority is properly vested and
for what purpose, that kind of thing.
Something else we confront and here at the hands of a quite effective sophist, Throzimicus,
I mentioned Throzimicus in the earlier lecture, well Throzimicus and Adiomontus and Glaucon
are going to be regaling with Socrates with questions throughout this dialogue and being
entirely skeptical of this sort of virtue ethics that Socrates is going to be proclaiming.
And at one point we've got Throzimicus and the others saying to Socrates, look, all this
talk about virtue, it really is quite tedious. I mean, it's sort of high blown and very,
very inspirational, kind of inspirational, homily in the life, but this isn't why people
do what they do. If you want to know why people behave the way they behave, there's a ready
answer to this. People behave the way they behave, that is, they solve the problem of
conduct in a very, very direct way. They do what they do because of the pleasure that
it yields or they do what they do out of fear of being caught and punished for doing otherwise.
That's the beginning, middle and end of it. There is no more to the issue than that.
The rest of this is just a lot of philosophical gabbing, do you see? I mean, it's a story
very well told in the myth of Gaijes. Yes, the myth of Gaijes. And so you now have the
group saying, yeah, the myth of Gaijes. And so somebody's going to have to report what
the myth of Gaijes is. What is the myth of Gaijes? Gaijes and his famous ring. Well,
this was a very well-known myth at the time, and it's been copied in lore ever since, and
there are earlier versions of it too. Gaijes will become a major figure as a result of
what I'm about to tell you. But Gaijes is out there working in the field, and somehow
there are different accounts given of this myth, but the more or less settled account
is the earth opens up, and Gaijes looks down, and there's a large slumbering figure that
he sees there with a hand up close toward the surface of the earth, and he sees on the
hand a ring. And Gaijes, ever the opportunist, reaches down, he pulls the ring off the finger,
and then the earth closes up again. And now Gaijes puts the ring on, and he goes off to
one of the governing offices. He's got taxes to pay or whatever, and he's sitting in the
anti-room with other people, and he starts playing with the ring. And as he twists it,
he disappears. And when he twists it in the other direction, he reappears, so he can make
himself appear or disappear at will. So what does he do? And this is the question that Socrates
has hit with. What does he do? What does Gaijes do? Because Thrasymachus and Adiomontus
and Glauconus satisfied that Gaijes is the right guide here to understanding what constitutes
the solution to the problem of conduct. So Socrates is waiting for them to finish this
story. He knows the ending of the story. Well, he knows the penultimate point they're going to
reach in the story. Well, what Gaijes does is he makes himself disappear, and he goes off to
the palace, and he kills the king, and he rapes the queen, and he takes control of the realm.
In other words, Socrates is told, in other words, he does what anybody would do. He does what
he damn well pleases. That's what he does. He makes himself disappear. If you want to know
what determines the ethical dimension of life, ask yourself what we would do if nobody would
see us, if we could never be caught. That's the answer. And therefore, you begin to realize
that the problem of conduct is simply the application of rewards and punishments in such a way as to
get people to do certain things. What we have here in republic is a rigorously, I would say
a ruthlessly, behavioristic theory of morality. Long before B.F. Skinner, a behavioristic
theory of morality. One does what the history of rewards and punishments incline one to do.
There is no more to it than that. Well, Socrates, of course, is not going to cave into this sort of
thing. Socrates knows as much about the myth of Gaijes as anybody else does. Socrates would be
very much inclined to have that story completed, because Gaijes really does fall on horrible times
by the way. And so if you're going to use the myth, you might want to carry it through to
its, if not its logical, then certainly its moral conclusion. But Socrates wants to bring
them back to a different kind of recognition. The point of the dialogue, the point of the
dialectical enterprise is not to rediscover what people do. We don't need philosophy to
discover what people do. All you have to do to determine what people do. The point of philosophy,
at least at this juncture, is to determine how people ought to behave, not how they do
behave. So from what people do do when they can render themselves invisible, nothing of ethical
consequence follows. You might be right back in the cave again. You know, from the fact that
if everybody in the world were in the cave, and everybody in the world declared that the only
reality were the shadowy forms being projected on the wall, it certainly would not follow that
that's the only reality. And if it really were the case that if everybody in the world could make
himself and herself disappear, they would all go off taking control of kingdoms and robbing
banks and the like, it certainly would not follow that that is the right form of life. It would
only follow that that's what persons of a certain kind do when they can get away with it. So it
really begs the question. It doesn't answer the question. The question remains, how should we
behave? And this is surely not answered by anybody who simply tells us how we do behave. So we're
back to square one. Now, in getting back to square one, Socrates says, look, Guy G's is like all of
us, at least in this sense. Of course, we are inclined by pleasure and pain. We are corporeal
entities. People tend to do things that please them and avoid things that cause them suffering.
Sometimes we are so driven by these sensual desires that in fact, our rational powers are
trumped. They're simply overcome. And this is very risky. He says, in a sense, we might regard
ourselves as charioteers. You know, we're standing in a chariot that's being pulled by two
horses. There's a good horse. And there's a horse that isn't a good horse. I want to pause at this
point because here's a platonic dialogue famously using the chariot driver being pulled by a good
horse and one that isn't. I want to return to the katha upanishad. You might recall the upanishads
from the very first lecture in this series. And we find this in the katha upanishad. Quote,
know now the soul, know now the soul atman, as riding in a chariot. He who lacks understanding,
whose mind is not constantly held firm, his sense is uncontrolled like the vicious horses
of a chariot driver. So we see from India to Athens this very, very useful metaphor of the
impulses of the body being like an untamed steed pulling us in one direction. And in the
metaphor as it's used by Socrates, there is this other steed. Look, we do have to be pulled,
don't we? If we're going to do anything, there must be motives and desires. And we must have a will
capable of resolving itself, resolving us to follow the right course of action. Now the will
itself cannot determine what the right course of action is, and desire knows only one course
of action, that by virtue of which it fulfills itself. So how then do we discover the right course
of action? Through rational power. It has to be the supremacy of reason, at least as regards
determining what we ought to do. And the supremacy of reason is just a reflection of our
recognition that mathematical proportion, harmony, balance is the guide and the goal of life. We are
to avoid excesses. We are to find that central point of proportionality, inclined to say that kind
of Pythagorean numerological balance that just is the emblem of truth. This is not something
that can be uncovered by the will and it's not something that can be uncovered by desire. It's
something that is accessible only to a rational being capable of exercising rationality and
preventing the distractions of sense, the impulses of desire from taking control. Now this can't be
achieved by anybody and everybody. In fact, if early education is of the wrong sort, you're never going
to get to this point. What do we mean by an education that's of the wrong sort? Well Socrates is
persuaded that the spiritual dimension of life, the non-material psychological dimension of life can
be corrupted. It can be rendered less than its own potentialities otherwise might allow. And this, as a result
of the experience, Socrates is very concerned about children being exposed to the wrong kind of music,
dithirambic music, what we might today call acid rock or something. Now why is that? And here the echo
of Pythagoras is audible. To be exposed to discord is to condition the soul to be at home with discord, to be
at home with that which is not harmonious and proportional and mathematically pure and therefore true. It's
to make us comfortable with that which is false. This is the same problem Socrates is going to have
with the poets. There's a certain species of poetry, a certain genre, which inclines us to be friendly to fiction,
friendly to what is false, indifferent to the truth. This is a true of every species of literature, but it's true
of some. He doesn't think Homer did us a favor by presenting the gods as often nitwits, corrupt envious and the
like. That's not the way to bring up children. They have to have a quite ordered regimen. They must be exposed to
gymnastic exercises that condition the body to find proportionality and harmony and beauty, beauty of form, beauty
of movement, self control and a form of music, martial music especially, that again conditions the soul to search
for and to derive great pleasure from the harmonious, the proportional, the balanced, the symmetrical and to eschew the
discordant, the monstrous, the uneven, what in the Pythagorean system would be the uneven, the odd. And indeed it isn't
every soul that is going to derive benefits even from that kind of regimen. Socrates says, look, let us recall the
Hesiotic myth, the convenient fiction of men of gold, men of silver, men of brass and men of iron. Hesiod refers to a time
ancient by his own lights of men of gold, followed by an age of silver, an age of brass or bronze, and many refers to his
own age, which is the Iron Ages, men of iron. This is a corrupted kind of metal. You'll never get out of this what you would get out
of men of gold. It was said that one of the myths surrounding Pythagoras is that when his thigh was exposed, it was made of gold,
do you see? Well, Socrates is of the mind, at least in this dialogue, is of the mind that you cannot get the leaders and guardians of
the state simply by sampling randomly from the population. You've got to have good stuff to begin with, and then a steady regimen
of early instruction and commitment to behavior that is proportionate, behavior that is harmonious, behavior that is beautiful and good.
Now, how do you get them? Glaucon says to Socrates, well, where are we going to get these guardians? And Socrates answers the question
by asking one. He says, you have hunting dogs, don't you? Glaucon says, you mean we're going to breed them? And indeed, it is the scheme
that Socrates puts forth that there'll be a sort of a big party. Everybody gets a bit tight, and then we have a marriage lottery.
Everybody thinks that mates are being assigned according to a sort of chance lottery. Meanwhile, in the back room, we're matching
those people who will form very, very good bonds with a high likelihood of giving birth to the most desirable types. So there is a genetic
theory of goodness here, as it were. Well, as has pointed out, Socrates, sometimes these good bondings produce witless offspring,
and sometimes very mediocre parents have heroic children. And Socrates says, well, in the case that the pairings don't give us what we need,
those infants are to be exposed, which is to say exposed to the elements. The state has no need for what it cannot use.
Socrates is not the happy-go-lucky, playful, nude wrestler, just having a good time with his friends. There's a soberness that sometimes takes on the character
of the ruthless. But Plato's Republic puts us on notice that not just any form of state can survive and produce a form of life of which we are worthy.
It's a state constituted around eternal principles of the sort found in Plato's Mino and of the sort atom-braided in the entire
Pythagorean view of the true and the beautiful and the good. Thank you.
I'm Tom Rollins, president of The Teaching Company. I hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses on tape series.
To order your next course, or to speak to one of our knowledgeable customer service representatives about our broad selection of more than 80 courses,
call us today toll-free at 1-800-TEACH-1-2. That's 1-800-832-2412.
Our great courses on tape are produced in response to interviews with customers like you. All are designed to serve learning as a way of life
and to suit your needs whether you're commuting, exercising, traveling, or just relaxing at home. Please give us a call at 1-800-TEACH-1-2.
