Lecture 13 Aristotle on Friendship
Man is by nature a social animal whose inclination it is to live in the company of others.
Man is by nature a political animal. These are two famous views of Aristotle.
That we are by nature social, we are by nature political.
There is something in us that compels us to live in the society of others.
Now again, this is not something we should be going up in a balloon over, at least not at the outset,
because Aristotle also points out that as man is by nature a social animal, so are bees,
and swans are social animals.
That is, there is a very strong tendency throughout the animal kingdom for affiliative modes of life,
living in flocks and living in prides and living in herds and the like.
We have this tendency, which I say is widespread in the animal kingdom,
this tendency to put ourselves into groupings.
Well, of course, given Aristotle's whole approach to understanding, the question that naturally arises is why?
Why do we do what, why, what are those groupings for?
What's the whole point of it?
We might say, what is the logos that seems to govern this affiliative tendency?
And anyway, not only do we have a tendency to group ourselves together,
but it seems we don't let it stop at the level of tribal enclaves.
We don't let it stop at the level of small familial organization.
There seems to be, whenever there are favoring circumstances,
there seems to be a movement very much in the direction of the forming of a polis.
And so this does raise a very, very interesting question.
Why should this tendency to live in the company of others ever move beyond the stage of very, very small tribal enclaves?
What purpose is being served by more elaborate modes of social life and political life?
Now, Aristotle says you can't form a polis with one person,
and by the time you have 100,000 people, you don't have a polis at all.
Make note of that, please.
He just may be right, which case we probably ceased being a political community somewhere around the time the Mayflower arrived, I guess, I don't know.
But obviously he has in mind some right size, some, for the most part, by and large and in general,
the right numerousness for a community that could properly be regarded as a political community.
Well, the question then, why do we ever go beyond small tribal enclaves?
Well, you might say, well, there's safety in numbers.
But you do not need a political community for that.
As Aristotle points out, pirates have no trouble defending themselves,
and indeed pirates have no trouble engaging in trade.
Lawless communities can do this sort of thing.
No, there really isn't any good evidence to suggest that you need something no less than a political form of life for self-defense,
and indeed political communities are defeated left and right.
That isn't going to do it, nor does the utilitarian notion of trade and commerce quite do it,
because that can be conducted in vanishingly small tribal enclaves and only quasi-political settings.
There must be something about the polis that serves a purpose that cannot otherwise be served,
that brings something about, that realizes a potentiality that otherwise would lay dormant
and would atrophy as a result of disuse.
Well, then we can ask the question, just what are the grounds of affiliation then,
if not just self-defense, and if not just commerce or utility?
Aristotle's two major ethical writings are known as the Nicomachean Ethics and the Udamian Ethics.
And of course, ample room for controversy exists as to which is first,
which is to be taken as the more complete and developed version of the other.
I should think the majority of scholars would regard the Nicomachean Ethics as Aristotle's developed position on matters ethical,
the Udamian Ethics as an earlier and less complete work.
I'd be quite comfortable with the vote of the majority on that, except as some scholars,
Sir Anthony Kenny at Oxford, for example, doesn't think that's the right order of things,
and I would always find it perilous to find myself disagreeing with Anthony Kenny on Aristotle,
or for that matter, on much else.
In these works, Aristotle is found pausing to examine the nature of that most basic form of social affiliation, friendship.
And I think if we pause to examine Aristotle on friendship,
and Aristotle on friendship serves up one of the summoning essays, I think, in the history of thought,
all the more summoning, all the more penetrating, all the more poignant for its matter of factness.
But I say, I think if we pause to examine Aristotle on friendship,
it's a very good introduction to Aristotle on the principles of social cohesion
and political affiliation in general.
Aristotle says that friendships come in different forms and serve different purposes.
Some friendships are grounded solely in considerations of pleasure.
That is, A befriends B, and B befriends A, because in each other's company,
some essentially sensual pleasure is derived.
Now, Aristotle is not priggish on this.
You'll recall that H. L. Mankin once defined puritanism as the haunting feeling that someone somewhere may be happy.
Aristotle is not opposed to people being happy.
He's not opposed to friendships being grounded in pleasure of that kind, sensual pleasure of pleasures of the moment.
He simply wants to note that to the extent that that is the grounding of a friendship,
the friendship will only survive as long as the pleasure does.
And it does seem to be in the nature of things that pleasures of that kind have an ephemeral quality about them.
Nonetheless, it is one of the groundings of friendship, and indeed quite a common grounding, a friendship of a certain kind.
Then he says there are pleasures grounded in considerations of utility.
A befriends B, and B befriends A, because A and B are useful to each other.
And again, who can gainsay the importance of associations that serve some useful end?
Aristotle is not devoting himself to lessons in uselessness or disutility,
but again he notes that the survival of a relationship of that kind cannot go much beyond the time when A and B cease to be useful to each other.
So these pragmatic or practical groundings of friendship more or less date the friendships
and also establish terms of friendship that shall we say could be served by almost anybody else
who came along at the right time with the right resources and proved to be just as useful,
or even more useful in which case A would leave B and go to C because C is now more useful to A.
It doesn't have to be heartless and it doesn't have to be headless, but it does have to be entirely self-regarding.
But then he says there is a third class of friendship.
He refers to it as teleophilia.
I'm almost tempted to refuse to translate this because English is not a good language for that particular juxtaposition of words.
Teleophilia, how is it usually translated?
It's usually translated as completed or perfected friendship.
Telea is etymologically related to telos, the goal or end or plan of something.
Teleophilia, completed or perfected friendship.
Well, in what is this grounded?
Ah, this is grounded in virtue.
More precisely, this is grounded in a sharing by the friends of a set of dispositions,
the adoption by the friends of a set of values, a set of principles and precepts of an essentially and irreducibly moral nature.
And in this kind of friendship, what A wants for B is what is good for B for the sake of B.
And what B wants for A is what is good for A for the sake of A.
That is, you want what is good for your friend for your friend's sake.
There isn't anything self-regarding about this.
Now, what we find in a friendship of this kind is a kind of constructive relationship in which each friend, in virtue of his own qualities,
realizes what is not only potentially in the other, but also realized in the other, but now revered and honored in the other,
and thus sustained and promoted and encouraged and nurtured and celebrated.
These are the friendships of a lifetime, and these are friendships that are principled friendships,
and they exist in virtue of the fact that they conduce to good.
They conduce to what is worthy.
Aristotle thinks this kind of friendship is available not to the many.
In fact, in much of Aristotle's writing on subjects of this kind, the subjects of interest, the targets of interest,
are referred to as the Kalloy-Kagathoy.
What is a Kallos-Kagathos?
The translation of that that amuses me most, I think, is where the Kallos-Kagathos is a quote, gentlemen,
which sounds very much like, all you have to do is go to a good men's club in London
and you'll find any number of Kalloy-Kagathoy, you know, they're gentlemen,
and they know the proper mode of address and dress and the like.
Well, I don't know that I would render Kalloy-Kagathoy.
Vivalric knights, perhaps, knights of the round table, that's an image that comes to mind.
The Kallos-Kagathos, I tell you how I'd be inclined to render the Kallos-Kagathos,
you've got to get to the top of a mountain and you can only get there with the help of one other person
or the entire human endeavor will fail.
Well, the person you're going to choose to help you will be the Kallos-Kagathos.
I think among other considerations, you'll find that he's a gentleman,
the gentleman is currently understood, he's going to have far more going for him
than just good manners and good breeding.
So Aristotle is insisting that this is not going to be the form of relationship characteristic of most friendships.
Now, there's another point of contention in this part of Aristotle's writing,
Aristotle on friendship, that I think does have to be addressed.
Because Aristotle sees this kind of relationship as available only to the few, in a manner of speaking.
And moreover, because Aristotle says this relationship, this teleophilia,
can only take place between those who are equal.
Some have argued, well, look, look, if the way you get a polis is by pulling together people who have a shared form of life,
a shared set of values, a shared commitment to a virtuous life, and so forth.
If that's what the good polis is all about, then the good polis is really a kind of political organization among friends.
Now, if you add to that that for the right kind of friendship, you've got to have those who not only are abundant in virtue,
they being very few in number, but absolutely equal in this regard, your polis is going to be an empty place,
there's going to be nobody in it. What do you have? Four people in the world?
Mother Teresa and two or three chums?
So some have argued that by the time you do the sort of the moral arithmetic of Aristotle's ethical and political writings,
well, you know, when you get there, there's no one there.
And I do think in this, there's a quite serious misunderstanding of Aristotle's sense of equality when he writes this way.
In fact, he tells us when he brings up the point that for Tilleophilia to obtain between two people that there has to be an equality between them,
he then says what degree of inequality would render a relationship like this impossible?
He says the sort of inequality that obtains between mortals and the gods.
So it would have to be a profound and essential inequality that would prevent a relationship like this.
The equality that Aristotle is getting at, I would argue, is what I might call an apt or proportionate equality.
Let me offer an illustration.
One goes if one can to the metropolitan opera and if one hits it on the right night and for the right opera where everybody's gargled properly
and the production is in place and the cast is well rehearsed and the spirit moves them all.
One finds several hours of absolute sublimity.
Now, let's say that that sublimity is courtesy of Leontine Price or courtesy of Curie Takanoa or Pavarotti and the like.
Well, the audience can't sing these arias, obviously.
And so there is no quantitative equality between those sitting in the seats and those singing on the stage.
But those singing on the stage are singing to an audience, an audience of refined and cultivated and appreciative taste,
who have studied and learned enough about the music and have entered empathically and sympathetically into the production
so as to become part of a genuine performance.
The audience is a central part of this.
This is not just sound in an empty room.
And of course the singers and musicians have spent a lifetime perfecting their art
so that they can translate the music and words of those now long dead into something that will be responded to in the right way by this audience.
Well, look, there is a proportionate equality then in this sense.
The singers have a talent that is appreciated by the audience in virtue of the audience's good taste and breeding as it were.
Do you see?
The audience greatly, greatly admires the wonderful performances on the stage,
wonderful performances in virtue of the life of discipline and devotion that has been lived by the performers.
Now here, and I speak again only metaphorically, but here you've got the possibility of a teleophilia,
not in that the people in the audience can sing like Pavarotti,
but in the sense that there is a mutual respect that each of the participants in this understands what is best and good in the other
and wants what is best and good for the other, for the other's sake.
Now, understood that way, you can constitute a polis without people being quantitatively equal to each other
and indeed so abundant in virtue as for their feet not even to touch the ground.
I don't think there's anything in Aristotle at the political or ethical level that is unrealistic for goodness sake
and he's too clever a chap to have put together a program in ethics and politics that could not possibly be realized in practice.
So I think some of these criticisms really do miss the mark.
Now when we say that the possibility of a completed or perfected friendship is brought about as a result of the virtue
that flourishes in the participants in this friendship, the question naturally arises as to what we mean by virtue.
Virtue on Aristotle's account is to be understood in two different senses.
That is excellence itself, arete, is to be understood in two different senses.
They complement each other but they are distinguishable.
There are after all the intellectual virtues.
There's something to be said for intellectual excellence.
Intellectual excellence as it reveals itself in scientific knowledge, in that deep intuitive knowledge that is the gift of rationality itself
as in great, great artistic ability, technique that the great sculptors and painters and so forth have.
These are virtues or excellences that are important and central, central to the creative life of man.
But then there are the moral virtues, the moral excellences and Aristotle has to give us a definition and a sense of these.
What are they like?
How do we know that we're dealing with something that is a moral virtue?
Well says Aristotle, look.
The intellectual virtues are not innate.
These things come about by way of teaching.
Now some people are going to learn much more and much more quickly than others.
But you don't become a great sculptor by birth as it were.
You might have great potentialities at birth that someone else doesn't have.
But technique is something that you learn.
You go to school, people teach you how to do it, you watch great people do it, you try to mimic what they have done.
As the intellectual virtues come about by learning, the moral virtues come about by habit.
That's right.
He says quite specifically, the moral virtues are not innate.
And indeed as the intellectual virtues, as intellectual excellence is earned on the classroom stools, so to speak.
And as the moral virtues are essentially acquired through habitual forms of activity, we see receding now.
The old platonic view, the men of gold, men of brass, men of iron, it's all intuitive.
The soul has it since a time out of memory, since a time out of time.
We're getting a rather more functionalist, commonsensical earthbound.
I don't want to say that Aristotle ever departs fully from his own teachers, from the academy.
But we certainly see a program of research, a program of scholarship that is very much directed at the world as we get it, as we have it.
It's based on wide experience.
How do people come about knowing things?
For goodness sake, they learn it in school.
How do people come to reflect virtuous behavior by being held, by being reigned in in childhood, brought up in the right way,
given good examples to follow, and practicing seven days a week, being better than you were the day before?
That's how it comes about.
Obviously, you've got to have something in there to start with.
There's going to be the usual elitist, hereditarian element in this teaching.
It's almost co-extensive with social philosophies, until quite recently.
But all that much said, practice and rehearsal and exercise and discipline and learning finally conduced to what Aristotle calls
the habit of virtue.
A point will be reached where it's like bicycle riding.
You're no longer thinking step by step, do I put this foot down, do I put this foot down?
And the person of virtue, the person who has developed virtue in the habitual sense, is no longer saying,
should I do the right thing, should I do the wrong?
He now is reflecting a form of life that just is a virtuous form of life.
But this again returns us to the question, well, what is a virtue?
Well, a virtue now, any virtue, a moral virtue, is a disposition.
It's an inclination or disposition to act in a certain way, to act towards certain ends and away from other ends.
The ancient Greek for a disposition is a hexus, and the plural would be hexes, EIS.
Now, suppose we take a characteristic in a motion and so forth, like anger.
Is anger good or bad?
Should one ever be angry?
Remember the first word in Homer's Iliad, manine, you know, this whole thing.
Now Aristotle's position on the emotions is what you might expect from this great naturalist and biologist
and common sense psychologist.
Look, nature has fitted us out with these emotions.
Nature does nothing without a purpose.
Obviously, it would be preposterous to claim that some set of emotions,
characteristic of the entire human race, is somehow bad.
So the question is the wrong question when you ask is anger good or bad.
The right question is, what is it one should be disposed to be angry toward?
That is, what should be your inclination or disposition toward anger?
To become angry when one has been treated unjustly is to have a good hexus for anger.
To become angry when virtue triumphs over vice is to have a bad hexus for anger.
Now, of course, Aristotle is going to distinguish between anger and rage.
Rage is a case where an emotion that is otherwise a natural supplement
and complement a human life now becomes such a controlling factor
that there's no possibility for a rational course of action at all.
And this gives us a clue as to what Aristotle takes the virtues to be.
The virtues are invariably the midpoint between two extremes.
The extremes are the extremes of vice.
The virtue is the midpoint between an extreme deficiency and an extreme excess.
What is it that the hero has?
The hero has the virtue of courage.
Now, what is an extreme defect of courage?
Cowardice.
And what is an extreme excess on the continuum on which we find courage?
Heedlessness.
Between the extremes of heedlessness and cowardice is that midpoint,
that golden mean, do you see?
Aristotle's golden mean.
That rock-solid, not rock-solid, because we do vary a bit around the midpoint,
that midpoint, you see that element of proportionality again,
that Pythagorean element, that Hellenic element, nothing to excess.
Maison-Aristan, the middle course is best, do you see?
It shows up in the sculpture.
It shows up in the acropolis itself, in the paintings, in the mathematics,
in the music, in the dance, in the drama.
It's always opposing the excessive.
It's always promoting the reasonable, the harmonic, the mathematically pure.
The goal is a perfectionist goal.
It's getting it right.
And of course we are of several natures, passionate and rational and willful and the like.
It's getting the blend right.
It's being to it that the ordinance of reason is disposatory,
that it controls the passions, it regulates the passions.
Well, it turns out that those who are fit to rule are really those who are fit for friendship.
They're persons of virtue.
They're persons capable of moderation and prudence, the moral virtues in general.
Now, why do we enter into these political societies?
I say we want to get back to the question, all right, we are by nature social animals
whose inclination it is to live in the company of others.
Now, why the polis?
Aristotle makes a quite interesting claim in the politics.
The claim he makes is that in the order of things, the polis precedes the family and the individual.
Now, this sounds almost crazy.
The polis precedes the family and the individual.
How could this possibly be?
Must be a misprint.
Must have been one of those students who wasn't taking very good notes that day,
had too much uzo or retzino, whatever he was drinking at the time.
Well, Aristotle says, I mean, Aristotle's a great biologist.
Obviously, the polis does not precede the family in the sense of family as a breeding pool, do you see?
If all one meant by family is a kind of hereditary relatedness,
then, of course, you have that without any kind of political community at all.
But surely that isn't what one means by family.
If that's what one meant by family, you could never have an adopted son or daughter.
What one means by family is a pattern of obligations and duties,
the obligations that parents have to their children, children have to their parents.
The power to dispose of property, to pass it on through wills,
to accumulate estates, to engage in familial modes of activity in the life.
Now, this all presupposes an essentially political form of life.
Obligations and duties are brought about irreducibly now within the polis.
So to have the family in that developed sense of family, some at least minimal form of...
Now, how about the individual?
Well, what do we mean by the individual?
All we mean by the individual is a body.
Oh, let's even say a living body.
Obviously, you need neither a polis nor a family for that.
All the family members might have died.
But when we start talking about George or Jack or Jane or Mary, what terms do we use?
Well, we say mother, father, brother, sister, son, daughter, cousin, teacher, plumber, philosopher.
But what are these designations?
These designations are the designations that come about within an essentially political community,
identifying certain tasks and responsibilities, obligations, duties and the like, contractual terms,
terms of merit, terms of condemnation and the like.
Again, the individual defining himself, Antigone defining herself as the loving sister of Polynesians,
these identifications of the individual, these things that give the individual a personal identity,
are inextricably bound up with familial and political life.
And absent that familial and political life, you've got that most deplorable form of life represented in Homer,
the life of the heartless, stateless, lawless man.
So Aristotle is recovering again this Homeric sense that a flourishing life presupposes a political form of affiliation,
a rich and familial form of life entered into by those who are prepared to live together at the level of principle,
live together in friendly relationships, and friendly relationships presuppose a commitment to a life of virtue.
Now, virtue itself is what is done by the virtuous person.
And this is, again, an area that sometimes misunderstood in Aristotle. Let me just say it again.
Suppose Jones is in a state of post-hypnotic suggestion and goes over and helps someone who has fallen down to get up.
When Jones is then awakened from hypnotic slumber and asked what he just did, he has no recollection of doing it at all.
We can all agree that it is a nice thing to help someone who has fallen down to get up and regain their balance, right?
But we certainly wouldn't say that the person who provided that help engaged in virtuous behavior,
because the person who provided that help didn't know what he was doing in the first place.
So in order to declare an activity to be a virtuous activity, it has to be done by a certain kind of person.
It has to be done intentionally by someone who is setting out to behave virtuously.
So Aristotle wants to make clear that to identify something as virtuous is already to identify the actor as a certain kind of person.
Virtuous things are done by virtuous people.
Mobs are not virtuous. Mobs are passionate. That's what mob rule is all about.
And mobs can tyrannize over the virtuous, because the tastes of the mob are generally grounded in considerations of pleasure and utility.
Mob rule does not constitute grounds of perfected friendship.
So again we find in Aristotle, although not to the same extent at all that we found in Plato,
a certain suspiciousness about radical forms of democratic rule.
A recognition that it's the Kalloy Kaga Thoy who really have to run the game,
and that perhaps the best mode of political life is some kind of constitutional monarchy,
where the rule of law is disposatory, but where those who are in charge of administering that law are chosen from the best sorts.
And when we do that, then the law will be used in such a way as to realize what is otherwise only potential within us.
And because that kind of lawful life realizes our humanity ever more fully, we are attracted to the rule of law.
We see in the law what Aristotle calls a filicon. We see a friendliness in the law.
The law is like a friend in that what the law seeks to promote in us is what is good for us for our own sake.
And so there's this wonderful symmetry between the grounds of individual friendship,
the grounds of political life, the relationship between the individual and the polis,
and the role of the rule of law in realizing within us what in our best state,
in our best moments under our best set of dispositions we would want for ourselves,
and we would want for those we've befriended.
And that, in any case, is the nature of the relationship between friendship on the one hand
and political affiliation on the other.
And on Aristotle's account, this is something special about us.
The swans and the bees are also social animals, but not in just this sense.
And the question, of course, is whether we are social animals in this sense,
and if we're not what we'd have to do to get there.
Thank you.
applause
