Lecture 15 Rome, the Stoics, and the Rule of Law
The death of Alexander the Great in 323 B.C. removed from Aristotle the protection of
a great, great patron. And it's no surprise that Aristotle left Athens, as was said by
one later commentator, so that, quote, the city would not sin a second time against philosophy.
Now with the removal of Aristotle from the leadership of his own school, the Lyceum,
this following Plato's death and removal from the academy, and with the emergence of
Alexander the Great as a force in the world, a force Hellenizing much of the known world,
Egypt, and as far as India, and up to the Caucasus, the balance of intellectual power became
rather more, more diffuse, and indeed the philosophical needs of this new and imperially
organized world were rather different from those that existed just after the Peloponnesian Wars,
when Socrates and his friends would get together in small groups to figure out just what went wrong.
I want to pick up the story at about 300 B.C. with the emergence of two new schools of philosophy,
one called Stoicism, the father of which is generally taken to be Zeno of Citium,
and Epicureanism, the father and founder of that being Epicurus himself. I'll spend much less time
on Epicureanism. Stoicism, so-called because the teaching was done in the Stoa, a painted
colonnade in the city of Athens, Stoicism borrows from cynicism, from the cynics,
the conviction that the entire point of philosophy is an essentially ethical point. The point of
philosophy is to help us understand our place in the world and to do the right thing in it. So
there's much less interest in Stoicism in what might be called the natural sciences. Nonetheless,
there is a core set of precepts in Stoicism, this school that will go through several stages of
development, early, middle, and late, and at the core is the notion that reality is governed by law,
that all of the physical world is governed by law, and that the human affairs, the affairs of state
and of daily life, must mimic and approximate and be obedient to those same principles of lawfulness.
I say this is central to Stoic thought, and so the question arises, well, are the Stoics then
materialists? The Epicureans famously are materialists. Epicurus' psychology is an unswerving,
biological psychology. Everything about life and mind is finally to be understood in terms of basic
material processes. Now, Stoicism differs from that, and the question is whether it's a difference in
degree or a difference in kind, and the answer to that is going to depend on just which Stoic
philosopher one is reading, whether it's Zeno himself or Chrysippus, later on Seneca, Marcus,
Aurelius. The list of famous Stoic thinkers is a long and extremely influential one. Let me say
just this much, that the Stoic principle of a law-governed cosmos need not collapse into a kind
of what I would call a kind of vulgar materialism, but it certainly matches up with what might be
called a kind of physicalism. That is to say, the Stoics see as the engine of life, a kind of
spiritus fire, a kind of Numa in the ancient sense of breath. That is, there is something capable of
ordering and organizing the physical world, and that something must have enough in common with
what it is that it organizes in order to have influences of that kind. So no, we don't want to
say Stoicism is materialistic, it's not just Epicureanism by another name, but we do want to
say that it will always render itself compatible with what might be called the nomological
dimensions of the scientific worldview. Now, what has real existence for the Stoic then is a body,
some kind of body. The Stoics are not big on what they would take to be superstitious or mystical
notions of reality. But body, of course, can manifest itself in extremely rarefied fashions,
I say, in the form of fire or spirit or some animating principle. And so the question then
becomes how we match up this world of bodies with ethics, with a rule of life, with a rule of law.
Is justice a body? Are moral precepts bodies on the Stoic account? Well, of course, justice and
moral precepts and ethical teaching all have influences on our conduct, which is to say these
are entities, these are items, these are notions that do influence bodies, they influence behavior,
they influence the entire operations of government. So there is a reality, there is a moral objectivity
in Stoic teaching. Morals are not simply customary practices, they have real being and they have a
real force in the world. But of course, for them to have a real force in the world, they must be
able to make appeals to entities capable of responding to this kind of influence and force.
Now if we examine the essential nature of law or morals, we discover that the essential nature of
it is rational and that the expression of it is linguistic. And this leads the Stoics to a rather
interesting conclusion and a conclusion that I would regard as quite original. There is only one
creature that has language and therefore there is only one creature that can deal with the sorts of
abstractions that are central to the rule of law and central to an ethical life and that is a human
creature. On the Stoic account and perhaps for the first time in any systematic philosophy, mankind
is removed from the balance of the order of nature. He is viewed as occupying a precious and separate
house, a separate oikos. It's the linguistic community that is able to participate in moral life,
that is able to participate in civic and political life. And all other forms of life are left outside
in that regard. Now this will have very interesting consequences. One of the consequences is that
the Stoics will come to conclude that in virtue of that very special ability, very special indulgences
become available to creatures possessed of that kind of power. One answer to the question, who is
it that invented or discovered the notion of natural rights, I think quite correctly would be, well,
the Stoics did. In fact, I might share an amusing story with you in this regard. The fine,
classic scholar Richard Surabji, who has done a good book, a quite interesting book on animal minds
and human reason, develops this aspect of Stoic thought and reaches the conclusion that indeed it
is Stoic philosophy that begins to talk about rights in the sense of something in hearing in
beings of a certain kind. I do recall the first time I heard Professor Surabji on this subject. He
was giving the Gaysford lecture at Oxford. And if I recall, he began the lecture by reminding the
audience of the bicentennial celebrations in Paris when the French were celebrating the Great
French Revolution and the rights of man and all of that. And this was in 1989, 200 years after
1789. And the heads of the European countries were also meeting in Paris at that time. And Mrs.
Thatcher got off the plane at the Paris airport and was asked by the press to comment on this great
bicentennial celebration and the French discovery of natural human rights and so forth. And Mrs.
Thatcher, in her inimitable fashion, was heard to say that as far as she could tell, the French
really didn't have anything to do with this at all, that it all began with Bad King John and
Magna Cotta. And before King John, she said as she strolled away the Greeks. Well, Professor Surabji,
I guess, got so interested in that comment that he says that he called Mrs. Thatcher's press
secretary to find out just which Greeks she had in mind. And quite interestingly was told that
well, she had the Stoics in mind. And I gather that a number of Mrs. Thatcher's quite offhand
remarks were really based on fairly careful research by her staff. And in this one, if indeed
she did have the Stoics in mind, I think we can say she got it right. Now, let me say just this
about natural rights. We're going to be getting to this issue from time to time in the course of
lectures. Jeremy Bentham, a great, great friend of the whole world of rights and justice and so
forth nonetheless would characterize natural rights as quote, nonsense on stilts, close quote.
And for Bentham to say something like that, I think we have to understand what one means by the
notion of natural rights. Natural rights as distinct from something a political community or a
legislative body or a constitutional document happens to make available, that is something that
could be revoked or revised in law, do you say, or withheld or withheld for cause. Natural rights
refer to a possession of rights by nature. That is, in the very nature of the being, there is
something so special about that entity that it bears rights. It becomes a rights bearing thing in
virtue of its very nature. Now, this was something Bentham thought perhaps really was nonsense on
stilts. We will consider this in later lectures. But the Stoics did have that sense that there is
something about the rational power of humanity. There is something about the rational and especially
the linguistic power that we have, this power of abstraction, this power of comprehension at the
level of language that that gives us certain liberties that otherwise would not be available to
any other kind of creature. It is in virtue of having these talents, these powers and faculties
that we can be dealt with. We can be dealt with according to good and defensible reasons. Actions
taught us now bear the burden of justification. We always have the right to ask why someone or
some government and the like is taking a particular course of action. Now, I don't want to make the
Stoics into late 18th century representatives in colonial America of meeting in Philadelphia to
hammer things out. Not at all. They are citizens of an imperial world. What increasingly will
become a world of Roman imperialism. And they are not sitting around anticipating Tom Paine on the
rights of man. But they are recognizing that the rule of law is quite different from a tyrannical
rule. That the rule of law is a rational order, accessible to rational beings. And that what the
law imposes is something that a rational being will find justifiable by taking counsel with his
own rational resources. This is a very important development in the conception of the individual
person, the conception of what civic life is, is all about. It's only by language that one
actually qualifies for membership within a moral order. Now, the moral order itself, like the
cosmic order, is an expression of what in the Stoic doctrine is referred to as the Lagos. And as I
said in an earlier lecture, Lagos has a variety of meanings in Greek. It can mean the word. It can
mean some sort of rational precept. It can be an overarching principle. And in Stoic teaching,
it's all of these things. And it is in virtue of the Lagos that we as rational beings come to
comprehend the cosmic order of things and become capable of legislating for ourselves. But suppose,
as is usually the case, we find fellow citizens deviating from the rule of law and from the
rational order. Now on the Stoic account, this isn't simply a violation of statute. This is the
essence of the unnatural. Insanity is a departure from one's nature. It would be like planets no
longer being in their orbits. Indeed, anything that defies the rule of reason is outside the order
of nature. It's a challenge and threat to the natural realm itself. Now, what is it in human
life that most characteristically defies the Council of Reason? Aha, emotion, of course, the
passions, anger, anything in which we have so vested an emotional interest that we will do things in
behalf of that, no matter what the Councils of Reason might recommend. So with Stoic teaching,
a great stress is laid to what the Stoics refer to as apothea. And the English word apathy doesn't
quite capture the meaning of apothea. To say, as we do in English, that someone is apathetic usually
means that somebody really doesn't care about anything at all as a kind of almost a moroseness,
a kind of lazy mind. Don't be so apathetic. Apothea is really an active principle. It is a
systematic and disciplined commitment not to invest such importance in things at the emotional level
as to deviate from the rule of reason. It is to deny oneself, as it were, the luxury of
undisciplined passions and emotions. It is the mark of the rational being. It's the mark of just
that being admitted into the moral order that he is never controlled by his passions, but is always
in the thrall, as it were, of his own rational and justificatory thought. There are so many
exemplars of the sort of the Stoic approach to life. Musius Skybola is one who very often comes
to mind when I think about the effect of Stoic teaching and the Stoic worldview on the conduct
of valiant people. Musius Skybola was the emissary sent to the tent of the king of the Etruscans.
This is on the eve of a potential war anyway between the Romans and the Etruscans. The Etruscans,
I think, had the view that Rome did not have much staying power. It was a fairly effete society.
It was very big on luxury and self-indulgence and the like. If you hit them hard and hit them
often and hit them long, they would fold, that sort of thing. Off goes Musius Skybola to engage
in relevant treaty-type colloquies with the king of the Etruscans. He is told in a rather casual
and dismissive way by the representatives of the king that the king is sort of engaged. You
can just wait. It is said that at this point Musius Skybola walked over to an oil lamp and put
his arm in it. As the smell of his burning flesh filled the tent, he said that the emissary from
Rome shall wait for the king of the Etruscans until the king of the Etruscans makes himself
available. Now, this is probably at least partly apocryphal, but it does capture something about
stoic resolve. Less apocryphally is the summons of Epictetus as he counsels one in the throes of
great melancholy and sadness when Epictetus says, never say of anything that I've lost it, only
that I've given it back. This is the essence of the stoic worldview. There is an order and a
rational plan to things. Nothing happens without a cause. Everything is an expression of the
overarching logos. There's never any reason to become that maudlin, that melancholy, that depressed.
There's never a reason to jack oneself up to levels of enthusiasm that are almost paralyzing in
their intensity. Understand your place and part in the great scheme of things. Your place and part
is a place and part first within the family, then within the civic community. And the civic
community is part of a larger community. And the ultimate moral community is the community of
language using, reasoning, justifying, linguistic beings who now occupy this common house, this
common oikos, and carry with them certain inborn natural dispositions and powers that qualify
them not only for life under the rule of law, but the solicitude of law, and all the benefits
conferred thereby. So this is an important development. And in fact, it's the kind of
development that's really just right for the emerging world of Rome. Rome, as you know,
is going to administer the world by the time the forces of the Alexandrian remaining armies are
defeated at Artemisium. The game is over. Rome is in charge. And for the next half millennium,
everything of consequence that takes place in what we are pleased to call Western civilization is
going to be indebted to or in response to Rome, Roman law, Roman legions. And stoicism, it's hard
to find a philosophy more at one with the political realities of the world in which this
philosophy is being taught than stoicism and the Roman world. Even one of the stoic's keenest
critics, Cicero, a philosophically eclectic person, but even Cicero, when he finally starts writing
on laws and when he finally starts writing on the gods, incorporates so much that is central to
stoic teaching that for all practical purposes, he qualifies as a reluctant stoic in his own
right. Now, on the question of good and evil, the stoics again are exemplary of a form of
rationalism that resists supernatural and mystical explanations. What we really mean by evil is a
departure from the natural. A man is evil to the extent that he conducts himself in a way that's
unnatural vis-a-vis his essential nature. Irrationality is an evil. Christians are going to
incorporate this sort of thing into conceptions of sin and conceptions of sin and redemption. But
the stoics are not approaching this with a religious perspective. They're approaching it with a
cosmological and ethical perspective that is no less deep for being, shall I say, not irreligious,
but unreligious. The stoics do see in the Lagos evidence of some supervening rational principle.
And in fact, this is a ball that can be carried very much in the direction of a monotheistic view.
But that's not what stoic teaching is all about. Stoic teaching is all about the rational order,
the rule of law, the responsibility of each person to act in a manner that's consistent and
compatible with his essential nature. Now, there are several departures from stoicism that the
Epicureans will feature. And some of these are quite famous. And I do want to add a word or two
about the much-maligned and often libeled Epicureans. Eat, drink, and be merry. For tomorrow you
shall die as the famous Epicurean maxim. And of course, the picture you get is of somebody
like Nero sitting back half nude, drinking too much, having grapes peeled for him by servants
with all sorts of dancing girls and weird colored lights and acid rock music and all that. And
that must be the essence and spirit of Epicureanism. Not a bit. The teachings of Epicurus are
extremely conservative at the level of individual behavior and social life. One of the principal
differences between the Epicurean and stoic system is that the stoic requires us to enter
the political world and participate fully in the affairs of the polis, to be law givers,
to be good lawyers, to be citizens of a world that's ruled by law, and to extend the operation
of the logos far and wide. The Epicurean scheme is one that has us remove ourselves from the
welter and the hurly-burly of daily life. The whole point of Epicureanism is to reduce
the likelihood of pain and suffering, to defer death as long as one can, to act in such a
way that the likelihood of loss is diminished. And pleasure turns out to be a kind of understood
in almost negative terms. Pleasure is the absence of pain. So what you do is you get
yourself out of the city. The stoic position on friendship, well, of course, friendship
is going to be central to the stoic conception of civic life. What's the Epicurean position
on friendship? Look, you never know when you're going to need them, so you better have some
friends around. But again, it's a kind of self-defense. It's a protection against the
slings and arrows of outrageous fortune. The Epicurean would be the last one, I should
think, to argue that you should eat, drink, and be merry for tomorrow you're going to
die because to eat, drink, and be merry and be so fearful of tomorrow's death is already
to be overcome by emotional states that are the cause of unhappiness and distress and
melancholy. Quite the contrary. Don't do anything to excess. Don't need anything so much that
its absence will constitute pain and suffering. The Epicurean teaching here and the stoic
notion of apothea are very close to each other, and both are extremely conservative.
The Epicurean scheme, of course, is generally quite explicitly materialistic in ways that
stoic teaching is not explicitly materialistic. This, of course, has important consequences,
I should say, at the level of detail. But if the question is what form of life would
you be living such that I would know you were an Epicurean versus what form of life would
you be living such that I know you are a disciple of stoic teaching, the chances are
the best discriminant that I would have would be in terms of where you were living. It would
be in terms of how you were earning your living. I'd be inclined to regard someone of the right
class, the right breeding, the right education, but nonetheless, outside the city, living
on some rather private estate, visited by a small group of friends, engaged in a sober
and decent form of life as one who would be quite at home with the teachings of Epicurus
if not an out-and-out Epicurean. If, on the other hand, I saw that you were serving in
the Roman Senate, that you were giving great, great speeches on how the laws should be modified
in such a way as to promote greater justice, if I saw that you had a kind of stolid resolve
in your commitment to the right course of action, if you looked to me like any number
of those busts of Roman senators in marble with that almost Leonardo Delphic smile, but
at the same time a kind of confident erect and sober bearing, I would say, aha, this
is someone who has been brought up properly. Now, if, on the other hand, I saw you bent
over in the throes of an alcoholic psychosis and mumbling, you know, raise the music, and
so I would conclude that you were lost both to Epicureanism and Stoicism, and that in
fact on both accounts you would be a being that is entirely unnatural, human in appearance
only, but one who had self-exiled himself from that oikos in which we find rights-bearing
citizens of a world fit for the rule of law, something that in fact in Roman law would
have been called a furiosus or a fanaticus, one who was non-composmentus, one who in
fact was a lunatic, a human being in shape and appearance only. Now, what shall we say
about the fate of Aristotle and Plato as these Stoic and Epicurean schools take over?
Well, Aristotle and Plato are being assimilated. They're going to be assimilated throughout
the balance of the history of ideas. They're going to be systematically misunderstood by
those who want to use the authority of an older and classical philosophy to promote a
newer and perhaps what's viewed to be a more promising philosophy. Certainly, Aristotle
and Plato have a very strong influence on Stoic thought. Aristotle and Plato both give
pride of place to rationality, to the rule of reason over passion. Aristotle himself
in his political science and comparative politics and analysis of constitutions is constantly
laboring to determine what the right rule of law shall be. Plato's Republic famously is a place
in which reason has dispositive power, in which the law is the last word, in which the guardians
have stripped themselves of any desire to feed the day-to-day needs of the body and the like.
They've given up the life of envy and acquisitiveness and all that. They don't even have private ownership
of their own children, so to speak. The guardians are there protecting the state with a kind of
apathair in regard to what drives most members of the mob, but never the guardian himself. So,
I say there are many, many residual influences of Platonic and Aristotelian philosophy in both
Stoicism and Epicureanism. And indeed, whenever the Stoic or Epicurean is asked to justify a
particular precept or to refer to some authority that might vindicate an otherwise odd view,
it will always be to Plato or to Aristotle that the later commentator will turn referring to
this earlier philosophy as well-known for its coherence and its authority.
Lastly, was Rome brought up by Stoic philosophers? Well, Rome educated itself through the good
works of Greek teachers. More than one ancient Roman would say that Rome itself was a Greek city.
The language of the intellectuals of the city of Rome was generally the Greek language. Whenever
they were doing philosophy, they would be doing philosophy in Greek. Their architectural forms,
their forms of sculpture are transparently Hellenic and Hellenistic in inspiration. Note,
however, that when things would get hot, it would not be long before the leaders of Roman society
would decide that much of the trouble was caused by these Greek philosophers. And on two separate
occasions, the philosophical teachers from the Greek-speaking world would be thrown out of the
city of Rome. So I don't want to suggest that the essential character of Roman life was philosophical
because of the strong influence of the Stoics. Let's just say that the strong influence of the
Stoics provided an intellectual foundation and justification for a culture that would become
distinctly Roman in a unique way, a distinctly Stoical kind of culture without treating philosophy
as anything other than a means of refinement, the sort of thing good families have their children
learn. We don't see in this Roman world that devotion to philosophy, that authentic devotion
to philosophy, that will flower that had flowered in Athens. We see now philosophy as a subject to
be learned, a guide to life, part of the overall discipline of mind and body. Christianity is on
the way, Rome hasn't fallen yet, philosophy is still the great illuminating influence in the
world of politics, but troubled waters are not far away.
