Lecture 16, The Stoic Bridge to Christianity
Philo of Alexandria was born in 20 BC, or thereabouts, and died in 50 AD.
So his period covers the life of Jesus Christ.
He's an interesting figure.
Philo of Alexandria.
He's a Jew. He has a Greek name.
He is part of the world of Hellenized Judaism.
He has studied philosophy, studied Aristotle and Plato,
and of course he is a faithful student of the Old Testament.
And in his writings we find him systematically integrating the thought of the great Greek philosophers
and the scriptural truths that are contained in the Old Testament.
Christianity is not merely a development out of Judaism.
The early Jewish Christians did not regard themselves as less Jewish.
Rather we find in the early Jewish Christians the breakup of thought into sects,
not unlike the kind of breaking up that we will see in the philosophy of the West.
Now what does it mean to be a Hellenized Jew at the time of the life of Jesus Christ?
It means to be a scholar.
It means that you are someone who has perhaps gone to Athens.
In many instances you are someone who has gone to Athens.
This is still the point on every scholar's itinerary, do you see?
You've got to get to Athens.
And you get to Athens not merely to see the statues and breathe the vapors
and pick up the resonances of that bygone time,
but the schools of Athens are still the best schools around.
Alexandria has a great library, but it's essentially a scholarly activity that's going there.
Philosophical originality, dispute, debate, and the like.
All that's alive in Athens at the time.
Now when the early Jewish Christians begin the formation of what will come to be called Christianity,
they are making an appeal.
Paul is going to make an appeal to people in the known world.
He's going to be going from jurisdiction to jurisdiction.
He's going to be consulting people whose practices vary widely,
whose own native ideas and theological convictions are of a sort that one would never find in Athens or in Rome,
or for that matter in Alexandria itself.
One of the characteristics of early Christian teaching is this transparent desire
to establish the articles of faith as it were, the teachings of the true religion,
on a foundation that is intellectually satisfying, intellectually rich, intellectually convincing.
Now I don't want to suggest that this is a kind of propagandistic ploy.
I don't mean that at all.
I'm saying that the early fathers of the church are going to have to reconcile the teachings of the church,
the message that is contained in the life of Christ himself,
with a philosophy that is regarded as one of the great, great productions of the human imagination.
There can't be such tremendous variance between the lessons of faith and the lessons of philosophy
that no grounds of compassion.
So there is much intellectual energy being devoted to having the philosophical light brought to bear on the authority of faith.
And given the historical period in which these developments are taking place,
it's not surprising that it's going to be Stoic philosophy that provides something of a bridge to the central tenets of Christian teaching.
So let me begin this lecture by outlining some of the features of Stoicism,
recalling some of the features of Stoicism, as these might be promulgated at the time of the Jewish Christians,
as these might be incorporated into the writings of Philo and others seeing a mission similar to the one Philo had set for himself.
You'll see obvious points of compatibility, but you'll also notice problem areas that have to be dealt with.
First, for the Stoics, what might be called the God of the Stoics, this is not a personal bearded entity, of course,
but the God, the divine principle within Stoicism, is one that is immortal and, of course, rational.
That is, the defining feature of the creative power of the universe is its inexhaustibility and its rationality.
Stoicism offers the obvious proofs for this, consider only the lawfulness of the cosmos itself.
Knowledge of this God on Stoic teaching, particularly later Stoic teaching,
knowledge of this kind of divine influence is one of the very preconceptions that a rational being has.
This is a very important point.
Stoicism here, at least later Stoicism, is granting us the intuitive resources to recognize,
recall Aristotle's claim, if the art of shipbuilding were in the wood, we'd have ships by nature,
but what the Stoics are getting at with this notion of a concept of the divine being part of our very intuitive resources
is that a rational being, recognizing the orderliness and lawfulness of the cosmos,
must match that up without further deliberation with the notion of some rational agency behind it,
recognizing that you don't get something like this accidentally.
So it's a kind of built-in conception for the ordinary recipient who is already and also a rational being
to take one look at the world around him and to recognize this just didn't come from nothing.
So again, you can consult the intuitive resources of your own rationality.
Now, I don't want to suggest that what the Stoics are urging here is truth by faith,
but I do want to suggest that in this aspect of Stoic teaching, we do have philosophical authority for the view
that certain ultimate truths are actually part of the intuitive resources of our very rationality.
For the cosmos to remain lawfully ordered, there must be the constant participation of the logos itself, do you see?
So there is an immediate presence of this divine agency in the cosmos, which is to say that the God of the Stoics,
and I always want to put that in quotation marks, that the God of the Stoics is not remote from the happenings of the world,
but is present in the happenings of the cosmos.
The events of the world, the events of the physical and natural world are dynamic, and these must record, again,
the constant participation of the divine fire, the numer, the logos, the creative force.
The God of the Stoics is also, and here the quotation marks are very, very vivid,
the God of the Stoics is also material in that very iffy materiality of Stoicism itself,
not some Olympian that has i-corps running in its veins,
material in the sense of something that can order material things,
that actually can influence that which has mass and bulk and extension and position and duration.
So is it a numer? Is it a logos? Is it a creative fire?
Well, this is going to depend on the particular Stoic philosopher whose text is being consulted,
but nonetheless the physical world, and us within the physical world, becomes subject to forces,
that indeed are divine in that Stoic sense of ultimate forces,
and for us to be thus influenced, and for the world to be thus influenced,
this ultimate force must have a kind of Stoic materiality. Let me just leave it at that.
Now, if you put these notions together, you get rather close to the possibility of a physically present and knowable God.
That is, you get something not unlike the God of the Hebrews.
The God of the Hebrews having a rational plan and order of things,
being present in the world, revealing himself through his works,
and working on the matter, on the physics of reality in a divine way to realize divine purposes.
Now, both Jew and Christian, and Jewish Christians,
obviously deny the materiality of God as a divinity of Olympian proportions,
as something that you can shake hands with and photograph and the like.
So here we have a bind of sorts.
We've got a Stoic philosophical authority for a rational plan, some sort of rational planner,
but not bearded, something that is active and present in the world,
something that makes the world conform to the scheme,
but at the same time, not something with moving parts,
certainly not the kind of material entity that the Epicureans would settle for.
So how are we going to handle this?
And I think one of the, I don't want to call it a compromise solution,
but the notion of God allowing his only begotten Son to become incarnated in the form of a human being,
and to bring certain lessons and messages and examples to bear on a distracted human race
for the purpose of redeeming that human race, that fallen race.
Well, here you have, I say I don't want to call it a compromise solution,
but here is God made man, which is to say the immaterial incarnating itself materially
in order to realize what an Stoic account to realize or further or guarantee
what an Stoic account might be regarded as the Lagos.
Now, how does on the Stoic account, how does the creative fire and the like order and organize things?
It does so nomologically.
That is to say, the manner in which the cosmos obeys the precepts that are central to Stoicism
is by law, by natural law, by physical law.
Things behave the way they do because they are regulated by nomic principles.
Namos in the Greek is law.
Well, this aspect of Stoic teaching, for goodness sake, matches up perfectly with the Decalogue.
How are we to understand what God expects of us?
Consult the Ten Commandments.
These come directly from God.
What are these commandments?
These are laws of life.
And what is it that we can tell the minute we begin to consult these commandments?
Well, first of all, they call for respect.
They call for the recognition that reality is a created reality, that it is an ordered affair
that represents the perfected nature of whatever creative energy brought it about.
This calls for reverence.
You don't place anything higher in the scale of value than what has brought everything about.
First, I am the Lord thy God.
The monotheistic rendering of this is reverential.
It doesn't just give pride of place to Zeus.
He's the topmost God of the Olympians.
This is the origin, the plan, the intelligence, the logos behind all that there is.
And nothing can compare with it in perfection.
And nothing can compare with it in the burden it imposes on us for faithfulness and devotion
and a reverential respect and indeed love itself.
Now, why would such an entity do all this?
This is something Stoicism, at least early and middle Stoicism, tends to leave unanswered
and which the Jewish Christians will answer.
You don't bring all this about for no reason at all.
You don't order the universe.
You don't impose lawfulness on the affairs of matter.
You don't give it shape and form.
You don't give it function.
You don't undertake the construction of everything there is according to a schematic
and perfected understanding of all possibilities and then the choice of those that are most apt.
Unless what?
Unless you have an interest in this.
So this isn't something, this isn't some Aristotle-like rational precept of some place,
the invisible architect of ships, you know, this sort of disembodied noose.
This isn't the God of the Stoics.
This is the God of the Hebrews.
This is a providential God who takes an interest in his creation and takes a particular interest
in that part of the creation that most reflects his goodness and perfection,
that part of his creation that is, although fallen, in some sense, perfectable.
This is the God of the Jews.
It's the God of Islam.
It's the God of the Christians.
It isn't an outgrowth of Greek thought, but it is something that scholars will attempt
to render compatible with the best and most authoritative of Greek thought.
Now, this, of course, raises any number of questions.
You now have, well, a providential God, a God that takes an interest in us.
How distant this is from Olympianism.
I mean, Zeus is counseling his fellow Olympians to spend far less time and energy
and solicitude on human affairs.
Why do you even bother with those characters?
This is a God, a providential God who wants what is good for us for our sake.
What does that sound like?
This is a God that has befriended us and has befriended us for the very best of reasons.
He's our Father.
Now, something grows out of that notion that lends itself sometimes to the most mawkish characterizations.
There are days of the week.
I must own up to this, and I do so with a certain degree of measured shame,
where the very phrase universal brotherhood has me looking for the exit signs.
I mean, it really depends on when it's said, by whom it's said, and in just what tone of voice.
It is one of the most summoning ideas imaginable, but like most things that are reduced in value by inflation,
it has been talked about so much, I would say universal brotherhood and family values are now almost neck and neck
on the list of things we should probably say less frequently and perform more reliably.
Now, let's go back to the original notion of it.
The original notion of a shared brotherhood is the stoic notion of our occupying a common oikos in virtue of the fact that we are rational language-using entities.
So, so much for that.
This is, there is that one common feature, that one common element in our humanity that separates us from the balance of creation.
Where the ones who talk?
Well, this can either be a source of kind of puffed up pride, look here, universe, where the ones who talk and you don't,
or it can be parlayed into something quite consequential.
Now, the stoics do parlay it into something quite consequential, particularly in the domain I would refer to as the juridical domain,
the domain of justice and law and justification and reasons for action, the plan of society.
But when you add to this a providential God that has endowed us with these abilities,
that has created a world that is right for us, for our good, so that we might conduct ourselves in this world in such a way
as to earn the eternal presence of God for all time.
Well, this is something that the stoics don't have contained in their philosophy.
This is something that is present in forms of Judaism, particularly the forms of Judaism espoused by the Jewish Christians.
And of course, it's going to be a central and a doctrinal teaching of the Christian church.
Well, well, we now have a providential God who is our father and this gives universal brotherhood a new meaning.
It doesn't matter whether you come from Assyria or Corinth or Egypt or Athens or Rome,
whether you're a sailor or a shoemaker or a candlestick maker or a king, you have this common heritage.
And so there is a basic egalitarian precept now that becomes part of the official teaching.
No one is morally superior to anyone else, whatever their socioeconomic status might be.
This has what must have been an extraordinary effect on countless people who had been oppressed and controlled and dismissed
owing to their birth, their language, their socioeconomic status, their skills, their position in the world.
Here's a message that says none of that counts for anything fundamentally because fundamentally you all come from the same shop.
You are children of a providential God who has created the cosmos and it is good and the book tells you that it is good,
has created an ordered and reasonable cosmos fit to be the home for that ordered and reasonable language using creature
that reflects in its rationality nothing less than the image of God himself.
Well, I think we've come quite a distance in the history of ideas from certainly from anything Homer had in mind.
And surely I think we've come quite a distance even from what late at night Plato had in mind.
Now famously the early Christian fathers are neoplatonists and they're going to rely quite heavily on Plato's teaching.
But this is not something that you can extract from Plato's dialogues.
I mean, you can see intimations of this, but you don't see rich anticipations of a view of this kind.
Oh dear me, well, one problem solved, ten problems created.
Here's a providential God that really has our interests in mind.
How come we are so nasty?
How come we go about killing each other and why do babies die of cancer?
What are we to say about the problem of evil in the world?
Why do things usually not work with all this rationality?
How come Rome is falling?
Et cetera, et cetera.
I mean, if the whole scheme is a scheme put together by this great, great logic entity,
this ultra-rational spiritist being and put together for us and we bear the mark of this maker.
In fact, the mark of the maker can be seen in all of his works,
but the very image of the maker is seen in this particular work called man,
because we are rational and because we have the capacity for abstract thought and life.
Well, how come things are in the state they're in?
And one of the problems that Christianity is going to have to deal with,
deals with it to this day, is the problem of evil.
How are we to understand evil?
Here's another problem.
You now have not only a providential divinity that contains all creative power within itself,
but by its very nature then this is an omniscient and an omnipotent entity.
Meaning we've got a God, a personally knowable God,
that could have had things any way he wanted to have things,
and indeed whose will is unopposable.
Well, that must mean then that my fate is determined.
God certainly knows everything I'm going to do with my life,
and if God knows everything I'm going to do with my life,
it must be because the script of my life was written not only from a time out of memory,
but out of time itself.
Now, how is this going to be?
Is this just an echo of the ancient Greek sense of the fates of Moira and Lechises and so forth?
Do we have a fatalistic doctrine here being spawned by a religion
that is supposed to be a religion of joy and happiness and optimism and the like?
So I say this is another problem that's going to have to be dealt with.
If you buy into Stoicism too much, you have a rational order that is so inflexible,
that everything is determined by it.
You have a determinate universe, and of course the question that immediately arises
is the extent to which we can enjoy anything like moral freedom in a world, in a cosmos,
in which everything that happens could not be otherwise.
Now, the Stoics were not deterministic in their psychology, not to that extent.
After all, Stoicism is essentially an ethical philosophy.
And Stoicism grants us not only the power of reason, but unfortunately the power to defy reason.
And the question then is why would an omniscient, omnipotent, and providential God constitute us in such a way
that we could defy reason?
So here there's going to be quite, quite, quite a problem to deal with.
What about Apothea?
What will early Christianity do with that aspect of Stoic teaching?
Epictetus, never say of anything I've lost it, only that I've given it back.
Marcus Aurelius, an emperor.
If you ever wanted a philosopher king, Marcus Aurelius is your man, isn't he?
He's one of the great Stoic philosophers, and he's an emperor.
And it's with some reluctance that he has executed and sacrificed all those Christians.
I mean, it really is with some reluctance that this great and good and stoically imbued emperor,
whose meditations are quite, quite moving document, nonetheless finds in the great, great order of things
a need to put out of life those who are the causes.
Do you see, if you're a Stoic to the quick, that doesn't inevitably make you apathetic in the face of disorder.
You become quite active in the face of disorder, and Marcus Aurelius, though benign in so many ways,
shows us that Stoic resolve can lead to quite dastardly deeds in the name of law.
Anything in the name of law and order.
Well, I say what's going to be the fate of apathaya as the Judeo-Christian and then Christian world
incorporate and promulgate philosophical teachings.
Well, apathaya becomes a way of reconciling oneself, and reconciling oneself to what?
Well, it's reconciling oneself not to the, the nomological framework of a rationally ordered universe.
It's reconciling oneself to the will of God.
It's reconciling oneself to the fact that the will of God ultimately is the cause of all things.
So the Stoic sense of apathaya will ground a certain aspect of Christian teaching,
that aspect of Christian teaching that supplies the Christian with resignation,
with a kind of Stoic courage, with a willingness to die for what he believes in,
a willingness to recognize that the fate of the flesh is quite different from the fate of the soul,
and that the intentions of the creator are realized beyond the pale of earthly existence.
Well, this is a quite cluttered period in the history of ideas.
We've got Greek and Roman influences colliding with already ancient Hebraic teachings.
We have the authority of Scripture trying to get matched up by scholars with the teachings
of those the Christian fathers will refer to as the pagan philosophers of Athens.
We have saintly beings.
We've got deeply religious beings who are openly hostile to the whole program of philosophy itself.
We've got people like Oregon and Tertullian especially taking a look at this slavish attention
to what Plato and Aristotle had to say.
What are you wasting your time on this for?
Take a look at what they made of their own world.
Take a look at their own debaucheries and the like.
And there they are sitting around cross-legged speculating on the cause of all things,
and they don't know anything.
What it takes for one to live the right sort of life is the teachings of Christ,
and you don't need anything else.
These pagans came too early.
They can be forgiven their cosmic ignorances because Christ had not come to redeem them.
But for us it's different.
We need not speculate any longer on the ultimate meaning of things because Jesus has come,
and now we know.
I say there is this kernel of anti-intellectualism in the early church
that is going to have to be dealt with if the church itself, if the faith itself,
is going finally to be erected on broad intellectual, rational, and teachable principles
that will appeal to the thinking parts of the world.
So I say this is a quite cluttered period.
It's a period of Roman hegemony that nonetheless is being erected on a civil world
that is unraveling even as these great emperors and lawyers write and work.
It's the ancient world of the Hebrew, a monotheistic world that turns its back on Rome.
It's a world of Jewish scholarship that finds in Athens an illumination that cannot be found
merely in Scripture, and sects form there, and the scribes and Pharisees have one account
and the orthodoxy another account.
It's a world of Greek philosophical diasporas in which teachers can be found all over the known world.
They've been brought there first by Alexander and now as part of Roman detachments.
It's a world regrouping.
It's becoming a world rather different from the classical world.
Still recognizably classical, but there are changes taking place.
Stoicism provides a bridge from that classical world to the one that will be recognizably Christian.
It does it by its teaching.
It does it by its influence on Rome and Roman administrative law.
It does it by certain philosophical precepts that match up better than others
with what Christians will be taking for granted in the first instance.
So, cluttered it was, and I guess I've presented it to you in a properly cluttered way.
We move on now toward Roman law, which puts order back in the house.
