It's a common place, I mentioned it in the previous lecture, it's a common place to notice
that Rome in its art and architecture and sculpture, its philosophy, many of its dramatic
productions, some of the great epics of the period, well it sort of reheated a Hellenic
and Hellenistic philosophy or art and the like. And it's a common place because indeed
there is so much that is derivative in classical Rome and derivative from older Hellenic and
Hellenistic forms. In fact there's a story and the truth of this can't be vouched for
but that Rome's 12 tables, the famous 12 tables on which were inscribed the laws of Rome were
put together after a Roman detachment had gone to Athens and taken council with Solon
and with some of the great archons of the ancient Greek world. So one might say that
even Roman law, and you'll see the limited sense in which I would be inclined to say
such a thing, that even Roman law has debts to Greek law, to Greek philosophy of law and
the like. The Greeks were an arguing people and they were filling the law courts all the
time and indeed ancient Greek law is itself highly developed. But if you had to pick a
contribution that the Roman world made to civilization and the history of ideas where
not withstanding to the contrary there may be debts of one sort or another to Greece,
that contribution would be Roman law and in its development and its precision and refinement
and promulgation there isn't anything in the ancient world that can hold a candle to it. It is
one of the great cultural achievements of any people and to the extent that all of Western
civilization is centrally indebted to life within the rule of law, this becomes one of the great
contributions to civilization in all its forms and varieties. Not enough can be said in praise of
this Roman contribution to life and to the very possibilities that are created by a rule of law
and absent that rule of law possibilities that never shall be realized. One of the critics of
Stoicism as I mentioned was Cicero. I described Cicero as eclectic in his philosophy and I also
said that eclectic though he was, Cicero was quite at home with Stoic teaching. He's a great figure
in Roman philosophy and in Roman politics and indeed he's one of the great essayists that the
Latin language will ever, will ever host. One of his most influential essays was an essay on the
Laws, De Legibus. And it's in this essay that Cicero comes to grips with the question, well,
what is the essence of law? What forms of law are there? How should the law be understood? What
is it that the law matches up with in us? And in this treatise, Cicero makes a distinction and
an important distinction between law as it operates differently in different jurisdictions, in
different civic communities. After all, rules and laws vary widely throughout the known world in
Cicero's time, going from Carthage to Egypt to Alexandria to Rome to Athens, any number of
statutory variations will be found. And Cicero refers to this as the use, Kivala, the, what,
what we would translate as civil law or civic law or jurisdictional law. He says, yes, this,
this can be found in, in any number of places. So that if you're a Carthaginian in Rome for
the day and you park your chariot in front of the courthouse and the meter expires and you
haven't put enough coins in and you're dragged off to court and you say to the judge, well,
look, I'm a Carthaginian where I come from, you can leave a chariot any way you like. The fact
that you never visited Rome before and that you were not aware of the particular principles and
precepts that guide daily life in Rome would constitute mitigating circumstances. I'm not
quite sure that the fine would be reduced and so forth, but, but at least it would make sense for
the magistrate in this case to say, oh, Carthaginian, and you are a strange people, aren't you? And
you've never been here in Rome before, have you? And, and where you come from, you can leave these
horses anywhere you like. You bring them into your houses and all that. Yes, I see. Well,
all right, just don't do it again. The best bet for you, by the way, is when you're in Rome,
you better do as Romans do. But that, that would be the beginning middle in it. But Cicero observed
something else. He observed that in every known community, there were certain precepts that
were honored. And these precepts were the same anywhere you went. Precepts regarding violent
and lethal assaults on an innocent other. Precepts involving the appropriation of what is
recognized to be the property of another. Precepts regarding what kinds of transactions remain
valid, even in the face of fraud and deception and lies and, and how fraud and deception and lies
can undo negotiations and settled agreements and the like. Now Cicero in this is, is recovering
something that can be found in Aristotle's politics. Aristotle in the politics is concerning
himself among other things with the nature of law. And Aristotle observes that there are
jurisdictional differences when it comes to law. The politics, you know, is a, is a treatise that
ends with that extraordinary definition of law. I mentioned it in an earlier lecture.
Diopera Neworexios Nusonomos Estin. The law is reason without passion, do you say? Disinterested
reason. It's got this essentially rational character to it. Now Aristotle says that, that,
that although there are variations from jurisdiction to jurisdiction in some legal precepts,
principles of equity, he says, core principles of equity are quote universal and are everywhere
the same. Close quote. And here's the trivial pursuits question of the day. When Aristotle sets
out to illustrate the universality of core principles of equity, what does he turn to? He
turns to Antigone standing before Creeon. What is Antigone saying to Creeon? She says, in so many
words, as I indicated in an earlier lecture, she says, look, that a sister will bury the body of
her dead brother. You know, that we're referring here to something universally understood. That
this is something that predates kings. She says, for goodness sake, I would not be embarrassed to
appear before the gods saying I've done this, do you say? The gods themselves. Soto voce, let
alone you, Creeon, you blankety, blank, blank, do you say? So Aristotle turns to Sophocles and he
turns to Antigone just to remind his Greek audience, his Greek students, his Athenian students,
what he means by a universal precept, a universal principle of equity. There are certain notions
of fairness that virtually express our rationality. This is not something that's going to vary from
place to place. That is, find an entity in whom this principle is not operative. And you've got an
entity that might be human in name only, or in face only, or in body only, but utterly lacking in
one of the defining attributes of a human being, namely a rational recognition that certain principles
are disposatory. Cicero gives a label to this. He refers to it as the youth's gentium. This is the
law or the judicial principle of nations, gains, gentes. Gaines is a tribe or a clan or a nation,
as it were. Gentium is the genitive plural. So this is the youth's gentium. How is the youth's
gentium to be understood? Cicero already recognizes that you're not going to be able to explain this
by saying that that tribe A taught it to tribe B, which taught it to tribe C, that it became the
youth's gentium by imitation. Because you will find it in places that have been utterly unaffected by
other places. Cicero's explanation for this is an explanation provided without a label. The label
for it is going to take place in the first and second century AD. But the explanation Cicero
offers for the youth's gentium is that there are these universal precepts. Wherever you find the
rule of law, you find these operating. Because they are expressions of human, they are reflections
of what is essential to a rational being, essentially known by a rational being. By the end of the
first century AD, this will be referred to as the youth's not to Rala, the natural law. And indeed,
Cicero, as with Aristotle before him, is laying, indeed, as with Sophocles before them, and to some
extent, Homer before them, is laying the foundations for one of the most developed theories in philosophy
of law, the theory of natural law. It will, of course, become famously developed and promulgated
by Thomas Aquinas. And to this day, I think there are many, even scholars who believe that
natural law theory is some Roman Catholic invention designed to make the papacy supreme and the
like. And, of course, it's important to remind such people that Aristotle was not a very good
Christian at all, and Sophocles was an even worse Christian, and Homer was probably even worse
than that. And Cicero, as best as we can tell, did eat meat on Friday, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
So that natural law theory is not part of a papal conspiracy. And indeed, it is foundational for
natural law, as understood in the history of law. Now, suppose the Carthaginian comes into Athens,
robs the bank, kills the teller, gets away in a getaway chariot, takes on an assumed name, uses credit
cards and signs the thing Tertullian or Cicero or Salist, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And he
appears before the magistrate and says, well, your honor, I'm from Carthage, and we're a fairly wild
bunch there. And I didn't realize that, you know, in Rome, you're not supposed to cause murder and
mayhem and thievery and the like. Well, now, at that point, the magistrate is likely to say something
like ignoranteal, legis, nem and em, excuse out. Ignorance of the law excuses no one. Now, we
already know that ignorance of the the traffic ordinances constitute grounds of excuse. So what
does the magistrate getting at when he says ignorance of the law excuses no one? Well, he's
getting at a notion of law quite different from what one finds in the mere statutory requirements
of one jurisdiction or another. He's getting at those core precepts that must be understood by any
being who is actually fit for the rule of law. Not to know this much is not even to be a being that
can be absorbed into the rule of law. It is to be an unnatural kind of being unnatural as a human
being. It is to fall outside the boundaries of the use not to rally. It is to be indeed part of no
gains at all because there is a use gentium. And if you were the member of a coherent and continuing
society of rational beings, this is something that you would know. Well, Roman law, administrative
law, Roman law successfully permitted Rome to administer the world, to administer the known
world for centuries and centuries. One of the most poignant documents that antiquity turns up,
at least to these tired eyes, comes about when the Visigoths have sacked Rome and taken it over,
the fifth century, A.D. And one of the first items promulgated by the leaders of the Visigoths is
titled Lex Romana, Visigoth Forum, the Roman law of the Visigoths. Poignant in what way? Look,
here you have Gothic princes, Gothic leaders coming in on horseback, odd customs coming from
remote places. They're coming in and in a manner of speaking, breaking up the China and causing
a general ruckus and so forth. But they understand something fundamentally. It comes very close
to vindicating the notion of a use not to rally. They understand that what made Rome great just was
that institution of law, a set of rational precepts that rendered life predictable, that let people
know what their obligations and duties and rights were, creating the possibility of brokering
disputes, settling disputes without force, without violence, a system that revered the citizen in
the sense of holding that citizen responsible to the law, thus recording the fact that that
citizen is understood to be a rational being, special in the cosmos, occupant of a singularly
unique family, this common oikos conferred by the by the Stoics and establishing the grounds on.
So the Lex Romana Visigoth Forum has just added evidence of the fact that that wherever you were
coming from in the world, you recognized in Rome not only military might, because the the barbarian
hordes, the the the the astragoths, the Visigoths, the vandals and the like, they were able to deal
with Roman legions by the time by the time they were dealing with these Roman legions. The question
arises as to how many Romans were filling out those legions and what those generals really
had their eye on and half of them were willing to come back into Rome and use the same military
force to conquer the city for themselves. So I say Rome as a militarily unopposable force
by the 5th century AD, forget about it, it's it's it's it's readily opposable long before that.
When we say that Rome fell in 476 AD, you know, one wants to smile and say was was that a
Thursday afternoon or a Friday morning, Rome had been falling and getting up and falling again
for for for centuries. Sacked time and again. Constantine in 300 moved move the whole thing
to the east. He centered the capital of the empire in the east. Rome remained the cultural center,
but what was durable in Roman civilization just was the law of Rome. The the administrative machinery
governed by principle, administered by legally trained and sophisticated and subtle minds,
it's worth noting by the way that any number of Roman emperors were lawyers and participated
regularly in the revision and drafting of laws and and an emperor who who who was just too far
outside and understanding of law would have been regarded as bizarre by his contemporaries and dangerous
to boot. So so here's great great staying power and long after the so-called form fall of Rome,
we have the institutes of Justinian. These are being put together in the in the 6th century.
The institutes of Justinian, the emperor Justinian has tribonian and his colleagues reduce to a
convenient formula. The institutes are elements of Roman law to put it in a form where you can
teach Roman law. This is now a greatly extended and variegated empire still committed where
possible to life according to the rule of law. And so the institutes are being put together at the
command of Justinian and and will and will provide the framework for political life
for centuries to come. Now what do we find here? What do we find when we when we consult the
institutes? This is item 1.2. This is after a brief introductory paragraph. This is the first thing
we can we can we confront in the institutes quote. The law of nature is the law instilled by nature
in all creatures. Could stoicism have said it any better? All creatures. The law of nature
is a law instilled by nature in all creatures. It is not merely for mankind, but for all
creatures of the sky, earth and sea. All peoples with laws and customs apply law which is partly
theirs alone and partly shared by all mankind. The law which natural reason makes for all mankind
is called the law of all peoples, the use Gentium. Here we are in the sixth century and it might
just as well have been Cicero who wrote this and if he wrote it and it had been graded by Aristotle,
Aristotle would have given it an A. What is taken for granted is that nature does nothing
without a purpose, that there is an order and reasonableness to it and that human affairs are
to be governed by the same rationality, the same orderliness, the same logos. Now what is meant
in the institutes about nature fitting out all creatures with law? Well you know what's meant
by this. The animal kingdom does instinctually what's required for its own survival and flourishing.
The animal kingdom can't sit back and wait for instruction. You can't have the baby sit back
until it learns that it's very, very important to suck at the breast or you'll start losing weight
and get very sick. No, what the baby does, the baby does instinctually because in this case
fitted out by nature with a rule, a rule that works to the advantage of life and people's also
are fitted out by nature with certain intuitive understandings that turn out to be absolutely
essential to a life that will be a flourishing and coherent and culturally continuing life.
And how does nature do this? By making us aware at the most fundamental and intuitive level
of core precepts of equity as in Antigone's defense and so forth.
So the Eustachendium now is a unifying principle that is capable of smoothing out differences
of culture and custom capable of providing at least the possibility of a shared civic life.
Now, at the risk of being contemporary, I don't know if you'll forgive me when I lapse into
conceding to contemporary issues and the like, that is at the risk of being what in the late 1960s
and 70s students insisted must be relevant. Let me make a few hesitating remarks about multiculturalism
and the use not to rally.
Anyone lecturing at the close of the 20th century has to hesitate when speaking about something
that allegedly is universally distributed throughout the human race. But after all,
what Rome was doing was simply putting on paper what anything fit to be called a human being
understands to be the case. I mean, for goodness sake, had these Romans not traveled much? Well,
you know, here's something to keep in mind. These Romans traveled everywhere. They were up in
Britain. They were doing battle with the Celts, do you see?
They were in the foothills of the Caucasus. They occupied Egypt. They overtook the Greek-speaking
world. They tried to control the ancient Hebrews with mixed results.
If anybody knew about multicultural contexts, it was Rome. Far more than we do, I submit,
because their contact was more regular and more dangerous.
Wouldn't that have been enough to tell these Roman jurists that the whole notion of use
gentium and use not to rally is a miscast notion? It's just bad anthropology. It's just
bad cultural anthropology. Get out there and conduct your polls and samples and sit down with
these people and come to terms with the fact that given their religion and their diet and local
customs and historic practices, well, for goodness sake, they've got a radically different sense of
law than anybody brought up in Rome or Athens is going to have. Well, of course, Cicero's response
to that is, no, they don't. No, they don't. How very, very interesting that although all
sorts of practices vary widely the world over, there are certain core practices that are so
essential to the very possibility of a rule of law that wherever you find beings who qualify as
civilized in the most minimal respect, you find these principles operating.
You know, there is a face of multiculturalism, and I think one always has to be a bit tentative
before adopting isms. There's a side of multiculturalism that really constitutes an
obstacle to toleration and affiliation and friendship. There's a side of multiculturalism
that casts certain people as so fundamentally different from other people that the two can
hardly make sense to each other. This is something Stoicism rejected. It's something Aristotle on
principles of equity rejects. It's something Plato rejects. It's something Homer in his deep
humanity rejects. The sympathy and respect for all the warring parties comes off every line,
comes out of every line and off every page. The ancient world for all its elitism
recognizes a fundamental unifying force according to which we have a shared psychology,
a shared spirituality, a common humanity. What the law in its developed form must appeal to
is that. Now, find a creature that cannot be appealed to at that level, and the best explanation
is not that that creature is the product of a different culture. The best explanation is that
that creature is incomplete in its humanity or defective in its humanity or outside the natural
order of humanity. What kind of creature would that be? It would be one the law would regard as
insane or profoundly retarded or just too young, not yet there, not yet up to it or stuporous
or in a drug induced state or having sustained a traumatic injury that rendered him insensate
or incapable of, but find an adult, mature, healthy human being anywhere and everywhere
in the world. And that human being in virtue of being a rational being will recognize certain
precepts as unchallengeable. The truth of them will be will be evident on their first expression
and were it otherwise, it would be impossible even to engage in trade even to to summon
sufficient credulity to enter into a transaction to believe that the party on the other side
will fulfill the terms of agreement. It would become impossible even to explain why punishment is
being imposed for certain transgressions or why rewards are being given. In order for reward
and punishment and the rule of law to make any sense at all, one must be dealing with someone
who recognizes himself as having certain agentic powers, the ability to do or forbear from doing
certain things and to do or forbear from doing certain things on the basis of a principle
which when asserted might result in a reward and when violated might result in a punishment.
There is no tribe so primitive, no people so backward, no time so remote that the operation
of these principles is not evident on first inspection. Lock centuries later will say that
the mad man reasons rightly from wrong premises and we might say that to that extent they'll always
be a kind of cultural influence on how precepts of law and fundamental concepts of justice operate
in a given place. There might be certain religious premises, for example. There might be premises
that on one cultural view are highly superstitious or mystical and given those premises, however,
the question then becomes are the conclusions that follow logically drawn from those premises?
So I don't want to argue that the cultural variations we observe are merely artificial
entries that obscure what is indeed a homogeneity. No, there is a great heterogeneity from culture
to culture. Rome was persuaded that that heterogeneity did not extend to the level of
rationality itself and therefore that all people, wherever they were from and whatever they believed,
whatever their customary practices were, were fit for the rule of law and could be brought up
to be worthy of the rule of law. After Alaric had sacked the city of Rome, great, great Rome,
and when Alaric sacked a place, it was sacked, mind you. Well, a number of Romans came back
into their defeated city. A number of military chaps came back with their bruises just to see
what was left of the place and how the pieces could be picked up together and put back together and
like. In the 5th century AD, Rutilius Nomathianus came back to his sacked city,
and he would write these lines. He would write these lines about his beloved city,
the city of Rome. Thou hast made of alien realms one fatherland. The lawless found their gain
beneath thy sway. Sharing thy laws with them, thou has subdued. Thou has made a city of the once
wide world. It was the promulgation of Roman law that would make a city of the once wide world
and create a coherent western civilization. Thank you.
