Lecture 18, The Light Within, Augustine's Idea of Human Nature
Well, in the previous lecture, I offered up a pay-in to Roman law and Roman civilization and the civilizing influences of Roman civilization.
But of course, Rome is a human city, and it's not anything like what St. Augustine will have in mind when he discusses the city of God.
Rome was a city that Augustine loved dearly, you know, in his youth. He was quite the bon vivant.
In fact, bon vivant would be a nice way of putting it. He was an absolute rascal, and by his own admission had engaged in just about every imaginable form of debauchery.
And of course, the best place for that sort of thing would be Rome.
I mean, you could hardly have a better time if you were a young and wild type than to be in a place like that.
Needless to say, Augustine sobered up, and as he sobered up, he began to recognize the transitoriness, the ephemeral nature, even of great and the greatest of empires, of merely human creations.
That there has to be more to life's meaning than an attachment to the pleasures of the flesh and the locales in which those pleasures are secured.
By the time of St. Augustine's philosophical flourishing, however, the early fathers of the church and their authority had put something of a stamp of anti-intellectualism on the faith itself.
This was problematical. Augustine, by temperament, by genius, and by historical circumstance, was ideally suited to reassess the place of intellect and the place of philosophy within what he understood to be a life of faith and of devotion.
Now, a few words about the anti-intellectualism. It wasn't no-nothingism, and it wasn't the special pleading of the vulgar against those judged to be their betters.
It was a principled anti-intellectualism in most instances. What would the early Christians see in consulting the greatest teachers of antiquity?
What would the early Christians see in consulting Plato, for example?
Well, he would see in Plato's Republic that the way you get guardians is that you breed them. That mankind divides itself quite significantly into, metaphorically speaking, men of gold, men of silver, men of brass, men of iron.
There's an elitist strain in this. The populace is regarded as a kind of mob that has to be ruled over and very often rolled over.
Just in case births don't present you with desired types, infants have to be put to death. They have to be left out to the elements.
That is, these children of God are entirely expendable if they do not serve the interests of the polis.
Now, that's something an early Christian does find in Plato. It's there. It's not something drummed up. It's there. It's in the Republic, and it's elsewhere.
An elitism, and an elitism that is simply incompatible with the notion of universal brotherhood.
So there's one element that early Christianity finds, and finds that it must resist and oppose, and finds, as a result of that element, that it must be entirely skeptical about the so-called wisdom of the ancients.
Well, suppose our early Christian is consulting Aristotle, which, as it happens, would be rather less likely than consulting Plato.
Well, he's going to find that Aristotle is very much taken by the natural world, by cuttlefish, by the average amount of wheat daily consumed by elephants, by anatomy.
Aristotle is very much concerned with the things of this world. The early Christian is not particularly schooled in Aristotle's metaphysical writings.
He might have some access to Aristotle's naturalistic writings. Certainly, by the second century AD, if he's reading Galen at all, he knows that there's a rich ancient Greek medical and biological science on which Galen's works will depend, if only critically, in places.
But you won't find in Aristotle, the early Christian doesn't find in Aristotle what matches up with the central tenets of faith and devotion, a providential and loving God in whose image we are made, a God that cares for us and is ever present in the affairs of the world.
Is he going to find that at all? So this just turns out to be another pagan irrelevancy.
Now that's Aristotle and Plato. It doesn't get much better than that.
Well, if they're not going to be guides to life for the Christian, then of course the entire experience is just something to be relegated to the school.
And it has been relegated to the schoolroom. Who's running around quoting Aristotle and Plato all over the place as those Romans?
Those a-feet upper-class aristocratic Romans schooling their children by bringing in Greek teachers to teach them philosophy and the fineries of the mind and certain rhetorical skills.
Why? Because most of them are going and end up arguing law cases and otherwise running for office and otherwise impressing each other with this and that, and again, things of this world.
Well, we have nothing to do with that world. That world has turned on us. That world kills people like us for what we believe.
We have fields of martyrs filled by that world with its philosophical, finery and rationality and powerful discernment.
Turn your back on it. Pay no attention to it. It's corrupt and it is corrupting.
Now that's part of the early Christian attitude. It's not all of it, obviously.
And like any summary, there's an element of caricature in it.
But there is this skepticism about philosophy as the right guide.
The Christian believes he has the right guide. He has the life and teachings of Jesus Christ.
That's the right guide. If he's a Jewish Christian, he has something older than that but entirely compatible with that.
He has the Old Testament. He doesn't need a Greek pagan to tell him how to live.
Nor does he need some Greek pagan to tell him why he is a lower class person and will remain so until he learns how to speak Greek well and can recite long passages from Homer.
Now, whatever might be said about the validity of the religious tenets, the validity of the Christian religion,
and that's a subject that I cannot, obviously, I cannot address at all.
I'm in the same position that Herodotus is in when he confronts questions about religion.
I'm in the same position that Parmenides was in. Life's too short.
And the subject is extremely complex.
And how could I possibly say anything about that at all when my eternal soulmate and I have deep and profound conversations over morning coffee and the like every now and then.
She will regale me with a deep, deep metaphysical question and my reply for over 30 years has always been the same.
I usually look up lovingly and I say, Madam, you must understand that with respect to the universe, I only work here.
So I'm not about to analyze the content of Christian or Judaic or Islamic teaching.
But what I will say is that in political and historical terms, the likely success of a faith is greatly reduced when it has an officially anti-intellectual attitude toward the history of ideas
and toward what might be referred to as the House of Intellect itself.
Now, why do I say that?
I say that because a successful religion is a religion that has been promulgated.
And it is promulgated by teaching.
Now, to be promulgated by teaching, including the teaching that comes from the conduct of the good and the wise and the decent themselves.
But to be promulgated by teaching, some appropriate set of signs and symbols, some idiom and vernacular, has to be developed.
I'm inclined to use the high-tech term.
Some sort of algorithm has to be located so that you can get from your set of cultural values, practices, language and the like, translate it into yet another and different set.
This generally requires a considerable degree of abstraction.
It requires the apt and effective use of metaphor and simile and legend and epic and the like.
It's a culturally daunting task.
And it's generally successful when it's undertaken by those who have been schooled.
Schooled in the ways of the world, schooled in the belief of those they might try to persuade to get a different set of beliefs.
And those who have a firm enough and principled enough understanding of what it is they're trying to promulgate,
that they are, by the very nature of the case, may I use the expression, intellectuals.
They may be peasant intellectuals.
They may have no degrees after their name at all.
Much of what they know might be by way of an oral tradition rather than read texts and edited and glossed texts.
But they have become conversant enough with relevant parts of the history of ideas to be able to go into the world and convert.
For all of the anti-intellectualism of some of the early fathers,
it very often takes the form of quite interesting and profound treatises.
That is, to some extent, they are becoming the disease they're trying to cure.
It's very much like anti-aristotelianism, historically.
The best critiques of Aristotle generally begin by presupposing the validity of
Aristotelian modes of argument, discovery, classification, definition, and the like,
so that to reject Aristotelianism usually requires as a preliminary condition, a founding condition,
that you be an Aristotelian, you see that kind of thing.
Well, similarly with anti-intellectualism, Luther, of course, famously is going to say,
you know, Luther, we're not quite to Luther yet, but Luther knows the best way to get things in good shape.
First, he says, you go to every school there is and burn any book that was written by a Greek pagan.
Now, he knows the enemy here.
Well, of course, Luther was extremely knowledgeable in just these books,
which is why he understood their potentially pernicious influence, or their actually pernicious influence.
Only a person of broad learning knows the enemy that well and in that way.
Well, Augustine, of course, is one of the premier figures in the history of Christian thought and Christian teaching.
And one of the missions that he sets for himself is to recover the philosophical wisdom of the ancients
and render it serviceable to the cause, not to turn his back on it, but to filter it,
to examine it carefully and critically, to see what is in it that is redolent of the best teachings of the church
and thus can be used in promulgating the teachings of the church.
Now, in Greek philosophy, man is not categorically outside the order of nature.
Man is by nature a social animal, so are swans and bees.
Aristotle spends much time on transcendental considerations in the metaphysics,
but when we get to Aristotle on the soul, it's a collection of basic,
life-giving, nourishing processes of an essentially biological nature.
Yes, we do have an identifying characteristic.
We've got this epistemonic or rationality, so the balance of creation doesn't have that,
but we can't fly nor do we live underwater.
In fact, Aristotle comes right out and says,
the subject of mankind, what we might call psychology,
would be the most important subject to pursue if man was the best thing in creation,
but he's not, you see.
So Aristotle's feet are on the ground, and he keeps our feet on the ground, too.
That's not the Christian vision.
We are outside the order of nature.
The Stoics began to put us out there, and Jesus, in redeeming us,
makes quite clear that our proper location is in another time, in another place.
In my father's house are many mansions, and it's human beings who occupy these rooms.
The ancient philosophers were notoriously skeptical about knowing the truth once and for all,
any number of places after the decimal.
That is, even in doing battle with skeptical philosophies,
Aristotle and Plato and the others recognize that there are limitations to what we can know.
Aristotle especially says the number of things we can know is limited by the questions that we ask.
Does a thing exist, et cetera, et cetera.
Christianity is the one true religion.
The truths of this religion are indubitable.
They are handed down by God Himself.
Hebrews took exactly the same position.
There are these truths.
They're divinely revealed. They're revealed in the book. They're revealed in Scripture.
We have the authority of the divinity Himself. Ask Moses.
So there's going to be a fundamental incompatibility there
between the inherent skepticism of a philosophical perspective
and the inherent credulity of one who will be faithful.
At some point, you throw up your hands and say,
I accept this as an article of faith.
I cannot prove it, but I believe it.
I believe it because it's so improbable or whatever.
But there must be, as we say, the suspension of reason, the suspension of judgment.
Sacrificing of one's epistemic resources to whatever God will reveal
through some other medium, an intuitive one, a teaching.
As I noted, the ancient schools were elitist.
They were sectarian, as it were.
They're at odds with the universal brotherhood
that is the cornerstone of the teachings of Christ,
the Christ's mission in life, in the human incarnation.
What the Christian knows is that Christ came to redeem all, not some.
What the Christian knows is that the fall of Adam marked everyone.
There is no exempted elite.
Adam's fall, what Dunn will refer to as the dregs of Adam's race.
That's everybody.
That's kings and queens. It's bishops. It's everybody.
And it's surely Greek and Roman aristocrats.
You don't get into heaven by being clever. You don't win at chess.
The journey to heaven is not by way of intellect.
And this is something, again, that Christianity will assert in the face of the unexamined life
that is not worth living and happy as the man who knows the causes of things and so forth.
And again, the pagan philosophers not only failed to redeem the world,
they did a lot to corrupt it.
Now, Augustine, in his treatise on freedom of the will,
has two discussions, both of whom have faith,
worried about what I mentioned was one of the problems bequeathed by stoicism.
You've got a rational principle that is disposatory.
The affairs of the cosmos are law, government, and the like.
What does that do on the matter of human freedom?
Now, when you translate that into Christian teaching, the problem gets ever more severe.
Because in Christian teaching, you now have a providential God in whose image and likeness we are made,
the world is created so that we can thrive and prosper within it,
His only begotten Son is sent here to redeem us so that even the fall of Adam no longer forecloses our options,
where no longer fated to an eternal damnation,
divinity itself has sacrificed itself to remove that blot and blight.
So here you've got a God that takes interest in His creation
and in no greater part of His creation than that which we occupy,
knows everything that's going to happen, and is capable of controlling everything.
Well, how can the will be free?
And here's the problem. If the will isn't free, how can I be held accountable for what I do?
I'm either determined in what I do, which seems to be the requirement,
given that there is an omniscient, omnipotent, and providential God.
Do you see? I'm either determined, in which case I am not fit to be judged,
or I can do whatever I want, in which case God's power is limited.
Can't have it both ways.
Now, once Augustine takes on the task, the intellectual burden of reconciling the teachings of the faith
to the ordinary standards of philosophical analysis and verification and coherence,
he finds himself dealing centrally with a question such as freedom of the will.
The Augustinian solution. Now, these are not entirely successful solutions.
Great philosophical problems don't get solved once and for all in that sense.
But look, let me cast it in contemporary terms.
Smith has to be in Chicago by tomorrow morning.
Smith is now in Washington, D.C., and it's six o'clock at night.
And we have agreed to pick Smith up at the airport tomorrow morning.
We're going to go to O'Hare Airport and pick him up.
It turns out that a terrible snowstorm then takes place.
All the telephone wires are down and everything else.
Smith does everything he can to find some alternate way of transporting himself to Chicago,
and he discovers the trains are still running.
So he gets on the train and he takes the train to Chicago,
and he gets off the train in the morning and who should be standing there, but we are standing there.
And Smith says, how did you know this?
Now, of course, we know exactly what...
If Smith has to be there, we know exactly what Smith has to do.
He finds out that the airplanes have been grounded.
The only other way he can get there in time is by train, and we are there to meet him.
Now, from the fact, I don't want to say we had an infallible omniscient knowledge of what Smith would do.
I'm offering this just as an example and a rather weak and tepid example.
But from the fact that we had a very, very high probability of correctly predicting what Smith would do,
it does not follow that Smith's will was not operative in the circumstance.
So from the fact that God knows in virtue of his omniscience,
everything that we will do, it does not follow that when we do it, we do not do it volitionally.
Here's an example. I've used this before.
I would just like those in the room who are male to raise their hands.
If you just do that, if the men in the room would just raise their hands for a moment.
Would you just raise your hand if you're a man and in the room?
All right. Now, I knew to a moral certainty whose hand would go up and whose hand wouldn't go up.
But it would be odd to say that from the fact that I knew in advance what you would do,
that when you did it, you did not do it freely.
So we don't want to confuse predictability, even perfect predictability, with determinism.
It's entirely possible that a fully predicted event, nonetheless, is freely brought about.
I say this doesn't settle the matter. I mean, the matter obviously gets more complicated
when, in fact, it's the same God who can cause the snowstorm and determine whether trains run.
I say I get preciously close to solving a problem in philosophy of religion,
and this is something I shall not do.
What we see in Augustine, however, on a matter of this kind, is the introduction of a method.
And it's very important to understand that quite apart from what one is prepared to say
about the force or validity of the Augustinian solution to problems of this kind,
there is a method of approach that will become significant in the intellectual history of the church.
And that is an analytical, dialectical approach.
Yes, indeed, Augustine is in the patrimony of Platonic teaching and the Socratic method,
right down to the point of dialogues between disputants.
He is recovering the dialectic as a way of wrestling with the philosophical imponderables,
but now within the context of religious teaching.
So how do we deal with freedom of the will?
The same method is brought to bear on yet another vexing question,
a vexing question of, shall we say, an epistemological nature.
How does one know God?
Christians are running all over the place and they're claiming that the Son of God came and redeemed them.
It was a rather odd form of talk.
The Orthodox Jew would find this every bit as odd as the Roman would.
The Son of God came down to redeem us because of the blah blah.
What kind of talk is that?
How do you know about God?
How do you know about anything?
On the Stoic account and the Epicurean account, knowledge begins with experience.
On the Stoic account, it begins with a mental image formed from transactions with the external world.
On the Epicurean account, it begins with sensation.
Aristotle at the beginning of the metaphysics has all been by nature desired to know.
An example of this is the delight we take in our senses.
Now, you can only know what is in principle sensible.
You've already described this God as an immaterial, spaceless, massless, something or other,
omniscient and omnipotent and all the source of everything.
None of this is sensible.
You can't know anything about it at all.
If you take it as a central mission in the life of a Christian to know God and to love God,
well, you might as well get off that train because you can't know that which you can't see, touch and the like.
QED, that's it.
Bob's your uncle.
Now, Augustine has to deal with that sort of thing.
And he does so through a quite systematic, dialectical, psychological inquiry.
Let me offer one example taken from Augustine himself, and it's an example that will show up in Descartes
and other philosopher's centuries later.
Look, everyone can perceive a square, a four-sided figure, all of whose sides are equal.
You not only can perceive a square, but you can conceive of a square.
You can conceive of a quadrilateral figure with equal sides and angles summing to 360 degrees,
four right angles, do you see?
You can conceive of that.
Now, nobody can perceive a chiliagon.
A chiliagon is a thousand-sided figure.
And the reason you can't perceive it as a chiliagon is that in creating a thousand sides,
it will seem to be a circle or an oval.
You won't be able to resolve the thousand separate sides.
So you'll never be able to perceive, but you can conceive of a chiliagon.
That is, you are capable of knowing by conception that which you could never know by perception.
So it would not follow from the fact that you cannot sense the attributes of God,
that you cannot know the attributes of God.
Now, in this, Augustine, for reasons of religious philosophy,
is actually making a quite significant contribution to our understanding of psychology and to epistemology itself.
The distinction between knowing by perception and knowing by understanding.
Aristotle, you'll recall, distinguishes between the chap who knows that this triangle contains 180 degrees
because he measured the angles,
and this chap who knows that every triangle contains 180 degrees, therefore this one does.
Now, what the second chap has is epistemic.
He has a full scientific understanding of what triangles are,
whereas the first chap is just somebody who, by way of experience,
happens to have stumbled across what is factually true,
namely the triangle in front of him has 180 degrees in it.
So I don't want to suggest that, you know, sort of Augustine invented the distinction,
but Augustine is deploying the distinction in the most interesting way.
And it is a way that also allows us to understand that we can comprehend the truthfulness
of any number of basic religious precepts that otherwise are beyond the range of sensory experience,
but are within the range of deep and reflective inquiry.
And when it comes to deep and reflective inquiry, particularly in connection with St. Augustine,
one turns almost immediately to Augustine's Confessions.
This is a work that I think should be on everybody's reading list.
I mean, if there's time to read Newsweek, there surely should be time to read Augustine's Confessions.
It is a profound, inspired, and inspiring work.
It is a work of great, great courage, as this person discloses to any and every reader
what makes him tick, what moved him, the kind of life that he once lived,
what he's prepared to attach himself to, the great sources of his deep confusions about things,
his recognition that ultimately his salvation is going to be by way of faith,
but thanks to the grace of God, he has a faith.
And what life now is going to be about, at least at the epistemological level, is faith seeking reason.
As a rational being, he knows he owes it to himself.
He owes it to the fact that he is in the image and likeness of his providential God and Creator,
to use his reason, to, as it were, not justify, not even illuminate, not vindicate,
but provide something of a gloss on what faith itself has revealed.
Here's the duplex nature of the human enterprise.
We are endowed at an intuitive level with certain understandings.
We can't justify them rationally.
We can't justify rationally the fact that up is not down and so forth.
There are certain basic acts or precepts of the mind just as a rationally operating sort of thing
that can't explain its own operations at the root level.
In religious terms, there are things understood at the level of faith,
things that come about by what the person of faith says is the grace of God,
that can't be proven rationally.
But can these things be reconciled to the requirements of reason?
In the confessions, in the city of God, in his treatise on freedom of the will,
Augustine sets down a religious philosophy that faces quite courageously
the taunts and challenges of skeptical philosophy,
weighs them against the truths of a religion about which he has no doubts,
and puts on the map of Christian thought the obligation to take reason as far as it will take one,
understanding that at the end of the day it is faith and the grace of God we must rely on.
But that's at the end of the day.
Meanwhile, we ought to use our wits and wisdom in order to see that the teachings of Jesus
are the right teachings and entirely consistent with the known and the knowable world and its possibilities.
