Lecture 19, Islam
In 632 A.D., the Prophet Muhammad had revealed to him a divine message which would come to
be recorded in the great and glorious Quran, and Islam was founded.
Fortunately for the history of ideas, the divine message itself supported a rich and
flourishing intellectual form of life, intellectual curiosity, a veritable mandate to think and
reason clearly about important matters.
Of course in our contemporary world, where there is a great tension between the Islamic
part of the world and the West, tensions that are grounded in political and military
and economic considerations, it's very easy to cast Islamic hostility to the West in terms
of a radical cultural difference at the level of intellect, philosophy and the like.
Nothing could be further from the truth.
Islamic faith is at once a culture, an ethics, a mode of philosophical inquiry, a commitment
to what might be called a reflective life.
And indeed had it not been for the Islamic scholars in the 9th and 10th and 11th centuries,
the West probably never would have fully reclaimed its own canon, its own Aristotelian and Platonic
canon.
Now 632, this puts us in the 7th century, and the 7th century I should think by most
lights, no pun intended, would be regarded as dark.
That is to say, when we talk about the dark ages, the 7th century is a very, very convenient
place to rest that prejudice.
I want to take a moment or two to comment on how ages get labeled.
They very seldom have an opportunity to label themselves, you know.
The Middle Ages, or the medieval period, is so-called essentially by Renaissance scholars
who thought that their own natural heritage derived directly from classical antiquity,
and that if it hadn't been for all those horrible middling, intervening years between Rome and
themselves, why they would have picked up the baton immediately, and there they were
in Florence and the Quatra Cendo, they would have been friends of Virgil's.
So the Renaissance humanists tended to regard everything that divided the world of Virgil
from Florence in the 1400s as merely a sort of middling or medieval affair.
I should tell you that medieval people, scholars in the medieval period, did not describe themselves
as medieval.
And I should tell you that scholars and teachers and scientists, such as they were in the 7th
and 8th centuries, did not get up in the morning and say, what a horrible thing it is to live
in these dark ages.
So it's really the historian that hurls these labels and sometimes libels at the past, and
yet does so generally for defensible reasons.
Well if we're going to call ages classical, early Christian, dark, medieval, Renaissance,
et cetera, et cetera, et cetera, at least if I'm going to do it, I think I have an obligation
to tell you what I mean by it.
To call an age a dark age, presumably as to refer to some other age, I should think before
it, that somehow was less dark, or perhaps to some age immediately following it, that
in some respect or another is brighter or lighter.
The reason we're inclined to think of the period 650 to 850 as dark is because we see
very little by way of philosophical energy or originality, very little by way of systematic
and critical thought, produced at the level of texts, produced through argument and discourse,
through the general and large culture of thought, so characteristic of the classical world,
and what will again be characteristic of the medieval period, particularly the part of
it we refer to as the scholastic age.
Now there are reasons for this, and of course one of the main reasons is that western communities
were under frequent and quite successful attack from just about every direction except
the Atlantic Ocean.
The Mediterranean Sea, which had been that sea on which western culture moved and reinforced
itself and refined itself and promulgated itself, now was in fact closed off to the
west.
The major Mediterranean trade routes were very much under the control of the Islamic
world, under the control of the east.
At one point the very tools of scholarship, for example papyrus, no longer would make
its way into the west, Syria are refusing to export these materials for the infidels
to be recording their blasphemies and their well-known ignorance, vandals and Saracens
and Gothic tribes, the collapse of Rome, the breakdown of political institutions, all of
these, conduced to a disordered, fragmented and to some extent quasi-nomadic form of life
in the part of the world we would now identify as the Anglo-European world.
So there were very, very good reasons for scholarship to come to a halt, at least scholarship
in the sense of a progressive and progressing body of knowledge refined through critical
inquiry, discourse, debate, the dialectical method and the like.
Now the eastern world, the world that would become the Islamic world, actually was the
beneficiary of much of the scholarship that was moved by Constantine when in fact the
Roman Empire became centered in the east.
The Byzantine world did more to preserve and indeed to promulgate classical scholarship
than at the time the west was capable of doing, and so by the time Islam was militarily successful
enough to occupy the Byzantine world and the Byzantine culture, it found itself having
ready access to a classical scholarship long lost to western communities and western scholars.
So by the ninth and tenth centuries we find Islamic scholars and Jewish scholars, those
occupying the major centers of eastern thought, translating and writing commentaries on works
by, of all people, Plato, in fact, Al-Farabi, will write a very interesting and penetrating
treatise on Plato's Republic and it takes a quite revealing turn in Al-Farabi's hands.
It's arrested by Plato's notion that until philosophers become kings and kings become
philosophers there will be no justice and rational flourishing in the world.
And Al-Farabi says to himself, he says in his treatise that here we quite see the influence,
the limitations of pagan thought because it isn't going to be the philosopher that brings
this about as a philosopher.
It surely isn't going to be the king who brings it about as a king.
You need a prophet if there is to be this kind of flourishing and reasonable and orderly
world.
And so you see very early the Islamic commitment to see to it that all political and naturalistic
and scientific writings record respect for and indeed are animated by the teachings of
the prophet.
There is, there is, there is a reverential and theological commitment that is at the bottom
of this sound, critical and sustained scholarship.
Now that much said, there's something I want to add to it.
That much said, there still is an independent philosophical movement within Islam.
That is, as we get into the 10th and the 11th centuries we begin to see philosophy being
done by Islamic commentators for the sake of philosophy.
It's not that the prophet is now being ignored, it's not that the Quran is no longer important.
Rather it's the recognition that there are fields of inquiry that can be developed as
it were holding theology constant.
And to this extent we can say that what the Islamic world is up to in the 10th, 11th and
early 12th centuries is not unlike what one might have found in Aristotle's Lyceum.
It's serious scholarship for the purpose of gaining knowledge, knowledge that will be
useful knowledge, and it's also a respect for the philosophical originality and power
of the classical world.
And these become extremely important and nurturing influences as the West is regaining its sensibilities.
Abbasenna, who is famous to all Aristotle scholars because of the importance of Abbasenna's
use of Aristotle in his own writings, has as his dates 980 to 1037.
It's Abbasenna who comes into possession of Aristotle's metaphysics.
And this must have been eye-opening to someone in the 10th and early 11th centuries.
What Abbasenna finds then, and he tends to read Aristotle's metaphysics through Christian
prisms, he doesn't have an uncorrupted version of the metaphysics which later will be cobbled
together by scholars.
But what Abbasenna now sees is a philosophical justification for the idea of the universe
being rationally ordered, for the idea of law, Namos, being that which is the regulative
principle at the level of matter, and which at the same time can be incorporated as a
means of understanding life at the level of spirit, at the level of civics, at what
might be called the level.
What he finds in Aristotle is a means by which to demystify the natural world, a means
by which to oppose and resist superstition and magic and the like.
And Abbasenna's commentaries on Aristotle, Abbasenna's understanding of the metaphysics,
however corrupt or defective the version was that he had at hand, puts Arab scholarship,
it puts Islamic thought very much at the center of naturalistic thinking and scientific thinking.
I should say also that the Eastern world never lost contact with ancient Greek medical traditions.
The Eastern world, Eastern medicine is in the direct patrimony of the Hippocratic school.
Eastern thought is in the direct patrimony of the experimental physiology of Galen and
the theories of Galen.
Eastern thought in the natural domain is fortified by research involving dissection, the comparative
anatomy of animals, anatomical examinations of those who've died of various diseases,
the study of organs in traumatized or infected or sick individuals.
A naturalistic medicine that accounts, as I said in an earlier lecture, even for what
seemed to be almost spiritus or possessing elements in naturalistic terms.
And so there will be this naturalistic cast put on the writings of the later Islamic scholars.
Now the importance of this can't be underestimated because if we want to take the world of scholastic
philosophy as recovering the gems of ancient philosophy and putting the West back on the
path toward a progressive, intellectually and scientifically powered course of discovery,
self-discovery and the like, the tools here are going to be the well-known, well-worked
tools of ancient Greek thought, ancient Greek thought as it surfaces not only in Aristotle
and Plato but in the Stoics and the Epicureans and the like.
The Islamic community's part and participation in this is the sine qua non of this rediscovery.
I say we can't emphasize this enough.
Write down to the level of translating these works and putting them into Latin and indeed
engaging in debate scholars from the Christian community.
Now what's needed for critical inquiry is not just the lonely scholar who reads a treatise
and says, well, I'm not quite sure I agree with this.
Let me do a gloss on it and raise certain reservations about it.
What we have in East and West by the 11th century and 12th century are two intellectually
warring camps, two different conceptions of human nature and its purposes, two different
conceptions of truth at the most fundamental religious level, and each of those camps using
classical philosophy as a means of justification and validation.
And so we get this wonderfully rich interpretive exercise as to what Aristotle really meant,
what Plato really meant, whether something can be known as a result of prophetic insights
or whether it's known by experience, whether something can be counted on as being certainly
true even if it's at the level of psychology or ethics or politics as opposed to it being
merely probably, probably true.
What is it that was in the divine message that was heard by the prophet?
Is this something only effective if you happen to be a disciple of the prophet or is this
something that might inform Christianity?
And what we get here now is a very high stakes game because philosophical positions at this
point may become very close to heresies.
That is to say, once you begin to use philosophy as a way of vindicating or verifying or authenticating
what is essentially a religious position, the wrong reading and the wrong interpretation
turns out to be an heretical interpretation and it's an offense against the religion.
And with this comes the politicizing of knowledge and indeed the philosophical enterprise itself.
It should come as no surprise that as the Christian church solidified its own position politically
and economically and socially, it found itself doing battle with heresies left and right.
And I think we should pause to examine how does a religion solidify its position?
It solidifies its position by developing an official canon, an official set of teachings
that constitute the way things are.
This now becomes a body of knowledge that can be taught to the faithful and the faithful
are understood to be those who are prepared to be obedient to this teaching, to this canon.
There has to be some essentially official version of the text.
Well, of course, to have an official version of the text is more or less to say the debate's
over.
This is the way it is now.
It's very much like founding a constitutional regime when the founders say we hold these
truths to be self-evident.
Well, of course, the truths that they hold to be self-evident are scarcely self-evident
and many would argue that they're not even true.
But the burden of the remark, we hold X to be self-evident, is to convey the fact that
for purposes of originating a country, arguments at this level are over.
They are concluded.
We're starting with the presupposition that.
And this is how you solidify a constitutional order.
Well, it's how you solidify a great institution of any stripe at all, political, economic,
military, intellectual, cultural.
Of course, once you do that, you then have to defend that position, do you see?
You make it official and certain burdens attach to those who are not prepared to accept its
validity.
So as the writers and thinkers in the Christian world begin to take on the challenges that
come from the East at the level of religion, and as a result of those challenges, work
out an ever clearer version of the canon, an intellectually durable and an intellectually
teachable version of the canon, debates break out within the Christian community itself.
And some of these debates have to be suppressed and are suppressed.
There are certain writings now that are put on the list as it were.
We also find certain forms of conduct long ignored by refined and juridically sensible
Roman magistrates, taking on a new color.
In a later lecture, I am going to talk about witchcraft and possession and the witch panics.
But it turns out now that to have disorders and diseases of a certain kind, well, what
might this be token?
Now here's a medieval world in which the world itself is understood merely as a kind
of metaphor for an ultimate reality that is eternal, do you see, and changeless and the
like.
So the events in this world take on the property of signs, really, symbols.
This is going to evolve into the extraordinary practices that we denominate chivalry and
the like.
But illness itself can take on a symbolic character.
Now this is not going on in the East, or if it's going on, it's going on very rarely.
But in the rather more rationalistic and rather less naturalistic West, the medical traditions
of the Hippocratics, the medical teachings and writings of a gallon, are of secondary
importance to an essentially rationalistic and religious perspective on the meaning
of life and what is symbolized by disorders of a given kind.
The epileptic in the West, as I mentioned in an earlier lecture, the one in a palsy
or in a frenzy or frothing, is paying for what must have been some grave sin.
After all, the inherent defect in the human race is a result of Adam's fall.
So the terrible things that happened in the wake of Adam's fall are a punishment, as it
were.
They have a retributed function.
And disease also may have a, we do know that our own mortality is something that we earned
through sin.
So I say left to its own devices, these intellectual and conceptual tendencies may have arrested
intellectual development in the West for quite some time.
Islam should be understood here as a very constructive opponent, as an intellectual
and epistemological opponent in possession of rich texts from the classical period and
able to marshal very formidable arguments against the religious and doctrinal teachings
of a church that has yet to work out fully the doctrines that will survive into the present
time.
And it's a result of these, as a result of these Islamic scholarly challenges that those
doctrines are worked out ever more richly and ever more fully.
Now the long debate, which is a term that I find extremely useful, what do I mean when
I say that as a result of these Islamic influences and engagement with Western thought, the long
debate was resumed?
Well the long debate is the debate about knowledge and conduct and governance.
It's the debate that animated the earliest philosophical inquiries into the nature of
things.
It's the debate that we find on every page in the dialogues of Plato.
It's what the entire corpus of Aristotle's teaching and research was all about.
How do you put something like that to an end?
To say that the long debate is resumed is to say, uh oh, might it have taken a pause
or stopped at a certain point?
Well here I think I'm on the verge of saying something that if misconstrued would appear
to be almost an impertinence, but I do think it has to be said nonetheless.
The way you put a debate to an end is to declare either that you've won or that your opponent
is unworthy or you simply refuse to speak further on the subject because to speak further
on the subject is to lend some credibility to what your interlocutor is saying.
The greatest threat to the continuation of the long debate is orthodoxy.
The debate stopper is the unswervingly orthodox position, orthodox, orthos, right, doxa, opinions
do say that this is the right way of seeing it and any way different from this is the
wrong way of seeing it.
If you put together that feature of early Christianity that was in a principled way anti-intellectual
and combine that with the worthy political and institutional ambitions of the Christian
Church fortified by the life of Christ, by the teachings of Christ, by the Bible, all
testament and new, the words of the prophet, the revealed truth of God, what Jewish Christianity
brings in by way of the official canon.
An Augustinian conviction that at the end of the day it is faith that we need, yes faith
in pursuit of reason and all that, but at the end of the day it is not finally by our
wits that we get into heaven but by the grace of God.
I say if you put these elements together you can achieve a degree of fundamentalist conviction
that is actually hostile to debate.
It takes debate, it takes debate if not as a heresy than as an insult to the faithful
and as an insult to the faith.
To the extent that the contemporary mullahs or ayatollahs are informing the world that
the last word is in on how the Koran should be understood, I would submit that they are
being treasonous to the great and good book itself.
What great religious teachers require of us is a kind of elastic hermeneutic agility.
The teachings are inevitably in the form of similes and metaphors and analogies and parables.
You can't get to transcendent truths by pointing at things.
You do it by telling stories, by presenting symbols, by engaging people in the dance
and in the chorus and in the drama and in the dialogue.
What Islam achieved wittingly or otherwise, and I don't think I'd want to say that Islam
set out to do this, there may have been some great providential force behind all this.
What the challenge of Islam guaranteed was that the debate would be revived, that there
was more than one book to consult, there was more than one set of prophecies, more than
one person enjoyed the direct inspiration of the divine, more than one language is used
to express God's wishes, more than one culture can constitute the center of a holy and deeply
spiritual life, and the question before the house is, who's better at this?
Oh, you think you are.
Well, on what basis do you think you are?
What truths do you have that you think are superior to these truths?
Oh, I see.
Your truths are grounded in the deep intellectual power of ancient thought.
Well, as it happens for the past 300 years, we've been examining this great ancient thought.
In fact, we've been examining works you haven't even heard about yet, and we find that that
teaching is entirely compatible, that philosophy is entirely compatible with the core precepts
of the teachings of the prophet.
So even when the fray is over in a military sense, and especially when the fray is over
in the military sense, the debate really picks up in earnest, and the Western intellectual
community has to sit back and say, now, wait a minute, we've got the works of the great
saint Augustine, Thomas Aquinas, is going to be, I mean, there's a view of Thomistic
thought that says this is a kind of refined Augustinianism, do you see?
Well, we've got the works of the early fathers, we've got the great works of Augustine, we've
got the epistles of Saint Paul.
But look, we thought we knew just about everything that the pagans had taught.
There are whole texts and tomes we hadn't seen before.
There's a whole world of naturalistic and scientific inquiry, inquiries that are grounded
in the practical considerations of medicine and therapy.
We haven't dealt with any of this before.
Now that's the long debate resuming, the long debate regarding whether the best way to find
the truth is by engaging in naturalistic observation, and if you want to know how many teeth a horse
has in his mouth, you don't go back and engage in some dialectical dispute, you walk over
to the critter and you pull the lips apart and you say one, two, three, four, five, and
if that's the way to find out how many teeth a horse has in his mouth, then why should
that not be the right way to find out anything and everything?
Why should we ever take counsel with anything other than our own experience?
And if our own experience answers questions like that, without relying on the authority
of some philosopher or even some prophet, why can't each person individually, through
systematic and critical and observational modes of inquiry, discover what the world
is made of and his place in it on his own?
And so we've got the seeds of controversy and heresy and skepticism already being sown
as it's in the very nature of scholarly inquiry.
Roman patrician families knew what they were doing when they exiled Greek philosophers
during times of civil strife.
This was not mere thuggish intolerance.
This was a principled understanding that too much philosophy weakens the faith.
And of course, we've had our own experiences with this.
I think we can all claim proud membership in a community that strives to be politically
correct, can't we?
We all know that there are certain unutterables and that there are certain modes and gestures
and idioms and vernaculars that come from an ugly and remote past, and the less said
about that, the better.
There are just some things you don't question if you want to get by and the like.
Now, by historical standards, the pressures on us to be politically correct are really
fairly light.
I mean, you can find yourself no longer a member of a club you might have enjoyed or
having a difficult time with a dean, but nobody's getting burned for this yet.
Pseud, yes, burned, no.
So the pressures against sustaining the long debate are always very great.
And to the extent that there has been a successful institution that has made its way through a
vexing world and found itself now securely in place, one way it stays in place is to
make sure that its intellectual foundations are not challenged and that skeptics and heretics
do not get a full hearing.
Well, again, and for the last time, let me say that quite apart from the tenets of Islamic
religion, quite apart from the actual contents of the Qur'an, the scholarly life, the contemplative
life that the Qur'an requires of the faithful is a life entirely compatible with the long
debate.
It's a life entirely compatible with a critical inquiry that must ultimately lead to confusions
and the progress that comes from eliminating confusions and getting out from under the
burden of self-deception and prejudice.
Thank you.
