Lecture 20.
Secular Knowledge, The Idea of the University
I would be disinclined to refer to any age in the West as dark after 800 A.D., which
is why in the previous lecture I was prepared to say, well, all right, 700 or maybe 650
to 800.
And if I paused and stammered and stopped at 800, it's for a very good reason, because
at 800 we get Charlemagne.
And it's a great crime against his record and good name, that we don't spend more time
in our teaching on Charlemagne and on precisely what Charlemagne accomplished.
The record here is a bit spotty, and of course so much legends around Charlemagne that sometimes
it's quite difficult to tease out the fact from the epic, so to speak.
He was a great and good Christian man.
We are all taught that in school.
I don't recall having been taught that all of his five wives were also good Christian
people.
We know that one of his edicts required that the problem of illiteracy be addressed, and
that little Abbey schools undertake the task of teaching people how to read and write,
though there's some evidence to suggest that he was not literate himself.
We know that he was a great, great military leader, but the best evidence suggests that
he probably never had more than 5,000 men in arms at any given time, although apparently
it was one of his ideas that the way you engage an enemy is by sending everything you've got
if you're going to do anything at all.
Now, I have no expert knowledge of Charlemagne's military strategies and tactics, but to the
extent that this was his general strategy, you can imagine the effect it would have.
Well, let's say you've only got 5,000 people in arms, but somebody over there bothers you,
and all 5,000 show up, and of course an adversary might reach the conclusion, my goodness, if
5,000 show up over that, you imagine what he's going to send over here if we really bother
him.
Now apparently he wasn't bothered too often or too much because we don't have any evidence
of Charlemagne's rule being punctuated by major military engagements.
There were important military events and the like, but in fact he was able to stabilize
the European continent and to a very considerable extent pull it together, integrate the diverse
peoples of the place through skill, through skill and some maneuvering and very capable
emissaries, and what I would call a plan, a plan that he does not set down for us in
explicit and scholarly prose, and so we more or less have to guess at it.
Now this great hegemonist Christian church that has everything worked out and its canonical
teachings correct to the last place after the decimal, etc., well Charlemagne decides
that his coronation will not be valid unless in fact he is crowned by the pope.
Now militarily, politically, economically, this was entirely unnecessary, Charlemagne
didn't need the pope or anybody else in order to establish himself as the unopposable leader
in the part of the West he occupied, but he understood that in that act he would be joining
crown and cross and he would be giving a certain spiritual and religious transcendental authenticity
to his own rule by having his coronation presided over by the bishop of Rome.
So we do have that important emblematic event and that very extraordinary statesmanship
on the part of Charlemagne.
He wants to increase the degree of homogeneity in the West by having the official liturgy
of the church practiced wherever Christianity itself is practiced, so he sends to Rome to
find out what the official liturgy is.
And of course the message comes back regarding this great hegemonist operation.
There isn't an official liturgy.
Yes, beginning of the 9th century the church itself was still groping and grasping and
trying to get its own sea legs and the like.
Obviously the dominant religious institution in the Western world, but I say scarcely the
highly integrated, coordinated, coherent body of teaching and practice that will appear
centuries later.
Well he also recognizes that cohesion comes about in large measure as a result of a common
language or at least a language that allows different peoples to communicate with each
other and it didn't take a space physicist to realize that if you were going to have
an official language, an official language for the business of the court, for legal documents
that might involve people separated by hundreds of miles, for transactions involving property
and territorial boundaries and the like, what language are you going to use?
You're going to use Latin, obviously Latin.
So Charlemagne casts about for a good Latinist.
He can't find one.
I'm hoping to convey something about the character of the Western world, circa 800.
He has to send off to Brittany for a good Latinist.
He gets a very good Latinist.
He gets Alquin, A-L-C-U-I-N.
Alquin was my name, learning I loved, those that would have mercy on me pray for my immortal
soul, good old Alquin.
Alquin comes down and he and Charlemagne have their discussions about how to get things
going and the like and apparently it's Alquin's proposal that the Abbey schools throughout
the realm be used to instruct the people, the common people in certain core subjects.
It will produce a shared culture, do you see?
Shared learning is part of a shared culture.
The ancient Greek sense of paevea being what pulls a people together, what it means to
be a Helene is to attach oneself to Hellenic paevea, you see?
Well Alquin is enough of a Latinist than a classicist to realize that the way you pull
diverse peoples together is under the blanket of a culture that is a summoning culture.
So there should be some core subjects that everybody studies and Alquin proposes a few
of them.
They should have some instruction in grammar and rhetoric and they should have some instruction
in harmony, you know, that kind of thing.
But these are very basic structures.
These are the things that are sort of foundational.
They're trivial as it were.
In fact they constitute a curriculum that is called.
The Trivium.
Now over a course of many, many years some of these abbey schools will become so popular
and so frequented by people who are seeking to gain instruction that monasteries form near
them and monasteries including teaching orders.
This is a long and variegated and wonderful story which I don't have time for but it does
turn out that in that course of time other subjects will be added to these three basic
subjects.
By the time we get to the 12th century there will be seven of these subjects.
To the Trivium will be added a quadrivium.
These seven subjects are what will come down to us as the seven liberal arts, do you see?
And the abbey schools are now appearing in a rather different manifestation, first at
the great great cathedral in Paris where as a result of an application to Rome the assembly
of students is constituted as a universitas.
And what we have now is the founding of the university at least in the modern sense in
which we would talk about universities.
You have to forgive anyone who's been a teacher, a university teacher most of his adult life
for waxing in a misty-eyed way about the university.
I shall try to control myself and I should think the character of the modern university
provides about all the control I need.
Let me do go back to the founding of the earliest universities.
These institutions are veritable engines of self-perfection.
If you had to point to an institutional means by which to carry through the kind of contemplative
life that Aristotle had in mind, that is life on the Isle of the Blessed, where one
devotes oneself to the contemplation of first things for the sake of keeping company with
what is best and most worthy.
I say if you set out to do this in an institutional way, this is what a university is capable
of supporting and sustaining and promoting and guiding.
Can't think of anything better.
You might say, well, what about a religious institution?
Well, religious institutions are of, no double entendre intended, transcendental importance.
But when we talk about a contemplative life, this must include the critical rational resources
of a rational being, and those very critical resources are going inevitably to take a skeptical
turn, a cynical turn, a doubtful turn, turns in the direction of incredulity, turns in
the direction of mystification and confusion and ambiguity and irresolution and the like
as you try to work it through.
The process of self-perfection is not a cakewalk.
It's a struggle and it's a daily struggle.
By the time you have surrendered your wits to the truths of a revealed religion, that
part of the struggle is pretty much over.
Now the question is, can you live your life according to the teaching?
So I would submit, and here disclosing my awful academic nature, that the self-perfectionist
institution is the university institution.
It's why it's so absolutely deplorable when these places are turned into trade schools
whose essential mission is to find some way of getting their students' jobs when they're
finished.
There should be a series of lectures, I think, hosted by the teaching company on the idea
of a university, will it ever be recovered?
But the original university also had its practical mission and its practical orientation.
It had to turn out people skilled in the law, skilled in rhetoric, able to handle documents,
engage in transactions, take a proper place as preachers and teachers, as priests and
emissaries.
So I don't want to say that the medieval university begins sort of off the ground and
floating like La Patte, you know, in the swift gulliver-tail, no, it has its practical functions.
But I should contrast the University of Paris with older institutions that were directly
committed to practical considerations.
I need only mention the schools at Bologna and Salerno in Italy that were devoted to
the specialties of law and medicine.
These predate the university.
So the world already had made provision for specialized technical training such that the
graduates could go out and actually do things and engage in the practical affairs of medieval,
late medieval life.
The university at Paris and those modeled on it had a rather different set of objectives.
The objectives here were scholarly objectives, the weighing and sifting of arguments and
evidence, the constant confrontation of one scholar before a group of students, all of
them having read the sentences of Peter Lombard or some other worthy work, some philosophical
work, and then students having to listen to disquisitions on this, ask just the right
questions, submit themselves to examination, construct their own glosses on these works,
et cetera, et cetera, this done corporately and collectively, done communally, within
a community of scholars, each of whom had equal moral standing to raise a question,
raise a challenge, ask for a clarification.
You might be interested to know that during much of the early history of the university,
chaps who were in my kind of work were paid by the lecture, and indeed they were paid
after the lecture, not before.
This might have quite a salutary effect on higher education today.
I'm thinking of any number of colleagues who might be jacked up to an almost room
temperature level of performance if in fact the evening meal would either be bought or
not bought on the basis of how well that particular lecture went.
The students in a manner of speaking unionized or formed a guild.
It was their way of dealing with town gown tensions.
The university's Paris itself from the earliest time also became rather bureaucratized.
The university as a bureaucracy was not invented in the late 20th century, but I think it's
to the credit of some of the great scholars at the University of Paris that when they
saw these bureaucratic measures gaining a certain hegemony, when they saw that government
and local ordinances and the like were militating against the free and full expression of an
academic life, they packed up and laughed.
Where did they go?
Well, they wanted to find just the right place to have a university if I may say so.
I do have certain prejudices in this regard.
They got on their boats and they crossed the channel and they trundled through Londonium
of one of those other weird Roman outposts that had been fought for with the Picts and
Celts and other strange people and Danes and Vikings and all that, and they picked, well
they just picked one of the great, great spots on planet Earth.
They picked that place where the Isis and the Thames merge and great, great oak trees
and a slubrious environment and the song of birds and the like, a place called Oxenford
which came to be known as the University of Oxford and at the University of Oxford great
things would happen from a very, very early date.
And by the way, the bureaucratizing of that place, et cetera, et cetera, a disaffection
and the like resulted in some of their dons leaving and going off to some swampy area
in the east of England or near Norfolk or something called Cumbridge or Umbridge or
Cambridge or something like that.
But I say these very movements signal the appearance of a genuinely academic class, signal the
appearance of philosophers, persons whose lives are going to be devoted to a disciplined
systematic form of study, persons who are going to bring under the protective cowl of
the university young and impressionable and promising students who have shaped and inclined
in the right way will improve the world in virtue of the intelligence and decency and
good judgment that they bring to bear on the affairs of the world.
The answer to the question, how did all good things happen between 1200 and the 20th century
in health, in science, in jurisprudence, in moral philosophy, in urban planning, et cetera,
et cetera, how did all this come about?
Can't be answered in a single word, but there's only one single word that isn't a
laffer when you attempt to answer that question by using it, the university, the university,
the place that invents the method of invention, the place that's set up specifically to criticize
its own core precepts and claims.
It is an exercise in irrational creatures refining himself and refining himself in the
kilns of debate and disagreement and rhetoric and inquiry and guidance and philosophical
and philosophical introspection.
Well if I have not satisfied my academic colleagues the world over with that little speech, nothing
will.
This is to say that on the whole universities are places worth having, but this is only one
of the great achievements of the period rather derisively referred to as medieval.
This derisively referred to period called medieval creates the university.
Between 1150 and 1300 it will also create over a hundred Gothic cathedrals in Europe
and in Great Britain.
Gothic cathedrals are not just big churches.
Gothic cathedrals are technically extraordinary, indeed unimaginably extraordinary creations
given the technology of the period in which they were put up.
We know the architects, I guess I don't, I wish I had a number for you here, we probably
know the architects for about half these places, which means that a number of these
colossi are attributable to nobody in particular.
I find it quite interesting for example that you can go and visit one of these extraordinary
architectural achievements, I mean on a par with Chiops, one of these extraordinary places.
The question is who designed this, who put this up, to whose credit, et cetera, et cetera,
nobody knows that.
A guild worked on it for a period of years, damn thing took 78 years, well we don't know,
there might have been somebody named Marcelin or something, but no record on this.
There are exceptions to this.
The cathedral at Clooney, for example, has a little motto, jizz, libertus, hoke, fake
it.
Jizz, libertus, made this.
And what's referred to here are these little emblematic angels, this is in a cathedral
that has gargoyles and the like.
But again the view is skyward, it's upward, it's toward heaven.
Notice this now with the paintings of Giotto early in the Quattrocento.
The kiss of Judas as Judas and Jesus face each other.
Here what we have is the human dilemma, the human character and personality presented
in all of its complexity.
Just look at the weight of these two figures, look at the gravity that pulls down man to
his earthly standing.
The look here now is not skyward.
The look is not through the glass and the upper levels of the Gothic cathedral.
The medieval perspective is a perspective of service, service to a higher end.
The Renaissance perspective is not indifferent to that, but it begins with an understanding
of oneself and one's place in the world.
In order to render more intelligible, they often misunderstood nature of feudal life,
of feudal economy, the role and life of the serf in the medieval world.
And indeed certain aspects of chivalry that otherwise look like a kind of Monty Python
comic, opera, bufa.
This idea of the person as a servant of the Lord, and the Lord can be the Lord of the
Manor, is not predicated on the serf's assumption that he is an inferior being.
It's predicated on the assumption that every being has a part and place to play in the
grand scheme.
The animating idea of the medieval period is an idea of harmonious and cyclical occurrences
and reoccurrences.
In the great, great order of things, everything does have its part to play.
We have actual writings.
As I am the servant of the Lord of the Manor, my Lord is the servant of the Lord.
Do you see this sense of a line of authority that begins with God's plan and God's will,
which then works its way through the life of every human being.
And if you end up the Lord of the Manor, that is the will of God.
And if you end up a serf on the estate, well, then that's the will of God also.
Serfs had rights.
Serfs could bring his lordship to court for abuse and the like.
In case you're skeptical and wondering, I can assure you that at least occasionally
serfs won these legal contests.
Now I don't know what their batting average was.
My own guess is that it wasn't very high at all, but at least the laws were in place.
There was this understanding of human beings by their nature, having rights of a certain
kind, and the Lord of the Manor indeed had his duties.
He had his duties to the Lord of all.
And the Lord of all is that rational and providential God that sees to it that things
have a certain fitness and aptness, and it is our task to preserve that good order and
to promote what is most worthy within it.
So the medieval period gives us these Gothic cathedrals.
It gives us the university.
These are two very worthy institutional achievements and artistic achievements.
The medieval glass windows, the height and bulk and mass of these places, there's something
quite interesting about the Gothic.
The 19th century esthete who restored our respect for the Gothic chiefly responsible
for that was John Ruskin, and he did this in any number of writings especially in the
stones of Venice.
And when John Ruskin talks about late Renaissance architecture, this sort of line and angle
architecture, everything done with a ruler, these little curlicues, these little endlessly
repeated curlicues, he describes it, I love this description.
He says the architectural ornaments of the high Renaissance represent the, quote, servile
ornamentation of the Ninevite, now spoken like Ruskin.
The point he's getting at is that what the high Renaissance does is it takes the average
person of mediocre ability, teaches him one thing to do, and has him do it over and over
and over again, and so the line and angle symmetry that you find in these ornamented
late Renaissance things are at the expense of human freedom.
The Gothic on the other hand, with all its ostensible imperfections, Gothic after all
is a derisive term, with all this sort of vulgarity and brutishness, is a full expression
of the free imagination in its devotional commitment to the divine.
The Gothic has a sameness about it, do you say, I mean it's different in every place
you are within the cathedral, gives you a different view, and so there's this tremendous
variety, and amidst the tremendous variety, some unifying principle that lets you know
that this is a genre, there's something being represented and said here, the Gothic cathedral
is a rhetorical statement, it's a statement that it once captures mystery, and truth,
and power, and scale, proportion, and beauty, and ambiguity, and all of that, does it make
us feel small, yes, but only in relation to the divine, and we can look up and see the
divine through those extraordinary colored and leaded and pictured windows that again
provide us with all the symbology we need to know the truth behind the symbol.
Well I think that you surely would want to be respectful toward the institution of the
university, and you certainly want to display good taste and say that even if the Gothic
isn't your cup of tea, Gothic cathedrals are warrant and applause about and the occasional
visit, but you might draw the line at this third great institutional creation of the
medieval chivalry.
The Romande de la Rose, you know this endless epic that's composed over a period of centuries,
the romance of the rose, the metaphor of an essentially romantic and sexual liaison
that finally is this rose ever going to be plucked and such attention to detail and where
it is in the garden and the flowers that surround it, isn't this just that great, great frippery
shop that is medieval Europe?
The knight errant with his preposterous manners and the cape laid down across the wet spot
so Madame's Tootsies don't get damp.
These jousting matches where men, otherwise intelligent, men, intelligent, healthy people
get on horses and proceed to kill each other in the interest of getting Madame's veil or
a scarf or a handkerchief and the like.
King Arthur and the round table and all that stuff, I say there's a kind of Monty Python
quality to it when given the comic book version of it.
What's the idea behind chivalry?
The chivalric knight is the secular priest.
He is the executive branch, do you see, of a government at the top of which is right
reason.
Right reason is the reason of the church because it's directly inspired by God and the reason
of God must now express itself through a willful medium, through a volitional medium.
That's what the knight errant is.
The knight errant is doing God's bidding as this bidding is interpreted through the rational
and pastoral resources of Holy Mother Church and in behalf of whom, in behalf of the populace,
it's the arrangement of Plato's soul, do you see, the tripartite elements of the soul,
the rational and the passionate and the volitional.
It's the Holy Trinity.
It's the three in one.
It's unity and diversity.
It's sacrifice as a form of nobility.
The knight's politeness symbolizes his strength because he is reserved and retreating by choice.
He has complete control of his emotions, which is why he can serve anyone if the cause is
right.
The only insult is an insult to honor.
Chivalry is one of the great civilizing influences in the history of Western civilization.
Yes, indeed, it could be given to certain excesses and lend itself to comic renditions.
But in this institution, we find the incorporation of some of the most deeply held and fully
articulated precepts of classical philosophy and the Christian lesson.
Apothea, the rule of reason over passion, self-sacrifice, a universal brotherhood, everything having
its place and purpose, the great order and design and logos being that to which we devote
our energies and are prepared to sacrifice a life which, after all, is a merely corporeal
life, the real life beginning at the end of our days.
Every aspect of the material world being merely a sign or a symbol, and therefore the hank
of hair of a saint may have a healing power.
The way the knight sits atop his horse may represent the manner in which God rides herd
on the affairs of the cosmos.
Everything has a meaning.
Shivalry is what alerts us daily to the fact that life has a point.
Nothing is irrelevant.
Everything counts.
It may lend itself to comedy, but it lends itself more directly to what the Renaissance
will call the dignity of man.
Thank you.
I'm Tom Rollins, president of The Teaching Company.
I hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses on tape series.
To order your next course, or to speak to one of our knowledgeable customer service
representatives about our broad selection of more than 80 courses, call us today toll-free
at 1-800-Teach-1-2, that's 1-800-832-2412.
Our great courses on tape are produced in response to interviews with customers like
you.
All are designed to serve learning as a way of life and to suit your needs whether you're
commuting, exercising, traveling, or just relaxing at home.
Please give us a call at 1-800-Teach-1-2.
