Lecture 22, Scholasticism and the Theory of Natural Law
Thomas Aquinas is the famous and great doctor of the church, the great 13th century Dominican
figure whose scholastic philosophy continues to dominate thought within the religious philosophy
of the Catholic church. He was a prolific writer. He was not, however, the most promising
of students, at least legend has it that he was a large and rather lumbering chap. His
classmates referred to him as the dumb ox. His celebrated teacher, Albertus Magnus, was
persuaded, however, that when that ox started making sounds, the entire world would probably
be affected by the resonances, and in this Albertus Magnus was correct. I would say outside
of Catholic philosophy, Thomas Aquinas is probably best known and most widely read for
his treatises on natural law and natural law theory. He was tutored in the law, and in
the 13th century, the European world again was in possession with the most refined productions
of Roman law, and in the 13th century, the church needed about as much help from Roman
law and legal procedure as you could ask for. The church had solidified its position, I
might say solidified its position politically, but had to deal with heresies of one sort
or another, and had to rely on the procedures of law and indeed the principles of law in
order to broker the competing claims of heretics, orthodox representatives of the official
teachings of the church and the like. But I say more than the technical requirements
of litigation and adjudication, law in the 13th century within the Catholic context was
understood to be so full and flourishing an expression of the rational order itself,
so much that which bore the mark of the maker on his works, that there was an inextricable
connection between legal precepts, the rationality of law, and religious precepts, the rationality
of religion itself. And so when Thomas Aquinas undertakes a treatise on law, he certainly
doesn't think that he's doing something removed from human psychology, ethics, philosophy,
politics, and religion. We find his most systematic treatment of law in that part of the Summa
Theologiae, the questions 90 to 108, which can be pulled out separately again as the
Thomistic treatise on law. Now what do we discover when we read Thomas on the nature
of law? Well, of course Thomas quite famously claimed that if our natures were different,
our duties would be different. And so to a first approximation what he seems to be saying,
and this of course would be entirely consistent with Aristotle's position, well you can't
really engage political and juridical questions until you've settled psychological questions.
Aristotle noted that before you begin the systematic study of politics or one who would
engage in a systematic study of politics must study psuke, he must understand the nature
of the human soul, the human mind, because politics after all is about people and actions
and the like. So I say, if you just looked at the sort of stock Thomistic phrase, if our
nature were different, our duties would be different, it looks very much like, well let's
try to develop some sort of human psychology and from whatever we find there we then can
cobble together certain principles of law and certain political modes of organization
and the like. That actually isn't the way Thomas approaches the matter. Thomas doesn't
see the task of understanding the nature of human nature as an essentially observational
inductive enterprise, the sort of thing you might find in experimental psychology. Rather,
we can gauge the nature of human nature through the arts and sciences of reason, that is we
can assemble a coherent and defensible understanding of human nature and then given that understanding
of human nature we can ask ourselves what political and legal arrangements are right
for a nature like that. That is we have to put together first a rational picture of what
the flourishing, healthy, wholesome human life looks like and then given that ideal as
it were, given that possible life, we then see how the law and various political arrangements
can do to lives lived according to that model. Now you might say, well doesn't this seem
to be rather backwards? I mean shouldn't you first have a developed psychology, after
all take the facts of human nature where you find them and then try to make the best of
a bad situation by putting together laws and political institutions that simply come to
grips with the nature of human nature. Well of course if you wanted to do it that way
you would begin with an essentially descriptive psychology, would simply run around and take
measurements and maybe run experiments on reaction time or use memory drums or whatever
and based on what you came up with you would then start putting together the sort of state
that is compatible with an entity. Well suppose you were unlucky enough to find yourself in
a place where everybody was mad or everybody was absurd or everybody was drunk or everybody
was hopelessly and irremediably stupid. You certainly would not want to be putting together
a system of law, you would not want to be cobbling together some kind of political state,
some set of political institutions, ideally suited to promote that form of life. No, you've
got to be able to step back from the mere contingent characteristics of human beings
wherever you might find them and ask in a rational way the question, what is the essential
nature of human life? And given that essential nature, what is good for a life of that kind?
Given this correct reason governed depiction of the kinds of beings we are, what should
the law be? What should the law strive to achieve? So when Thomas serves up his well-known
definition of law as an ordinance of reason, an ordinance of reason promulgated by one
who has the good of the community in mind, one who is responsible for the civic good
or the communal good, an ordinance of reason promulgated by one who is responsible for
the civic good, we begin to understand his understanding of law by inquiring into what
is meant by good. What is it that is good for man? And what is good for man can simply
be what man chooses or what man says is good. Because again, you might be constituted in
such a way, contingently or as a result of bad habits, as a result of bad upbringing,
as a result of disease or injury, as a result of a weak character, you might choose as good
for you all sorts of things that are not good for you. The drug addict certainly will choose
drugs over not having drugs. The alcoholic will choose alcohol over being denied alcohol.
The lazy person will choose rest over labor. The duplicitous person will choose deceit over
truthfulness. So again, you can't simply use a kind of descriptive psychology. You can't
go out and take a poll to find out what good is. Again, you have to understand through
the exercise of reason what the essential nature of human life is. And then on that
basis, determine what the basic goods are for a life of that kind. And so Thomas Aquinas'
psychology is a rich and developed psychology of human goods. But it is not a merely descriptive
pollster's psychology on what people around the world or people calling up people in cyberspace
or people answering telephone interrogatives happen to say they think is good. People magazine
is much better than Tolstoy, and therefore we want to make sure that there are many more
copies of people magazine than there are of war and peace. No, that's not the termistic
understanding either of human nature or the way you approach that particular problem of
knowledge, how you go about finding out what the essential nature of human nature is. You
do not go about that simply by asking people. Well, let's get to Thomas on the problem
of knowledge. Now, look, nine times in ten, if any philosophical description of Thomism
is offered, it's going to include some reference to, or the actual term, neo-Aristotelian. You
do get the distinct impression that Thomas Aquinas is sitting in his study preparing
for examinations on Aristotle's philosophy and wanting to make sure that he gets A's
in these things, or that all he's doing is really trying to reconcile the teachings
of the philosopher. And by the way, Thomas Aquinas is great and deep and enduring respect
for Aristotle, has him invariably referring to Aristotle not by name, but as simply the
philosopher, capital P, as in the last word on important subjects, the master of them
who know. So he's obviously using Aristotle as a philosophical guide and a philosophical
authority. But let's do, Thomas Aquinas is going to become St. Thomas Aquinas. He's
a Dominican priest. His mission in life is service to the church. What he's attempting
to get right is the spiritual dimension of human life, the obligations that we have to
God, conducting our lives in such a way as to be worthy of the salvation that was secured
through the death of Jesus Christ. This is not somebody who's trying to get tenure in
a philosophy department. And he certainly is not going to settle once and for all for
the philosophical musings, no matter how deep and penetrating they might be, of a pagan
philosopher who died in the fourth century B.C. and probably would regard many of the
teachings of the Catholic Church as peculiar and chiefly the customary perspective of some
people quite clearly not Hellenic or at least not inured to Olympianism. So I say we don't
want to read Thomistic philosophy as a kind of reheated Aristotelianism. The stakes are
entirely different. The objective is entirely different. Aristotle becomes important because
Aristotle, as far as Thomas Aquinas is concerned, really was onto something. He understood this
utterly integrated nature of the realization of our humanity, the political world in which
we find ourselves, the disciplining influences of law, the importance of early instruction,
the sources of self-corruption. See, Aristotle was very, very good on these points, and these
points are all going to be used effectively by Thomas as he develops what is, finally,
a deeply moving and analytically powerful, nonetheless religious philosophy. And whatever
we might want to say about Aristotle's philosophy, it does not have as its central inspiration
the promotion of a particular religious view. Well, this helps explain why it is that when
Thomas Aquinas gets to Aristotle on the intellectual and moral virtues and summarizes them
quite aptly and shows the important part they play in the acquisition of knowledge and generally
in the conduct of life, he says, yes, but this isn't going to be enough. The intellectual and moral
virtues aren't going to be sufficient unto the task. And why is that? Well, look, the intellectual
virtues include, among other things, epistemic, developing a scientific understanding that is a
complete explanatory scheme by which we comprehend the affairs of the world. But that's the means
by which we comprehend the affairs of the world. Of what help is that going to be in that central
Christian mission, that unique obligation the Christian has to know the divine essence? How can
the intellectual virtue of epistemic get you to the divine essence? The divine essence is not
something accessible to the senses as such. And when you go down Aristotle's theory of learning,
the means by which we come to comprehend things, of course, it all begins at the empirical level,
the exercise of the senses, all men by nature desire to know. An example is the delight we
take in our senses. Thomas Aquinas is not downplaying this. This, of course, is quite important
when it comes to what might be called secular knowledge, systematic knowledge, knowledge of
the natural world, all the sorts of things that Aristotle was quite interested in. But knowledge
of the divine essence, that isn't going to do it. Now, suppose we consult Aristotle on the moral
virtues, on prudence and courage and the like. Well, again, Thomas Aquinas is going to place a
very, very high premium on the moral virtues. He's going to be a rather consistent Aristotelian on
the matter of the moral virtues. But here's a concern Aristotle never had to deal with in his
ethical writings, and that Thomas has to deal with seven days a week. Salvation. Salvation,
conducting one's life in such a way as to secure the eternal reward of heaven.
Now, you're not going to find this kind of talk in Aristotle. When Aristotle talks about the
contemplative life being the sort of life one might live on the Isle of the Blessed,
this is Aristotle telling his students, you know, this is even better than tenure,
fellas. I mean, this is really something worth shooting for. But Aristotle is not
suggesting some ethical scheme by which we gain salvation, because Aristotle is not persuaded
that that kind of salvation, I mean, Aristotle is simply not addressing this. He doesn't
have the original sin scheme and redemption and all. So, Thomas understands that to the
moral and intellectual virtues, something must be added, which the Greek philosophers had no
occasion to comprehend, let alone to develop. And that is the theological virtues, the theological
virtues. Charity, faith, hope. Now, what would Aristotle have made of something like charity?
Well, of course, Aristotle, in the list of virtues, recognizes that magnanimity is not
itself a unique virtue. It seems to underlie all the virtues, the megalopsocos, the great
soul person, the great spirited person, the magnanimous person. Well, now, what's the
characteristic of the magnanimous person? Well, let's go back to Aristotle for a moment. Suppose
I said something like this. Well, Aristotle teaches that we should attempt in every way to
perfect our virtues. And one of the virtues is courage. Well, all right, I'll be courageous.
Damn it. Do you see? There'd be something missing here. Even if I proceeded to behave in a courageous
way, somebody might say, look, he's behaving in a courageous way, but he does seem to be kicking
and screaming all the way. There's great reluctance about this. Similarly, with any of the other
virtues, suppose that although I am behaving virtuously, my disposition to do so is really
not very magnanimous, do you see? So Aristotle wants to make magnanimity, at least in one of the
ethical treatises, he wants to make magnanimity foundational for the virtues. It's not just
that the man of virtue behaves in a virtuous way, but behaves in a virtuous way in that full,
spirited intention to be virtuous, that is to have a very positive disposition toward behavior
of that kind. Now, I think that's about as close as we're going to find Aristotle getting to the
notion of charity, do you see? Charity in the Christian sense of being sure that you never
neglect the needs of others, that you do not place yourself first in the scheme of things,
that you exercise restraint when it comes to taking a particular share of something, that you
don't even take what perhaps legitimately is your share, if in so doing it you deny something
to someone that he actually, that that person actually needs. Charity as much more like the
Stoic Epictetus, never say of anything I've lost it, only that I've given it back, the understanding
that whatever one has is a gift, and that gift requires a thankfulness and an inclination to share
that as God has been so generous toward us, so too in our charity must we be generous toward others,
generous toward others in the matter of forgiveness, in the matter of sharing,
in the matter of sympathy and the like. There's a theological virtue, absent which you cannot
know salvation, no matter how successfully you might live your earthly life, absent the
theological virtue of charity, there'll be something fundamentally missing in your moral makeup.
Faith, now faith, I'm not quite sure what the right understanding of faith would be to Aristotle,
but faith as the Greek I guess we'd say would be Pistis, faith, having faith in something.
Well, faith would probably be the sort of thing that on a strict Aristotelian account
you might want to protect yourself from. I mean this gets very close to a sort of
superstitious rejection of the evidence of sense and the counsels of reason. You now have a
disposition to believe something, though you cannot come up with the telling reason for it,
and you do not have palpable empirical evidence supporting it. Nonetheless, that is, even though
I can't see it, I can't feel it, it has no reference to anything in the observable world,
it makes no direct contact with or provides any direct access to the senses, and I certainly
can put together an airtight rational argument according to which this is necessarily so.
I believe it. I don't think that Aristotle would regard that as a virtue. I think he probably
regard it, I mean I want to be tentative here. Aristotle is rich and and and thick in implication
and innuendo, but I don't think that the that Aristotle the epistemologist anyway
would be inclining Suke in the direction of faith. Faith is the sort of thing you walk around with
until you get the data, so to speak, and the minute you get the data, particularly contradictory data,
that's it. Yes, but that's not it for faith on the Thomistic account, because if we would know
the divine essence, we must recognize that the evidence of sense is never going to be
entirely successful. The record there is going to be an ambiguous one, and rational power will
get us very far, but finally it cannot get us all the way. We have to understand that there are
certain mysteries surrounding the creation and surrounding our place within it, but it is through
the grace of God that we can have faith that there is a providential God in whose image we are made,
and that that providential God has provided us with the means of salvation, the theological
virtue of faith. If you don't have that, you're doomed, no matter how clever you are, no matter
how great your practical reason is, your phronesis is, no matter how developed your secular epistemy
might be, it won't get you all the way. For Aristotle, these are the things that do get you
all the way. If they don't get you all the way, that's tough, because this is all you've got,
because Aristotle does not have a theory of divine grace. Now this is a gift we have on a
particular construal, and that particular construal is the Christian construal, as represented by
Augustine, and of course by Thomas Aquinas. And similarly with the hope that a future eternal
life will find us properly positioned, that indeed we will redeem the great confidence
that God has had in us, that we will have made the proper use of the great gifts that have been
bestowed by a loving God, and that although we cannot see that eternal future, we can be hopeful
about the prospects. Now these religious virtues make quite clear that Thomism, as it's called,
and indeed scholastic philosophy itself, is not an exercise in recovering the philosophy of Plato's
Academy or Aristotle's Lyceum. It is a philosophy put together by a religious community for the
sake of guiding the destiny of entities judged to be immortal. The soul lives forever, and the whole
point of earthly life is to conduct ourselves in such a way that that eternal life, the important
part of the story, the part of the story that never ends, is a life that has been redeemed,
and a life in the company of God himself. Now the problem of conduct for Thomas Aquinas
is the problem of reconciling us to the eternal law. It's not simply a matter of making sure our
life within the political community is a decent one, and that we are civically responsible,
that we choose good leaders, and the like. The problem of conduct now is a very, very high
stakes problem to say no more on the subject. This is not simply a matter of accommodation,
developing our personal virtues, and going out sort of in Cleobas and Beidou fashion, you know,
going down in legend and song among our countrymen. The problem of conduct is not something about
how we appropriate the characteristics of the hero. It's how we appropriate the characteristics of
the saint. The problem of conduct now is inextricably bound up with notions of the holy life, the life
of deep devotion, a life that is committed to this, to know God and to love God, and to become worthy
of God's presence in the life to come. And again, this is not primarily the Hellenic or Hellenistic
philosophical agenda. This is not what the Stoics or Epicureans were up to, and it's not what Aristotle
was up to. Note, I haven't mentioned Plato very often because we do recognize that in important
respects, this was very much what Platonic philosophy in one of its stages was up to,
and on a certain reading of the later books of Aristotle's metaphysics, Aristotle does say,
in the later books of the metaphysics, when you try to come to terms with what sort of science
is at issue here, that in a certain light, the science at issue here might be called theology.
So yes, indeed, there are Aristotelian anticipations of some of this, that in fact,
a science that transcends the realm of the earthly and material, and attends rather to the cosmic
plan behind all, attends rather to the rational, intelligent plan, the great intelligent
artificer who had put together this scheme in the first instance, that that's the ultimate
subject of metaphysics. Well, all right, this is a pre-Christian, and one might say a pre-Christian
I want to call it a pre-Christian theological view. Theologia, a science that is devoted
to the plans and purposes which for want of a better word, we ascribe to some divine essence,
not Aristotle's word, but certainly when Thomas Aquinas is talking about the divine essence,
we can find things in the metaphysics that match up, if only comfortably,
uncomfortably with that. Now, what gets us from these achievements? God's given us
through the grace of God, we have the theological virtues. Of course, we've always had the
moral virtues and the intellectual virtues. How come we're not better? I mean, there's a question,
I'm sure all of us ask ourselves regularly, with all this equipment, how come we're not better?
And of course here, Thomas is quite faithful to both Aristotle and Plato. Look, we've got these
twin natures. We are material entities. Thomas Aquinas has lengthy sections on the nature of man
in the sense of the biology, the sort of the physics, the nature of perception, emotion,
motivation, desire, and the like. Discussions of the relationship between our characteristics in
this regard and those of non-human animals. So there's plenty of this in Thomas's major works.
And of course, the clear recognition that the culprit is desire, that we inevitably find ourselves
when our God is down. We inevitably find ourselves desiring things that are not good for us.
Children would like to have ice cream before supper. Ha, ha, ha. And every human being
has a tendency to like what is not good for them. The pleasures of the moment very often trump
the dictates of reason. And the hedonistically oriented self-interested person who would rather
have gratification now at all cost, damn the torpedoes full speed ahead, inevitably is moving
in the direction of the brain and the fat. So that all there is as a pattern of stimulation,
desire, the satisfaction of the desire, then the rekindling of the desire, and then a behavior
that'll satisfy it again, an addiction to one's own desires, do you see? There's the problem.
Now, how do we get protection against ourselves in this regard? Well, first we have to have the right
theory of human nature. And again, as I said at the beginning of lecture, you don't get this by
running around and watching what people do. Thomas Aquinas is satisfied that the defining
mark of human nature is rationality itself. That coupled with this is the fact of our divine
pedigree. We are children of God. That God has put us here for a purpose. That purpose is for what
is best in us to flourish. What is best in us is the capacity for an integrated, wholesome family
life, for the responsibilities of parenthood, for responsibilities to the church, to conduct
ourselves in a prudent and reasonable manner, to desire that which is good for us and to shun
what is not in our interest, what is inimical to a rational form of life and a spiritual form of
life. There are these basic goods. We are to act in such a way as to preserve our physiological
integrity, to promote our health. It's one of the great gifts. And so one of the basic human
goods just is the integral physiology that we call the healthy body. We do have the
potentiality for developing the moral and intellectual virtues. And this is by habit
and by study and by contemplation. And we also finally must deploy, as it were, the theological
virtues so that the form of life we live matches up in a proper way with the life that Jesus lived,
a life that was abundant in charity, that was the very epitome of faith in divine providence,
and that gave all of us hope for an eternal future that would cancel out the frustrations
and disappointments of earthly life and reward us for the commitment and devotion that we had
made during those years. You start out with a correct rational understanding of the nature of
human nature, and the psychology, law, and politics will follow. And it won't work the other way around.
That, in a nutshell, is what the Thomistic position is on the problem of knowledge
and the problem of conduct. Much more on this subject, obviously, than can be conveyed in a half hour.
