Well, I think having done a little bit of renaissance bashing in an earlier lecture,
and chiefly to set the record straight on the medieval period, it's only right now to
return to the question, was there a renaissance, and the renaissance now being the renaissance
most people have in mind when they talk about the renaissance, was there a renaissance that
really should engage our attention and indeed attract our allegiance as the great defenders
of the renaissance for centuries now would have us do.
What period are we talking about?
Well, the renaissance is generally regarded as beginning in Florence and the Quattrocento,
Florence in the 1400s.
We do know that what is achieved there is perhaps the first instance of what might be
called conscious urban planning.
This is a city with a group of city fathers taking very, very seriously the civic dimensions
of life and wanting to get it right.
The feudal world is now in the background, urban life has begun in earnest, and the question
is what is the function of the city and what should it look like and what should it try
to promote and the like.
We've got wonderful records of this period.
We've got Alberti's treatise on architecture, d'architectura, Alberti working with the
pope and I say engaging in a quite self-conscious way in the planning of a city, how the height
of the building should match up with the width of the streets, what it is about a city that
makes it the right kind of place to live, whether the children of servants should be
living in the same house as the families that are being served so that even though they
might be children of poverty, they become associated with children of affluence with
the children of successful people.
There's a very definite thoughtfulness now brought about by the dynamics and the complexities
of urban life.
Things are being thought about now at the civic and social level that didn't have to
be considered in any sustained way within the context of feudal organization.
So certainly one thing that is new about the Renaissance, not a rebirth because the ancient
city of Athens was not like Florence and the Quattrocento, no matter what the Florentines
themselves might have thought.
Something new here now is this understanding of the city as having very definite moral purposes.
The city is a place in which we learn lessons and realize possibilities.
The city is a place in which an essentially progressive being, an organic and progressive
being can make his way.
Now of course the ancient polis was also understood as having centrally moral purposes
and ancient Greek maxim is polis under the doska, man is taught by the city.
But not in the sense of this is the place where you come in and make your mark as a
progressive organic being, your Thursdays may be radically different from your Wednesdays
and the like.
No, that wasn't the idea.
But with the Renaissance we do very much have this idea of progress that a life no matter
where it begins can end up in an entirely different place.
This depends on initiative.
If things aren't working out for you in Venice, go to Florence if not there, go to Rome if
not there, go to France.
One can move around, one can make one's way, one can make deals, one can borrow money, one
can engage in banking and trade, join the Navy.
It's an entirely different world.
It's a safer world.
It's a much more mobile world.
And with that mobility, as we see in the 20th century, with that mobility, social issues
arise that otherwise do not arise where people pretty much die in the house in which they
were born.
And where what your father does for a living pretty much determines what you are going
to do for a living.
And what the reputation of your family has been is likely to be the reputation you carry
around with you all the days of your life.
So we want to say that this Renaissance period is new in many important ways, not so much
a rebirth as it is a birth.
Well the governor of Florence, now writing in the 16th century, Leonardo Bruni, who's
chancellor, when he actually writes about his city, and he writes so lovingly about
his city, says, look Florence was never under the foot of an imperial Rome.
It hasn't been a place dictated to.
This is a city which from its very origins has been peopled by a free and creative population.
It's a place that we love.
So you see Bruni, I mean here he's obviously doing some chamber of commerce work.
But Bruni, whether he's being a civic booster or not, is writing something that Florentines
by and large will agree with.
As Albert he puts it in his book, he's describing this place as this, our most.
Now I don't know how many citizens of contemporary cities would describe their places that way,
but the Florentines of the Quattrocento and for a century thereafter will see in Florence
possibilities that they think could not really be legitimately dreamed of by people living
in a less civic, less salubrious and nurturing environment.
Well all right, that says that there's something new about Florentine life in the Quattrocento,
but what about rebirth?
What about renaissance?
What is it that the 19th century esthetes were referring to when they referred to this
period as a rebirth?
Well the Florentines themselves thought of themselves as recovering something that had
been lost, recovering something of the classical world view, the Athenian and I think perhaps
more so the Roman-Republican world view.
What they thought had been lost was a devotion to the humanizing and humanistic arts, to
that centered perspective on human nature and what is right for it.
They thought what had been lost was all of the poetry and music of life, the splendor
of life, the great great sculpture, the great orderliness, the great great beauty, the beauty
of the place for secular purposes, not just great churches and temples, but great houses,
great paintings.
Things like Raphael will end up doing on a wall.
The School of Athens, if you take a look at Raphael's School of Athens, which is I think
usually regarded as one of the great great productions of the Renaissance artistic imagination,
if you take a look at the School of Athens, the layout of the subjects is quite the medieval
curriculum with the liberal arts standing around mathematics, which is the queen of
the sciences and so forth, the centrality of logic, we've got Aristotle and Plato there,
we've got Plato pointing up toward considerations of a transcendent nature and we've got Aristotle
with his hands sort of keeping himself and everything else at ground level and trying
to figure out what the cuttlefish are doing.
I say even in this splendid fresco by Raphael, you do see the recurring themes of the medieval
world view, but of course it's now being presented in an artistic medium that certainly
would have been shocking to medieval citizens, this kind of realism and the like, something
I should think that might have looked quite pagan to them in a way.
Well there is then, shall we call it a rebirth, there is a renewed interest in the human dimensions
of life, the human civic dimensions of life and the part played in that life by art and
architecture, poetry, song, drama and the like.
Those who are engaged in studies of this kind refer to themselves as humanista, these are
the humanists, what it means when we ask the question to what does the phrase Renaissance
humanism refer?
Well I think a lot of people are inclined to think that there was something especially
humanitarian about the citizens of the Renaissance.
I think we have to disabuse ourselves of that prejudice, in fact when in Florence it was
proposed that a scheme of taxation be put together for the benefit and relief of the
poor.
There were threatened riots in the street, indeed I should think by ordinary Renaissance
sensibilities, the idea that successful people should be taxed for their success.
In order to support those who lacked sufficient initiative and vigor to care for themselves,
well this must have looked very, very peculiar indeed.
Let me not dilate on that point, let me just say that Renaissance humanism refers rather
to humanistic studies and humanistic studies being those that feature art and letters,
architecture, painting, poetry, drama and the like.
Now this of course is characteristic of the Hellenic and Hellenistic achievement and the
achievements of ancient Rome, but certainly we don't identify, I mean suppose we had a
true-false test or a fill-in-the-blanks test or a trivial pursuit quiz and we said, all
right, come up with the word that most identifies ancient Athens, that is the one contribution
you would think of that comes to mind when I say the ancient Greeks, this may be a prejudice
of mine, my guess is that most people would, if it weren't the first word, it would be
in the first two or three words, would say philosophy, the ancient Greek.
If we played a word association test and I said, I want you to name three ancient Greek
left at blank, well you'd either think maybe dramatists or philosophers.
Well now if by Renaissance we mean recovering what gives the ancient world its defining
marks, we've then got to match the term Renaissance up with the fact that the Renaissance will
produce no philosophers of abiding significance, do you see?
Now there are plenty of people doing glosses on philosophical works and running schools
in which people study philosophy, there are many, many scholars who are functioning as
exegetes explaining what Plato said and what Aristotle said, I need only mention Lorenzo
Valla and Pomponazzi and Pico della Miranda, the list is a long one, the Medici's support
the formation of a center in Florence which they call I think quite presumptuously the
academy, this is going to have very, very little comparability to what Plato and the
crowd had been up to in ancient Athens.
But I say there's much by way of what might be called philosophical scholarship, the sort
of thing that you might find going on in philosophy departments today even.
But as far as significant original creative philosophical energies coming from those who
are wise and are committed to a philosophical form of life, philosophical productions that
will color and shape philosophical discourse in the centuries to come, well here's another
trivial pursuits question, define that way now, name two Renaissance philosophers, I
don't know who you come up with, Martin Luther is going to be one of the powerful figures
in the history of western civilization, but I don't think the most admiring of Lutherans
would regard Martin Luther's principal contribution to be philosophical, quite the contrary, he's
the one who thinks that the way you get the game played correctly is first by burning
everything Aristotle ever wrote, so whatever might be said of Martin Luther, he certainly
is not applying for a tenured position in a philosophy department.
One of, if I might speak personally for a moment, one of my favorite figures in intellectual
history, certainly top top ten list, is Erasmus, Erasmus who playfully would refer to, as a
good Christian, he would playfully refer to his saint Socrates, Erasmus whose praise
of folly begins with stultitio locutor, folly speaks, do you see, and he's going to comment
on the prejudices and beliefs of his entire age through the right voice, the voice of
folly, Erasmus who understands that every enthusiasm is simply reason denying itself the pleasures
of thought, that everything that gets us to take out after a witch or a neighbor, everything
that finds us investing all in the political dimensions of life, everything that reaches
for splendor and fame, this is all a kind of intoxication that is suffered by people
who really lack the wit and substance, discernment and sheer good humor to live a flourishing
and effective life among friends surrounded by good books, good music, good food, good
fellowship, Erasmus, if you want to use the term renaissance humanism, Erasmus is the
very instantiation of renaissance humanism, this is a character created by what Matthew
Arnold in a later century will call the best thing said and thought by the human race.
Now if that's not a good enough puff for Erasmus, I don't think I can do much better than that,
and let me then go on to say that some to cross all of his works, the Erasmian worldview
does not rise to the level on another construal we might say sink to the level of philosophy
as I have described it. So if you can't get a world class philosopher out of the works
and workings of Erasmus, then I think the point is very well made, and I do think it's
an important point. The renaissance achieves so much at the level of literature, commerce,
art, architecture, and perhaps most importantly civic life, and it's doing this without the
benefit of philosophical originality, and I should say without the benefit of scientific
originality, and a few words on that in a few minutes will help to make that point.
Most of the philosophically inclined commentators of the period, most of the people who are
writing exegetical works on philosophy or running schools or running libraries, have
a rather skeptical position about philosophy and its pretensions. Luther is particularly
thundering in his denunciation of the pagan philosophers, but we can find important and
quite temperate writers, Petrarch himself, who sometimes is regarded as sort of the
personal origin of the renaissance, the great Petrarch, who writes on his own ignorance
and that of many others, says that as far as he's concerned, he can get as far as anybody
needs to get with the Bible, Cicero, and the folk wisdom of his fellow citizens, and he
specifically eschews what he regards as the speculative confusions and ignorances of the
great ancient philosophers. So here's Petrarch, again, you could hardly pick a more salient
figure in what we define as the period of the renaissance, quite skeptical about ancient
philosophy. Lorenzo Valla is quite skeptical about ancient philosophy, in fact quite taken
by the fact that the philosophers of old were so taken by themselves. And this gives us
yet another side of renaissance life that's quite different from what we found in that
part of the classical world that gives it its reputation. There is an unabashed practicality
about this age. This age is featuring, centrally now, life as something that either culminates
in success or failure. I don't think that there would have been many figures in renaissance
Florence and the later renaissance of the north, who actually would have aspired to
the lives of Cleobas and Bito. The idea that the best thing that you're going to have to
show for a hardworking life is that you're going to fall asleep outside a temple, and
most of the people who see your dead bodies when you fail to awaken will recall you as
being a couple of really nice and worthy young men. I don't think this truly would not have
happened enough with the Medici's, for example. And so there is this renaissance conception
of virtue, which is really quite different, I should think, from what Plato had in mind
with virtue and from what Aristotle had in mind with virtue. In the renaissance sense,
Virtus is a kind of publicly observable sort of thing, but it's, I mean, with Aristotle
too, virtue is what the virtuous man does, but all important here is the notion of the
doing, and the doing that qualifies as virtue in the renaissance is really the doings of
the political leader and the doings of the patron. The Medici's will show you their virtue
by the patronage they give to the artists and sculptors and architects of the period.
If you would know the sort of man I am, look at the buildings and paintings and statues
that have been brought about as a result of my patronage. So there's a great, there's
a kind of life as a public figure. It is to be known. You don't want to stand out in some
bold and arrogant way, but your reputation is your virtue. It's not so much an interior
state as it is a public perception. To use contemporary vernacular, if the paparazzi
are not following you around, there's a question about just how much virtue you have attained.
And, of course, on the Stoic and Epicurean and Aristotelian and Platonic views, as different
as they are, it surely isn't the attention of the paparazzi that will qualify you as
a man or woman of virtue. Now, what do we say about the science of the period? I mean,
after all, if we want to regard the Renaissance as the birth of the modern world and if we
identify modernity with scientific achievement, what do we want to say about the science of
the period? Now, I want to classify the age we describe as the Renaissance. I want to
classify this as a transitional period, not the birth of the modern world, but an intermediate
period, a period that has liberated itself from feudal social organization, that has
been valiant in rejecting what it regards as the aimless analyticity of scholastic philosophy.
But it's an age that is spending more time looking back to antiquity, really, than it
seems to be spending looking forward to modernity, or perhaps we might want to say that it's
an age that's trying to look in both directions at the same time. And to some extent, we see
this in the quote, science-close quote of the period.
The Medici's were great collectors of books. In fact, one of the things that went on in
the academy they set up was books were translated and catalogued and made available for scholarly
study and the like. There had been a legend around for the longest time that the great
philosophical insights of Aristotle were really a kind of re-warmed, platonic philosophy,
and that what we find in Plato's dialogues is really just an inkling of the wisdom that
Socrates had. It was about as much of Socrates' wisdom as someone with Plato's limitations
was able to gather, that of course what Socrates knew, which was just a distillation and indeed,
maybe even a dilution of the profound and deep wisdom of Pythagoras. And of course Pythagoras
and his group never wrote anything down anyway. We can only guess what deep, profound knowledge
the Pythagoreans actually had. And if you keep tracing this back, you discover that
the wellspring of all of this knowledge was none other than the god Hermes. And if there
would be any way of discovering what the actual teachings of Hermes were, all would be known.
I say this was something in the wind. It all comes out of Egypt, you know. I mean everything
comes out of Egypt and of course the Renaissance has its own bout with Egyptomania and you
can see this in certain of its architectural features and the like. The Victorians will
give us another round of this. The late Georgian period will give us another round of this.
It's the attractiveness of what for some would be the strange.
Well, guess what? The Medici's get a book which turns out to be the authentic teachings
of Hermes. Here it is. How long we've waited for this? They turn it over for translation.
It's translated and published as the, as the commander, which is the, the, the commander
is the one who's speaking to Hermes Trismegistus. Hermes thrice blessed, do you see? God Hermes
Trismegistus and commander are having these colloquies and commander is recording all
this great wisdom. And so what we get is the corpus Hermeticum.
Well, I tell you that the best scientific minds of the period attach themselves to these
Hermetic writings. Of course there was the usual round of skepticism and the like. Not
too much skepticism about the authenticity of the document, which by the way as it turns
out in the 17th century through the right kind of philological research, Casabon would
would say certainly wasn't done earlier than the second century AD. But, but, but in any
case in, in Renaissance Florence this document came out of the, the crypts of Egypt, you
know, rather out of the, the Hermetic crypt itself after it had no longer been hermetically
sealed, what we might say. Now, and we find all sorts of wonderful things in this. We
find for example that the center of the universe is the sun and that the earth is just one
of the objects that revolves about it. We find a heliocentric theory. Guess who was attracted
to Hermeticism? Copernicus. Guess who was really attracted to Hermeticism? Kepler. Guess
who didn't poo poo it entirely? Entirely. Well, Newton. These ideas have great, great
staying power. Newton is obviously going to be much more removed from, from Hermeticism
than, than Copernicus. Copernicus says, Copernicus says what, what, when he's developing his
own heliocentric theory, he says that this is perfect. It's perfect that the sun would
be in the middle of things. That's where it belongs because it, it is radiating the
kind of energy that is, and these are, these are really hermetic references. We very often
cast Giordano Bruno as one of the forward looking men of science. This is somebody who's, who's
defending the heliocentric theory against, against the Ptolemaic theory, the Ptolemaic
theory according to which the earth is the center and the sun goes around it. Well, Bruno
actually is also one, Bruno will be burned at the stake by the way, but, but before any
of these awful things happen to Bruno, he's running up and down the continent. He goes
as far as, as England and he's promoting Copernicanism. He's promoting the heliocentric
theory. He, he, he even scolds Copernicus in some of his lectures for not seeing the
deep hermetic implications of his own Copernicus, his own theory. There's a wonderful little
vignette and Oxford Don recorded a lecture given by Bruno when Bruno visited Oxford and,
and promoted these views and the like. When Bruno spoke out of town, he, he, he always
one of the marquee, you know, to, to feature his full name in, in Latin, G, Giordanus
Nolus Brunatus. So you'd see that you were going to be addressed today by one Giordanus
Nolus Brunatus. Bruno was a tiny little chap. I think he was about four feet 10 or so. And,
and the Don writes in his notes that we were addressed today by a Florentine, one Giordanus
Nolus Brunatus, a man whose name is longer than his body. Now, now, the point I want
to make on, on this score is not to cast Renaissance speculative science as, as a, as a gaggle of
mystery superstitions and the like. Out of Renaissance alchemy will rise modern chemistry.
I mean, it will be foundational for developments that, that in the ripeness of time give us
the science of chemistry. Hermeticism is, is just what an age that hasn't quite developed
a scientific worldview, but knows that there is something more than what tradition serves
up. Hermeticism is something that will have an appeal. You don't yet have the scientific
and epistemic resources to screen out certain possibilities, to screen them out, because
based on the well-established, developed scientific laws that you have, if that body of knowledge
is right, all of your science must be wrong. So I say to have that critical perspective
already is to have achieved much in science. And the Renaissance is not at a point where
that kind of achievement has, has taken place. Now, the church itself poses something of
a problem, because the doctrinal teachings of the church do reach natural phenomena. God
is the creator of everything. God has placed man at the center of everything. The whole
point of the creation is to have made something in the image and likeness of God who, through
the gift of salvation, might come to spend eternity in joyous contact with the Father,
etc., etc., etc. Now, now the church's position on these things will include, if not explicitly,
and surely by way of implication, more or less official positions on the order of the
heavens, on the place of earth, within the heavens and the like. And in an age that
is dealing hip and thigh with heresies of one sort or another, the musings of scientists
can create something of a furor. There's something else going on in this period, and
that is a gospel of success that is giving rise to excess and at the cost of piety.
And what the Reformation is going to be about finally is the reaffirmation of the pious
life. It seeks to put the brakes on Renaissance developments that are moving so progressively
as actually to leave the profound, deep religious moorings that are the ultimate moorings for
the Christian life. Savanarola wants the vanities burned. He wants paintings and books brought
to the square in Florence and burned up, and they are burned up, and Savanarola himself
will be burned up not far from where he had the vanities burned. Bruno will go about as
a progressive man of science, and he'll get burned at the stake also. Luther, in laying
the foundations for the Reformation, will tell us that the way you begin is with a good book.
He will translate it into a German that is accessible to the man in the street. You begin
with the Bible. You begin with the word of God. You don't need Greek pagans to tell you
how to live your life. Universities should purge themselves of this kind of pseudo-learning.
There is a strong anti-intellectual core in the conservative side of Renaissance thought.
There is a strong superstitious core in the scientific side of Renaissance thought. The
Renaissance is an interim period. It's not the birth of the New World. It's the awakening
to certain possibilities yet to be redeemed.
