Lecture 24 Let Us Burn the Witches to Save Them
My lecture today is going to be on the three centuries of which
are prosecutions and persecutions running roughly from 1400 to 1700.
And I don't want anybody to think that I regard three centuries of witch hunts
as one of the great ideas in philosophy.
So I probably should say just what it is about this three-century spectacle
that requires inclusion in a course of lectures of this kind.
The witch hunts were not a willy-nilly affair.
The witch hunts were based on deeply thought-out considerations
on the nature of sin, the nature of human nature, the nature of law,
the nature of crime and punishment.
The witch hunts would feature centrally the known science of the period.
It would feature medical specialists, if not medical specialists.
Well, specialists in certain fields of inquiry, which I'm happy to say,
no longer feature specialists.
We don't have people pricking bodies to find out where the devil's spot is
and floating women in pools to determine whether their souls weigh less or more and the like.
So certain specialties come and go.
I suspect the specialty of astrology, for example, probably is not...
Well, maybe it is worth investing in,
but there are not likely to be PhDs given in it soon,
although in the past astronomy and astrology might have been quite close together.
So I say the witch hunts and the witch persecutions
tell us something about the intellectual ethos,
not just of an epic, not just of, let's say, 1450 to 1500,
but the broad intellectual ethos of a period that spans centuries
and, most importantly, perhaps for present purposes,
spans periods of time in which the modern world will be introduced
to the greatest scientific achievements.
There are witch hunts and witch persecutions are still going on.
When Descartes is alive and Newton and Galileo,
they are at a fever pitch in the age of Copernicus
and then Kepler and Tycho Brahe.
So this isn't some activity and some backwater
engaged in by superstitious people who really have no idea of what's happening.
This is an official systematic program of arrest,
interrogation, trial procedure,
the application of developed principles of Roman law
presided over by magistrates and figures with the right education.
Some of the best people are engaged in this importantly.
There are documents written and drafted and promulgated
that alert officials as to how these trials are to be conducted,
how the punishment must fit the crime,
the conditions under which an admission of guilt will be acceptable to the court,
and all along determining whether the alleged witch actually is a witch
by using the best techniques, the best evidence,
the best scientific and technical information
and procedure available at the time.
This is an important chapter
and it's also an illuminating chapter.
Every age has its witches
and every age has a theory that confirms the fact
that those targeted for particular abuse
or those suffering particular attention and scrutiny
are really the right ones.
We got it right all along.
If there isn't a commie under every bed,
you can do check the broom closet, that sort of thing.
So every age has this Tiananmen Square
and the Chinese in Tibet, et cetera, et cetera.
It's usually based on the view that someone's conduct
or perspective or theory is so unorthodox
as to constitute a threat to the received wisdom
and the core values that keep the community together.
Whether or not you call such a person a witch
depends on the discursive practices of the time.
But the idea behind it is very often the same idea.
Well, how do I know that?
Well, one way I know that is that in the entire history
of recorded law, provision is always made for witches.
Roman law makes provision for what you do with witches.
The Greeks had to deal with...
Greek law has to deal with property damage
brought about by witchcraft.
And there isn't any period that I know of in legal history
that's entirely silent on this matter,
except for from early in the 19th century on.
Although in the middle of the 19th century,
there will be adjudications in which cases of insanity
are understood partly in terms of the phases of the moon.
So I say old ideas have great staying power
when they play into our most cherished prejudices.
Well, how do the Romans and Roman law understand
witches?
Well, they understood witches, I guess,
the way anybody who believes in witches today
would understand witches.
These are people who have formidable powers.
Can't figure out quite how they came about having these powers.
Things like this happen.
They can do things.
Well, they're formidable powers.
They might not be formidable powers,
but they're different powers.
There are herbalists in ancient Rome.
These are women whose husbands have died.
They've got no visible means of support
other than moving their little push carts
through the streets of Rome
and taking out a specially grown basil
or parsley or oregano
and getting some oils out of it.
And it just turns out that if you use my concoction,
your warts will go away
or you'll get a good night's sleep
or your children might behave better.
And if you put two drops in this at night
in a glass of wine,
your wife will love you in the morning, et cetera, et cetera.
So there are people doing this,
applying trades of this kind.
Or their special prayers
might bring good fortune to somebody.
Now, this has to do with what the Roman world
referred to as the conduct of the Lamia.
This is the good witch or the white witch
or the white magic or whatever.
The law took no notice of this at all.
People going around and doing things like this
just went around and doing things like this.
I guess if you were a very sophisticated
and rather skeptical Roman,
you would say that anybody who's sucker enough
to pay for this sort of thing deserves everything he gets.
But there isn't any reason to clog the courts
with activities of this kind.
And by and large, the pre-Christian world
deals with the so-called white witch,
the harmless witch, just that way.
Now, the law, however, does take particular notice
of forms of witchcraft
that are destructive of property or person.
And how does ancient Roman law deal with witches
who do this, where the cattle die
or the barn burns down
or the wart grows back or gets bigger?
Now, in that case, the penalties of law
are determined by the damage that's done.
It's not because it was brought about by witchcraft.
It wouldn't matter.
If you, in fact, are responsible for this happening,
then the penalty is going to be
brought down on you for having been responsible.
If you did it by way of witchcraft, fine.
If you did it by way of intentional design
or because you're a paid arsonist,
the law isn't particularly or deeply concerned
with underlying patterns of motivation
or even the sources of the power that you have to do this.
It's that you did it.
The law's position in the ancient world is very much,
what did you do and in the circumstance
could you have done otherwise?
We leave it to the playwrights to
plumb the depths of human psychology.
We leave it to the philosophers to tell us
what the healthy mind and the insane mind
might look like.
Law is concerned with the act and its consequences.
What did they know?
So the ancient courts and the ancient jurists
are not big on theory,
and they're not particularly one over
to considerations of deep motivation and the like.
Christianity introduces a new set of problems
as regards witchery.
Now, I want to be slow,
but I hope not boring on this.
One does have to be careful to lay this out,
particularly within the ambit of a half hour.
Look, central to Christian moral teaching
is that our worthiness for praise and blame
is logically tied to our moral freedom.
You do not praise one for falling at 32 feet per second per second.
The laws of physics guarantee that an object
is going to fall with that acceleration.
So we don't say, my, how quick you are.
That's not a cause for praise.
And if you're dropped out a window
and fall at 32 feet per second per second
and land on somebody and cause them bodily harm,
we do not charge you with the moral offense of hurting others.
We say for goodness' sake,
this poor person was thrown out the window
and landed on somebody.
The damage was done, in effect,
the damage was done by a physical object falling from a height,
and it just happens to be the case
that that physical object was billed.
No, praise and blame are reserved for those actions
over which you have moral control.
Those things that come about as a result of your intentions
and the laws referred to as mens rea,
you've got to be able to frame the wicked deed in your mind.
The mind itself has to be the source of this offense.
Now, this, of course, is co-extensive
with juridical reasoning since a time out of memory
that the law punishes what the actor does
when the actor in the circumstance could have done otherwise.
And there have always been, throughout the history of law,
the mitigating circumstances of coercion
or sickness, insanity, and the like.
But I say the emphasis that Christian teaching will place
on moral freedom is a new and more significant emphasis
because the stakes now have to do with nothing less
than eternal salvation.
Part of this teaching, then,
is that the powers of Satan cannot be deployed in such a way
as to rob us of our moral freedom
because, if that were the case,
there'd be no basis upon which to judge us at all.
How could you ever tease out the difference
between someone acting in a malign way by intention
and someone whose intentions had been so corrupted by the devil
that, in fact, the person were merely an instrument of satanic purposes?
So there's a very strong presumption of moral autonomy.
Call that article one of the Constitution, that sort of thing.
That's central, do you see?
Now, how do you account for any supernatural event?
Well, take the words, literally, supernatural,
something that is above and beyond what is naturally produced.
These come in a variety of forms.
The most popular, of course, are miracles, miraculous events.
David Hume, perhaps somewhat playfully,
will describe a miracle as the suspension of a law of nature.
And this really is the ordinary sense of the miraculous.
That is what all the forces of nature routinely bring about.
Now, it's not being brought about.
Something's being brought about that you almost never would see happen
in the natural course of events.
Well, now, suppose there is a person who has supernatural powers.
Supernatural powers.
Someone who can bring something about that nobody else can bring about.
Well, very, very few people have ever brought about.
What do you say about such a person?
Well, do you say that they are performing miracles
and really should be understood as saints?
Some people in this period were performing
what were regarded as miraculous cures and the like,
and indeed were understood as saints.
But the actions of the witch fall outside the pattern
and possibilities of nature and not in a saintly way.
Well, apart from, you know, who?
Who has supernatural power?
That is apart from Almighty God.
Who has powers that go beyond the power of the natural?
Well, of course, the devil has these powers.
Now, if the witch has supernatural power,
and if the witch's supernatural power is by way of the devil,
what difference would it make,
whether what she is doing with this power
is getting rid of warts or causing bonds to burn down?
Obviously, she must have in some way,
if only implicitly, accepted the devil's help here.
What in the period of the witch hunts will be called
entering into a pactum implicitum?
There's an implicit pact.
You see, there must be some kind of pact.
Otherwise, the devil willy-nilly can take control of our autonomy,
make us instruments of his purpose and the like,
and that is not acceptable.
So there must either be an explicit or an implicit pact
that is formed, a Faustian pact.
Do you say, I'll give you my soul, so to speak,
if you let me cure warts or cause bonds to burn down?
Well, now this puts an entirely different face on the act of witchery.
Witchery now becomes the crime of heresy.
And as the crime of heresy,
it becomes a matter of small consequence,
whether the witchery is for good or for evil,
whether its principal effect is negligible or indeed colossal.
The witch, if acknowledging herself to be a witch,
has entered into a pact, if only an implicit one,
and that pact itself constitutes the life of the heretic.
The stakes now are very, very high
because acts of heresy are punishable and indeed punishable by death.
So you see how the witch theory,
coming out of a more foundational theological theory,
a theological scientific theory regarding the order of nature
and the grounds on which anything can escape the order of nature,
how all of this will become a background consideration
for the very definition of witch
and for the fact that witches are going to be tried
and that the trials are consequential.
Now trial procedure has already been rediscovered.
The 13th century is in full possession
of a very nearly full possession of Roman legal procedure and the like.
And one of the great gifts of that recovery of Roman law,
that recovery and dissemination of Roman law,
is that the old accusatorial scheme of law
is now, if not replaced, then usefully augmented
by an inquisitorial procedure.
And I can't go on at length on this,
but let me make a distinction between the two.
Before the recovery and the reapplication of developed Roman law,
the complaints between parties would be in the form of accusations
and the way it would work is Smith accuses Jones of doing something.
Now Smith and Jones are going to bring their cases before the relevant tribunal
and Smith as the accuser is going to have to make his case.
If he fails, he faces multiple penalties.
There's going to be a counteraction brought against him
and this puts some sort of a ceiling on the kinds of accusations
that will be brought against people.
Now, in the medieval period, the way some of these competing claims were broken
would be through trial and ordeal and compregnation.
And again, I mentioned Monty Python in a previous lecture.
Well, these things can be treated as if they were merely ridiculous.
But trial and ordeal and compregnation, trial and ordeal,
imposed great, great trials and ordeals on the contestants.
There were very good reasons not to bring trivial and frivolous accusations against another.
You might find yourself in a jousting match.
You might find yourself carrying hot coals.
You might have hot objects across hot coals carrying burning water.
And the idea was that God will favor the innocent
and that itself is based on what I should think is an extremely optimistic
and counter-historical thesis.
But I say with the recovery of Roman law, some of these practices went the way of all flesh
and were replaced by an inquisitorial procedure where the authorities actually can bring an action
and engage in an inquisition, take counsel and testimony from the parties to the dispute
and then the magistrate himself can undertake the appropriate hearing
and can impose the appropriate remedies.
Now, I say this inquisitorial function, which is very much like a grand jury function in our system of law,
this overall had salutary effects.
But it worked very much to the disadvantage of those tried for witchcraft
because now the accuser did not have to face the accused.
The inquisitor could ask all sorts of questions and one asked,
well, who brought these charges against me would be told,
and this was unique to the witch prosecutions, would be told,
look, powers of the witch being what they are,
we don't want to compromise the health or well-being of those who have brought charges against you,
as was said in one case, from the very nature of the charge,
you should be able to guess who brought the charges against you.
So there were deviations from accepted trial procedure.
Torture was permitted, but no confession made in the torture chamber would count as evidence against the witch.
Rather, a period of time had to elapse two or three days,
and the same admission would have to be made in open court,
not during the coercive period of torture.
Torture typically was not needed, however, because most charged with witchcraft
agreed that they were witches. You get the picture, don't you?
Well, I mean, we're talking about eccentric and very often troubled people,
80 to 90% of whom were women, generally older women, very often unattached,
not at a very high level in society, not at a very high level of education.
As the example I gave you, people walking through the cities, applying their trade,
trying to eke out a living, they don't have a settled domestic life,
they don't enjoy any degree of prosperity, they might be at sixes and sevens with their own rational powers.
I should say that with marginal exceptions, the insanity defense has never pleaded in these cases,
and in fact, given the nature of the witch theory, it couldn't have been pleaded anyway, do you see?
So we have people owning up to the fact that they do have these powers.
The way you get charged with witchcraft is because you've probably said something like,
I shall put a curse on you for this, or I'm responsible for what happened to your sheep
because of what you said to me, that kind of thing.
Very often witches were drawn from a community in which the people bringing the charge
otherwise would quite naturally be friends of theirs and neighbors of theirs.
And a church hell-bent on rooting out heresy in all of its forms
had good reason to make a spectacle of those engaged in this kind of heresy.
They had very little by way of self-defense in these actions,
and their execution could have the necessary chilling effect.
Putting a better face on it, the church authorities knew that it was far more important to save the soul
than preserve the body, and if burning the witch is a means to salvation,
then in the flames you will find the greatest of favors we can do for anyone.
Well, you do need evidence for this sort of thing, don't you?
I mean, these courts are serious places.
The magistrates we have reason to believe are honorable men.
I do say that 80 or 90% of the cases we are dealing with women as the victims of this sort of activity.
Some have read patent misogyny into the entire enterprise.
That's a separate subject, and it's one that one doesn't have time for in this context.
What kind of evidence?
We do need evidence. It can't just be that somebody calls you a witch.
It's not like Salem. In fact, by European standards, the Salem thing was rather scandalous.
All this based chiefly on hearsay evidence and on the theatrical behavior of the accusers.
But we actually want some palpable proof that those charged with being witches are witches.
Well, go something like this then.
First you need a book, you need a treatise, you need a document put together by those who have expert knowledge
and the right kind of learning to lay out the salient characteristics of the witch
and how these characteristics are to be discovered through the right kind of examination.
You need a book that tells you what the right punishment is.
You need a book that sets forth the theory of the witch, the basis upon which one comes to be a witch, etc.
And this has to be a book applied in a sufficiently even-handed way so that it doesn't make much difference where in Christendom you are.
You have just as good a chance of justice in one place as another.
The book was the Malleus Maleficarum.
The authors were two Dominicans and the Pope put the seal of approval on it as did the kings and princes of Europe.
So the book was in place. What we discover in the book is this.
Among other things, by entering into a pact with the devil, the witch has a diminished or even lost capacity for remorse.
What that means then is that what a God-fearing and good Christian person would find so melancholy and woeful as to weep over.
The witch will not weep over.
And so if you approach the witch with an official text to be recited seriously and somberly,
regarding the love that Mary had for her dying son whose blood was spilled for our salvation,
if you go down this list, reminding this person of the ultimate sacrifice of Jesus, God-made man, for her and her salvation,
and after you've given this full account, you point to her and say,
now do you cry and no tear forms?
This at least is suggestive evidence that you're dealing with a witch. It's the tear test.
When James I of England will write his little treatise on demonology,
it's something he backed away from a little later in life,
but when he writes the treatise on demonology and talks about the tear test,
he not only summarizes the tear test but says,
beware lest you be gulled by the tears of the crocodile, the tears of the crocodilia.
So even forming tears may not quite do it if there's some reason to believe that these are not authentic tears.
By the way, in case you're wondering, yes, one of the characteristics of aging is dry-eye.
We have whole clinics set up to deal with it, and it would not at all be uncommon for post-menopausal women,
particularly with not an especially wholesome regimen, dietary and otherwise,
for them to be incapable of the kind of full lacrimation that younger people can provide.
So too bad they didn't know. Well, they knew about dry-eye,
but they had a different theory to account for it.
The tear test. Now, how about the flotation test?
Freud would have had a field day with this.
Woman is put in the center of a circular pool that is deeper than her height,
and she is held up suspended by chaps around that circle holding long sticks pressed gently against her body.
And the symbolism is something you should be too ashamed even to consider.
But in any case, there she is, and she's being thus suspended.
And on signal, the sticks are pulled away, and the question is, does she float?
If she sinks, the presumptive evidence is against her being a witch,
and if she floats, the presumptive evidence is in favor of her being a witch.
There's a certain property of levity that's taken on when the soul has lost saving grace, etc.
In any case, you float.
If you've come into one of those packs with you know who, you tend to float.
Osteoporosis, by the way, is something that is going to be commented on in the 16th century by Johann Wehr.
He doesn't deny there are witches. He says, look, that older women float is to be understood,
according to older women having more brittle bones.
I mean, of course, they float. It's the lightness of the bone.
They may be witches, but you can't just base it on a test like that.
Wehr's book, of course, was condemned by both Protestant and Catholic faculties at all the major universities.
You know, what did he know?
So you've got the quotation, and then, of course, you've got what in its way is probably the most assault of test of all.
For the devil to work his way and have his influence and to confer the powers that the witch is after,
the devil has to do this through the instrument of the body itself.
Where the devil has entered the body, the body will have lost its sensitivity.
There will be evidence of the devil's mark.
Now, the devil is a cunning chap, so the devil is likely to leave his mark in a relatively inaccessible place.
So what is called for here is completely shaving the body of the person charged with witchery,
and then bringing in specialists who know exactly how to apply pricking calipers to the surface of the body
and the inner recesses of the body to locate points of reduced sensitivity.
They are called witch-prickers.
And if, in fact, you get the combination of a flotation, the failure to form tears,
an admission of witchery in the first place, and a devil's mark picked up by the witch-pricker,
you might as well get yourself ready for pregation.
You might as well get yourself ready for death by burning.
What do we want to say about all this?
It's going on in the Renaissance.
The body count is in the tens of thousands.
It's done for a noble cause, human salvation.
If the question is, are your chances better in Catholic Europe than in Protestant Europe,
I would say the statistics here are not particularly good.
Your fate does have a lot to do with where you are, but I'm not sure it breaks down very well on sectarian grounds.
I think you've probably got, shall we say, six chances in ten of going up in smoke in a Catholic land
and maybe four chances in ten in a Protestant one.
Are you better off in a secular or ecclesiastical court?
We've got the kings and princes of Europe proving they're good Christians.
Chances are you would do worse in a secular court than you might in an ecclesiastical court.
All the convenient discriminants, all of the convenient partitionings of good guys and bad guys
in a matter of this kind just won't work at all.
This went on for a long time.
It went on as scientific developments were proceeding apace.
It went on in the face of counter-evidence, of eloquent defenses of those charged with this.
This was something that gained momentum.
It gained momentum.
It took on a life of its own, and it took on a life of its own because it achieved certain significant social objectives.
First, it put on notice anyone tending toward heretical beliefs and practices.
Secondly, it gave an authority to the accusers and the courts that bolstered their general authority.
Third, it centered religious teaching regarding the source of good and evil in the world.
But it had a side effect that turned out to be a quite important side effect.
Suppose you were engaged in naturalistic studies of this kind.
Suppose you were doing alchemical research.
Suppose you were engaged in what the Renaissance might take to be science.
You had to make abundantly clear that you weren't engaged in that other kind of activity.
And one of the side effects of this was the development of what I've called in other places a rhetoric of scientific objectivity
even before there were developed principles of scientific method.
We already see a scientific community forming in a very self-defensive way
at a time before science has worked out its own canons of inquiry and explanation.
And the rhetoric of scientific objectivity still presents itself as a form of orthodoxy,
more or less immune to criticism from the outside.
