Lecture 25, Francis Bacon's Great Instauration, the authority of experience.
When the writers of the 18th century Enlightenment reflected on the century before their own,
and judged it to be the dawn of the new, the great great age of science, the great age of Isaac Newton,
Isaac Newton being a veritable icon in the mind of 18th century Enlightenment philosophers,
it was quite customary for Newton's name to be joined to the name of Francis Bacon.
We hear repeatedly in 18th century treatises of the method of Bacon and Newton,
of the science of Bacon and Newton, and by many lights Francis Bacon was the prophet, so to speak,
whose prophecies would be redeemed in the extraordinary achievements of Isaac Newton.
With Francis Bacon right at the beginning of the 17th century,
the world of thought is introduced to what Bacon himself will come to call a great instauration,
a novam organam, a new method, and you can just feel in the very prose itself
the thought of a man who understands that the antique world is being seen now in the rear view mirror,
that progress is in front of us, and that all we have to do is get the method right.
We have to disabuse ourselves of the reassuring ignorances of the antique past
and get ourselves ready for a new and prosperous voyage,
whose maps will be set by the senses themselves and by reason pulling together the facts of sense,
the data of science in ever more coherent holes.
Bacon is one of the great accomplished figures and complex figures of the Elizabethan age.
His dates are 1561 to 1626.
He will hold various positions of the most influential being as Lord Chancellor of the realm.
He's a significant figure in the history of British common law.
He's important as a judge.
He has functioned admirably and ably for the first Queen Elizabeth,
though never rising as high or as quickly as he'd like to.
He had an uncle who was one of the important members of the Queen's cabinet,
her finance minister and the like.
He never could quite get the patronage from his uncle that he needed
to get all the plumb positions he really wanted.
He is a man of great ambition, by the way.
He'd be in a kind of lifelong intellectual struggle with Sir Edward Cook, C-O-K-E,
one of the great fathers of the British common law tradition,
one of the great authoritative writers on British common law.
Sir Edward Cook and Bacon actually were in pursuit of the same young women,
the same young woman earlier in their lives, and Cook won that one.
And in many of the subsequent skirmishes, I think we can say that Sir Edward Cook came out on top also.
Bacon had to resign from the bench in a scandal on the basis of the charge,
but perhaps was a correct charge, though it scarcely would have focused on Bacon in any singular way,
that he had accepted a bribe of one sort or another.
He doesn't strike me as the sort of chap who could do anything quite that puny,
but there were very good political reasons for undermining the authority of Bacon.
He's one of the great stylists in the English language.
There is more than one Shakespeare scholar in the world.
I think the number is probably quite small now, but most people are satisfied that it's the Earl of Oxford
who wrote all of the plays of Shakespeare.
But when I was a youngster, the controversial theory was that all the plays of Shakespeare were written by Francis Bacon.
Bacon, of course, does have a magnificent style.
He's the very soul of wit.
He can turn a phrase like nobody else except, of course, Shakespeare.
And I come from the Fuddy Dud School of Amateur Shakespeare Scholarship.
I think the plays of Shakespeare were written by a chap named Bill Shakespeare,
or Shakespeare, he spelled it differently.
And on the proposition that you couldn't have that much depth and penetration and wisdom
with the sort of negligible education that William Shakespeare had, I say, aha,
another of the pretensions of the Academy.
How is it that all the PhDs are not out there writing King Lear then, do you see?
So I'm not one over by that one.
But certainly Bacon would not have had to write any of Shakespeare's plays
to go down in history as one of the great essayists,
one of the great moral essayists and juridical essayists ever to write in the English language.
His philosophical works are very much devoted to prosecuting what today we would call
the agenda of science, to put centrally on the map of thought
a scientific way of doing things.
Now, just a word about the age of the first Queen Elizabeth.
This Elizabethan period is a kind of sinus clearing, expansionist, prospering period.
Here's this woman who's an expert latinist who can do a man's job better than any man has ever done it.
A person of great, great focus.
She functions as one of the great patrons in the history of art and letters.
She wants her reign to produce something special and singular in the world.
She's judged by the poets of the time as the fairy queen.
She is astraya.
There's something quite magical about her.
As a result of her reign, things will be done that have never been done before.
This is the general framework, the ethos, in which an intelligence such as Bacon's
will set itself to the task of contributing to the new,
enlarging the possibilities yet even further.
And most importantly of all, dragging the human imagination,
kicking and screaming away from the secure moorings of the old Greek,
the old Latin, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
If the Renaissance is an age in transition,
the age of Elizabeth is an age that understands itself and sees itself largely in futuristic
and evolutionary terms.
This is a crowd looking toward tomorrow and not being distracted
by the celebrated achievements of the past.
Duly noted achievements of the past, but that's the past.
Of things that have never been done, do you see?
Bacon will tell us that it is an unsound fancy and self-contradictory
to think that things that have never been done will be done,
except by a method that has never been tried.
Let me do it again.
I think I've got this down.
If it's not a perfect quote, there's only a word or two out of order.
It is an unsound fancy.
Fancy in that sense, meaning just idea.
It's an unsound fancy and self-contradictory to think that things that have never been done
will be done except by a method that has never been tried.
Now, what is this method that has never been tried?
Bacon here wants to set down nothing less than the methods of invention,
the methods of discovery, the means by which secure and certain knowledge can be gained.
The problem of knowledge is going to be answered in a word.
If you want to know what there is, go look at it.
The guide here is experience.
It's the light of experience.
It's not the authority of the past.
He says, look, Aristotle was a very clever chap.
Aristotle needs no defense from me.
That wise old Greek, probably the smartest kid on the block.
His biographers should never cease praising him.
But think of the achievement of Aristotle as a kind of water level.
If all you do is stay with the wisdom of Aristotle,
your knowledge will never rise higher than where it was when he left off.
We can't just get anywhere by sitting around and reviewing the genius of Aristotle.
And by the way, condemning anything that seems to depart from the Aristotelian canon.
The chap died in the 4th century BC for goodness sake.
That was a long time ago. Two millennia.
Let's get on with it.
So Bacon is not setting out to engage in a kind of Aristotle bashing.
His position is a progressivist position.
There's an impatience about it, an elegance about it.
Let's say it's an elegant impatience.
The great work is the Novomorganum, the new method.
And the new method is now featuring, what is the new method, featuring experimental science.
That's what's new about it.
And in its way, I mean, Roger Bacon, no relation as best we can tell,
but Roger Bacon's achievement is notwithstanding,
the Oxford Experimental Movement notwithstanding.
Bacon really does have a more modern conception of what an experimental science looks like.
It looks like what it involves is a set of disciplined and systematic observations
which are stored in what Bacon calls the table of discovery.
Now these initial experiments, Bacon tells us there are really two genres of experimental science.
There are two kinds of experimental programs.
One he says are the experiments that you might call the experimenta lucifera.
These are the light shedding experiments.
They're light shedding.
They shed light in that they tell you what's there.
And while these are just systematic studies of the influence of A on B,
the routine mechanical causal relationships that you come to observe
between events in the external world.
And you file these in the table of discovery.
He says the nice thing about this kind of experimental work,
which some of you might regard as a kind of busy work,
the nice thing about this kind of experimental work is it never fails.
If all you're setting out to do is determine the influence of A on B
and you set up the conditions properly and you do the study,
you will know the effects of A on B.
So this is something that never gets undone.
And you never go home with that melancholy desperate sense that you've made no progress.
You have made progress.
Any time you've learned anything about the causal connections in the natural world,
you've made progress.
And you should look for these connections everywhere, everywhere.
On things like dissections of human corpses and the like,
you know, there's a certain fragility of temperament,
at least at the time when it came to that sort of thing, though it was going on.
Ah, says Bacon.
And as for things that are mean and sorted, you see,
and as for things that are mean and sorted,
whatever deserves to exist deserves to be known.
So Bacon here is saying, look, the policy has to be a hands-off policy.
If you want to find out about the world and the universe surrounding it,
that includes everything.
Nothing is a taboo topic.
Take off your gloves, roll up your sleeves,
and get down into that swampy complexity of reality
and create order where initially you find a mess.
You do this by turning on the lights and finding out what's there.
And turning on the lights and finding out what's there
is what the experimental Lucifer are all about.
Well, this is what most of Bacon's critics, by the way,
would have to mean by, quote, mere, Baconian fact-gathering, close quote.
And indeed, if experimenter Lucifer were the only sorts of experiments
that Bacon countenanced and sought to promote,
we would say that he was about as tedious and dull
as any number of contemporary scientists are,
who seem to be engaged in nothing but a kind of Baconian fact-gathering.
In psychology, this, by the way, has reached epidemic proportions.
And not only lately, one of the great 20th century psychologists,
Donald Hebb, now deceased, used to have a phrase,
I think I've got this right, one of his students told me,
that he used to speak often of what he called porcupine research.
And what Hebb meant by porcupine research was this.
Now, we've done a study, and we have found this relationship in the rat, the cat,
the dog, the pigeon, the goldfish, and the resus monkey.
And we are now going to undertake a series of studies to see if we can get it in the porcupine.
And here, Hebb is reflecting on what might be called the dismal prospects
for a merely Baconian fact-gathering enterprise presumptuously calling itself science.
Well, this gets us to the experimenter fructifera.
Ah, the experiments that bear fruit.
Now, when you go through Bacon's volumes to see precisely which kinds of experiments he has in mind,
there's a fair amount of dull Baconian fact-gathering that's set forth in these volumes.
And I don't think anybody would be celebrating Bacon's part in the history, in the modern history of science
by pointing to the particular experiments that he thinks are the important ones to do.
I would not cast Bacon as in any sense a great scientist.
He might be Newton's prophet, but he's not Newton, and he's not Galileo and the like.
He's essentially laying out the field.
He's laying out the boundary conditions.
He's providing the inspiration and somewhat providing what might be called the architectonics of experimental labors.
But he's not doing research that will have any lasting value,
and he's not even proposing experiments that the great age of science will find either illuminating or fruit-bearing.
But what he's getting at with the notion of experimenter fructifera will turn out to be
some experiments actually allow you to choose between theoretical possibilities.
They're experiments which conducted in certain ways actually lead to the falsification of one of two alternative possibilities.
There's something sort of pre-Carl Popper in the Baconian sense of the experimenter fructifera.
Popper, of course, is aware of the fact that if what we take to be scientific understanding is the possession of a universal law,
well, no number of confirmations will ever confirm a universal law,
because a universal law refers to an infinite number of possibilities and life being short,
you would never be able to confirm all of the infinite number of ways in which A and B are functionally related.
So you've got this perplexing situation in which the confirmatory procedures of science can never be used,
where, in fact, you're dealing with the other aim of science, namely the possession of a universal law.
Of course, Popper famously inserts instead of verification as the essential nature of the logic of science, falsification.
No number of positive instances will ever confirm a universal law,
but one instance of falsification is enough to defeat it.
Well, you get the spirit of this, not the wording, but you get the spirit of this in Bacon's sense of the experimenter fructifera,
doing the kind of research that really tells in favor of one possibility and very much against another,
given you've got competing possible explanations, causal explanations as to what's going on.
Now, there's something else we find in the Novomorganum.
Of course, he says, and as for things that are mean and sorted, whatever deserves to exist deserves to be known,
but there are other things that are not only not mean and sorted, they're absolutely sublime.
The human understanding is a case in point.
Science has no reason to stop short of an examination of the mental life of the scientist himself, in fact, mental life in general.
What we need is a special science. He calls it the philosophy of humanity, so to speak.
What today we might be inclined to call psychology, if in fact psychology actually is doing this.
Cognitive psychology to some extent does do this.
What we want is a science that is brought to bear on the actual operations of the mind itself.
And this science, like science in general, is going to have these two experimental components,
the experimenter lucifera, where you set about to establish the factual operations of the mind.
We're going to see much of this being picked up and carried forward by John Locke in a future lecture.
Not that Locke had to sit down and read Bacon and say, aha, now I know what I'm going to do,
but I say Bacon here again is prophetic, even if he's not directorial, so to speak.
The experimenter fructifera is much less clearly spelled out in this part of Bacon's program,
but quite clearly he understands that there are observations that will tell for or against a particular theory regarding human nature.
Now there's something else in this part of Bacon's scientific psychology worthy of note.
He says, look, if you're going to do this, and we must do this, we must have this philosophy of humanity sort of thing.
Of course, humanity presents itself in two rather different aspects.
It presents itself in that root biological aspect of human beings as biological entities,
and there's an obvious connection between the operations of the mind and the operations of the body.
So one of these sciences is going to be patterned very much on the model of the Hippocratic physicians, do you see?
That is to say Bacon already is recognizing in the first half of the 17th century that a systematic scientific psychology
is to some extent going to be a physiological psychology.
It's going to be indeed a medical psychology, something like, I don't want to put words in Bacon's mouth,
but if indeed he is using the Hippocratics as an example, then he must have this sort of thing in mind.
He must have in mind a scientific psychology that derives insights and essential information from, for example, clinical neurology.
We understand how the mind operates by taking a look at the disordered mind as a result of brain pathology
or vascular lesions, etc. I mean, this is going well beyond anything you'll find in Bacon's Novomorganum,
but it's not going that far beyond a model of scientific psychology based on the Hippocratic clinical tradition.
Ah, but man manifests himself not merely as a biological or medical entity,
an entity best characterized as healthy or diseased.
Man manifests himself and his humanity most fully in society, in his political and civic life,
in his interpersonal relations. This is a central figure in the Elizabethan age speaking, do you see?
Man in all of his various forms and activities of life gives you a creature that can never be bottled up in terms of his internal biology,
but can only be understood under the light of history, civics, politics, Francis Bacon.
Who's the model here? The model here is not Hippocrates.
The model here, so much for the notion that Bacon spends most of his time bashing Aristotle, the model here is Aristotle.
What Bacon finds in Aristotle is this full appreciation of the fact that a developed psychology is at once politics, ethics, moral thought,
biology, do you see? Ethology, relationship within the overall animal kingdom, metaphysics,
those things that transcend the level of mere material and corporeal life and the like.
So we have this two branched philosophy of humanity, one in the Hippocratic tradition that is entirely naturalistic, biological, clinical and medical,
and one in the naturalistic hyphen political tradition of Aristotle, man in society, man understood as a participant,
and indeed as a recipient in a series of interpersonal influences of a social and moral nature.
So that there must be the study of man in the particulate and the study of man in the aggregate.
Man in the aggregate, so Bacon is looking ahead to a kind of sociology, because man in the aggregate, like man in the particulate,
is very much a reflection of his experiences. The primary mode of knowing is sensory and perceptual and observational,
and on the basis of what we know we come to be the kinds of beings that we are.
Therefore it's entirely likely that the nature of humanity is going to reflect the local conditions in which it has been shaped
and the social kills in which it has been forged.
Now so far to this point you might think that you're looking at a sort of early version of social constructionism,
meets B.F. Skinner, behaviorism and the like. It's a rather interesting turn taken here.
Bacon is not indifferent to hereditary factors and to the men of gold, men of brass, men of silver sort of thing.
He doesn't dilate on it, but it's quite clear that what we're getting here is not a radical behaviorism at all.
He knows enough about animal breeding and animal husbandry and the like to recognize that the environment can do much, but it can't do all.
So built into this is a rather conservative, I mean it's a very progressive, it's a very optimistic, cheerful,
novum organum, the world is our oyster, just get your method right and the sky's the limit.
But Bacon also is realist enough to know that there are certain constraints,
even on what science can understand and can explain and can bring about.
Now to call Francis Bacon a prophet of Isaac Newton and to say that the novum organum is actually a new method,
requires us again to take hold of Ariadne's Golden Cord and to pull ourselves to various places in the highways and byways of human history
to make sure that we're not ascribing newness to something that really isn't new.
I'll be closing the lecture in my characteristic finger-wagging, bloody-dutish way,
but I do think these reminders are particularly important lest we be victimized by what scholars sometimes call presentism.
You know, it all began with us.
Look, experimental science is going on a pace in the ancient Greek world.
I mentioned in a previous lecture, all you need is Archimedes for that one.
This is a developed understanding of what we mean by finding the relevant variables that determine a particular outcome
and discovering a method by which you can prove that it is X and not Y that is responsible for Z.
Certainly the Hippocratics are referred to by Bacon himself,
so if what you're looking for is an anticipation of a human science patterned along clinical observation
and the entry into the table of discovery of what the clinical scientist or physician has turned up, this is ancient.
If you're looking for something rather more modern than that, systematic physiological studies of the effects of introducing lesions
or surgical intrusions into animals to see what the consequences are,
well, certainly the 2nd century AD, if it hosted no one other than Galen himself,
would have provided ample evidence of a deep, sophisticated, scientific understanding of how you do...
Look, I don't want to encourage anybody to cut up animals even for an evening's meal,
let alone out of mere funky curiosity, but let's do notice the fact that in a world that believes that our linguistic abilities
are something uniquely associated with our neck and chest, that that's how we become vocal.
That is against the Stoics who think that you need great rationality to be part of the linguistic community.
No, no, it's really something peculiar to the laryngeal anatomy.
Here we've got Bacon sectioning the recurrent lingual nerve of the piglet in the brain
and showing that you can terminate vocalizations by surgically intruding into the brain.
It's got nothing to do with the throat at all.
Now, this is 2nd century AD, and by the way, Galen's record of surgical studies and the like is a prolific one.
It would be Galen's biological science would have dispositive power on medical and biological thinking
for centuries, well into the renaissance.
It's Parakelsus who starts mounting criticisms of this.
Now, this is just... I'm sorry to be quite so gaseous on the subject,
but this is just a reminder that when Francis Bacon talks about a novum organum, a new method,
he's not referring to something new to the world.
He's referring to something new given the most recent traditions of knowledge gathering.
As we see it in the scholastic period, and that's a period that's much more the target of his abuse than the ancients are,
and this kind of renaissance natural magic that floated about with really no secure moorings at all.
Bacon is saying, look, Aristotle had the right idea, but we've got to get further than Aristotle got.
When Bacon tells us, for example, in the human sciences, when Bacon tells us what the proper templates are,
where does he reach to?
He reaches to Hippocrates and Aristotle, so the complaint is not with the ancient world.
The complaint is what has interceded between the good start that the ancient world made
and then what Western intellectual history did with it, which was pretty much replaced it with a collection of religious orthodoxies,
ultra-rationalistic, scholastic, logic-chopping analytical devices that found us falling in love with words.
He says in one of the famous passages that, you know, this is like falling in love with a picture.
Words are simply representative of things in the external world.
For goodness' sake, if you're interested in the external world, go into the world.
Don't sit around talking about it the way a lover might just fall in love with a picture, do you see?
The picture is worth more than a... the picture and the words are overmatched by any fact of observation, do you see?
So Bacon here is providing at once inspirational homilies, exhortations, and indeed advice to the Western intellectual community
that progress requires the right kind of method.
The right kind of method was known to antiquity.
The intervening centuries have allowed us to impose a kind of official blindness and ignorance on ourselves
by way of orthodoxies of an essentially religious nature,
and what we now have to do is come to grips with the secular dimensions of knowledge
and the secular dimensions of progress.
