Lecture 27, Newton, the Saint of Science
The 17th century is not just the age of science, it's the age of Isaac Newton.
And Isaac Newton, by the lights of the 18th century, was a veritable icon, a veritable Saint of Science.
The Newtonian achievement was at once a source of great, great inspiration and confidence.
For goodness sake, look what Newton accomplished and look at the methods that he used to accomplish it.
The sky's the limit. And the first thing that the 18th century was prepared to defend in coming to that conclusion
is that Newton's methods were the utterly secular, non-superstitious, non-hidebound, forward-looking,
analytically rigorous methods of the true scientist, not in the thrall of ancient wisdom,
not caught up in scholastic niceties and the like. Newton realizes the prophecy of Bacon,
Newton conducts the experiments, he puts together the crucial experiments,
he develops the theoretical possibilities and figures out the right technical ways,
even to the point of designing instruments, for determining which theories are to be accepted
and which ones are to be jettisoned. He's an immensely important figure in the history of ideas itself,
not only for the contributions that he personally made, but because of the effect those contributions
and his very life had on the tone and character of thinking that would take place after the age of Isaac Newton.
He wrote down in his regular philosophy, his rules for conducting philosophy, the rules for philosophizing,
just the way one is to go about doing scientific work. These hold up very well.
They still are exemplary scientists to this day, particularly in the developed branches of science.
If they don't cite Newton, certainly mimic or at least follow in the tradition established in these writings
and in Newton's great Principia. Now, of course, a life that is that productive, covering the range of topics Newton would cover,
can also be interpreted as a life that is simply continuing traditions that are already well in place.
And it is sometimes written, even by admirers of Newton, that we don't want to go up in a balloon
over the accomplishments of Isaac Newton. After all, there was Kepler and there was Galileo
and there was Copernicus and didn't Newton himself say that if I have seen further than other men,
it's only because I have stood on the shoulder of giants.
Well, let me say that I think one can defend the proposition that Newton ushered in a revolutionary perspective in science
and that that revolution can't be explained merely as his continuing work in progress.
The term revolution is an overused term. You know, there's a Freudian revolution
and Kant introduced a great Copernican revolution in philosophy.
But I think Newton did usher in a revolutionary change in method, in the understanding of science
and in the very attitude we have about ourselves as knowledge-gathering, theory-testing entities
capable of altering the physical world very much almost at our own bidding.
In what sense can he be reduced to the continue of traditions already well in place?
Let me just mention a few. I don't want to be overly actuarial about this.
Newton is the first not only to develop a new method in mathematics.
He shares with Leibniz the discovery of calculus and these are different forms of calculus
and of course a great scandal will break out on the question of priority
and national honor is involved on both sides of the channel and the like.
I shan't go into that. But he not only develops, he not only invents and discovers the calculus, the calculus of fluctuations,
but does so for the express purpose of solving problems in physics.
That is, he is the one who matematizes the agenda of the physical sciences.
Mathematics now as an applied, not just an abstract undertaking, but an applied methodology
for dealing with problems in astronomy and dynamics and the like
is a revolutionary application of mathematics.
And you do not find this in the work of Kepler or Orkin.
Now Descartes was an original thinker in mathematics.
Was he not? He's the discoverer of analytical geometry.
But unlike Newton, his philosophical works, his works in natural philosophy with just one or two,
and they really are minor exceptions, it's absolutely devoid of mathematics.
So here you've got someone like Kepler himself, very, very skillful in mathematics
and more than Kepler entirely imaginative and creative in mathematics,
but still doesn't see the relationship we now know to obtain between mathematics and physics, mathematics and the physical sciences.
If you're sitting there saying, well, this is quite obvious, you're simply recording the fact that you are children of the Newtonian age
and children of Newton. This was not quite obvious in 1600.
It certainly wasn't obvious to Francis Bacon himself. It wasn't obvious to Descartes 50 years later.
Newton makes it obvious. That's the habit genius has. It makes obvious what had never been thought of before.
When we consult Kepler on the laws of motion, we find Kepler insisting that motion will cease when force is no longer applied.
Now this is the theory precisely replaced and defeated by Newton's laws of motion.
Now again, I'd be the last one to engage in a kind of Kepler bashing,
but I'm addressing this point which is often made that the best way of understanding Newton's achievement is that he carried on the work of Galileo or Kepler or Copernicus and the like.
Central to Newton's laws of motion are propositions that were explicitly denied by Kepler in his major scientific works.
Now Galileo, of course, is a much better candidate for the honor of establishing the two new sciences and the like and for the Newtonian scheme very much to be built on that.
But Galileo, whose pioneering research in mechanics is legendary and indeed foundational for the science that would follow, still leaves no possibility, for example, for the tides to be influenced by the moon.
Now this may sound like a small part to play, but this is so central to the correct universal law of gravitation that indeed Galileo is not part of the program that has Newton in the universal law of gravitation establishing the central fact that the tides are under the influence of planetary and lunar forces.
Now, alright, so Newton was a very original person and the answer to the question, was he merely if productively carrying on traditions already well in place, the correct answer to that?
Note that I say this with a wrigh smile on my face, the correct answer to that is no.
You don't become an icon, I think, merely by being extremely clever, although Newton was extremely clever at one point, he writes something to this effect.
He says in the summer of my 23rd year I devised a calculus of fluctuations and realized the relationship between the Earth, the moon and the other heavenly bodies and he's just going online.
I remember reading this, I think I was in my early 20s when I read it and I was saying to myself, this isn't anything like what I was doing in the summer of my 23rd year.
So Newton, you know, here he is, his father dies before he's born, his mother remarries not too long after that and decides it's probably the best bet if he's brought up by his grandparents some distance away.
He's sort of working around a modest farm and this, that and the other thing. You'd never predict anything of the sort that's going to take place.
Some uncle comes by regularly and finds that the lad has a certain cleverness about him and if the family can do without his presence for a while, maybe he could go up to Cambridge and study something or other.
It's a pity it was Cambridge, but he went up to Cambridge, he gets a very, very good math stone, he gets Isaac Barrow who is an important contributor in the history of mathematics and then all of a sudden in what seems like a matter of minutes and what turns out to be really just a matter of a few years,
we find evidence of this extraordinary genius. So you've got the makings of legend here. This is like little Mozart, you know, playing sonatas with his hand behind his back.
You've got this evidence of a prodigious mental capacity at a very early point. And then of course at the end of his life, he died at 87, he's 86 years old and when he comments on what he regards to be the greatest of his achievements of a lifetime,
what is he put at the top of the list, but lifetime celibacy. Now this of course is also part of the making of a legend. I've tried to keep up with the sorts of things that Newton did and accomplished and I have my own hierarchy.
I think the universal law of gravitation is right up there. The Principia certainly is going to be on the top two or three. I wouldn't put lifetime celibacy in the top 16 on a list like that.
I don't know whether he put it there because it was especially hard for him or what. We also know of Newton that he had more than a casual interest in astrology, he had more than a casual interest in alchemy.
He is not shunning some of the natural magic hyphen natural science dimensions of late Renaissance scientific thought. And the other thing that I should point out, although it needs very little rehearsal by me, he never lost faith in the central proposition that the harmony and lawfulness discovered as a result of his genius and the genius of science was a reflection of God's plan for the universe.
This is a God fearing Christian man from helmet to horse. And indeed he's interested in biblical interpretation, scriptural analysis. So he's interested also and productively in refining and redesigning technical instruments.
He makes original contributions to mathematics. He's the greatest astronomer, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. This is Isaac Newton, folks. And to be part of a species that includes Isaac Newton I think is a cause for some pleasure, although it's also a cause for asking oneself seven days a week and what precisely are we doing with our lives.
Now he considered Kepler's laws of planetary motion. And here we get a picture of how Newton's mind operates. Here we've got Kepler's laws. And they're precise laws. And the data of Taiko Brahe, these are observational data, excruciatingly detailed observational data, feed into this Keplerian image.
This is an achievement on the laws of planetary motion. Newton's trying to work out the best way of understanding all this. I just want to take a moment or two on this because it's quite interesting.
So how does Newton approach this? First, he reduces the problem. He renders the problem in utterly abstract terms. He reduces the problem to the problem of an ideal mass, a point. Just think of a point revolving around a center of force.
So he's moving away from planets. He's moving away from astronomical data. He's moving away from anything anybody's going to see in a telescope and the like. He's sitting there with a pencil and a piece of paper or a quill and a piece of paper, whatever.
And the question is the behavior of an ideal mass that is making revolutions around a center of force. This becomes an idealized model of an imaginable world.
When he reduces the problem that way, he solves the equations and shows that although Kepler's laws actually don't work at the level of observation, and they don't, they do work at the level of the ideal representation of the problem.
Newton makes the distinction between knowing the truth of something, absolutely as it were, and knowing it hypothetically. And by hypothetically, he means approximately, do you see? Later on when he says hypothesis known Fingo, I frame no hypothesis, he means he's not committing himself to mere approximations.
He wants to get at the very, very heart of it. Now, the reason I want to dilate it on this reduction of the Keplerian problem to that of an ideal mass going around a center of force is to say that this becomes a model of representing complex problems.
An idealized model of an imaginable world can be used to frame and test conjectures regarding the facts of the actual world. Newton is important in introducing into the methodology of science the role of the model, the idealized model.
And you can idealize models of society, you can idealize models of moral systems. Philosophy to this day talks about the possibilities in all possible worlds, truth tests being tests of what would obtain in all possible worlds.
We talk about artificial intelligence. There are whole books written on the history of metaphor in science. Here is Newton concretely, idealizing a complex problem in astronomy, solving at the level of idealized abstraction,
returning now to the database and seeing the extent to which the ideal solution and the observational data match up with each other. This is paradigmatic of theoretical and applied science hand in glove at their best, and as far as I can tell, nobody's doing this before.
Only in the ideal world of mathematics do Kepler's laws hold up. It's only in the ideal mathematical model that the laws hold up. In the world of actual physical things there are discrepancies, so Newton now must distinguish between truth and approximations.
But note, you do now have the absolute standard. You've got that mathematical model that now is the standard, so you see this is a defeat of skeptic scientific skepticism. You now have an ideal standard by which you can gauge the adequacy of your empirical data, the adequacy of theories constructed at the level of observation and empirical data.
This relationship between the ideal model as a test of theories and progress in science, this connection, this fundamental Newtonian connection, becomes a central feature in the progress of science.
Now, he's an icon, but he's also the representative of an age. He's a figure in the 17th century. The 17th century is a time of great foment. It's a century in which one king will lose his head. It's the century of Cromwell and the round heads and levelling and a kind of puritanical conservatism.
But it's also a century of a restored monarchy, the restoration giving us Charles II and a certain upbeat, forward-looking, positivistic, progressive attitude with the restoration of now a worthy man to the throne.
Science is becoming an important part of life in the world. This is a world on the move. Trade routes are expanding. Ocean going commerce is now everywhere. There are companies being formed in colonies around the world.
Many, many practical problems to be solved and technical minds and scientific minds being employed to solve them.
Now, a group of such minds assemble themselves regularly for regular meetings, and by 1660, their celebrity and contributions are of such a nature that they gain a royal charter, and they are now constituted as a body called the Royal Society of London.
The motto will be Nullius et Verba on the authority of nobody's words, do you see? What counts here is not the reveal truth of Scripture or what the king says or the productions of the wise man.
No, no, no. The Royal Society of London is devoted to the discovery of useful knowledge using the methods of science. Newton is going to be president of the Royal Society one of those years.
In fact, it is said that during the period of his presidency, an off-coloured joke was told one evening, a joke at the expense of a woman. Newton is said to have left the room and made clear that he would not preside over further meetings unless there was a solid commitment to keep that kind of talk out of the affairs of things.
I say a very, shall I pause for a minute and tell you a story that has to be apocryphal, but how absolutely delicious it would be if it were true, and there must be some truth to it.
Newton had a period of deep depression in his 40s, the point where he was hardly leaving his rooms, his friends feared for his well-being.
Hard to imagine what would have depressed Newton, but well, no, maybe it isn't then either.
But the story is told that one of his chums, Chris Wren, good old Christopher Wren, a fellow who built London and a few other things like that, was visiting.
And how are you doing, Isaac, and so forth and so on, and apparently moving some papers around, and Newton wanted to know what that was all about.
And as the story goes, well, the Europeans were offering a money prize for anyone who could solve a particularly difficult math problem that Wren and Robert Hook had been working away on.
And I say, as the story goes, this was left behind, and the story concludes that the next day Newton is leaving his quarters, goes over and flips this over to Wren and says, well, we've solved that one.
And apparently the depression lifted.
Now, if it isn't a true story, at least it's a useful legend with which to treat depression, which is a serious problem in our time.
If you find yourselves going into a state of deep depression, come up with an original solution to a mathematics problem, and apparently your entire affect will undergo a sudden change.
A few words about the Royal Society, about what it symbolizes, less about what it actually accomplished.
It's founded or given a royal charter in 1660.
Within years, really, we will see in the unpublished letters and papers of the Royal Society that the crown has asked for a detachment of fellows of the Royal Society to go to some village to inquire into the claim that a woman has given birth to a sheep.
Now, this is the sort of item in a vast collection that only an historian of ideas is going to find absolutely precious, not because it's whimsical.
You don't honestly think that anybody in the second half of the 17th century in England, certainly anyone in the Royal Court or the Royal Society, left the remotest amount of room for the possibility that a woman was giving birth to a sheep.
That's not the point. The point is that 30 years earlier, a claim like that would have resulted in a detachment of clergymen going to that town and looking over the situation and providing a reply to the crown that this was just a troubled woman or they mixed the things up at birth or whatever.
No, what's revealing is that before the 17th century is over, it's deputizing fellows of the Royal Society to check on claims that involve what seem to be outside the order of nature.
Do you see the authority of science is now already and widely accepted?
Not just thanks to Newton. This is the age of Newton and Galileo and Hawke and Robert Boyle and Christian Huygens and Christopher Wren, etc. et al.
But the smart money now is being bet on science. And when you face some epistemological conundrum, when you face some great technical difficulty, when you have to determine the draft of a ship, or your longitude at sea, or the best trade route, or whether a woman has given birth to a sheep, or how to get rid of scabs, or what to do about the stone,
when these seasonless questions of life and limb, commerce, and economy, and politics, and society surface, it now is increasingly common to look to the community of scientists and say, either softly or loudly, as a command or a supplication, help, help.
So the age of Newton is introducing the age of science itself.
Now, are we the children of that age? Well, you can answer that question by asking a few questions in your own right.
What do we do when we come up with a fundamental problem in economics? Child-rearing. Marital relations. Domestic problems in general.
I will say it, I've threatened never to say it again. Family values. Nutrition. Problem of aging.
Insurance settlements. What to do with mentally unstable people? International tensions. War and peace. What do we do?
Turn on the telly. That tells us what we do. We round up people from think tanks with PhDs, and MAs, and BAs, and LLBs, and LLBs, and we round up the usual suspects. They come in trailing degrees.
They have specialized in the conformations of the eye of the gnat, and you never know when you're going to need that, but if it just turns out that some fundamental social or moral or political or economic or psychological difficulty bears in some way at all on the peculiarities of the optical system of the gnat,
boy, do we have 26 people you can call on for that, whether it's the Hastings on Hudson, which will have you solve your biomedical problems, do you see? Or I don't know the names of most of these things.
The Rand Corporation. What to do about population and food distribution. Where did all this come from? Of course, the temptation is to say, well, the great achievements of science being what they are, we now develop highly specialized knowledge that was mastered by people.
People educated and trained in those subjects, and sure enough, they're serving the intended purpose. The plain fact, you know, is this. I can think of no truly consequential social problem, domestic problem, interpersonal problem, existential problem of life that has ever been solved within a specialty that grants PhDs.
Now, it certainly is true that there are econometric models, and I have nothing but the deepest. I can't say that because it isn't true. I certainly admire the persistence and devotion of persons who devote significant fractions of life to deep study on narrow subjects of which they gain.
I'm getting at something rather different because I would probably be as inclined as most people to ring up specialists when various problems crop up. I'm getting at an ethos.
An ethos according to which no problem is a real problem unless it admits, at least in principle, of a solution. This is an extraordinary perspective. The idea that if a problem is a bona fide problem, it's soluble. How did anybody ever reach an idea like that?
I mean, the competing theory, of course, is that if it really is a real problem, forget about it. It'll never be solved, do you see? I mean, if it's a problem that really plagues one, if this is the sort of thing keeping you awake at night, the most you can hope for is that you will finally be bored through fatigue and continuing to iterate its terms, and you'll finally go to sleep out of exhaustion.
And with the freshness that comes from a good night's sleep, your energies will pick up and you'll start engaging in things that distract you from the problem. But that isn't the way we think about things anymore.
The medieval period understood that life is short, brutish, nasty, et cetera, et cetera. The best laid schemes of mice and men gang after glee and all that. No, no. It's the age of Newton. It's the scientific world view that contributes to the general optimism, the general conviction, that no matter how complex a problem is, first, it can be broken down into components.
So there is an in principle reductive strategy available to us. No problem is so great, so vast, that it does not lend itself to some kind of partitioning such that you can solve it a piece at a time.
And when you're finished, what you then have to do is knit the pieces together, work your way back up. This is Galileo and Newton and Descartes. I mean, this is the whole 17th century project.
You can break these things down and build them back up again. And there's no problem so complex as in principle to be beyond the reach of this method.
Now, I tell you, that is a new idea in the world. It continues to animate thought in the present world. We do not look for miracles. We do not look for divine intervention.
We take a problem, no matter how colossally great, and we say, bring in the experts. And we don't do that out of a rank superstition.
We do that out of the record of achievement saliently produced by Isaac Newton's Universal Law of Gravitation and furthered and embellished by scientific accomplishments in the wake of that and certainly of scientific accomplishments richly indebted to Newton's method.
Now, it isn't going to be long before this very line of reasoning will be applied to society itself. This is going to be the topic of my next lecture, because if the universe itself can be understood in mechanical terms, then why should puny little societies be any different?
But I do want to offer, as if not a corrective, at least a gloss on all this, a rather more sober, and I should say a rather ancient Greek understanding of this.
What makes a problem a problem is precisely what does not allow it to be broken down into smaller parts, because a problem is not a collection of parts.
It's something that begins beyond the reach and the ken of man. It's something tied up with fate and man's fate.
What one has to learn to do is recognize the life that becomes possible within the range of this problem and under the weight of this problem.
And anything you do by way of breaking it down or reducing it or making believe that it really is soluble, that there's some secret handshake or barometer or slide rule or anatomical blowpipe which if applied in the right way at the right point in the right location of the partly shaped body will make everything better.
You know that standard definition of modernity, there's no problem so great that it can't be handled with a sufficient amount of plastic.
I want to return us at least for the moment to the possibility that that ancient Greek sense that some problems are simply intrinsic to the very life and nature of humanity itself.
And so the right task now is not to look around for a solution, but to look around for an accommodation, is sometimes obscured by the extraordinary technical success and reach of the developed sciences.
So the news is mixed. Thanks.
Thank you.
