Lecture 28, The Social Machine, Thomas Hobbes' Leviathan, and the Science of Statecraft.
The age of Rene Descartes and Isaac Newton and Robert Hook and Galileo is also the age
of Hobbes, and the implications of developed science would not be lost on Hobbes.
Hobbes was persuaded that if all of the universe could be reduced to systematic laws, if all
of mechanics and dynamics could be reduced to systematic laws, it would be very strange
indeed if society itself could not be embraced by the same rational, experimental, empirical
approach to problem solving.
And indeed that colossal classical work of his Leviathan really is a work in social engineering
and the way you go about creating a world that minimizes warfare and civil strife.
Hobbes is a central figure in the history of social philosophy.
He also lived a very long life.
Hobbes' dates are 1588 to 1679, these are periods in which momentous events took place
in England and Europe.
He had a highly variegated career in his own right.
He was a well-instructed person, you might not be aware of the fact that Hobbes did quite
an authoritative translation of Thucydides.
He was an accomplished classical scholar.
It was a translation that went through a number of editions.
For five years he served as personal secretary to Francis Bacon.
I've noted over a course of years, you know there really isn't anything wrong with the
job of a secretary, it depends on just who it is you're working for and I would have
been quite delighted to spend five years as Francis Bacon's secretary and indeed given
the scientific outlook that Hobbes would come to promote and come to adopt, we do see a
Baconian influence on Hobbes' thinking, though Hobbes himself is going to be much more taken
by the achievements of Galileo.
Now this as I mentioned in the previous lecture is also the epoch in which England will be
head one king, it will have a protector, it will then have a restored monarchy, Hobbes
is there for all of this.
He sees revolution in England, civil strife, he sees regicide, actually he will exile himself
in France for a period of time with another Englishman, indeed he spends some time tutoring
this other Englishman, the future Charles II, so of course Hobbes' own fortunes are
going to be shifting, if you're over there tutoring Charles II during the era of Cromwellian
hegemony, it's probably a good idea to stay in France, if you come back with the restoration
of the monarchy under Charles II, being Hobbes is quite a good thing to be.
Now what's Leviathan all about?
Well Leviathan I say is a treatise in social and civic engineering, it is the application
of scientific thinking to the complex problems of society, and it's an approach to solving
those problems, it's an approach that's going to benefit from Baconian and Galilean and
Newtonian considerations, but it will also bear the stab of Hobbes' own original and
powerful thought.
Now what gives Hobbes confidence that you can actually bring this kind of instrumentation,
intellectual and otherwise, to bear on nothing less than society itself?
Well society after all is part of the natural world, we have used our reason and our observation
to solve other kinds of problems that crop up in the natural world, society isn't excluded
from that, so society is a fit subject for it, but of course to get the show on the road
you must disabuse yourself of certain habits of mine that have prevented progress in this
area in the past.
So as we approach Leviathan we discover that the first item on the agenda is leaving behind
us certain absurd modes of thought, eliminating absurdities from our thinking.
Let me summarize what Hobbes takes to be the most paralyzing of absurdities in the House
of Intellect.
First, chattering away using terms with no settled meaning at all.
Hobbes understands, in a way that perhaps would take many, many decades to be developed
more fully, Hobbes understands that the very basis upon which we comprehend a problem is
brought about discursively.
There's something about the manner in which we represent problems in language that render
them unsolvable, or poorly understood, or poorly comprehended, or indeed in principle
not solvable just because of the way the problem was stated in the first place.
I don't want to credit Hobbes with an anticipation of what in the late 19th and 20th centuries
will be called linguistic analysis, and indeed you can find anticipations of this recognition
of the power of language to deceive or clarify as early as Plato's, Philibus and other dialogues.
But Hobbes begins right off the bat with the recognition that one of the plaguing absurdities
is a kind of casualness and lack of discipline in establishing the meaning of the very terms
we use to establish what makes a problem.
We also have a tendency to conflate spiritist things, imaginary things, objects of superstition,
mysticism, legend and lore, with ontologically real, material things.
Loose talk is in the current vernacular, the way we would describe the absurdity that Hobbes
is warning us against.
We fail to distinguish, he says, between real bodies and spiritists in material things.
We speak, for example, in fact, to this day.
We talk about seeking to infuse faith in someone.
Now, of course, this is a figure of speech.
I don't think we have to be chastened if we understand this as a figure of speech.
The problem is, when you adopt this kind of talk habitually, you begin to think of faith
as some thing that can be infused as such into a material body.
Before you know it, you're under the weight of your own linguistic confusions, and you're
beginning to treat non-things as things and vice versa.
This is a habit that must be relinquished if there really is going to be a scientific
understanding of how societies should be structured and maintained.
Here's an absurdity, that old platonic notion of the reality of universals, that the only
way you can have cats in the world is because they approximate some universal cat-drinking
cosmic milk.
Now, of course, here Hobbes is a victim of the world's understanding of Plato at the
time.
I'm not quite sure that Plato ever subscribed to the view that we have cats in the world
because they answer to an ontologically real universal true-formed cat and the like.
Aristotle thought some of the followers of Socrates did subscribe to that view.
Of course, this is the great nominalist, realist tension of scholastic philosophy, whether the
universal categories are just class names, which was the position taken by the nominalists,
or whether these universals, in fact, have a reality that there really is that all entity,
and these particulars are just instantiations of it.
The great nominalist, realist dispute surfaces throughout intellectual history, and Hobbes
here is mindful of this fact and says, look, civic society has an ontological reality
accessible to sense.
Don't start cluttering up the field with that old universal's business.
What you can regard as being here and now and real is what you can palpate, smell, touch,
and see.
Finally, he warns us against metaphorical modes of understanding and representing problems.
It's one thing to develop what Newton develops as a mathematical model.
It's another thing to begin to think that reality is just the model, or that in saying
that something is like something else, you've captured the essence of the thing to which
the relationship of similitude can be applied.
He thinks that this was something that the scholastics were particularly guilty of.
This metaphorical mode of thinking, because the universe displays design, there must be
a designer, because after all, it's very much like designing a house.
It's not just a pile of bricks.
That's not part of the Hobbesian realist approach to social problems and civics.
What is reality then?
Reality is physical reality, and Hobbes makes no mistake about it.
It's physical reality, and that is to say it is material reality.
If we're to have a scientific understanding of man, therefore, then man must be accepted
as a material entity.
So much for going up in some sort of transcendental balloon over the nature of human nature.
Man is a material object in the world, subject to the laws of gravitation.
He's got mass.
He has moving parts.
He bleeds when he's stuck with a pin and so forth.
What is society?
Society is a collection of such entities, so society properly understood is a congruence
of material objects.
This doesn't dehumanize.
The proper understanding of humanity just are all of the realistically material dimensions
of human beings that can be recorded, studied, and explained.
Society is a collection of such persons, and therefore it can be understood as a complex
system made up of matter in motion, in this case material humanity moving from here to
there for various purposes.
There are two kinds of motion that we can observe in man.
There is the involuntary or vital motion, the sort of motion that takes place when
the digestive organs work on food, or when a hot object finds the hand being reflexively
removed.
There's that kind of involuntary motion, but there's also intentional motion, not the vital
motion that is instinctual or reflexive.
Why do we ever move intentionally?
We move intentionally because we have motives and desires.
Now if we are material things, what will be the root motives and desires?
Anybody?
Well the root motives and desires are going to be those grounded in pleasure and pain.
That is to say the foundational psychology is a hedonistic psychology.
The reason Smith moves from here to here is because this location has something Smith
wants which couldn't be got in that location.
That's the source, that's the cause if you like, that's the reason for the movement,
but the movement then is to be understood as a particular complex material entity seeking
some state, or seeking some thing and moving toward it as a way of gaining it.
Well what's the ultimate motive then of such a complex material object?
The ultimate motive then is its own continuation.
The grounding motive is survival.
Not the ancient Greek eudaimonia, not eternal salvation, the eternal salvation maybe is
that survival in caps, all right, but what then motivates one is just the possibility
of deathlessness, and what approximates survival?
Well anything that promotes good feelings, and what puts a distance between us and survival?
Well anything that causes pain and injury.
Now what about this full-blown and high-blown moral language that is bequeathed by the ancients,
celebrated by the scholastics, and the stock-and-trade of all deeply religious people?
That moral discourse, what is morality all about?
We are told to approach the good and shun evil.
We're supposed to conduct our lives in a way that's morally sound and fitting.
We are to seek to promote virtue within ourselves.
Now Hobbes is not a man lacking in commendable human characteristics, and he's not skeptical
about morality.
He wants to know what the ontological standing of moral terms is.
Are these just words devoid of meaning?
He says no they're not words devoid of meaning.
Words like good and bad or good and evil have meaning.
It's the meaning that is associated with considerations of survival, pleasure and pain.
What is good is that which conduces to pleasurable states of affairs.
What is bad is that which has a destructive or painful consequence attached to it.
Now once you put these ingredients together you begin to see the basis upon which we enter
into civil society.
Why do we enter?
What man is by nature a social animal?
No Hobbes I think would put it rather differently.
Man is by nature a self-defending animal, a self-interested and indeed selfish animal
seeking to survive in a perilous world.
Therefore man enters into civil society in the interest of survival.
He enters into civil society in a self-interested way.
What is it he tries to avert in forming these social compacts or social affiliations?
He's trying to avert the constant challenge of daily life outside civil society.
What's that?
It's getting clunged over the head or eaten up or ganged up on.
Now you might say well look that certainly isn't something that's going to bother Perkley's
no no says Hobbes look.
There are differences among us but for all practical purposes we are sufficiently equal.
We're sufficiently alike in body and mind so that no individual could count himself
as able to defend himself against any other.
The strongest among us could be undone by the weakest among us.
All it takes is a lethal instrument, a poison, a knife in the back.
The smartest among us can be undone and subverted in our plans.
We can be ganged up on.
People can enter into confederacies against us.
You don't as I think Henry Kissinger once said regarding President Nixon if everybody's
your enemy you're not paranoid.
Well you know Hobbes is saying look potentially everyone is an enemy of the other in that
one's own interests the time might come when self-interest requires aggressive actions
against another.
When something Smith needs he can only get by taking it from Jones.
This is a possibility contained in the very nature of things.
We enter into civil society to gain protection against these possibilities.
At the bottom of it all what we're trying to do is avert a violent death.
The ultimate purpose for entering into civil society is self-defense.
It is to forestall or prevent or render less likely death by violent means.
Goodness gracious.
Now we have a nice Victorian house in a small Maryland village and it never actually would
have dawned on me that what got us up there was fear of violent death.
I speaking only for myself and my wife I think we thought the price was right and I say I'll
recur to this Hobbesian view of things but of course Hobbes is not picking up the story
where people are buying houses in rural communities and the like.
Hobbes is picking up the story at the outset.
What were the original impulses behind human beings entering into collective associations?
Now of course there's nothing in entering into a collective association that's going
to protect you from a violent death.
You go in and you join a nice crowd and all of them are homicidal maniacs except for you.
So I mean it only makes it worse that there are now 12 of them.
You would have been better off if you would only live next to one of them.
It's not just by collectivizing that we spare ourselves as it were, no, no, no, no.
When we enter into these associations it is for the express purpose of conferring on somebody,
some group, some person sufficient power and legislative autonomy and authority to be able
to protect what we take to be our central interests, to protect us against members of
the same community we've entered into this civic association with.
So this is not simply a club of like-minded people.
It's a group of independent entities, fearful of each other, needing the protection that
can come from numbers but needing the added protection that comes from having those numbers
controlled and regulated.
They are controlled and regulated by a monarchial power.
They are controlled and regulated by Leviathan, by the state.
And the allegiance that we have to Leviathan lasts as long as and no longer than the state
is capable of protecting us, protecting our interests and protecting our life.
The nature of the relationship is essentially contractual, rather less than covenantal,
more contractual, not written on paper necessarily, usually not.
But the understanding is this, you are the king so long as under your kingship my life
is secure, and the minute my life is at stake I have to rethink the nature of this commitment.
Ah, so.
So how then do we reduce the likelihood of the civil strife that so surrounded Hobbes'
own life?
We have to do it by giving the political power, political authority, such a range of options
that that authority actually can achieve what is the whole point of civil society, namely
the protection of life and limb and property.
And in order for this to happen, obviously we have to surrender certain of our own rights
and options.
That we might have, as Locke will say, those that we might have in the natural state, do
you see?
So we are going to give this monarchial rule, dispositive power over us on a day to day basis,
that we never would have to suffer outside the bounds of civil society, but we're prepared
to accept those constraints and impositions for the much greater gain that comes from
having that kind of authority operate in the interest of our own lives and possessions.
Now this, of course, is a theory based on a psychology.
It's based on a hedonistic psychology.
And Hobbes is not at all sheepish about expressing it in no uncertain terms.
Let me read you a relevant passage from Leviathan.
This is on reward and punishment.
This could have been written.
I think the prose here is better than Professor Skinner's Rest His Soul, but it certainly
could have been written by B.F. Skinner.
Reward and punishment, by which, fashioned to the seat of the sovereignty, every joint
and member is moved to perform his duty, are the nerves that do the same in the body natural.
Concord, health, sedition, sickness, and civil war, death.
Now, let me parse this passage, if I may.
Reward and punishment, by which, fastened to the seat of sovereignty, every joint and
member is moved to perform his duty.
What does that mean?
The sovereign has the instruments of reward and punishment.
It goes with the scepter.
The sovereign can punish.
The sovereign can reward.
The sovereign can praise and shame.
And it is in virtue of that power that we are moved.
Every joint and appendage can be moved and put into operation by the proper application
of rewards and punishments.
Make no mistake about it.
That's what chivalry and honor and duty and courage and all that is about.
It is the sovereign with sufficient resources to make it too heavy a price to pay to enjoy
the pleasure of disobedience.
In fact, reward and punishment in the hands of the sovereign affect our actions just as
the nerves do in the body.
This is a material, physical kind of influence.
It's not something transcendental.
It's something quite immediate.
It's do that.
And if you do that, this will happen.
You'll be called Duke, do you see, that kind of thing.
And if not, it's off to the tower.
So there's quite a close correspondence between the natural body and the civic body.
And here the parallels are direct.
Remember, remember, Hobbes says, abandon this metaphorical way of thinking.
He does not offer this as a metaphor.
Concord in the civil state is health.
It's exactly what health refers to.
The civic manifestation of the healthy body politic is concord.
Sedition is sickness.
Sickness is what eats away.
Do you see?
Sickness eats away at the body until it finally kills it.
That's what sedition does, treason, disloyalty and the like.
Ultimately then, sedition leads to civil war, civil war.
What is that?
That's death.
Death in what sense?
You no longer have a civic community.
You've killed it.
You've killed the body politic through civil strife.
Understand the machinery of the body.
You understand the machinery of the state.
Understand what conduces to health in the body.
Not metaphorically now.
You understand what conduces to health in civic society.
Why?
Because they are both essentially material entities governed by causal scientific natural
laws.
Well now what about, at this point of course, one begins to think of the theological virtues
of Thomas Aquinas, particularly the virtue of charity comes to mind.
Well what about charity and altruism and these other noble aspects of Christian teaching?
These finally on the Hobbesian account are really disguised forms of self-regard, selfish
interest, enlightened self-interest and the like.
They constitute desire for honor and eternal reward or fear of reprisal.
They're ultimately grounded in hedonistic considerations.
It's interesting that when Descartes wanted his major philosophical production to be examined
by the best minds in Europe, and this was a customary practice by the way, to get a
good and close and critical reading of what you thought was your major work, one of the
most useful figures for pulling together the best minds in Europe was Father Marcent.
He knew everybody, he was well connected and he was sort of the chap you'd write to to
get so and so to read your work.
Descartes asked Father Marcent to get a good close critical reading of his work and to
pull together people who were really up to the task.
Four of them engaged in this critical review.
One of them was Father Marcent himself.
One of them was Pierre Gassendi, a contemporary critic of Descartes and one of the famous
men of his time and of the century after his time.
We don't hear much about Gassendi now.
Gassendi is known to intellectual historians chiefly as a 17th century writer who revived
Epicurean philosophy and who put in place a quite radically materialistic psychology
so he's going to be opposed to Descartes dualism of mind and body and the like.
The third of the four was Hobbes and this records two facts.
First the high esteem in which Hobbes was held, the recognition of his robust critical
and intellectual powers.
And secondly that Hobbes was very very well connected in these regards and would be just
the sort of person you would want to comment on a work that is going to have these dualistic
mentalistic elements that's going to be rather reserved about a reductive scheme that brings
everything down to the level of matter and materiality and the like.
Hobbes' critique of Descartes is still good reading and Descartes' extended reply to
Hobbes' critique is not entirely convincing.
I say the work itself and the commentator's reactions to it are available and I say even
in 1997 or 2000 or 2097 the reader will be repaid for the efforts.
Of course what Hobbes is going to be insisting in his criticism is that Descartes has to
come to grips with the fact that the only thing we can know about with certainty are
those physical material processes that will submit to direct observation and to the kind
of systematic and scientific study already made famous by Galileo and the other community
of sciences.
He's not going to leave any room for anything to be outside this and at the same time claim
ontological standing.
Hobbes in the 17th century is declaring the following.
Human nature in all of its manifestations is part of nature and the tools we've developed
to study and discover the laws and principles of nature are the same tools to be applied
when it comes to human nature.
When you take into account everything in the universe that is material there is no remainder.
The ultimate ontology is an ontology of matter and we will understand ourselves best and most
fully if we understand ourselves in terms of the laws that govern the material creation.
This is really an anticipation of something that Voltaire in his sprightly and his impish
way will put in a rather different way in the next century.
That all the heavens should obey fixed immutable laws and that a little creature five feet
tall should do as it chooses solely according to his own caprice is simply unimaginable.
Well it was unimaginable for Hobbes and the social machine has been understood by scientists
ever since as something that can be studied scientifically brought in for annual repair
greased in just the right places get the wheels going right and before you know it the world
is our oyster and all the problems are solved the enlightenment is on the way.
