Hello. I'm Tom Rawls, President of the Teaching Company. These lectures are part of the Superstar
Teachers series. They are produced by the Teaching Company.
The lectures on these tapes are titled, The Great Ideas of Philosophy. The lecturer is
Professor Daniel Robinson. Dr. Robinson has been teaching psychology at Georgetown University
since 1971. He earned his doctorate in neuropsychology at the City University of New York. His scholarly
books and articles have established him as an authority in the history of psychology,
philosophy of psychology, as well as in psychology and law. He holds the position of Professor
of Psychology and Adjunct Professor of Philosophy at Georgetown University and, since 1991,
has lectured regularly for the sub-faculty of philosophy at the University of Oxford
in England. Professor Robinson is past president of the American Psychological Association's
Division of History of Psychology and the Division of Theoretical and Philosophical Psychology.
He is fellow of the American Psychological Association and of the British Psychological
Society. Dr. Robinson is also visiting senior member of Linacre College, Oxford.
Lecture 31, Skepticism and the Pursuit of Happiness, David Hume.
The year 1776 has particular significance to citizens of the United States. It also
has particular significance to students of philosophy. It's the year David Hume died.
Some might think that the latter event may be of even greater consequence than the former.
Hume is surely one of the most, if not the most influential philosophers to have written
in the English language. He's a central figure in that extraordinary achievement, which sometimes
referred to as the Scottish Enlightenment, that achievement roughly between 1700 and
1850, in which Scottish schools of medicine and law had pride of place. The architecture
of Robert Adam, the works of play fare, the philosophies of Thomas Reed, David Hume,
Dougal Stewart. Dougal Stewart would be described by Thomas Jefferson as one of the two greatest
metaphysicians of the age. This was a period of great and flourishing art and scholarship
and science in Scotland, in Edinburgh particularly, which took itself to be, quote, the Athens
of the North. Hume did study law for a while. Apparently he found the study of it a way
of killing an interest in it. He's a man of extraordinary literary skill. He was a master
historian. Hume's multi-volume history of England is still a good, rather wiggish history
of England. He was a correspondent with some of the major intellectual figures of the time.
He housed Troubled Russo for a period of time. He'd make his way to the salons of France.
He was a great conversationalist. He was a rather corpulent fellow. The women of the
salon would find his conversation irresistible, and spelt Frenchmen perhaps rather envious
of this chubby scot would point to him as he'd discorsed away and remarked that, quote,
the word was made flesh. There isn't anything about him that really is in the manner of
the nasty skeptic, the irksome, irritating doubter. He was a man of great, great generosity
of spirit. He has to be one of one's favorite figures in the history of philosophy. He was
well and widely read in Stoic philosophy. He conducted himself in many ways according
to Stoic teaching. The famous hours surrounding his own death give us David Hume, who is noble
and in control of himself, and sensitive to the feelings of those around him. Nothing
like the fellow who will argue in an essay on suicide that one's life is not owed to
anyone else, and indeed, if one is not loved and needed and finds the tragedy of life unacceptable
or its pains unacceptable, there really is no argument against one giving it up. He withdrew
that essay. A Hume scholar friend of mine once asked me why I thought Hume withdrew
the essay, and I said I thought he withdrew it because it was a pretty poor essay, actually,
and that was not as satisfying. Hume's treatise of human nature appeared in 1739. He said
it fell stillborn from the womb. Nobody paid very much attention to it. It's a wonderful
work, but it's a 1739 work by somebody who's not quite 30 years old at the time. He will
later regard it as somewhat immature. He will put the main points together in other and
more accessible works, which will become quite famous and influential in his own time
and in the subsequent history of philosophy. By the 1750s, what Hume writes in philosophy
is what serious-minded philosophers have to read and comment on.
Well, of course, he's cast in histories of philosophy as the great skeptic. He's charged
with that by his contemporaries. He seems to be an enemy of the faith. He seems to be
somebody turning over all of the tables on which our most confident epistemologies depend.
Hume himself sets out in his philosophy, actually, to defeat skepticism, to put knowledge on
a firmer foundation. He has in mind not causing trouble, but creating clarity.
So, how does he earn the reputation that he has? What is it that he develops that makes
him so controversial a figure? He says right in the acknowledgments page of the
treatise of human nature that he acknowledges the important contributions of, quote, My Lord
Shaftesbury and Bernard Mandeville and Dr. Hutchison. Who are these people?
Well, there's a long tradition in which Hume himself is located called the tradition of
the British sentimentalist moral philosophers. A long tradition in place. In Scotland, it
doesn't begin with Hutchison, but Hutchison is one of the early proponents of this. Some
might trace it to Calvin's institutes, really, and all of Calvin's writings on our natural
instincts and the like. But it's a tradition that asserts the following. The fundamental
grounding of morality is human sentiment. That is to say, the moral dimensions of life
are not marked out by the productions of abstract rationality. They're marked out by the actual
constitutive nature of our being. We are equipped by a providential God in such a way as to
have certain core sentiments that really constitute the grounding of what we value. Sentiments
of benevolence, for example. And so the early part of the British sentimentalist tradition
seeks to establish is a kind of naturalized moral theory. Not something abstract, transcendent,
a gift of the school men and analyticity and all that, but something very, very earthy.
That the moral domain, the domain of values, that what makes anything really count to us
is inextricably bound up with the kinds of beings we are. Now, of course, if you're a
person of deep religious conviction, then you understand this to be the gift of a providential
God who has fitted us out with just what we need by way of a moral temper to do God's
bidding in the world. But if that isn't your, if your religious position is not the foundation
for your metaphysics, then indeed you simply take this as a fact of nature, that by the
very constitution of our nature we have certain inclinations and not others. Now, in acknowledging
these debts right at the beginning of the treatise, humans identifying himself as someone
who is going to strive for an entirely naturalistic account of human nature. Something that we'll
find the grounding of our epistemologies, our metaphysics, our political actions, our
morality in our nature, not outside of our nature. And of course, what this is going
to give rise to is the view that you simply cannot extricate the particularities of human
nature from the claims that we make about morality, knowledge, and the like. There will always
be the stamp of our perceptual mechanisms, our sentiments, our passions, and the like
on any production of ours, including the most wanted productions of philosophy. Philosophy
isn't outside the human condition, it's an expression of the human condition, and you
can't, you can't get out of that bind at all. He's an empiricist of course, he's influenced
by the writings of Bacon and Locke. On Barclay, by the way, he says he can, he must own that
he can find no logical flaw in anything that the Bishop of Cloyne has proposed, but as Bishop
Barclay himself says that if you accept his philosophy, nothing changes. Well, that's
good enough for Hume, nothing changes, so let's move on. So Hume is not going to be
caught up in the Barclay and dilemma about whether or not anything exists outside the
realm of what is, of what is perceived. Developing Locke's program, Hume argues that the, the
mind is formed out of, out of sensory experience, that this is where everything begins. It begins
at the level of perception. The external world impresses itself on the organs of sense, that
out of those sensory impressions, we have either our current sensations as we actually
see what's going on by the revival of, of, of earlier perceptions. The mind is capable
of the act of reflection. This is reflecting on, on things that have, that have previously
happened. But, but I say these impressions then constitute the basis upon which the mind
makes representations of the external world. So what Hume is arguing is that there is
some external physical world capable of exciting the senses, but that the contents of the mind
are just copies or, or simulacra of what is occurring at the level of sensation. So what
we have then is a theory of knowledge as always mediated. We never have an immediate
knowledge of the external world, only the mediated knowledge that comes by way of this
intermediary, namely the perceptual or sensory capabilities of a, of a creature of the sort
we are. You understand then that what is being said is you cannot know the external world
as in itself it might really be. You know the external world by way of perceptual mediation.
Now one might see in this skepticism, except that I think it's, it's fair to say that Hume
operating out of a naturalistic tradition, this is a almost a century before, well this
is a century before Charles Darwin, but the 18th century is already hosting an essentially
Darwinian view, Adam Smith's economics is, you know the, the system that, that allows
the maximum degree of freedom is the one that has the most successful products prospering
and, and the like. This is already a quasi Darwinian worldview. Hume is quite comfortable
with the proposition that the creatures of nature survive in virtue of having the kind
of constitution that renders survival more likely. And so although our knowledge is mediated,
this is not to lead to an abject skepticism about our knowledge of the external world,
it's simply to, I want to use this phrase, it's to psychologize metaphysics. It's to
take the traditional problems of ontology and epistemology, the problem of knowledge
itself and to tie it in with the peculiarities of human psychology. And more generally even
the psychology of the animal kingdom. So it's not an abject skepticism, but it's the naturalization,
it's opposed to rationalism and to, and to abstract conceptions of, of knowledge.
Now what we discover then in Hume is an argument to the effect that our knowledge inevitably
reflects our constitution and that includes certain habitual tendencies of the mind, that
is the mind does have certain operating principles and therefore all of our knowledge claims
are going to be infected by or colored by, shaped by the foundational operating principles
of mind as such. One of the great triumphs of rationalism is the discovery that every
effect has an antecedent cause. This is something that we know by rational analysis, nothing
shall come of nothing. It's the very bedrock of religious faith where God is the cause
of all things and it is the foundation of all of the sciences which are devoted to unearthing
what? The causes of things. Hume is, is, is famous for raising questions about the concept
of causation, how we ever arrive at the concept of causation. And I want to make a distinction
here that sometimes lost in the secondary literature and, and indeed I think an error
in reading Hume occasioned to some extent by the various ways Hume defends and, and illustrates
the problem. I don't think there's any evidence that Hume was skeptical about there being
causes. Hume is concerned about establishing the basis upon which we have the concept of
causation, that is the basis upon which we could ever know about causes, which is a question
rather different from whether events in the external world are caused. That is, there's
a big difference between whether the universe is created by a providential God, okay, as
a question of fact shall we say, whether the first big bang was divine, and the question
about whether we could ever know that. Hume on the issue of causation is examining the
basis upon which we ever know about causality. And he says we know about causality through
certain habitual modes of operation of the human mind. He takes Locke's rather primitive
use of the notion of association and develops it into the very laws of association. Hume
is famous for developing core principles of association to account for how the mind
comes to work on the evidence of sense. All other things being equal. A becomes associated
with B when A and B have been present frequently in experience. That is, repetition becomes
one of the principles, all other things being equal. When A and B occur together frequently,
A and B become more, anytime two events as Hume have been, quote, constantly conjoined
in experience. The two of them, any one of them in the future, excites the idea of the
other. All other things being equal. Events that occur together closely in space and time
are more fully and firmly associated. The principle of contiguity. When events are
temporally and physically contiguous, they are more strongly associated. And all other
things being equal, when the pattern of occurrences is such that one event reliably precedes and
the other event reliably follows, the association is very strong, grounded as it is in cause
and effect. Causation, then, is simply what the mind assigns to constantly conjoined experiences.
Any time A and B are constantly conjoined and A reliably precedes B, it is by virtue
of a very habit of thought, one of the operating principles of mind as such, that A is regarded
as the cause of B. And at this point in his writings, Hume pauses to say, almost parenthetically,
though it's a phrase that would excite the energies of many of his critics, so you see,
anything might be the cause of anything. Now, what does Hume mean by that? Look, he doesn't
elaborate on that particular point, but it's quite clear what his meaning is. Suppose we
had been constituted in such a way that we would sample the external world, let's say
the senses worked in such a way or the brain worked in such a way that we would sample
the external world, we would see it for a second, then we would go off the air, let's
say for four seconds, we'd come back on the air for a second, we'd go off the air for
four seconds. Can you imagine what our notions of causality would be in that circumstance
where maybe in one second you see a pitcher in a baseball game doing this and then you're
off the air and four seconds later, nine people are running around, you would inevitably
be led to the conclusion that whenever Smith does this, nine people are made to run around.
The point Hume wants to make is that the concept of causation is not a recording of something
observed in the external world, it's an habitual mental process that the determinants of the
concept of causality are inherent in our mental operations themselves. He has psychologized
the concept of causality. In one famous illustration he says, I see before me a table on which
there are billiard balls and one ball moves and it strikes the other and the second one
moves. He says, quote, I must own, I cannot see some third term betwixt them, I cannot
see some third term betwixt them, I see ball one move, there's a term, I see ball two move,
there's a term, I don't see causality. So where is the causality? Causality is in that
habit of mind that renders causal any reliably anteceding and succeeding event, any constantly
conjoint pair of events or multiplicity of events. So you might say then that although
Hume is not skeptical about causation, he reduces the human understanding of causation
to a pattern of reliable experiences such that we will invent as it were causations wherever
these spatial temporal contiguities and cause effect properties in the mind where those
terms are satisfied. Now suppose we walk the highways and byways of the world and we confront
some poor fallen figure, let me make this as graphic as possible, this is the age of
making things graphic, we find some poor fallen victim in a pool of blood, his pockets emptied,
he sprawled out and there is no sign of life at all and the question that arises is whether
some moral wrong has been perpetrated. We want to get at the ultimate grounding of morality.
Well again, if you use the billiard table example, all you see out there are various
objects in space with certain colorations and the like. Now what then is the moral content
of what has taken place? It can't be anything out there. That is if the same spectacle were
looked at by a goose, there would not be some moral judgment brought to bear on it. What
happens is this, there are certain events or spectacles or sights or occurrences that
excite in us feelings of revulsion and it is in virtue of exciting such feelings that
the event in question comes to be judged as morally wrong. The categories of moral right
and wrong are reflections of human dispositions and sentiments, certain characteristics we
have in virtue of our very constitution, our very biological constitution and history
of experience and learning and instruction determine what we will come to call. So to
this extent one might say well is Hume relativizing morality? That is a large question fit for
Hume's scholarship and one that takes I think much greater time than we could possibly have
to examine even in a course devoted to Hume himself. It is not so much a relativizing
as it is a psychologizing of morality. Hume is sufficiently satisfied that we are sufficiently
similar in our basic constitutive principles that he would not be greatly surprised if
certain core moral precepts showed up everywhere and anywhere, although the beneficiary of
cooks, voyages and the like, like so many 18th century writers, Hume is aware of the
great variety of cultural values that show up in different tribal communities and the
like. So he already knows that even though we may be biologically constituted in a very
similar way, these value judgments do tend to be relative to culture, tribe, context
and the like. In fact I think I should pause to say that the enlightenment scanned across
luminaries produces very, very few figures who in addition to observing the considerations
and considerable differences between and among the now more fully known peoples of the world
will not declare the European white male, the patently provably superior of the lot.
I don't want to digress to point out the truly abominable things said about Native Africans
by Immanuel Kant as in quote from the fact that he was black what he said could be known
to be stupid, close quote. Or David Hume, who after serious and deep reflection on the
subject concluded that the European peoples were superior to all others. It's very, very
rare in this literature that you see someone, one of Hume's critics, James Beattie, a colleague
of Thomas Reads and the author of a wonderful poem called The Minstrel. Beattie is one of
the exceptions to this. Jefferson is sort of between Beattie and Kant in this. But I
say the enlightenment has its dark shadows and its implicit and very often explicit racist
and imperialist attitudes so that when we revere and celebrate and applaud the great
philosophical and scientific achievements of that age and the great liberating political
theory of the age, let's do keep in mind that these aren't angels. These are primarily
chaps slogging through very, very difficult issues and bringing most of their prejudices
with them, prejudices that remain well in place even after the philosophy is done.
So Hume on the level of morality now is again psychologizing it and tying it into the very
constitutive principles of our nature. And so the question is, well given the constitution
of our nature, what's the whole point of things? Of course the whole point of our biology and
our survival is the maximization of pleasure and the minimization of pain. Morality then
and politics itself should be looked at as social constructions designed by creatures
of a certain kind who as best they can are trying to maximize something. And Hume has
a word for it. He's among the first ever to use it in this sense. What they're trying
to maximize is ready? Utility. Hume is among the, I mean his contemporary Bentham, the
famous father of utilitarianism, will actually be using the concept and the term utility
after Hume and more central even Hume does. But Hume is noting that the significant source
of our major activities is a pleasure maximizing pain minimizing goal. It's part of what creatures
like us would obviously do and that utility is what we seek to bring about in our affairs.
Now, so as Hume skeptical about morality, no he's not skeptical about it. He simply
wants to show how our constitutive nature brings about these moral judgments. Well,
look what we've done now. We've taken the concept of causation and we've tied it to
certain habitual modes of thought. We've taken the concept of morality and we have found
that it's bound up with what the behaviorists might call a conditioning history, certain
basic sentimental predispositions. We will find in a footnote that I'm sure Hume was
sorry he ever wrote that in matters of this kind, passion, passion rules reason as it
ought to, he says. And I think we do have to pause over that to redeem Hume from his
more energetic critics. What's the sense in which passion should rule reason? Well, the
sense is, look here, you're in the dark forest and you hear some growling roaring sound and
out of the corner of your eye some large striped thing seems to be looming large. Now, you
could sit there and with all of the arts and sciences of logic start doing an essential
analysis of the a priori and a posteriori probabilities associated with entities like
that actually turning out to be hungry tigers and so forth, or you could in a manner of
speaking run like hell. Now, the reason you do the latter is because you are fitted out
by nature to respond to threats against your very survival, to do what it takes to avoid
pain and the destructive power of pain and to do what you can to secure pleasure and
those pleasures are usually, if not invariably, wrapped up with survivalistic considerations.
The baby does not suck at the breast because it has read books on nutrition, but because
it derives nourishment through an activity that is a pleasurable activity. Freud, of
course, is famous for this sort of thing. Now, this is the sense in which passion should
rule reason. What we have to set out to do are we have to maximize what bears centrally
on our interests as beings of the sort that we are. And it is at the level of emotion
and appetite and passion that the needs of the body and the needs of life most insistently
record themselves. Reason then becomes the deliberative means of securing what the
appetites and the passions require. Well, my goodness, this, I mean, to the extent that
this does not sound controversial, it's because we are all reluctantly aware of the
children of Humes. We certainly believe that the essential functions of government ought
to be understood chiefly in utilitarian terms. We understand that the world as we know it
is a creation of our own mental machinery. We can't get outside the box that is the box
that includes all possible thoughts we might have. We do understand the talk about God being
the cause of all things is really a kind of mythos or belief system. You certainly can't
go from the facts of the external world back to the assumption that somebody brought it
about. You do it because it is an habitual feature of the human mind to do that. You,
throughout life, constantly conjoined events are viewed as causally related. Now you come
into a world that was sort of there before you could have seen the actual reality of
before you could have seen the antecedent, but by a kind of induction, you assume an
antecedent and that unseen antecedent is you know who. Well, dear me, there will be more
than one Presbyterian minister in Aberdeen and Glasgow and Edinburgh wondering whether
anybody should be reading this sort of thing and whether you should walk around with Humes
inquiry wrapped in a plain brown wrapper. I do have this other aspect of Humes that sometimes
is missed even by those who should know better. What is Humes famous problem of induction?
Humes tells us, look, the future is under no obligation to mimic the past. This is a famous
line in Humes. The future is certainly under no obligation to mimic the past. The affairs
of the universe are the affairs of the universe. These are purely contingent events. They take
place in time. Nobody knows what the future is going to bring. Nonetheless, the whole
point of science is the discovery of laws, general laws. General laws tell you that because
this has happened in the past, this is what you can predict will happen in the future.
So the enterprise is an essentially inductive enterprise. Science allows me, we are told
science allows me to predict the future. Humes wants to point out that this itself is yet
another expression of habitual modes of cognition, but certainly is not sanctioned by logic.
There certainly isn't a rational argument according to which necessarily what has happened
in the past will happen in the future. Now, you might want to say, well, look, let's just
be sensible about it. It just turns out that the laws of science do predict events. That's
why we continue to attach ourselves to their validity. But that, of course, is simply invoking
the principle according to which the future is under an obligation to mimic the past. So
you cannot vindicate induction by pointing to the past success of inductive arguments.
That begs the question. That is to refer to the past success is already to assume the
validity of induction. So you can't do it that way. So as rationality and logic do not
establish that the future will mimic the past. And as the only support for that proposition
comes by way of the very inductive processes that are under question, we have Humes' famous
problem of induction. Is Humes skeptical about science's ability to predict things? No, he's
not skeptical. He simply wants to record once again the psychological dimension, the
ineliminable psychological dimension of all we know and all we feel and all we value, and
that outside that human context of thought and feeling, everything is in a shadow. Is
that skepticism? I think in a way it's almost a kind of stoic resignation to the limits of
human knowledge. Quite a chap, David Hume. We live with his bequest and all sorts of
problems go with that bequest and we wrestle with them seven days a week.
