Lecture 32, Common Sense and Divine Providence, Thomas Reed and the Scottish School
Who was that doubty Scotsman, Thomas Reed, who had come down to us known as the Father of Common Sense Philosophy?
A man who until quite recently was not written about much in philosophy, but in the last ten years has come to be restored
not only to respectability, but indeed to a position of philosophical eminence, though he has not yet been caught up with by the textbooks.
Well, Reed was, if publisher Parish had been in place during Reed's time, I'm not sure he ever would have had an academic position.
He was born in 1710. His first book of consequence came out in 1764. He would have long been denied tenure and probably would have been relegated to some backwater.
But the Enlightenment had different standards. Reed was known to be an exceptional person by all of his contemporaries.
He did train for the ministry. He held a position in the church at Neumacher for a period of years and then settled down to teach.
He had graduated from Marshall College at Aberdeen and he settled down to teach there.
It wouldn't be long, by the way, and even before his 1764 book on an inquiry into the human mind, that he would be called to Glasgow to take the position recently relinquished by Adam Smith.
So he was quite an influential and recognized scholar in his day. At Aberdeen he was the founder of what came to be called the Wise Club, which met every fortnight,
engaged central philosophical issues, wrote papers and the like, and some of the productions of the Wise Club turned out to be important philosophically.
In his inquiry into the human mind he has a section titled The Geometry of Visibles in which some scholars think, and I think soundly that in this he anticipated by a half century the non-Euclidean geometry of Riemann.
He was a master of optics on his mother's side. He's a Gregory, which is a famous Cambridge university family, famous in optics and mathematics.
His writings were influential in the states. His closest friend and student, Dougal Stewart, I mentioned, would be declared by Jefferson to be one of the two greatest metaphysicians of the age,
the other being de Stout Le Conte tracé in France. Jefferson would also write to a nephew that if the nephew would understand what this constitutional convention is all about,
he would read that part of Thomas Reed's inquiry on natural language, and I might have time to say a few words about read on natural language.
One of the signers of the Declaration of Independence, one of the participants in the Constitutional Convention of 1787, and one of the associate justices of the first U.S. Supreme Court, James Wilson, was not only a native Scott,
but in the first major jurisdictional dispute that the court would settle, Chisholm v. Georgia, we find James Wilson actually citing Reed's inquiry.
I look back longingly on a time in which Supreme Court justices are citing major philosophical treatises for the benefit of those who would seek to know what the principle is on which the court's deliberations are based.
Now I should think they might be citing, well, I shan't go into that. His French translator, Victor Cousin, would become an important figure and an official person in French education,
and Cousin would see to it that a readian common sense philosophy would guide French education and indeed did guide French pre-college education for nearly a century.
He was a man of extraordinary breath and of winning character. He was a reserved and not self-promoting fellow at all.
I agree with the Brown University philosopher, Roderick Chisholm, that if you're looking for 300 pages of absolutely luminous and brilliant and clear analytical philosophy in the English language,
you probably have no other place to look than Thomas Reed's inquiry into the human mind. It's a tour de force.
And of course he is the most influential and celebrated of Hume's contemporary critics, and there's a story too long to tell in its fullness about Reed wanting Hume to read the inquiry before Reed sends it off to the printers just out of fairness.
Well, they had a friend in common, Hugh Blair, and so Blair says, well, all right, I'll send it to Hume.
Now, Hume returns the package on open, so to speak, with a note saying that it's always been my view that clergymen should spend their time troubling each other and should leave philosophy to philosophers.
Well, fortunately Blair persists. He sends the thing back and he says, no, no, no, I think you better look at this.
And Hume reads it and indeed would be influenced by it, and it's clear in later editions of Hume's work.
In the last edition of Hume's work that will be sent off months before he dies to Millar, his publisher, he says in this final version, he says, I think in this work I have answered the criticisms of Dr. Reed.
He says, and that silly Beatty, Beatty I mentioned in an earlier lecture, being the one who had the right position on the question of sl-
Well, he sends back a glowing letter to Reed. He says quite revealingly, if there was any part of this estimable work that I didn't quite fathom, it's the section in your chapter on seeing, which you called, you refer to as the geometry of visibles.
And I say it's quite revealing that that was the part Hume missed because it's in the geometry of visibles that Hume's epistemology comes under the most direct and penetrating criticism.
I shall get to that in a moment or so.
Reed writes back to Hume in response to this kind letter, and I think in Reed's reply, you do see something of the spirit of the Enlightenment.
I regret to say that in my own view these days do seem to be gone forever, but here are two philosophical disputants who really are at cross purposes in the most fundamental ways.
And what does Reed write back? He writes back to Hume and says, this is very nearly a quote. I don't have the passage in front of me.
He says, after thanking Hume for his remarks, he says, and although we here at Aberdeen, sir, are all good Christian men,
we would prefer your company to that of Saint Athanasius himself.
And I fear if you were to write no further in metaphysics, we would have nothing to talk about at all.
This is the smile of reason, as it has been called in the Enlightenment.
Now, what about the inquiry itself and the major claims that Hume will be found making?
First, Reed wants to acknowledge what Hume himself says, that when it comes to causation and our knowledge of the external world and the like,
Hume tells us in the inquiry that once he left the privacy of his study, he thinks the way the ordinary person thinks,
that he quite understands common confusions here because they are his own confusions.
It was only in the solitude of his philosophical reflections that he was able to produce the philosophy he produced.
And Reed will fixate on that sentence and say, Riley, so we see that Mr. Hume's philosophy is very much like a hobby horse,
which a man when he is ill can keep at home with him and ride to his contentment.
But should he bring it into the marketplace, his friends would quickly impanel a jury and confiscate his estates.
That is to say, Reed's common sense philosophy puts a certain requirement on the philosopher, namely the willingness to live according to the terms of his philosophy.
Reed says that the only complete skeptic that philosophy turns up is Piero of Alia,
who was so doubtful about the reality of threatening and dangerous things that his friends used to have to walk around the city with him
lest he march into flames or fall into rivers and the like.
But Reed says even Piero of Alia is said to have chased his cook down the street with a frying pan in his hand
for the awful meal he had served to some of Piero's guests, so that even Piero knew where to draw the line at Pironism.
Now, Reed here is just being playful. He's kidding around a bit.
When he gets to Descartes' famous cogito ergo sum, he says,
here we have a philosopher probably no one except Piero ever doubting his own existence until this Descartes comes along
and he says Descartes would not accept his own existence until he could come up with a very good rational argument
that culminates in a conclusion that he exists and how fortunate for Descartes and for all of philosophy
for had that argument failed Descartes' situation and that of philosophy would have been absolutely deplorable.
He says a man who disbelieves his own existence is no more fit to be reasoned with than one who thinks he's made of glass.
Now, I say this is Reed at his most playful, trying to get something quite clear to his readers and to fellow philosophers, namely
that in any significant conflict between the dictates of common sense to be defined in a moment
and the productions of the philosophical imagination, guess which one is going to have to yield, do you see?
Now, what does Reed mean by a principle of common sense?
He doesn't mean the wisdom of the crowd. He doesn't mean the prevailing opinions, the settled ethos of a given community.
He says by a principle of common sense, I mean that under which we have nothing less, we labor under nothing less than an obligation
to take for granted in all of the ordinary affairs of life and he illustrates it by referring to what he calls the lowly caterpillar.
The lowly caterpillar will crawl across a thousand leaves until it finds the one that's right for its diet.
That's how a principle of common sense operates. You can't get out of bed in the morning and engage the business of life
except on a certain set of core principles, these being obligatory. They're not matters of opinion or belief.
They are the necessary preconditions for thought and action.
Indeed, you do not deliberate on these. That's what makes them principles of common sense.
And in some of his unpublished works, ensconced in the Berkwood collection at Aberdeen, you see how painful it is for him finally to settle on the term common sense.
He wishes there were another term. He doesn't want to use intuition. He doesn't want to use scholastic terminology.
But what he does want to get at is what rationalism itself, what Leibniz himself, would take to be the necessary preconditions for there to be thought and action.
But I say, Reid is not presenting this in the tradition of Rash.
Now, suppose we take the central aspect of Hume's so-called skeptical philosophy that obviously will be most troublesome.
And that is the idea that our knowledge is mediated, that we can never get out from behind that prism, do you say,
through which reality must be projected for us to know anything about it?
Reid says, in this, Hume is in a long, almost uninterrupted philosophical tradition that includes some of the most improbable soulmates, so to speak.
It includes Aristotle and his theory of the phantasms. It includes Locke. Of course, it includes Locke.
It includes all the scholastic philosophers. It includes David Hume. It includes all of Hume's critics. It's central to Bishop Barclay.
And what is that theory to which they all subscribe?
And by the way, Reid says, and if that theory is right, he says, I lay my hands across my lips and become a skeptic.
If that theory is right, he chooses to call it the ideal theory.
We might want to call it more easily the idea theory, the theory according to which the contents of consciousness are the result of copies made of something at the level of the sense organs,
so that we never know the external world directly, but only by mediation of the senses, and that whatever the senses report is what the mind has to deal with.
The mind somehow constructs podiums and persons and stars and sweet tastes and the like.
Out of something at the sensory level, we can never know the relationship, however, between what the senses have done and the external world itself.
All knowledge is not, no knowledge is immediate, but mediated, do you see? There's the core problem.
Reid says, well, look, if Hume had used, if these philosophers had used the methods of Bacon and Newton, instead of sitting back and speculating idly in an armchair,
if they actually subjected views of this kind to the sort of experimental analysis that we now know to be the right mode of inquiry,
Reid is constantly celebrating the achievements of Bacon and Newton, they never would have come to a view like this.
And at this point, Reid offers up, I will not have enough time for this, he offers up that section in the chapter of scene called The Geometry of Visibles.
Let me do this as painlessly as I possibly can. Just imagine that the eye is positioned at the center of an indefinitely large sphere on the surface of which you could project anything that you liked.
Well, anything you project on the surface of the sphere, of course, will be spherically projected.
If you took a right angle triangle and projected it, it will follow the curvature of the sphere.
Now, what Reid is offering here is an example of how the external world impresses itself on the senses.
As the bottom of the eye is itself curved, then any projection from the external world is going to take on that curvature.
Except in the very, very small phobia of the eye, if it's so small, there will be very little discrepancy between a curved triangle and a rectilinear one.
Now, suppose you draw a right angle triangle on a piece of paper.
Well, here's a core question. What is it you see? Do you see the curved linear projection that would take place optically?
Or do you see what, in fact, do you see that triangle as the tangible triangle, as a rectilinear triangle?
You see it as a rectilinear triangle. It has none of the spherical geometry projective properties that you would expect if the mind was simply making a copy of whatever is taking place at the bottom of the eye.
Reid wants to argue this, that when the external world impinges on the sense organs, it sets up an activity.
That physiological activity constitutes a kind of sign system, do you see?
A natural sign. The external world creates natural consequences in our sensory body.
The mind, he says, by a way we do not understand, is able to go from these signs, from these physiological signals, to the thing signified.
The mind is able to go from the sign to the thing signified.
Now, Reid came too early to know that the physiological events in vision are first biochemical.
That is, first there are changes in the pigment chemistry of the retinal receptors.
And as a result of these biochemical changes, patterns of electrical activity are set up in the optic nerve fibers.
And these signals are then sent back into the brain, so that the whole game is played out at the level of neuroelectric processing.
Nobody sees neuroelectric events. You see stars and persons and carpets and shoes and the like.
In other words, you are going from the physiological sign of events in the external world to what is signified by those signs.
Now, how does that come about?
Reid says, look, this is a gift of the mint of nature.
Sure, he's a Presbyterian minister, and sure he thinks that a providential God has fitted us out in such a way as to be able to get from one side of the street to the other,
just as the caterpillar knows what leaf to eat.
Yes, you can talk about a providential God. You can talk about the mint of nature.
But whatever it is you're talking about, there is a perfect fitness and actness between the constitutive principles of our biology and the demands the external world places on us.
This is not an accidental arrangement.
And if, in fact, all we knew were those chimera or whatever it is the mind is possessed of when it goes about making copies of whatever is in the sense organs, for goodness sake, we couldn't get from A to B.
We would have to be doubtful about there even being an external world.
He says, I adopt the philosophy of Bishop Barkley.
I follow him to the end of his logical tether.
What happens?
He says, I step into a dirty kennel and I bang my head against a signpost.
And after a thousand such experiences, I come to the conclusion that there really is an external material world and I'm located in it and better remain mindful of that fact.
So Reid rejects the proposition.
Oh, and by the way, on that so-called copy theory, according to which the mind somehow makes copies of what's taking place.
Well, the only sense modality in which you could talk intelligently about copies is vision.
Nobody can make a copy of it.
No mind can make a copy of an odor or a taste.
And so if the geometry of visible shows that the ideal theory doesn't work in vision, it can't possibly work anywhere else.
It's tried out at the level of vision and it fails.
There's a long, long text that goes with the proper analysis of Reid's geometry of visibles.
I'm simply trying to convey how his commitment to a Baconian-Newtonian mode of experimentation and Reid did experiments.
You can tell in his writings that he's actually using himself in some of these visual perceptual studies.
What a blind mathematician he knows from his conversations with Cambridge's Dr. Saunderson, who was a civilian professor in the patrimony of Newton himself and who was a blind mathematician.
So I just want to get across the use of what Reid takes to be the right method of inquiry.
It's not idle speculative philosophy.
It's a Newtonian-Baconian experimental approach.
You have a hypothesis come up with the telling set of observations that would speak for or against that hypothesis.
Don't just assume it's the case because it seems to make sense to you.
He takes the ideal theory to be the product of a kind of philosophical pre-scientific philosophy.
After Newton, Galileo and company, we should be able to do these things better.
So he's agitating, as Locke and Hume did, he's agitating for a natural science of psychology, a natural science of the mind,
but understanding that to be an experimental science, not just speculative.
Now, what about the concept of causation?
Constant conjunction is the basis upon which we make causal ascriptions.
Well, Reid says this can't possibly be the case.
No two events have been as constantly conjoined as day and night, says Reid.
No two events have been as constantly conjoined as day and night, yet he says no man come of age,
regards day as the cause of night or night as the cause of day.
There are any number of constantly conjoined events which we know are mere correlations.
You know, more than that.
And a sailor doesn't have to keep shooting his victim to come to the conclusion that he might be the cause of the victim's demise.
This is just nonsensical. It doesn't work that way.
Oh, very often we sort of habitually attribute causation where if we knew better and thought more clearly about it,
we would withhold such ascriptions.
But that the concept of causation is no more than the associative principle set forth by whom that, he says, is not the case.
Indeed, Reid says, how might we come about?
No set of observations of events taking place in the external world could possibly lead to a concept like A causes B.
They would just be bang bang, bang bang, do you see?
Reid thinks that the concept of causation actually is an inference we make based on our knowledge of ourselves as having a genetic power.
That is, from the knowledge of ourselves as having an active power, which he says must begin very, very early in the life of anyone.
The picture you get is, look, the point at which the infant knows the difference between sucking his own thumb and having something else in his mouth.
The point at which one recognizes that one is able to bring things about probably is very, very early in life.
The point at which we are exercising an active power, that is to say a power not only to do something, but to forbear from doing it.
Now, since we recognize ourselves to have the power to bring things about, the inference we make when we see things being brought about in the external world
is that there must be some kind of power bringing that about also.
So Reid actually turns the tables.
Reid begins with an understanding of ourselves as having active power being the basis upon which we then might make causal attributions in the external natural world
and concludes then that absent active powers, had there not been a form of life with active power, the concept of causation never could have been formed in the first instance.
So Reid's analysis is comparably psychological as it were, but it is leading very much in the direction of a kind of moral autonomy,
a kind of autonomy, a kind of self-generating, self-defining being, being the necessary precondition for the humane operation to take place at all.
For there to be humane modes of causal concepts, there must be Reidian active powers.
I hope this isn't too cluttered.
Now, what about this humane position on morality?
This worrisome position on morality, the whole passion should rule reason and all that stuff.
That is, the wild horse and the platonic chariot is really the one that ought to be telling the charioteer where to go.
Well, Reid says, you know, even the committed hedonist can't possibly defend that position.
Now, take the committed hedonist who is setting out to do nothing but maximize pleasure, maximize utility, what have you.
Reid is not accepting that any such being outside the realm of pathology has actually ever existed, but suppose you had an entity of that sort.
That entity would have to have the full rational powers and resources of the very kind of entity that humes seems to be skeptical about.
People will take horribly tasting medicine that cause great, great revulsion in the belief that it will have long term salutary consequences.
This is only possible to a rational calculating being able to anticipate long range consequences and able to commit himself to a course of action likely to produce what is good on the whole over the long run.
So it isn't enough to say that we are pleasure seeking, pain avoiding organisms as if that sort of settled the matter.
Given the human history and the inclinations of human beings and the needs and purposes that we identify, we have to be and are rational entities even at the level of rational calculations as to what is in our long range.
Point number two, the evidence that a philosopher should look for to determine whether a theoretical position he has taken is sound or not, must be evidence of a documentable kind.
Philosophy can't be just mere chatter.
Now, what we know about human history shows ample evidence of an essentially altruistic disposition in human beings.
There is no question that the lives of saints and heroes alone make clear our capacity for bonafide self-sacrifice.
Not in the interest of utility, but in the interest of what Reid refers to in anticipation of Kant, by the way, what Reid refers to as the first principles of morals.
That is, there must be just as there are necessary preconditions for us to be knowledgeable about the world.
There must be active powers for us to have the concept of causation.
There must also be a set of dispositions that indeed are principled dispositions, dispositions of an essentially moral nature.
They can't come from the outside.
They have to be there to match up with events in the external world.
Nor can they be mere passions or emotions, because passions and emotions as such are not principled.
They're simply states of sentiment or states of feeling.
So Reid wants to argue for not a rational theory of morality.
He wants to argue for a psychological theory, but a theory that acknowledges the principled nature of ethics.
Are over and against or as contrasted with its merely passionate or emotional content.
Now, what about conventions and the like?
Do things mean what they do depending on where in the world you are, what your conditioning history has been, why language itself is brought about conventionally?
Locke had a conventionalist theory of language.
Hume also has a conventionalist theory of language.
Well, for words to take on a conventional meaning means that we have to agree on what they will mean.
But in order for there to be covenants and agreements of any kind, there must be some way of signaling agreement and some covenantial bond that we're prepared to enter into.
And that itself requires a kind of language.
Reid argues that for there to be an artificial language such as the one I'm using now, it must be grounded in what initially is a natural language.
A language of fearful expression, invitations to cooperate, hoping someone will stop, signs of pleasure.
He finds these throughout the animal kingdom and he says that artificial languages are grafted onto these natural behaviors which allow us to have a shared kind of life with each other and indeed with other creatures of nature.
Again, Jefferson referring to Reid on natural language is saying, look, philosophy tends to obscure things.
Let's hunt for a language that is as close to the natural language of cooperation, self-defense, self-interest and the like, as we can get.
Personal identity.
Well, Hume offered an improvement over Locke.
Locke's theory of personal identity, the sharing of elements of consciousness doesn't quite work.
It doesn't work too well.
The Scriblarians did a number on that.
Hume says, no, personal identity is rather more like a parade formation.
If you take the elements of memory or the elements of consciousness as entities in a parade, well, some can go and they're replaced by others, do you see, as soldiers might be replaced?
The parade formation remains continuous over time even though the separate elements are exchanged.
Reid thinks this whole approach to personal identity is a non-starter.
Locke's theory, he says, founders, for someone to have a memory of being somebody doesn't make him that person.
If you remembered losing the Battle of Waterloo, it would not make you Napoleon.
Moreover, it fails at the level of logic.
If you want to say that all the self is, it's just identical to memories, then try it this way.
He borrows a page from Barclays Alsophram.
Try it this way.
Imagine a brave officer decorated for valor in battle who recalls being the young boy once punished for stealing apples from the orchard.
Call the brave officer B and the young boy A.
Now imagine an aging general who recalls having been the brave officer decorated for battle but has no recollection of the young boy punished for stealing fruit from the orchard.
And call the aging general C.
On Locke's account, A equals B and B equals C, but A doesn't equal C.
So the logical properties of transitivity, the identity statement simply fails.
The reed even pauses to ask how a person of Locke's philosophical ingenuity and power could put together a theory so easily defeated.
Defeated at the level of logic and defeated at the level of experience.
And he says, well, this is what happens really when you just engage in a kind of speculation without any scientific rigor.
The answer to the question, how do I have a personal identity?
Reed says, look, for there to be trees and there must be a traitor.
For Hume, who says that my personal identity when I look for it is just a bundle of perceptions.
Reed says, who's doing the looking?
If not Hume himself.
Well, Reed is a significant chapter in the history of common sense maneuvers designed to neutralize the arts of philosophy.
When the arts of philosophy seem to distract us from the day-to-day requirements of life and society.
The more one reads in Reed, the more philosophical power one finds there.
I think he would have maintained his status throughout had he been as inscrutable as Hegel.
