Lecture 34 The Federalist Papers and the Great Experiment
Between May and September of 1787, a group of men convened in Philadelphia in what we
know was an especially hot and humid time.
They had to rent rooms.
They were going to be there for over four months.
Some of them found a way, if they lived in an adjacent state, found a way of getting
home, not weekends, but perhaps every fortnight.
They were living out of suitcases.
Their deliberations were by their own vote, conducted in secret.
The press was not invited.
They were there for the express purpose of creating a nation.
When I say for the express purpose, most of them, of course, would have reached that conclusion,
oh, shall we say kicking and screaming.
They actually weren't sent there to fashion a constitution for the United States.
Most of them thought, or at least the people who sent most of them their thought, that
there should be some fine-tuning of what had already been established in earlier constitutional
type documents, certainly not going there to reinvent the country.
The one who did show up with a constitutional plan in the back pocket, so to speak, was
Hamilton.
But I think it can be said that in this regard, Hamilton was in the minority.
Nonetheless, they certainly recognized that more than fine-tuning was involved, and they
surely knew from the earliest deliberations that what was at stake involved rather more
than the redrafting of existing documents.
It has sometimes been said that what took place during those four and a half months
was nothing less than miraculous.
In fact, Jefferson, who wasn't there and who later would find out everything you could
possibly want to know about those deliberations by reading the notes taken by James Madison,
couldn't believe that Madison was at once a full-fledged participant in every day of
the meetings, and at the same time could record these notes with such accuracy and completeness
and dispassion, representing views contrary to his own, with faithfulness and respect.
Jefferson thought that Madison's notes were miraculous, let alone what actually was achieved
in those deliberations.
Was this a meeting of the country's wise old heads?
Well, there was only one old head in the room.
It was Ben Franklin's head.
I guess Ben Franklin's head was old.
I forget the arithmetic.
I believe the average age of the participants was somewhere between 34 and 38.
I think if you take Ben Franklin out, it's something like 34.
Who presided over these meetings?
I think of the noblest citizen we had at the time.
The meetings were presided over by George Washington, who speaks almost not at all during the four
and a half months.
He occasionally reminds those assembled that these are, as it were, in camera sessions.
There's nothing to be said to the press.
If you have the press commenting on the day-to-day affairs of this deliberative body, the country
is going to be driven to fearfulness and confusion.
They simply won't know what's going on.
They will reach reckless conclusions.
So everybody decided, yes, indeed, mum's the word.
When we're finished, we will present the fruits of our labor and our fellow citizens will
reach their own judgments about it.
How scrupulously was this principle adhered to?
Quite scrupulously.
There's one event that says much.
Apparently after one of the day's deliberations, someone, one of the representatives, had his
notes for the day fall to the ground.
So they were on the floor of the room.
And apparently another one of the delegates seeing them on the floor, not knowing whose
notes these were, picked them up and put them on the president's desk, on George Washington's
desk.
And the next day Washington holds up the notes and does caution those assembled about the
need to preserve the confidentiality of these deliberations and certainly to be very, very
careful in handling documents and then asks whose papers these are.
And of course, no one claims them.
Now this has but a measure of the esteem in which Washington was held by his contemporaries.
We know when Mrs. Adams will write back from the court of St. James what the estimation
of Washington was, even outside the continental United States, she tells us that with all
the European dignitaries coming to the court of St. James, the one person who when he entered
the room was so obviously the aristocrat in the group, all eyes turned to George Washington.
I think it's just too easy because of how we've popularized and mythologized Washington
and because we're skeptical of our own mythologies to underestimate the significance of this man's
character in the forging of the American Republic.
We all have our historical villains and favorites.
I should think that if I were ever to presume and I won't ever presume to do a sort of a
cultural history of America at the founding, Washington would be the central figure.
The embodiment of what at least at the level of rhetoric was taken to be the animating
principles of the New Republic.
His nightstand apparently not only had the good book, I guess just about everybody's
nightstand had the good book, but also Addison's Cato.
He very much looked forward to productions of Addison's Cato.
I think during one of the winter campaigns he actually had Addison's Cato staged for
the troops.
I don't know whether it was to provide them with a greater moral uplift or to provide
himself with it, but Addison's Cato is of course one of these great figures from the
Roman Stoic achievement, and Washington comes down to us and I think accurately as a person
of great Stoic resolve, great self-discipline.
He had a temper, he was known to use languages that went well beyond the king's English
and all that, but when push came to shove, when sobriety was needed, when dispassion
was needed, and when self-sacrifice was needed, Washington was the man of the hour.
It was proposed that his title, when we constituted ourselves, should he be His Excellency or
King, or you know that was one of the, and apparently his scoffing and shortling responses
were enough to alert people to the fact that President will do, will just preside over
this thing and wish the best for it.
The document itself that came out of the 1787 deliberation seemed to be lacking in something.
That is, when the press got hold of these drafts and alerted the people to what was
contained in these drafts, the press noted, and then much of the nation, it wasn't a nation,
but much of the collective conscience noted, that something seemed to be missing.
There wasn't a Bill of Rights.
Yes, Constitution of the United States seemed to have a, well, was this an oversight?
I mean, we just never got around to this Bill of Rights business.
And of course, during the following ratification period, when the question was how many of
the colonies are going to stand behind this document, great, great rhetorical flourishes
were devoted to this incredible negligence on the part of the Philadelphia Convention
here, no Bill of Rights.
I shall return to this in a few minutes.
This is to say that the ratification procedure was doubtful from the outset.
It wasn't clear at all that that arduous performance by those exceptional people in
four and a half months in Philadelphia would come to anything other than yet another piece
of paper on how you might go about constituting a government.
What does all this have to do with great ideas in philosophy?
Well, I think that the Federalist papers, which were put together by Madison and Hamilton
and John Jay, are designed chiefly to win over New York to the ratification of the Constitution.
But those papers are one of the great contributions to what might be called practical philosophy,
one of the great contributions to political philosophy.
Of course, if it had all come from a single hand and had been dressed up as a kind of
philosophical treatise, I think it would have surely ranked with Aristotle's politics,
it surely would have ranked with Plato's Republic, and any number of lesser works.
Now, why do I say that?
Well, first, why isn't it written by one hand as a treatise in philosophy?
Let me recur to the previous lecture.
Those who met in Philadelphia did not meet to do philosophy, and those who met in the
salons of Paris did not meet to do philosophy.
They met to change the world, and they knew that if you were to change the world according
to rational and defensible principles, you would need all of the scientific and natural
philosophy help you could get.
So the philosophers are recruited by these persons.
Of course, the Philadelphia crowd read David Hume.
Of course, they read John Locke, but I think it's more than interesting to note that the
first edition of John Locke's political science treatises in this country.
And we don't see another edition of that work for 460 years thereafter.
Now, look, we visit Monticello, and we go into the anti-Roman Jefferson's great classical
house and all that, and there's a bust of Locke and Newton.
Yes, yes.
Locke is a highly respected, highly regarded philosopher, a friend of Newton's, a physician
to Shaftesbury and all that, a figure of respect.
No one should think that anybody in Philadelphia was going home after a day's labor and reading
Locke to figure out what he should say the next day or what he should vote for.
Did they read Hume?
Yes, they did read Hume.
I think Hamilton probably read Hume a little more than some of the others read Hume.
But if it's a question of the people they were reading, well, they were reading Montesquieu.
They were reading treatises on law.
They were reading about various forms of government and their fate.
They were reading history.
They were particularly interested in ancient history because ancient republics had something
quite summoning about them, and the question was, why did they fail?
Why did every republic so called, I mean, and most of these didn't approximate anything
that would be produced here, but they collapsed.
Why did they have no staying power?
Is it only a tyranny that can keep itself in place?
This is a cafe question.
This is a 2 a.m. question of a cappuccino if all you're doing is engaging in the life
of the mind.
But if you are setting out to constitute a government, if you are setting out to do
this in such a way as to invite the charge of treason, you better have good reasons for
doing this, and you better know what you are doing in the first instance.
These are serious students of history.
They're serious students of political philosophy.
They're not doing philosophy.
They're instantiating its lessons.
But not in order to vindicate philosophy, but to change the world, to create a new world,
to create a novice ordo seclorum, a new order of the ages.
They said that.
That wasn't something said about what they were doing.
That's what they understood themselves to be doing, creating a new order of the ages.
So I do want to say that these are not primarily philosophical achievements and they were not
intended to be philosophical achievements.
Now who wrote the Federalist Papers?
Who are these people?
Alexander Hamilton, of course, is born in the islands.
He is one of the delegates from New York.
He's one of the delegates from New York, really representing a lesser but quite powerful financial
interest in New York.
That's how he gets to Philadelphia.
And I don't think anybody would regard Hamilton's presence in Philadelphia as his being a man
of the people, so to speak.
That is, there's a very definite influence that he is there to protect.
James Madison, I'm going to say less about Jay.
Jay's own illness and other duties makes him the least prolific of the three contributors
to the Federalist Papers.
Hamilton did the most and then Madison.
James Madison, he's the chap we are all taught in school, gave us the Constitution of the
United States.
This is Madison's doing.
He took the notes.
He pulled things together.
He was there first with the most that was needed at the time.
He's a signal figure in the history of American politics.
He's a Princeton graduate.
We mustn't ever hold that against him.
And he's there on the occasion of Princeton adopting a new curriculum under new leadership.
The College of New Jersey is now going to form as Princeton University.
And whom do they bring in to provide the kind of intellectual and philosophical and moral
leadership that is right for the time?
But one who will come to be a signer of the Declaration of Independence and the like, John
Witherspoon, a native Scotsman, and a Scottish common sense philosopher.
Yes, indeed.
In fact, Witherspoon will argue in one pamphlet or another and one letter or another.
And in this idea, say, Witherspoon overstepped the bounds of propriety that Thomas Reid isn't
the father of Scottish common sense philosophy, why he, Witherspoon, in any number of sermons
that he gave, had defended essentially that position before Reid's inquiry was ever published.
Well, we don't have the particular sermons in which Witherspoon developed Scottish common
sense philosophy.
I will bet the mortgage that in none of those sermons do we get anything like the geometry
of visibles.
We certainly don't get the critique of the object.
But that Witherspoon would present that as a sign of his standing, is itself revealing.
And what it reveals is there is already a commitment to a common sense position, but
a common sense position in that Reidian sense.
That is, principles that one is under an obligation to take for granted just to get out of the
chair in the morning.
Do you see?
This isn't an object of deliberation.
It's not an object of opinion.
It's not an object of belief.
It's the necessary starting point for any kind of venture at all.
There's a common sense precept.
Now how much was Madison influenced by Witherspoon this much?
Madison completed his studies, the studies required by the university for a degree, and
then stayed in addition a year to study with Witherspoon.
So the influence was considerable.
Now nothing is more tedious than some scholarly attempt to establish the collision of billiard
balls.
You know, I mean, this is how Hermeticism gave you, well, at first it was Hermes, and
then it's Aigliophamous, and then it's Pythagoras, and Socrates got it from him, and then it's
Plato and Aristotle.
This isn't a matter of Madison listening to Witherspoon, reading Reid, and then a few
years later, trundling off to Philadelphia and founding the country.
No, I'm referring to an ethos, not a set of mechanical interdependencies, but an outlook.
It's an enlightenment outlook.
It's a common sense, naturalistic, scientific, progressive outlook.
But now it's going to express itself in the most practical of ways.
It's going to create a government, and it's going to create something that the architects
themselves know has never existed in the history of the world.
If the Federalist Papers are a defense of the form of government that was put together
in Philadelphia, and if that form of government itself is an original contribution to the
history of political activity, then the Federalist Papers constitute a significant contribution
to philosophy itself, and constitute in their fullness one of the great ideas in philosophy.
Now, did we get a republic?
What after all is a republic?
There was some speculation at the time.
There were those who declared themselves to be Federalists.
There were those who declared themselves to be Anti-Federalists.
There were those who declared themselves to be Republican.
The question is, what form of government is a Republican form of government?
If you keep talking about the ancient Roman Republic, was that a republic?
Was Athens in the Age of Pericles a republic?
Madison actually answers the question by serving up something that I don't think would work
as a dictionary definition, and I don't think entirely honors the historical record.
He says this, a political regime is a republic only when the government's power is derived entirely
from the people.
Now, that's not his quote.
He goes on to say this.
And when it is, quote, administered by persons, holding their offices during pleasure for
a limited period, or during good behavior.
Now, this comes to us in mother's milk, so to speak, so there isn't anything in this
that seems at all controversial.
That is, the leader of a nation serves at someone else's pleasure.
That the term of service is governed by a consideration of good behavior.
That you can have the head of state impeached.
That he gets there and stays there solely at the sufferance of those who are governed.
For goodness sake, the man's a traitor or a lunatic.
I mean, if anyone thinks that this is the sense Pericles had of what it meant to be
autocrator in Athens, mind you, that's not what he thought.
And Pericles was, if I may use the term, a republican-oriented leader.
I mean, by ancient standards, he's actually one of a kind.
But here what we find is the claim that you have a republic to the extent that government
is self-government.
That those who lead that form of government are chosen by the people serve at their pleasure
and are required to uphold standards of conduct acceptable to those who are governed.
Well, if you take a look at history, Madison says, the best lesson of history is that the
closer something comes to approximating a republic, the sooner it dies.
The only sorts of republics that seem to make it are what he refers to as a kind of puritanical republic.
That John Adams was very much behind that view of republics.
Adams said this.
He said, only, quote, pure religion or austere morals will be capable of holding a republican form of government together.
You've got to have a collection of people who are so committed to a fundamentalist core of essentially religious teachings
that indeed they can be self-governing but will not create an anarchy in the process.
You see, what's the protection against an anarchy?
In a self-governing state, the protection against anarchy is the adoption of common moral precepts, shared moral values.
This is how we don't all go our separate ways anarchically.
Well, of course, this then would give us a kind of theocracy, which is precisely what the founders are seeking to avoid.
The essential ingredient in Adams' mind, and it's also going to be an essential ingredient in the minds of just about all
writing and speaking on this subject until circa 1770.
The common good, the whole point of constituting a republic, is not to defend the individual against the claims of a majority,
which would have been regarded as reckless and outrageous.
It's to secure the common good.
The goal of the writing, the goal of this form of political organization is, I want to say this clearly,
and in the face of what obviously must be opposition, the goal is communitarian.
It is not individualistic.
We invent the American individual much closer in time to the age of Jackson.
John Wayne on the horizon is not the picture of what we're aspiring to achieve circa 1760.
Barry Shane in a very fine book called The Myth of American Individualism, published by Princeton.
Barry Shane is at pains to point out, through a thorough examination of the resources,
that all of the scholarship and lay writing of the period is of a communitarian nature.
There are regulations against excess.
You still have a kind of puritan strain in American thought.
And indeed what the Constitution is setting out to do now is to protect the individual colonies against encroachments
by a strong central government.
The reason there isn't a Bill of Rights in the document is at least at this point,
well there are several reasons for this and the shortness of our time really makes it difficult to explore this in any but a superficial way.
But look, the answer to the question why there isn't a Bill of Rights in the first draft coming out in 1787,
there are really two answers to this.
First, there's a strong principled position that if you set forth in a Bill of Rights such rights as the people have,
you're in the preposterous position of giving government the right to determine what our natural rights are
and since our rights in a self-governing people, our rights are what we declare our rights to be,
why put in this document what the government will grant us by way of rights?
To list them is to limit them.
So there's that opposition.
But another part of the story is this.
The point of the document is first of all to constitute a nation and to give it a centrality,
but not a centrality that will trump the interests and orientations of the separate constituent entities, do you see?
So the structuring is such that there are certain rights reserved to the individual states and their people that cannot be abridged by the central government.
Now why not a Bill of Rights that tells us the rights the individual has that cannot be abridged by his local government?
That I submit to you, now there are exceptions to this, but I submit to you that at the time,
most of the architects of the American Republic would have regarded that as silly.
You are a citizen of Maryland.
You have voluntarily entered into that association.
You're part of that community.
Of course, it's a voluntary association.
You could pick up and move somewhere else.
You can't be at war with your own community, do you see?
What sort of scoundrel would you be?
So obviously in entering into this form of self-government, you have accepted that the majority, the ethos of your community, will be disposatory.
It's silly to think that you need protection against the very voluntary associations you've entered into.
So one reason why there was no dilating on the notion of specific rights of individuals is because it wasn't thought to be a burning issue,
that the individual would seek to defend himself against his own state.
Now this is 200 years ago and things changed, but I say those are two very quick glosses on why that convention ended without there being a Bill of Rights in place.
Montesquieu taught that there are three essential forms of government.
There's a despotism and what you have to cultivate in people for a despotism is fear.
There's one or another form of monarchy and the right set of dispositions, if you're to constitute a monarchy worth having,
the right set of dispositions are going to be grounded in considerations of honor.
And then wrote Montesquieu, there is the Republican form of government which depends on nothing less than the cultivation of virtue.
And so we do find in this stoic outlook of Washington and the other founders, the recognition that a republic will work here
because we have the resources to create and preserve lives of virtue and self-sacrifice.
A special kind of person is needed.
Some of our people were referring to us as having natural kings and queens, natural aristocrats,
aristocratic by birth but aristocratic by character.
In explaining this particular feature of our organization, things that we take for granted,
that we hold to be true without any need of proof, we take these things to be self-evident to do so,
all men are created equal, this is at a time when slavery as a practice is permitted in order to keep the southern colonies in the game.
We take these things to be self-evident, per se nota is the way the scholastics would put it, something being self-evidently true.
How could these patrons of natural science make so unscientific a claim, so counterfactual a claim,
a claim that's defied seven days a week by the evidence of sense.
There are no two people in creation who are exactly alike, do you see?
We take these things to be self-evident.
Well, understand the internal logic of this political philosophy.
We are out to create a new order of the ages.
We are out to produce a form of government, every kindred example of which failed.
And we think this one will succeed.
But for it to succeed, certain philosophically disputable principles will simply have to be put on hold.
For the purpose of constituting a republic of a certain kind, worth having and worth keeping.
Certain core precepts must be accepted as self-evidently true.
They're self-evidently true given this is what we're trying to bring about.
It is self-evidently true that a self-governing people, each of them individually,
must be the equal of every other as being a being of moral worth.
That the law will make no distinction between and among people except on the basis of their actual conduct.
That there is an essential equality across all of those who are at once fit for the rule of law
and fit for a life that is a self-governing life.
There's something very powerful in the Federalist papers as you read the separate contributions of Jay and Hamilton and Madison.
And that is the utter respect they have for the people whose allegiance they seek to cultivate.
As with the philosophes and the secularization of knowledge,
I would say what the Federalists do is give philosophy an absolutely civic face.
This is something that every self-governing person, every member of a self-governing community must be engaged in.
Everybody is in the long debate, everybody's vote counts.
A new idea worth having.
