Lecture 35 What is Enlightenment?
Kant on Freedom and the Forms of Knowledge
Kant died in 1804. Not long before he died, in one of his final essays, he titled the
essay, Vossist Aufklärung. What is Enlightenment? His conclusion was that Enlightenment was
synonymous with freedom. I shall get to this in the next lecture on Kant. Vossist Aufklärung.
What is Enlightenment? So here is one of the central figures of the Enlightenment,
one of the central figures of the German Enlightenment, recognizing that he is the product of an age
that has earned the Soberket Enlightenment. The question that arises sometimes in scholarly
discourse about Kant is whether the best way to understand Kant is that he provides sort
of the culmination of Enlightenment thought, or whether, in fact, he is really bringing
down the curtain on it and showing that many of its loftiest aspirations are entirely impossible
because grounded in a certain kind of mistake. Well, I say this is a rich fertile ground
for Kant scholarship, and Kant scholarship is among the most actively pursued in contemporary
philosophy. I don't want to go into that question directly, though I probably will address
it obliquely. Kant is credited chiefly for three major critical works, referred to respectively
as Kant's first critique, second critique, and third critique. The first critique is
the critique of pure reason, the second is the critique of practical reason, and the
third is what he called the critique of judgment, the critique of pure reason. And I think we
have to understand the German sense of critique so that it's not, we're not understanding Kant to
say, let me take reason and show you that it's useless and silly and should be criticized and
the like. What Kant is engaged in is a critical examination of the nature and the limits, the
source, the nature and the limits of the subject of this critical examination. The critique of pure
reason is an inquiry into how much we, the extent to which we can solve problems of knowledge in
virtue of the rational resources that we have available to us, what the reach and limits of
reason might be, and where reason leaves off, what else there might be to serve us. So I say it's
not a broadside against reason any more than the critique of practical reason as a broadside
against practical reason. The critique of judgment is a work of an essentially aesthetic nature,
aesthetic philosophy. Kant was widely read. He was not widely traveled. There he lived in
Königsberg all his life. It is said that he never went more than 50 miles from his front door. A
man of very methodical habit. It's well known that people could set their clocks by when Kant was
prepared to take lunch. He had a house made. There is a student whose memoir records the fact
that Professor Kant could be a quite affable and genial host, and that indeed he even had a sense of
humor. Evidence for Kant's humor is not abundant in his philosophical writings, but then as the
comedians say, I guess you'd have to be there. The critique of pure reason is a work that comes
about because Kant says he has been awakened from his dogmatic slumbers. And who's it you think
awakened Kant from his dogmatic slumbers? None other than David Hume. Bertrand Russell writing,
I say, as bombs fell on London would not be very kind to Kant and would declare that having been
thus awakened by Hume's writings, he proceeded to return to a state of sleep from, etc., etc. Well,
Kant was awakened to the great, great benefit of philosophy in general. Now,
what is it in Hume that would awaken one from one's dogmatic slumbers? And what's the dogma in
which in our slumbers we more or less, well, here comes Hume declaring that everything we know is
the product of experience, that such a basic concept as that on which all science and inquiry
depend the concept of causation is to be understood chiefly as a kind of habitual mode of mental
operation, that the moral domain properly understood as the domain of passions and sentiments and
the like, grounded in considerations of self-interest and utility. This is an eye-opener. This is a
wake-up call. Here's the alarm going off. If you have a philosophical nerve still functioning in
your body, Hume's philosophical contributions have to get that nerve popping. No question about it.
So, so there's Kant saying, aha, this has to be dealt with. He doesn't think much of Hume's
Scottish contemporaries and the critic criticisms that they arrayed against Hume. He mentions,
rather dismissively, Thomas Reid and James Beattie and Oswald, the contemporaries of Hume,
and makes a rather disparaging remark about their thinking you could defeat Hume's philosophy by
consulting the wisdom of the crowd, which is how he wants to understand common sense. In fact,
the Kant did not read any English, and the translation of Reid's inquiry available to him,
which had been anonymously translated, it should have been, it's a horrible translation, renders
common sense. Geminer mentioned Fischstand, the way you might talk about a common criminal. So,
so if Kant wanted to have it his way, he could have regarded Hume's critics as relying on Geminer,
common in the sense of the common misunderstandings and moronities and imbecilities of, you know,
homo sapiens, that kind of thing. Nonetheless, we know that Kant knew better, and we know that in
Kant's time, German scholarship was regularly in contact with summaries, redactions in the
like of major works in the English speaking world of philosophy, and especially the world of Scottish
philosophy. So the ink was not long dry on major Scottish treatises in philosophy, before summaries
of these works would be available to German intellectuals, and specifically, Kant can be
shown to have been influenced by Reid. Indeed, there are aspects of Kant's moral theory that more
or less track the, the reading notion of basic principles, basic moral precepts. Now, getting
to Hume, starting with the first critique, Kant says, look, Hume is right in insisting that all of
our knowledge arises from experience. Obviously, you, you, you, you can't know whether George has
his shoes on, unless you look and see. There isn't some sort of ratio-snative, introspective,
logic-chopping procedure for answering questions like that. But Kant says it is a mistake to assume
that because our knowledge arises from experience, that it is grounded in experience. There's a
difference between something arising from something else and something being based necessarily on
something else. Now, how does Kant want to make this point? Well, let's take Hume's thesis about
causal concepts. According to Hume, we come to regard A as the cause of B when A and B have been
constantly conjoined in experience. That is when the associative principles of repetition
and contiguity and cause and effect have worked their magic. The mind is so constituted that
that's the, the inevitable conclusion it reaches. It's not the conclusion of an argument, it's just
a habit of the mind. We've got the wonderful illustration of the billiard balls. One hits two.
One moves, it hits two, and two moves. Hume can't see a third term betwixt them. So, in fact, causation
must be a production of the mind. Now, Kant wants to pause at this point and ask, look, what does a
theory of constant conjunction presuppose? Let's take the billiard ball. Billiard ball one moves.
Then billiard ball two moves. That's what succession is all about. First one event,
then another event. Now, you might want to say you can't see some third term betwixt them,
that is, you can't look at a billiard table and see causation. Guess what else you can't see? Time.
That is to say, you cannot get succession. You cannot get A happening and then B happening.
You can't get constant conjunction. You can't get any events in experience at all located in time,
unless time, as a categorical framework for experience, is already in place. You must
presuppose the ordering of events in time in order for there to be succession, constant
conjunction, contiguity, and the like. Time is not a stimulus that works on a sense organ.
So, time can't be provided by experience. It's not a something out there that stimulates. Now,
any time Kant is dealing with some aspect of the understanding experience of knowledge,
morality, whatever, that cannot be given in experience. That is not an empirical outcome.
He refers to it as pure. Pure in Kant's language means non-empirical. A critique of pure reason
means a critical examination of the very forms of rationality that could not possibly be provided
by experience, but constitute the framework within which experience becomes possible.
I shall get to that in a few minutes. Now, pure, a pure entity, time as being non-empirical.
What else can't you get by way of the senses? Well, you can't even get the out there I see
before me. That is, space as such is not given in experience. Objects are in space,
but space is not a stimulus. It's not an object. Well, what is it then? It's something that must
be present for there to be experience. All experience presupposes a spatiotemporal framework.
There cannot be experience except by way of time and space. Kant refers to these as the
pure intuitions, the pure intuitions of time and space, pure in the sense of non-empirical.
Intuitions, it's one of those words which in both German and English can give rise to
great, great confusion. Let's just say that what Kant is referring to is a necessary precondition
for something else to come about. Do you see? He refers to the pure intuitions as being a priori,
a priori prior to any and every experience. So the a priori, pure intuitions of time and space
become the necessary preconditions for there to be any experience at all.
So the concept of causation is not simply a habit of the mind based upon certain common
experiences. The concept of causation must be grounded in something more fundamental
and grounded in that which experience could not possibly convey.
Now if time and space are the necessary preconditions for there to be any and all possible
experience, what about the necessary preconditions for our having any understanding of the world
at all? Locke's essay on the human understanding says how comes the mind to be furnished? I answer
in a word from experience and Locke goes on to argue, as I mentioned in an earlier lecture,
that you get these complex ideas by associatively pulling together simpler ideas which are grounded
in sensations. Hume carries the ball a bit further in the empiricist tradition. Kant says that isn't
quite going to do because that isn't the form that understanding ever takes. Understanding
does not take the form of a constellation of merely haphazardly connected events which happened
to be experienced frequently. All of our understanding, all of the knowledge claims
we ever make, have certain formal properties about them. That is, they all take place within
a rational framework, a particular kind of framework, and that framework itself includes
entities that could not possibly be gained through experience or given in experience.
At this point, Kant develops a very well-known fourfold table which he titles the pure categories
of the understanding. Again, pure now, meaning non-experiential, not given an experience,
not empirical, the pure categories of the understanding. And the categories are the
categories of quantity, quality, modality, and relation.
The category of quantity, think about it for a minute, all of our quantitative judgments,
all judgments we make of a mensurational nature, a measurement nature, a comparative
nature on a scale of magnitudes, all such judgments have this in common. They are either
based on the concept of unity or the concept of plurality or the concept of totality,
one, many, all. All quantitative judgments answer to that categorical framework. Something is a
unity, it is a plurality, it is a universality. Now, if all you had were fingers and toes,
you'd have no trouble with quantities up to 20, let's say. You'd have no trouble with unity,
and you'd have no trouble with plurality. But there is nothing that the senses can reveal
that answers to totality or universality. From the fact that you know that there is no number
so large that one cannot be added to it, everybody knows, no number is so large that one cannot be
added to it. Nobody knows that by counting. I mean, what number are you up to right now? You
know, 11 trillion, 600, it isn't like that at all. The concept of infinity itself, the concept of all
cannot be brought about as an inference from experience. You don't think that there is no
number so large that one cannot be added to it because so far you haven't got a number like
that. Past experience has never given you that number, so you're probably not going to get one
if you keep counting. It's not a probability statement that you make. Rather, you understand
that I don't want to, I do want to say you understand me. Understanding has this category
of quantity within which all empirical data seek a place and an ordering, but you cannot get
totality from experience itself. Now let's take the category of modality. Something either is
actually the case or it's possibly the case or it's necessarily the case. Now take the modal
category of necessity and think about it for a minute. If A is greater than B and B is greater
than C, necessarily A is greater than C. If all men are mortal and Socrates is a man, necessarily
Socrates is mortal. Now think of these syllogistic certainties, the certainties of mathematics,
these necessary truths. Is it not obvious that nothing in the world of sensible matter is what
it is necessarily? You could not possibly get the concept of necessity by way of experience.
Nothing you will ever experience in the sensible world is of such a nature that it could not be
different. You might say that a particular event like an object falling when you release it is
almost certainly going to go down because for goodness sake, this is just the way
material objects have behaved since a time out of memory. But you could leave room for the
possibility. You certainly would not be engaged in any kind of logical contradiction by saying,
well, I'm not sure it's going to happen next time or there may be an exception. There always may be
an exception in the realm of contingency, in the realm of mere physical happenings.
So the concept of necessarily X can't possibly be the gift of experience. It can't possibly
be something provided empirically. And yet it is in virtue of the concept of necessity
that concepts like actuality and possibility become intelligible and take on their meaning.
That is, something is only probable to the extent that, A, it isn't happening, it's not actual,
and it isn't necessary. Because if it's necessarily X, then it's not something that's
probably X, it's necessarily X. Now, it's sometimes said that what Kant is providing here is merely a
list of descriptors that we use for our experiences. And these are somehow tied in with,
you might want to naturalize Kantian philosophy and say, well, this is just sort of the way the
brain works. The brain organizes things this way. Now, Kant actually raises the question
in the first critique of whether the way to understand the pure categories of the understanding
is in terms of the particular organization that we have, the kinds of beings that we are,
et cetera, et cetera. Well, as Kant points out, if that were the case,
then the pure categories of the understanding would be only contingently worthy and serviceable
and right. Do you see? They would simply be contingently tied to a particular kind of
cognitive being. And if you were a horse or a duck or a Martian or something else,
well, the pure categories of the understanding would simply not pertain to you. Kant says,
this is a failure to mistake the claim being made. The claim is not a claim about how we go
about describing and ordering things. The claim has to do with the necessary framework for all
understanding. It wouldn't matter if you were a Martian or anything else. Quantity, quality,
modality and relation constitute the necessary epistemic framework within which there can be
knowledge. Knowledge will always be about quantity, quality, relation and modality.
Now, these pure categories of the understanding are not themselves a generative of content.
That is, Kant is not specifying in advance how many quantitative things we can know,
or whether we can ever know the difference between something being certainly true or
merely highly probable. These constitute the forms of the understanding, just as the pure
intuitions of time and space constitute the form of experience. Do you see? The form of
all experience is by way of the pure intuitions of time and space. Kant is not specifying what
experiences we're going to have, only that if there is to be an experience, necessarily there
must be the pure intuitions of time and space. Kant is not specifying what the understanding
comes to have, only that the form of all understanding is in terms of the pure categories
of the understanding, and these are not empirical. One way of understanding
Hume, and indeed the debate in the literature and the history of ideas between Hume and Kant,
is this. Hume may be understood as claiming the following, as insisting the following.
There are two classes of things we can know about. We can know such things as
all bachelors are unmarried men. That's true, it's necessarily true, it was always true,
it's true of all time, and you knew beforehand that it was true. You knew beforehand that if
you were going to meet somebody who was a bachelor, that person would be an unmarried man.
What kind of a truth is that? It's what we call a tautology, or a truth by definition, do you see?
It's what Hume in one passage refers to as a truth about words. Now propositions,
where the meaning of the subject term is contained in the predicate term, all bachelors are unmarried
men, are what in philosophy are called analytic propositions. And analytic propositions are
true and necessarily true, and their truth can be known entirely independently of experience,
so that we say they can be known to be true or priori. Here's a proposition. Bill is wearing shoes.
Now that's a different kind of proposition. There isn't anything in the subject term Bill
that's included in the predicate term wearing shoes. Bill could be shoeless, he could be barefoot,
he might not have feet. So this is a claim about the factual content of the world. You might want
to take Hume's epistemology, his solution to the problem of knowledge, as claiming this generally.
Statements of that sort, Bill wearing shoes, facts about the world, are synthetic propositions,
synthetic propositions. And you might want to see Hume as proclaiming that no synthetic proposition
can be known to be true or priori. That is, any factual statement about the world has as a condition
of its truth a relevant observation. You cannot establish its truth prior to some relevant experience
test and the like. So the Humean epistemology, the Humean solution as it were to the problem of
knowledge, is that there can be no synthetic proposition whose truth is knowable or priori.
If you want to see what the Kantian rebuttal is in a nutshell, and of course it's always hazardous
to try to distill these ponderous arguments, distill them to the point where they really do
lose essential ingredients. But you might want to see in Kant's pure intuitions of time and
space, and pure categories of the understanding, this claim, every experience we shall have
will be within a spatiotemporal context, and every knowledge claim we make
will match up with the pure categories of the understanding. And this all refers to things
in the external world including bill wearing shoes. So in fact all of the empirical statements that
we make will necessarily have certain properties which can be established a priori by way of the
pure intuitions of time and space and the pure categories of the understanding. Now if that
is the case, then I am able to make, I'm able to offer such synthetic propositions as any event
that takes place, takes place in time, or has a limited duration, or has either a unity of plurality
or a totality, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. These are actually going to be statements about
real world events and describe this way, frame this way, that their truth will be known a priori.
So one might say that the textbook rationalist reply, if Kant is a textbook, you know the textbook
rationalist, usually Descartes, Spinoza, Leibniz, Kant, the textbook rationalist reply is that indeed
it's Leibniz, Nisi, Intellectus, Ipsa. Mind has an organizing, ordering power, a categorical
propensity that every knowledge claim fits into what might be called the forms of knowledge.
The forms of knowledge like the forms of experience are not themselves given an experience but
determine the ordering, organizing, and patterning of all possible knowledge, and so for Hume to be
right, in a manner of speaking, for Hume to be right, Kant has to be right. That is, you've got to
have the Kantian framework for the understanding and for experience in order for Hume on causation
and Hume on knowledge to work. This is all really quite breathless when it comes to a very powerful
philosophy. Now, when Kant grants that Hume got this much right, surely got this much right,
all of our knowledge arises out of experience, Kant is already recording
modest credentials as an empiricist, and he's also stating his own position to be very much in the,
in the, shall we say, the patrimony of the ideal theorists in Reed's terms from Aristotle on, namely
that our knowledge of the external world is always mediated. That is, our knowledge of the
external world is by way of experience, and of course, experience presupposes the operation
of the senses, and so what we know of the external world factually takes the form of phenomena.
Phenomena meaning objects of perception. The world known and the world knowable is the world
as processed by the organs and principles of perception. Now, there's got to be something
behind this realm of phenomena, and the question is how accurately and veridically and validly
does this mental representation of reality that we have reflect the actual reality. That is,
to what extent are the perceived phenomena faithful copies, renditions, depictions of reality as in
itself it really is, and reality, the things as in themselves they really are, are not phenomena,
but what Kant refers to as numina. The numinon is the thing as it really is. The phenomenon is
the experience it creates in a recipient of the nature that we have. Well, Kant's answer to that
is quite, it's the answer I think you'd get from traditional skepticism, really. The answer is
that factual knowledge of the world is inevitably and always phenomenalistic, and the only way you
could go about inquiring into how good the match is between the phenomenon and the numinon is if
you had some independent way of presenting the numinon. But you can't present anything except
to the senses, do you see? So you're right back in the bind again. So the answer to the question
how good is phenomenal knowledge as a representation of what is numinally real is you'll never know.
You'll never know. Well, you might say to Kant, then how do you know there really is a numinal
realm? And the Kantian reply is, from the very fact of phenomena, it follows that there must be
some numinal existence behind this phenomena, that that is a something reason itself can reach.
So reason can inform us that there is a numinal realm, but reason cannot tell us what that
numinal realm is. We know that it is, we don't know what it is.
Well, the pure categories of the understanding have a way of structuring and organizing the
known and knowable world. And to that extent, you might say that this sounds a bit like a Prussian
version of Hume. It sounds a bit like, you know, something coming out of Königsberg rather than
Edinburgh. But they're really pretty much getting to the same point. The whole thing is hopelessly
subjective, etc, etc, etc. Not so. The pure categories of the understanding are not subjective
states. They are formal structures. And so this is not an invitation to a kind of humane skepticism.
But it does establish certain limits on the knowable. The knowable is going to be confined to the
categorical framework within which all elements of the understanding are located. Reason can step
outside of this, which is why Kant can step outside of the categories and reflect on them.
So reason has a certain reach superior to the understanding, but it's not limitless.
