Lecture 37 The Phrenologists, Early Sciences of Mind and Brain
This great age of Enlightenment philosophy featuring David Hume and the rich traditions
of British empiricism and Kant completing the rationalist program that had been developed
first by Descartes and developed further by Leibniz as these great movements of thought
in philosophy were taking place. The scientifically oriented figures in the Enlightenment were
not at rest or in limbo. Recall that Descartes' contemporary critic Pierre Gassendi had much
to do with reviving Epicurean philosophy and the ontology of Democritus and the atomists
Gassendi arguing that the right understanding of what the constituents of the universe are
is a physical and physicalistic understanding that ultimately everything is reducible to
an atomic particulate form. Newton's own physics is a corpuscularian physics and Newton's methods
that lead to a kind of reductionistic approach to complex problems. Locke's philosophy of
mind is a corpuscular theory of mind. Break the thing down to its elementary sensations
and then figure out what sorts of laws it takes to build these little elements up into
ever more complex ensembles. And even Descartes, you know, for all the claims about Descartes'
mind-body dualism, Descartes' psychology is really quite radically biological. You know,
in the eleventh hour he finds an aspect of mind or of soul, a super-rational sort of
abstract theorem-generating kind of mind that saves the whole system from a vulgar sort
of materialism. Some have even argued that with Galileo called before the Inquisition
in 1633, Descartes is certainly not going to come on as a radical materialist some years
later. I don't think that the right explanation of Descartes' position is in terms of a failure
of nerve. I think he's sincere in his dualism. But I say except for those uniquely rational
powers conferred on human beings only by Descartes' philosophy, well, the rest of these
philosophical psychology in Descartes is quite explicitly biological. So there's a good
solid philosophical foundation for a materialistic approach to issues of mind and mental life.
And of course, I don't want to call it a canonical summary of the position because, as I've mentioned,
it's really a polemic. Laumetri's man and machine becomes almost a rallying cry for
those who are going to try to prosecute the agenda of philosophy by way of the biological
sciences. Those who think that philosophical speculation is fine for the salons and the
coffee shops, but that if you really want to find out about the nature of human nature
and everything that goes with that, the problem of knowledge, the problem of conduct, the
problem of governance, well, for goodness sake, study the nature of the beast and put
together general theories, systematic bodies of knowledge that allow some progress to be
made in figuring out what kinds of entities we are. Well, by the end of the 18th century,
by the full, full rightness of enlightenment thought, any number of these theories were
around. Before I get to Gaul and phrenology, which is, Gaul's phrenology is a quite developed
theory by a quite accomplished scientist, a scientist very easily caricatured and depreciated,
and he mustn't be. But I say there were other systematic theories around. I should mention
Joseph Lavater, who was a Swiss naturalist. Lavater was satisfied that indeed if you examined
the facial characteristics of human beings closely enough and correlated these facial
types, these physiognomical types with what was known about people in the world, criminals
and geniuses and musicians and the like, you actually could have a handle on an understanding
of that most complex of mysteries, human personality, what's underneath all of our merely public
displays of behavior. You could really get at the sort of the center of human psychology
from the outside through the right kind of observation of the face, the cephalic index,
the shape of the nose, the interocular distance and the like. And there was a, quote, science
close quote, of physiognomy. In fact, Theophrastus, who took over Aristotle's Lyceum after Aristotle's
death, had also developed a physiognomy for various personality types. So this had been
around for quite some time. There were Renaissance anticipations as well. But Lavater wrote quite
influential on the subject. I might amuse you with a story. I wish I had more time for this.
When Darwin interviewed for the position of naturalist on the Beagle, he was interviewed
by the captain of the Beagle, Captain Fitzroy, who's quite an important figure in British
history. In fact, in fact, Fitzroy wrote quite an account of the same voyage that Darwin
famously wrote about. And their accounts are sort of hand-in-glove accounts. They're very
interesting. Well, Darwin tells us in his memoir that throughout the interview, Fitzroy
kept looking at Darwin's nose. And Darwin got the job, and the Beagle didn't have separate
quarters for a naturalist. So Darwin and Fitzroy were sharing the captain's quarters, and
they did become fast friends. And one night over a conversation, and I should think of
Fitzroy said, you know, you almost didn't get this position. And Darwin said, why is
that? He said, well, you know, you don't have a naturalist's nose. You see, Fitzroy was
an avid Lapitarian. He was avidly attached to the physiognomic theory of character and
personality and the like. Darwin concludes the memoir by saying that, happy for Darwin,
the captain was prepared to accept, at least in this case, the possibility that the nose
lied. And indeed, if a nose ever lied, it would be a nose that said Darwin was no naturalist.
Now, what we have here is not some freakish sort of outlying mode of thought. The Enlightenment
is satisfied that there is no problem so complex as not to be approachable by the methods of
science. And the methods of science are observational methods where the observations are pulled
together into ever more general theories. Newton set the tone for this sort of thing
as Bacon prophetically indicated in his writings what the mode of inquiry should be. So naturalists
and biologists and clinicians and the like are engaged in the same sort of enterprise.
Well let's get to Franz Josef Gaul, the father of phrenology, that science which the great
William James will refer to a century later as bumpology, that if you carefully grope
about the skull surface of a human being and you feel the bumps and crannies, you can make
all sorts of correct predictions and statements about the intellectual and moral and temperamental
qualities of the individual. All you have to do is develop that gift of touch and know
what you're dealing with. And there are phrenology maps that go back to the early 1900s. There
were over 30 journals devoted to the subject of phrenology. There were phrenology heads in
the offices of some of the leading medical figures of the day. This was a quote, science
close quote that really took on the status of a movement for a period of time. And I say it's
very easy retrospectively to think of the whole thing as a kind of charlatanism perpetrated
by some eccentric. Well nothing could be further from the truth. Gaul was the product of the best
medical education that the world at the time could provide. Certainly the University of Vienna
was on a par with the best medical school, certainly with Edinburgh. He showed great
promise as a medical student and indeed that promise was redeemed by the research that
Gaul actually undertook. It was Gaul who got hold of fetuses spontaneously aborted during
different stages of gestational development and carefully drew and sketched the development
of the nervous system during gestational periods. This is virtually the founding of
developmental neuroanatomy, human developmental neuroanatomy. Pains taking work, systematic
work. The brains have to be removed. The studies have to be done very carefully. Of course
Gaul's focus was chiefly on the cerebral cortex, which is the most readily visible.
Physically the dominant part of the human brain and the like. So Gaul is doing that. Gaul
was one of the pioneers in what today we call comparative anatomy, examining the structural
nuances from species to species, recognizing the differences in the conformations and the
relative contribution of the cerebral cortex to nervous systems different from our own.
And of course Gaul famously was interested in the characteristics of the brains of exceptional
people, exceptional in both directions. The profoundly retarded, the violent assaultive
criminal, those executed for the most ghoulish of crimes, those who had served distinguished
careers as political leaders, as leaders in the field of music, leaders in the arts,
did everything he can to get hold of these brains and see what's different. Gaul, once
he had developed a scheme for phrenology, would frequent social gatherings and apparently
would prevail upon guests to let him palpate their heads, do you see? And of course once
phrenology was on the map, in all the right places, you know how in the, what was it,
the 1960s at a cocktail party you'd invariably asked, what is your sign? Well, by the 1820s
you went to comparable parties and people would be palpating each other's heads and
paying what would seem to be an almost too close attention to the peculiarities of the
skull formation of other party goers and social guests and the like. So this had standing.
Now on the basis of his anatomical studies, Gaul was prepared to propound what he rather
immodestly referred to as the four incontestable truths of phrenology. Now phrenology was
just the name he gave it from the Greek phranesis for, for phrenos, for mind. So this is going
to be a science of the mind, a mental science, a psychology, a scientific psychology. And
he's going to propound what, what his studies lead him to conclude are the four incontestable
truths of phrenology. Well, of course, nothing more wets the appetite of the scientific world
than somebody claiming something to be an incontestable truth. I mean, this is, you
might just as well open the window and say, will you all please come in and attack my
theory? And so Gaul, if he had done nothing else, would have advanced the, the discipline
of psychobiology simply by claiming hubristically that this is it. These truths are incontestable.
Now let's get on with things. Well, what are these incontestable truths? Every mental
and moral faculty of the mind, here's the first incontestable truth. Now, and understand
the sense in which Gaul is using moral, every intellectual and emotional and dispositional
temperamental feature of, of life is associated every such faculty or power. He took the faculties,
by the way, from the Scottish Enlightenment list of mental faculties. He was an avid reader
of the read and, and, and others in read circle. Every one of these definable mental faculties,
is conditioned by its, its existence depends upon a particular region of the brain. For
every discernible faculty, there is an identifiable portion of the brain that is associated with
it. That part of the brain, not there or diminished in its functioning, that particular faculty
will not be there or will be diminished in its, uh, expression. Secondly, the amount
of the faculty that you have, how much you are inclined to X, Y or Z, is determined by
the relative, uh, contribution of your brain to that faculty. Now, now Gaul is not saying
that the bigger your head is, the more you have these things. No. For, for a given brain
mass, the fraction of that brain that's devoted to a given faculty determines the extent to
which that faculty predominates or does not in that person. Gaul was not so foolish as,
I, I recall, oh, it must have been 25. No, I guess it was over 30 years ago that I reviewed
a book for a, a publisher in New York and, uh, the, the learned authors were arguing
that, uh, the intellectual differences between human beings and everything else and, and
between and among human beings themselves was just in the size of the brain, the sheer
weight of the brain. And I, I was able to write a very brief review for, uh, what I
think in those days resulted in a payment of $25 if I'm not mistaken. I, I just wrote
back, uh, dear Mr. So-and-so, if the mass of the brain were the mass of the mind, the
bear would be shooting at my behind. Don't publish this book. Well, of course they did
publish the book. It was a dreadful book. Um, no, Gaul understood that, uh, that it's,
it's not just the size of the head or the weight of the thing. In fact, I think if you
want us to come out on top, and I suspect every species given a choice would want to
come out on top, but if you want something anatomical about us that would put us on top,
it wouldn't be the actual weight of the brain. Indeed, it wouldn't even be the weight of
the cerebral cortex. I think the thing that routinely puts us ahead of chimps and, uh,
dolphins and all that would be the ratio of the weight of the cerebral cortex to the weight
of the spinal cord. We, we do very well in that, in that one. Um, I'm beginning to sound
like Gaul. Um, and, and by the way, that, that ratio is, is, is, is very high, uh, for
all things answerable to this description homosapiens. And we know there are a lot of
dumb ones of those. So I'm not quite sure knowing that ratio is, is, is the last word
on, on the, on the subject. We, we've canvassed a fair number of philosophical views advanced
by people with a ratio very, very high in that domain. And, and, um, apparently they
don't all agree with each other. So, so even if you have the same ratio, there seems to
be ample room for, for disagreement and, and confusion. We'll be getting to Hegel soon.
And, uh, one could only wonder what the ratio might have been, might have been there. Now
the, the third incontestable truth of phrenology is that the mental and moral faculties are
innate. And I think one answer to the question why many of the philosophes, uh, tended to
hold Gaul at arm's length was this rather in egalitarian dimension of phrenology. The
idea that the, the major differences between and among us at the level of mental and moral
qualities are innately determined. Let me, um, offer several qualifications on this.
First off, in Gaul's multi-volume treatise in which these ideas are presented and developed
and defended, he is quite clear in acknowledging the profound influence of the environment
and learning and experience and social life on, on how we turn out. He, he's, he's not
a fatalistic, uh, scientist when he describes these propensities, these faculties shall
we say as innate. What he is recording is his sense that for the environment to have
any influence, it has to have an influence on something. And that something is genetically
given so that all brains are not going to be precisely the same at the outset and some
are going to be far richer in potentialities, which nonetheless may never be realized than
other brains are, which though quite diminished in their potentialities are nurtured in such
a way that indeed the brain with diminished potentialities can be in a person whose achievements
greatly outstrip those of one whose native endowments must have been greater. I think
it's fair to say, not that this is a correct view, but that it's a common sense view. It,
it's not much removed from Socrates' convenient fiction, which he hearkens to Hesiod for men
of gold, men of silver, men of brass, men of iron. If you want to pick guardians for
the state, it's not enough just to have the right educational or training regimen. It's
not enough to make Spartans out of them. Do you see? You've got to start with the right
material in the first instance and even our own founders in the, in the shadow or the
light of Montesquieu understanding that a Republican form of government depends on
citizens abundant in virtue and that you, you, you, you hope for that because you'll desperately
need that, but that's not something that can be guaranteed. The Enlightenment is generally
satisfied that under the right set of social arrangements, the differences between and
among us become negligible. And that what accentuates the differences among us are these
artificial forms of governance, class systems, caste systems, other pretensions and, and
the like. So I do say that Gaul's position on item three probably would have, it certainly
would have troubled somebody like Helvetius. It probably wouldn't have troubled at all
someone like Holbach who thought the whole thing was, was based on brain mechanisms
anyway. And I should think that the, the, the most agile thinkers of the Enlightenment,
the French Enlightenment, and there I guess I would put Dito and Condor say, probably
would have said, well, yes and no, you know, that sort of thing, sensible position is yes
and no. And what's the fourth incontestable truth? Well, this gets a bit Byzantine. I
hope I can unravel this with some, with some dexterity. Look, it goes something like this.
When we are infants, the bony covering of the brain is quite soft and during fetal development
it's quite soft. The calvarium is quite elastic. It's, it's not quite rubbery, but it, it,
it has a lot of give to it. All right. Now add that to the proposition that a given brain
is, is hereditarily predisposed to have certain areas much more developed ultimately than
other areas, that there is a disposition within the given brain for certain parts to become
much more elaborate than other parts. This is the innate nativistic feature of the theory.
All right. So what's happening then? All right. So, so little Billy, little Jane is developing
a way. And let's say in little Billy and little Jane, the, the characteristic of amorousness
is going to be, I forget quite where amorousness is. I think it's sort of above the ear and
slightly forward. I'm not quite sure. I wish I had brought a phrenology map with me. This
was not something which in neuropsychology, doctoral education, we, we had much of a chance
to study actually. We did spend a lot of time on the brain, but we weren't using phrenology
maps at the time. They, they had become, I say, I think just a few years before I was
in school. I don't know quite when. Now, but let's just say that with, with all due respect
to Gaul, I hope I'm not condemned for a mistake here. Let's say amorousness is somewhere around
here or is it avidity? I'm not quite sure. All right. Now, now if Billy and Jane are
predisposed to avidity or amorousness, I mean more than in the usual sense. All right. So
this part is now going to start elaborating itself during early development. So it's going
to start pushing out on the calvarium here. Now, let's say some other faculty is going
to be present in much less potency. It's going to be much diminished in, in potentiality
itself. Let's say big on amorousness, low on avidity. All right. Okay. And let's say
that avidity is over here. So you, you now have a much greater protuberance here and
a relative, uh, uh, imagination here. Now this is going to go on throughout the development
of the system and, and indeed this elasticity in the calvarium exists after birth even for,
for a period of time until the suture is closed and the cranium becomes harder and so forth.
So by that time you've already got a skull whose, whose conformations will be reflecting
the conformations of the cerebral cortex underneath. Now Gaul's critics early on would
shortle and say, well, Gaul is presupposing a perfect relationship between the bumps and
crannies of the cranium and what you would find in the underlying cerebral cortex. Trivial
pursuit question 62. Who is it who did systematic studies relating the degree of relatedness
between the conformations of the skull and the conformations of the cortex underneath
the skull? Answer Franz Joseph Gaul. He knew all that for goodness sake. Say what you will
about the weirdness of the theory of phrenology. Gaul is a fine, anatomist and descriptive
scientist, but he says to a first approximation you really get a lot of information. You see
he's idealizing the, the system. He's, he's in a quasi-Newtonian tradition here. Under
ideal circumstances, yes, the characteristics of the skull would reveal quite precisely
what's underneath. Doesn't quite work out that way. Look at the difference between the
mathematical ideal of, of, of a Keplerian version of the solar system and the actual
physical reality. Newton shows they're not the same, but they're in very close proximity
to each other. Similarly here. So that means then that you ought to be able to palpate.
If you've done these correlational studies well, your skillful palpation of the cranial
surface should reveal the underlying moral, temperamental, emotional and intellectual
potentialities and characteristics of the individual. Well, all right. Off we go. These
are four incontestable truths of phrenology. Well, it's only going to be a matter of years
before physiologists begin to test this theory directly. And, and, and will actually put
France on the map of psychobiology or physiological psychology. The developments in France would
would lead the day for quite some time. And the technique of choice was to take animals,
non human animals, unanesthetized non human animals, cut their skulls open and surgically
destroy selective regions of the brain, sew them back up. And among the survivors, you,
you would have an opportunity to observe among the survivors what deficits were brought about
by destroying specific portions of the brain. The names that, that stand high on the list
here in my own view, I would have to say to some extent high on the list of villainy would
be Francois Magendis and Xavier B. Schacht. And most significant of all, the earliest critic
of Gaulle and the one who, who was the first to develop this technique, Pierre Florens.
I, I might mention that with some of these in the case of one of these luminaries, he
actually lost the affection of his wife and daughter for the kind of research going on.
There are instances of students being amused by having live animals pinned against a waxed
board as their brains were exposed and, and, and surgically destroyed and the like. Now,
I don't want to become tediously moralistic and I'm not going to stand here waving animal.
I should say that as Aristotle makes quite clear, our character is shaped by our works. That
is, we make ourselves into the sorts of beings we are in virtue of the manner in which we
conduct our lives. Now, anything and everything for the sake of knowledge, that's an interesting
question. But one has to wonder the extent to which one really does transform one's character
when one is prepared to bring that degree of pain and suffering to bear on, on innocent
beings to test a theory. Even a theory judged to be so important as Gaul's theory was judged
to be. Well, that much said, what can we say about the general findings? I don't want
to reduce this lecture to something tedious in functional neuroanatomy and the like or
psychobiology. Well, as it turns out, Florens paradoxically discovered that the areas of
the brain Gaul had identified with certain specific functions were not identified with
those specific functions. And he thought that this was a telling devastating critique of
Gaul. And of course, what Florens ends up publishing is that indeed, when you remove
these areas, it is other functions that are disturbed. So, so Gaul may have got the specific
structure function relationship wrong. But the research that set out to disprove or at
least to challenge Gaul's theory increasingly showed a quite reliable relationship between
specific areas of the brain and specific functions. It didn't redeem phrenology, but it did do
this. Gaul put on the map of scientific thought, a problem that continues to animate what we
call today the, the cognitive and brain sciences. And that is the problem of localization of
function. Where in the nervous system is one or another psychological or moral or emotional,
motivational, perceptual function determined, controlled, operated and the like, do you
see? I say that goes on even, even as we meet. And of course, with brain imaging techniques
and other noninvasive techniques, one is in a position to get very good answers to questions
like this without pestering cats and dogs and rats and so forth. Indeed, one of the most
reliable sources of information in this area, and Gaul was not ignorant of this, is the
neurology clinic itself, a post mortem on the patient who had been very well worked up in
advance, lived some number of years, you'd like to think forever, but it doesn't happen.
And then permission given to examine the nervous system of that person after death to see that,
oh my goodness, here's this aphasic, couldn't say anything except tan, tan, tan, had no
expressive verbal abilities at all. And sure enough, on post mortem, we find that there
is a lesion, there's a tumor in the third frontal convolution on the dominant side of
the brain, we've got Broca's area and the like. I say clinical neurology, the findings
of the clinic have been powerfully informing regarding the structure function relations
in the nervous system. Well, does this then redeem, vindicate all of the materialistic
philosophies from the time of the democratists and epicures in the ancient world to Gassendi
and the biological parts of Descartes and Gaul. No, what it says is this. It says, first
off, the methods of experimental science, systematic observation and theory construction
are not only available to us in dealing with the problems of life and mind, but they are
available to us in ways that go beyond the introspections of philosophers. You don't
have to do this the way Locke is doing it or the way Hume is doing it. You can actually
go into a laboratory and ask basic questions about the material basis of some significant
aspect of human nature. And I don't want to say that Gaul is the father of that movement.
I mean that movement again has ancient roots and renaissance branches and all. But Gaul
in the period in which he had leadership understood this approach to be the right approach and
by contemporary lights it's almost assumed to be inviolably true.
