I think anyone who sets out to develop Hegel's thought within the ambit of a 30-minute lecture
really deserves all he gets, suits for libel, perhaps even actions by surviving members
of the Hegel family if there are any. Sometimes when students ask for a quite sharp distinction
between the classical and the romantic perspective, you know, students very often want one-line
answers to questions that really call for volumes. But what is the difference between
the classical and the romantic world view? Over the years I have struggled so often to
make the distinction that I finally, I guess, at a fatigue and frustration hit on this one,
Aristotle's will calls for him to be buried next to his wife, and Hegel's will calls for
him to be buried next to Fichte. Now, I'm not quite sure that conveys all of the distinctions
I want to make between classicism and romanticism, but it certainly is an introduction to some
of the distinctions that I would want to make. What Hegel shares with his immediate predecessors
and indeed with romanticism at large is that science, science as traditionally understood
as quote, perfected, close quote in the age of Newton and so forth, is a narrow, one-sided,
misleading affair that if science is going to stay at the level of mechanistic explanation
and the particularization of the complex into some reduced non-reality, then what science
will be capable of explaining is very, very little indeed. It's just going to be an exercise
in the vindication of its own flawed methods. Do you see? If you assume that the ultimate
reality is corpuscular, you will then develop a set of methods designed to deal with corpuscles
and guess what you'll discover if you do that. Well, corpuscles, of course. And what will you conclude?
Well, you see, I said that the whole thing was corpuscular and I've got these methods
and it reveals the corpuscles, QED. And of course, what you will have missed all along the way
is what the rest of us are pleased to call reality. The other thing that Hegel finds sorely wanting
in science is that, ironically, it doesn't actually explain anything. Now, suppose we take one of the
classic laws of physics, F equals MA, every high school physics student learns, that if you want to impart
an acceleration to something, you have to apply a force that's proportional to the mass of the thing
that you're trying to accelerate. Force equals mass times acceleration. Now, suppose you had a
high school student or a youngster who had not been taught anything in physics at all and you went to
the blackboard and instead of writing F equals MA, you wrote F equals 5M plus 3.2A. Do you think anybody
would jump out of the seat and say, ha, that's a tremendously funny thing you've just said, they're
absolutely ridiculous, makes no sense, no. No, in fact, none of the laws of physics makes any more
sense than some radically different form of the law. The laws of physics simply describe what is. It turns out
that if you do the right kinds of measurements and so forth, F equals MA. The world could have been
constituted in such a way that F would have equaled something other than MA. It could have been 1.5MA
or MA plus 6. Now, what Hegel is getting at when he says that the scientific laws produced by this
mechanistic science don't really explain things, what He's saying is that these laws don't tell us why things
are the way they are. Why does F equal MA? What is the point of all of this precision and lawfulness?
There's got to be a story behind this and it surely isn't revealed by the equation itself. It says the
scientific community might sit back in a rather arrogant way and say, well, look, that's the way it is, but the
question that you then want to address is, look, there's more to it than this. Why is it that way and not some other
way? So I say Hegel is going to be part of that tradition that I've called the romantic tradition that finds in
science not only a mechanistic perspective at variance with the rich, dynamic, evolving nature of reality, but
an enterprise that produces laws which in an almost paradoxical way explain nothing. They describe, at best they
describe, and they describe events observed in a very, very limited sort of way. They describe events observed by a
mechanistic model of reality. So what we ought to be looking for is not merely those causal connections revealed
in scientific laws. We should be looking for the reason behind the laws. And when it comes to human phenomena, this
becomes unavoidable. Now let me pause and examine the difference between a causal explanation and a reasons explanation.
Aristotle, you'll recall, was satisfied that you do not have a genuinely scientific knowledge. You do not have bona fide
episteme with respect to any phenomenon at all until you can give a complete causal account of it. But on Aristotle's
understanding, a complete causal account will be rendered in terms of material causes, formal causes, efficient causes, and most
importantly of all, final causes. That for the sake of which? The tilas, the goal that is realized by the event in question.
Now, the easiest way to illustrate this is, for example, within the context of adjudication. Suppose we have someone
brought before the bar of justice for having mortally wounded another. Smith is charged with shooting Jones. Now if the
answer to the question, if what we're trying to establish is the cause of Jones's death, the answer to a question like
why did Jones die can take a variety of forms. We might say with the poets, dust thou art to dust returneth. Or we might
turn to page one called introduction to the syllogism. All men are mortal. Socrates is a man. The rest is for you to fill in the
blank. But of course, what the court will say, what a jury will say, well, look, this is true of all human beings. This doesn't
identify just what it was that brought about Jones's death. This just says we're mortal. So a definitional cause is not going to be
very helpful here. Well, now we might have some pathologist come in and tell us that the bullet severed the basilar artery or
something like that. The brain was denied a blood supply and so forth. And what we have here is some kind of efficient causal
explanation. Now, of course, at a key point, Smith is going to stand up in frustration and desperation and say, I shot him. He was
engaged in an adulterous affair with my wife. Or I knew I was the primary beneficiary in his will and I desperately needed the money.
Now at a certain point then, the jury will breathe a sigh of relief. Those in attendance will breathe a sigh of relief. So will the judge,
so will the lawyers, perhaps not defense counsel, but everybody now will have an answer to the question. They will know that this event was
brought about because there actually was a reason behind it. And you now have an explanation entirely different from the explanation you get in
terms of the finiteness of human life or the brain's need for blood, any kind of scientific mechanistic account. Hegel wants to argue this point
more generally, that you do not understand, you do not have what could properly be called a scientific knowledge of an event until you can ground that event
in some underlying, or shall I say, overarching set of reasons. Now when I say that Hegel is going to apply this more generally, he's going to apply it to human history
itself. There is a distinct evolutionary perspective in Romanticism. Romanticism contains nothing if not the idea of a struggle, the idea of a
struggle that produces newer and different and ultimately better, more developed forms of things through the Sturmendrang, you see. There is this element, I mean, for goodness' sake,
of the struggles of Faust himself and what comes out of it. And the forces of nature can be dark and mysterious, but nature works its way. And when nature is given untrammeled
access to the resources of the natural world, it produces through a kind of gothic operation, all sorts of outcomes that are not predictable on a mechanistic view.
Well, what about human history? What do we find? Suppose you do an anthropological study of history. And I will do an anthropological study in 25 words or less.
We begin clearly in very tiny tribal enclaves. We're trying to scrape a living out of the rocks and at the la Torah. We might be running fast from predators who are bigger and tougher than we are.
We wait in hiding for something edible that we actually can either outrun or outfox and so forth. This is a very limited sort of life. And out of the struggles in that life will evolve an ever more resourceful kind of humanity.
And out of that will evolve a more settled human community. And out of that will evolve certain social forms and practices. And out of that will evolve, particularly with literacy, a more defined and abstract level of the rule of law, et cetera, et cetera.
Now, are we to assume that this is just some sort of accidental set of occurrences? Doesn't this patently point to a plan or a scheme of some kind? These are not developments that take place in a haphazard way. These are developments that take place in a progressive way.
These are developments of an evolutionary nature, do you say? It's out of the struggle itself that something gets resolved. And it is in the resolution that you are at a plane higher than you were before the struggle was engaged in the first instance.
Look here. There is reason in human history, do you say? In fact, one of Hegel's most accessible works is the essay titled Reason in History.
Now, you might say, well, what is this? Reheated Aristotle or something? Well, no, it's not reheated Aristotle, though the Aristotelian dimensions of this are not difficult to discern. Hegel's going to make rather more of it.
Look, Aristotle did say if the art of shipbuilding were in the wood, you'd have ships by nature. So we all know that great textbook example of Aristotle on final causes, the way you get a Greek trireme as you need somebody who designs these things, knows what it's for, knows what it's all about, puts together the scheme, and then you get the laborers using efficient causal mechanisms to cobble together a Greek trireme.
The art of shipbuilding is not in the wood. If you take a block of wood and leave it there forever, you're not going to get a trireme with sales and all locks and all that.
Yes. And you are not going to get the evolution of human nature. You are not going to get the progressive refinement and rationality of human life, except as a result of something that realizes itself thereby.
There is something that is working itself through human history. And Hegel is satisfied that that something is ontologically real, that indeed in the absence of that ontologically real something, you could not have such an evolutionary and progressive course.
Hegel refers to it with more than one term. He typically refers to it as the absolute. And of course that's capital A. Sometimes he refers to it as the absolute idea.
William James, our own William James, that great phrase maker, and I do believe the best writer of that family. I say this as a Henry James admirer.
William James will say at one point that every time the Hegelians refer to the absolute idea, they sound like they're going up in a balloon.
Well, James's quintessentially pragmatic American philosophy is going to be at war with this kind of thinking, at least in one of James's incarnations. He's going to be at war with this kind of thinking.
But the romantic idealism of the German intellectual world is not at war with this kind of thinking. It recognizes in this kind of thinking the possibility of answering questions that a mechanistic science never even gets around to addressing.
There is something that must be realizing itself because the patterning and evolution and progress revealed by human history is not a haphazard affair and cannot be accounted for in terms of mere accidents.
Now, the absolute expresses itself in a variety of ways, and in Hegel's time he is satisfied that the fullest expression of it is in the ordered state itself.
In fact, in a passage that I should say in the wake of two world wars that took place in our own century, this is a phrase that has a kind of chilling property to it, don't blame Hegel for what a later history engages in.
But when Hegel reflects on the state, when he sees in the state the our current expression of the absolute in human history and says of the state that it is, quote, the march of God in the world, you say to yourself,
goodness gracious, is this the sort of state hegemony that the Nazis were claiming for themselves that, in fact, what they represent, what the state represents is the realization of nothing other than a providential expectation of what a providential requirement of what
must be, a regime that will last for a thousand years because it has gathered to itself all of the principles of what is right, morally sound, fit for the world, a rational order and the like.
Well, of course, more than one scholar has pointed out that you can get fascism and any number of bad things by way of what are sometimes called the Hegelians of the right.
The Hegelians of the right will be the ones who, in Marx's day, believe that the, and thereafter, believe that the power of the state should be obeyed, that fidelity to the laws of the state is the first obligation of citizenship and so forth.
Kant, of course, had insisted that there is only one morally good thing in the universe. The only thing that is unequivocally good in the entire cosmos is the good will.
And Kant had grounded morality ultimately in what we would be disposed to bring about if we could bring about anything that we could in our most rational moments.
Hegel is not satisfied with this. He believes that it leaves room for that which is arbitrary. It even leaves room for that which is wicked.
He grants to conscience a certain moral authority. Indeed, he claims it can have an authority over mere convention.
But when you start to substitute the claims of conscience for the requirements imposed by the state, there is no end to trouble.
Fichte here, the chap he would be buried next to, is a much better model.
Now, back to Fichte. I said I'd be bringing up Fichte again, more than as a cemetery mate, by the way.
Fichte is a quite interesting, historically important person in a number of ways.
I said he was a younger contemporary of Kant's. Remember Kant's three critiques, the critique of pure reason, the critique of practical reason, and the critique of judgment.
Anonymously, Fichte published a work titled A Critique of All Revelation.
It was not only Kantian in tone and character, but it struck many as being Kantian in its philosophical power and insight.
And indeed, many people began to attribute it to Kant himself, so that Kant had to write publicly that this very interesting and fine essay,
this critique of all revelation, was not written by him, by Kant, but by this young philosopher, Fichte.
Well, of course, if at that time in Germany you want to become a household name, be thought of as someone whose work is of such a nature that you might have thought Kant did it.
So Fichte became a celebrity overnight, so to speak.
Later in the day, Kant and Fichte would have a falling out.
But I say there's Fichte looming early in importance while young.
There's much more to say about Fichte. He would become a university rector at a time when Napoleon's troops were occupying all of Prussia,
and when indeed German-speaking people were tripping over themselves to affect the manner of the French, even to learn French, to adopt French modes of dress and the like.
Fichte delivered a lecture which has cast him by post-World War II lights as the wrong sort of chap.
He delivered an address, a lecture to the German people, Raiden und die Deutsche Nation.
And in this, what Fichte wants to point out is, look, you don't have to go looking for things French, do you see?
There are deep, lusty, meaningful traditions that the German people have embedded in their culture,
and one should be true to one's culture. If one is looking for an authentic form of life, this isn't something you import from a foreign and conquering people.
It's something you find within the ethos, the resources, and the legends of your own people.
I should say Fichte was, well, look, I can't go on too long on this, but when the Nazi propaganda machinery was in full force, and I don't want to say full flower,
when the Nazis were trying to make a case for what it means to be a German, they were reviving all sorts of things, not the least of which were Wagnerian operas.
But of course, one of the things revived by Rosenberg and the other propagandist was Fichte's Raiden und die Deutsche Nazis,
which seemed to give a certain pride of place to German culture and the like.
Fichte would have been so contemptuous of everything said and done by the Nazis that any attempt to establish Fichte as a foundation for Nazi politics is doomed to fail.
Fichte is important philosophically as the architect for that logic, that kind of Hegelian ontological logic that features the thesis, antithesis, synthesis, that famous dialectical triad of thesis, antithesis, synthesis,
that progress through conflict, reality growing out of opposing tendencies, yin and yang, do you see, there is an eastern influence here,
but the idea that anything you get is the product of a collision between opposing forces.
I think it's correct to say, as one scholar as Professor Kaufmann has pointed out, that in all of Hegel's voluminous writings,
the actual use of the phrase thesis, antithesis, synthesis occurs once.
So it's primarily a Fichteian contribution, but the idea behind it, of course, is fully embraced in Hegel's ontology and in Hegel's logic.
Now, I mentioned on the idea of freedom in the preceding lecture, Fichte saying, oh yes, man born free, but everywhere in chains, oh yes, man born free.
How would a free being ever know he's free? Do you say, of course you're born free, you've got this moral autonomy, you've got this Kantian moral autonomy.
How would you know that? There you are being free, aren't you? You are free, but you couldn't know you're free until on the first occasion that freedom is resisted and oppressed by another.
It is in attempts to constrain your freedom that the world presents you with the possibility now of being conscious of your freedom.
So it is through the dialectic of a free being facing oppressive and coercive forces that the idea of freedom dawns.
The idea of freedom is finally what impels us as moral beings.
Now look, he says in his characteristics of the age, he says man goes through stages of development, stages of moral development.
And this presently culminating stage is the stage at which we are self-conscious of our freedom.
And indeed we are so in awe of this freedom that we exercise it for its own sake.
Freedom now has no purpose beyond its almost arrogant hubristic exercise.
He said we live in a stage, this is what he's calling the 18th century, he said we have entered the stage of perfected sinfulness.
And what he means by perfected sinfulness is you do something for the sheer sake of doing it, for the sheer sake of asserting your freedom against any and all grounds of constraint, opposition, coercion and the like.
You have to get past this, you have to begin to recognize freedom as an instrumentality.
It's the means by which to produce what is finally good in the world and for all.
So we get fictor saying that it's only when you abandon your individuality that indeed you can come to have an eternal life.
As an individual entity, you're a material, particular entity.
And it's abandoning that and surrendering oneself to the good of the whole, do you see, that the possibility of a transcendent life, a life that transcends mere materiality becomes possible.
I've spent a little more time on fictor than I should, but these fictian elements are going to be present in Hegel's thought,
and Hegel will develop these in an ontology based on dialectical oppositions.
Now similarly with Hegel's logic is an interesting and often misunderstood logic.
I have every right to say I might now be on the verge of misunderstanding it myself.
Hegel's admiring English translators described his style of one of Himalayan severity.
Whole departments have been organized around an attempt to get Hegel right.
Tenure is one or a loss depending on how you deal with Hegel.
There are entire traditions in philosophy that are Hegelian from dawn until dusk,
and I've yet to meet two Hegelians who agree completely on any central aspect of Hegel's teaching, agree completely on it,
and in fact in some respects you're led to believe that unless you're a member of the Hegelian cloth you're never going to get it right anyway.
I have written on Hegel and have been invited to be a member of the All of Minerva and so forth.
I resisted that, not on principle, just being a bit busy and the like.
Well look, here we have a pair of spectacles, and you might say, well this is a particular thing,
the traditional logic you distinguish between particulars and universals.
Ah, but how do you get a particular thing?
The only way that these could be a pair of spectacles is by not being everything else.
Do you see? By not being everything else.
That is, the situation ontologically is rather more complex than what Hegel would take a simple-minded science to believe.
The only way there can be a this is in virtue of it's not being everything else.
There is a dialectic that realizes a particular this, so each particular is in its own right.
Now, this puts Hegel onto something, it puts Hegel onto the possibility that there may be particulars
which in their very nature instantiate cosmically important universals.
Indeed, the whole domain of genius is the domain in which through the particular the universal is dialectically brought about.
There are three domains in which this happens on Hegel's account.
There is the domain of philosophy, the logical domain that I just described in which one by Hegelian logic can establish
the ontological possibilities of the individual only in virtue of the universal in which it stands in dialectical relation.
There is that.
The artistic genius, the artistic genius produces in the singular particular work the instantiation of the universally beautiful.
So it is in the domain of aesthetics as well, in the domain of philosophy and in the domain of aesthetics
that the dialectic operates in such a way that the individual instantiates the universal
and thus there are truths in the aesthetic domain that are ultimate truths.
And religion.
Hegel was finally persuaded that the religion that succeeds most fully according to his own systematic philosophy is Christianity
and this chiefly because God incarnates himself in human life.
The life of Jesus is the life of a man and in the life of the particular biological, individuated genius, do you see,
is instantiated the universal Christ.
The dialectic here is between the death of man as the source of the resurrection of the life of the spirit.
The ultimate ontology is an ontology of spirit realized through a dialectical, conflictful process
that is most fully represented in Christian teaching and Christian thought.
Well, this is all quite summoning and it's also all rather un-Greek if I might put it that way though.
As with all the romantics was wonderfully schooled in ancient classical thought and the like.
But consider the saliency of harmony and proportion and fitness in the ancient Greek world
and what we find in Hegel instead is a world of dissonances and conflicts, a world of struggle, do you see,
a world of collisions, dialectical collisions at once logical and ontological, a reality that comes out of struggle.
An evolution, not a harmonious process but an evolutionary and organic process moving towards something that ultimately is achieved
but not proximately achieved.
The name of the game is not to find the golden mean on the midpoint and preserve it but to move on
and it's not even fully intentional because human history is the realization of an absolute ego, an absolute idea
that uses human history for its own realization.
In the Enlightenment we also find one of the great essays in the English language, Burke on the Revolution in France
but it's the same Edmund Burke who was among the earliest people to do a serious philosophical disquisition on aesthetics itself
and when Burke raises the question about what it is that gives sublimity to art, what does he find?
It's something that can strike awe and terror in us.
Do you see, Burke here is already foreshadowing romantic thought.
Here's Burke in the Enlightenment and a great Enlightenment figure in his own right
but he already is anticipating that there is much more to truth and reality than would be picked up merely by the anatomical blowpipe
scalpels and the like.
Hegel could have said as much that that beauty carries with it.
There is something ancient in Greek about it, something about the ethos, Thanatos tension, the tension between the life giving
and the death giving forces of nature that they are in dialectical relationship to.
What Hegel is giving us, updating Burke so to speak, is the recognition that with the sublime comes a dialectic of terror
and conflict and conflagration, that progress is won at a price, that history is organic, nothing stays in place
and reality is always more than what we see.
Thank you.
