Lecture 42, The Liberal Tradition, John Stuart Mill on Liberty
I should think that after David Hume, maybe even before David Hume, John Stuart Mill might
be properly regarded as the most influential philosophical scholar in the English language.
And his influence extends over a wide range. He certainly laid the foundations for what
we would take to be the scientific psychology of the 20th century. He wasn't alone in this.
But in developing arguments in defense of inductive science, inductive experimental
science, and indeed in developing a systematic associationistic psychology in its own right,
John Stuart Mill would be cited by more than one of the authorities in the 20th century
history of psychology as a source of philosophical inspiration and philosophical justification.
His essay on liberty is probably one of the most widely assigned treatises in the university
curriculum, at least in the United States. It's a summoning document, and it is the locus
classicus for arguments that favor the liberal state, and that would oppose any and all forms
of state paternalism, moral paternalism, and the like. It's a veritable pain to the sanctity
of the individual and the right of the individual to articulate for himself a form of life within
which he is prepared to live, even if it is merely his own life. He also is important as a critic
of all competing traditions, both in politics and epistemology. And in fact, in one of his final
works, a very thick work, which I am disappointed to have to say, is read far less than his other
works. And perhaps because of the title, he calls it an examination of Sir William Hamilton's
philosophy, and it runs to 600 pages, and it's not the first thing you'd reach for on a shelf,
something titled an examination of Sir William Hamilton's philosophy, even if you knew who
Sir William Hamilton was. I say it's a pity that it's a work not read more, because Mill says that
in this work, he will now answer the criticisms that have arisen in response to his philosophical
writings in the course of an entire lifetime. And the reason he's going to choose Sir William
Hamilton, he says, is because in Sir William Hamilton's own works, he finds both those
precepts he is most prepared to defend, and those precepts with which he thinks have had the most
pernicious effects in philosophical thought of all. So Sir William Hamilton becomes a convenient
target of praise and target of blame. And in that work, we find Mill making clear just what his
utilitarian social theory asserts, what his psychology asserts, what his position on inductive
sciences, his position on the superiority of sense over that of alleged intuition, and so forth.
Well, a few words about John Stuart Mill. His life is well told in his own autobiography. He was
a prodigious learner in youth. His father, James Mill, saw to it that his schooling would take
place on his father's knee, and on the knees of some other estimable people like Jeremy Bentham,
and so forth. He certainly was plied with Latin and Greek, that his two dead languages did much
to shape his mind. He was brilliant, of course. Psychologists who do these things estimate what
the likely IQ would be of various people in history who came too early for their IQs to be
measured. And I think John Stuart Mill weighs in at 200 or something. I mean, he's at the top of
the charts. And this because that it's quite clear from his logical writings, his political
writings, and his philosophical writings, that he would do very, very well on the GREs or the
college boards or the SATs, you know, both the afternoon and the morning test and the like.
I don't know why anybody would do a calculation like this when you can sit down and pick up the
fellow's books and discover for yourself that he's obviously clever and cleverer. He became quite
depressed as a relatively young man. He attributed that to too much attention to the head and not
enough to the heart. And for Mill, what bailed him out of it was poetry, chiefly, poetry of
Wordsworth and Coleridge. It got him back to nature and back to himself. And I think we find
out much about Mill from what form of poetry took him out of the doldrums. And indeed, he had a
close attachment to any number of figures in the romantic movement, though his own philosophy,
his own independent thinking would be very much in the direction of a scientific worldview,
including certain reductive strategies, measurement, and so forth. Another of the early influences
on Mill was the French writer Auguste Comte. That's C-O-M-T-E. Auguste Comte's major works are
published in the first decade of the 19th century in a series of essays published collectively under
the title A Course of Positive Philosophy. I think one of the early English translations
of this was done by Harriet Martino at Oxford. By the way, Mill would come to serve a term in
Parliament representing Oxford. He wasn't re-elected. I think it's miraculous when someone like John
Stuart Mill is elected to public office at all, and I think to expect a re-election is really to
be greedy about the things. Well, Auguste Comte is one of the fathers of a version of what is
called positivism, and I think I probably should make distinctions in the use of that term if I
could take a few minutes in today's lecture. In Auguste Comte's writings, Auguste Comte believes
that progress in the world takes the form of distinct stages, and these are stages identifiable in
terms of how we go about understanding the world. In the earliest phase, he says, which he calls a
religiomistical phase. Our understanding of ourselves and the world is in terms of certain
religious and superstitious beliefs so that the planets move because gods are dragging them
across the heavens and chariots and so forth. This can go on for a very, very long time. At a
greater level of systematic and critical thought, this religiomistical stage moves into a stage
that Auguste Comte calls a metaphysical stage. Now, you no longer think that the events in the
world are brought about by animated beings and deities and demiurgies and the like, but by
essentially neutral, unseen, hidden forces of a sort known only through their effects. But again,
there is this tendency to attribute ontological standing to what is unseen nowhere to be found.
You just sort of assume that it's there. It's a kind of metaphysical, philosophical understanding.
But in the most developed state of the human understanding, we actually have a knowledge
of the causes of things, and this is the scientific age. And the knowledge that we have by way of
scientific inquiry, Auguste Comte calls positive knowledge. This is the positive stage in the
development of human understanding. We've left metaphysics behind us, and we've certainly
left the religiomistical worldview behind us. Now, that's one sense of positivism. When you hear
the term positivism used, it generally isn't in that original sense of Auguste Comte, but there's
a family relationship between and among the different uses of positivism. Positivism is also
used in connection with a certain philosophy of law as in legal positivism. Jeremy Bentham was
one of the important figures in the reform movement. Jeremy Bentham understood that if you're going
to reform society and give the lower classes an opportunity, there'll have to be education in
place for them. He had much to do with the founding of University College London. In fact,
he's still stuffed and on display there. Good old Bentham I saw him three or four years ago. He's
still looking, I can't say fit as a fiddle, but he looked about as good as you could as a
corpse of that age. One of the programs at the University of London, which was designed to
educate the working classes, was a course of lectures to be given by Austin. When Austin's
lectures were published, we had a new sense of the law. Austin made a distinction between divine
law, the moral law which comes from conscience, and the law as put forth by legislating bodies or
authorities or kings or princes. He made a distinction then between divine law, moral law,
and positive law and argued that the only kind of law, the study of law has anything to do with,
is positive law. And of course on Austin's account positive law is just a command. What a
law is a command given by a superior to an inferior and backed up with punishing sanctions. This
is the so-called command theory of legal positivism. So that's another sense of positive. I say it has
a kinship to the older form of positivism in that the law is something socially brought about. You
can observe it. You know what it is by reading certain books or looking at certain acts or
observing certain patterns of punishment and reward and the like. Now then the third sense of
positivism, which what Mill is going to end up developing, is a positivism that actually we
identify less with Mill than with a writer in the very end of the 19th century, Ernst Mach,
who's one of the great figures in the history of physics and at the University of Vienna. Mach
particularly in a book titled An Analysis of Sensation, wants to get metaphysics out of
science completely, remove it completely. You know you're engaged in a scientific enterprise to
the extent that you are not saddled to metaphysical speculations. In fact Ernst Mach goes so far as
to declare that all we mean by a scientific law is a systematic description of experience. You
don't need any kind of metaphysical or non-observable elements in order to develop the agenda of
science and to have a developed science. What you end up with is knowledge that is testable and
confirmable and metaphysicians need not apply. Now earlier in the 20th century when that school
of thought formed in Vienna, which we know as the Vienna Circle, you know, Neurath and
Karnapp and Company, this came to be a philosophy of science known as
positivism, logical positivism. And in fact when they had their first sessions of exchanging
papers and the like, their first official meetings, they referred to those meetings,
the Vienna Circle founders referred to those meetings as Ferein Ernst Mach. So they obviously
are acknowledging this intellectual debt to the writings of Ernst Mach. Now that's yet another
sense of positivism and when we refer to science as being positivistic in the 20th century,
scientific positivism, we're referring to a science shown or allegedly shown of its
metaphysical foundations and its metaphysical impulses. Well, that's a bit of a necessary
digression. I would say that John Stuart Mill should be understood as promoting a philosophy
of science that will be compatible with a Machian and positivistic view of science. Science is what
takes place in the domain of that which can be experienced. It is an empirical enterprise.
Now, in fact, that pretty much exhausts the domain of the knowable, period. John Stuart Mill goes so
far as to define matter itself. That is, if we say what is knowable is what is within the reach
of our capabilities and that would be the material world. Well, what is matter? John Stuart Mill
defines matter as, quote, the permanent possibilities of sensation. All we mean by a material world
is that which in principle either directly or through some kind of aiding device becomes an
object of experience. It's a permanent possibility of sensation. Reality exists in so far as it makes
some record on us. And there isn't anything behind that. And therefore, there isn't anything we can
know that's behind that because there isn't anything behind that. That's what there is.
Now, so what has existence is that which in principle is subject to experience. And what
does this oppose? This opposes intuitionism. John Stuart Mill is opposed to nothing more explicitly
than to intuitionist theories of knowledge. The idea that there is some non-empirical level
at which we know things, the Kantian a priori, for example. He also targets Thomas Reed's
principles of common sense as just another version of intuitionism. He's very much opposed to this.
In fact, he thinks that intuitionist theories have a particularly pernicious influence.
He says at one point that in fact, they are the source of institutional oppressive
and constraining practices. The idea that something is justified well intuitively,
you know it's right, allows absolutely scandalous forms of excess. He calls it the great intellectual
intuition as the great intellectual support of false doctrines and bad institutions.
So, and as far as the the vaunted truths of intuition, now remember I've said in an earlier
lecture in defense of Leibniz and the Nisi intellectuals, so everybody in the room knows
that there's no number so large that one cannot be added to it. And you certainly don't know that
by counting, ha ha ha. Well, you know, Mill pauses on this and says now wait a minute,
there's no number so large that one cannot be added to it and you don't know this by counting,
therefore it must be known a priori. Is that what the rationalist school says? He says you know,
you arrive at that conclusion because you've employed a particular method of inquiry.
The method of inquiry you've employed, he said is what might be called the you don't recall
ever learning a particular thing that up cannot be down, etc, etc. And since you can't recall
ever learning it, you assume you must always have possessed it. He said, but that's not the right
method to settle a question like this. The right method is not the is not the introspective method.
The right method, he says, is the psychological method. Now, what does he mean by that?
How do you learn things now? You learn things now by being presented with what it is to be learned,
being rehearsed through repeated presentations, forming the necessary associations. John Mill
is very much in the patrimony of David Hume. He's, he's an admirer and disciple of Humes in
many ways. Through the laws of association, you come to learn these things. Since we can
establish, since we can establish right now and today, that associative principles and
experience are all that has to be taken into account to account for your learning of something.
Why assume that anything else was involved in your learning these things which happened too
early in life for you to reach introspectively through memory? Do you get the point? The point
is this. Let me show experimentally how to bring something about in the here and now. Isn't that
to be the chosen explanation for how something came about at a time that your memory can't reach?
Why assume it was known intuitively when we can show that all learning in your conscious
more adult life is by way of association and experience? So he's satisfied that you can
experimentally, you can confute the refute, the claims of the intuitionist.
The psychological method arises from, from what is in essence a psychological philosophy on Hume's
part, namely that all of our knowledge claims are the result of repeated and associated experiences
and that what we can know about just is what can present itself to the arena of perception
and the disciplined arena of perception guided by core logical precepts, these being inductive
precepts. He does not find that Hume's problem of induction should be regarded as a paralyzing
problem at all. If the future is under no obligation to mimic the past, then we'll just take repeated
measures to make sure that the future for whatever reason does seem to be mimicking the past,
whether it's under an obligation to do so or not. Well, if we've come this far with Mill,
the problem of knowledge solves itself in that well-known empiricistic way, now fortified by
methods of experimental inquiry. In Mill's treatise on inductive logic, he actually sets forth
a methodology that is a science of method, so to speak, and tells us how experimental manipulation
should be performed to determine what is causally efficacious in a particular context,
principles of concomitance. That is, A is the cause of B. Whenever in presenting A, you can bring B
about. It's a kind of manipulability hypothesis. That is, you can do an experiment to determine
what the efficient cause of something is by holding everything else constant and varying
one variable at a time until you find the variable which, when varied, brings the thing about.
There's no mystery to this. You just have to do it in a quite systematic way. And Mill's methods,
as they are called, still turn out to be the dominant methods within the experimental sciences.
Well, suppose we take the problem of conduct now, and we try to reduce that to something
that might be examined within the context of experimental science. Well, history is something
of a theater in which experiments are performed left and right. And John Stuart Mill thinks the
record of history is fairly clear on what moves us. He thinks that by and large, with some
modification, Bentham got it right. What we do, we do chiefly as creatures of nature, constituted
in such a way as to maximize our pleasures and minimize our pains. What he thinks, what Mill
concludes, is that the most significant sources of human activity are grounded in principles of
utility. The ultimate test of a course of action is whether it is useful, whether it serves some
fundamental human purpose. The justification for it is not in terms of an abstract moral theory,
the justification is found in practice. The right test is not whether something,
the right test ethically is not whether something holds up in logic, it's whether it holds up.
Now, Mill does not want to be misunderstood in affirming utilitarianism, in affirming utility as
the standard by which we judge the ethical content of actions. In fact, the traditional
complaint against the utilitarian is that he is some kind of caricature of the Epicurean,
eat, drink and be merry, for tomorrow you shall die. That the whole point of life is to do things in
such a way as to make oneself happy, avoid pain, and you can do this in any number of ways. You
could become a brain in a vat, for example. We talked about brains in vats, just put this brain
of mine in a vat and stimulate all the pleasure centers so that as long as you can keep the brain
alive, I'm really maximizing happiness. Well, Mill is not going to attach himself to anything as
tawdry as that. And in fact, he thinks people who characterize utilitarianism that way have
depreciated the very nature of human nature, the very nature whose dignity they would set out
to affirm is deprecated by the view that what we find pleasurable is always at a low and vulgar
level. Mill's thesis is that, in fact, when people set out to assign utilities to courses of action,
what they include in that centrally is a life that becomes thereby enriched, more meaningful,
more developed, more purposive, more in their own control, and more elevated. These are all
utilitarian terms. Utilitarian terms are not reducible, finally, to caloric intake or
joys and pleasures and tickles and the like. The ultimate pain can be a kind of existential pain,
because the ultimate pain is a life that is not authentically one's own. So utilitarianism here
need not be understood in vulgar terms or prosaic terms. It can rise, indeed, to great and even
sublime heights, depending on what your characterization of human nature is. Of course,
one complaint with any form of utilitarianism is that if you're pretty loose on the side
of how utilities are calculated, then almost any moral theory can be rendered in utilitarian terms.
I mean, it turns out to be that what maximizes utility is a perfectionist orientation in life,
and, of course, Aristotle's ethics is utilitarian. If it's making sure that there is a perfect harmony
of the composite nature of the soul, such that reason rules, I mean, if that's how you maximize
utility, then, of course, Socrates is a utilitarian. So I think for utilitarianism to be a serious
player in the game of ethical theories, it always has to distinguish itself from
Kantian deontologies and perfectionist Aristotelian schemes and so forth.
Now, if you are an empiricist, a card-carrying empiricist, and John Stuart Mill was one of those,
then the realm of the knowable is the realm of the factual, the realm of the observable,
and in realms of this kind, of course, we enter as members of a universal religious sect,
which is the sect of fallibilists. We can always be wrong. We can form all sorts of ideas. It's
just in the nature of associational processes that we may come to regard any number of things as
causally related, which aren't causally related. The whole point of experimental, systematic,
and disciplined inquiry is to correct our mistakes. Now, of course, the only way you can correct
your mistakes is to own up to the fact that you are very much inclined to make mistakes,
and you never know where the corrective is going to come from. So how do we put ourselves in a
position where self-deception becomes less likely and correction becomes more likely,
by opening up the game to all ideas? All ideas have an equal right to a hearing.
Nothing at the level of censorship should in any way interfere with the freest and fullest
expression of, so the position now on freedom is this. If the wildest view, the most pernicious
view, the most degrading view is false, its falseness will only be discovered by allowing
it to present itself and subjecting it to criticism. And if instead what seems to be
patently false and reckless and destructive for whatever reason turns out to be true,
and it is the truth that sets us free, then indeed what seemed to be that actually turns
out to be redemptive. And the only way we ever would have had any access to it at all is by
allowing it to express itself. So in the tradition of John Milton's Areopagitica,
we find John Stuart Mill presenting the the liberal position on freedom of inquiry,
freedom of expression, the free marketplace of ideas that's become almost a mantra in the
late part of the 20th century. But Mill sees in this freedom an engine of progress. It's the
way a fallible creature prevents himself from a life of continued and repeated error.
Nobody's ideas by virtue of personal authority take precedence over anybody else's ideas.
Precedence is one by being earned, and it is earned in the arena of utility, usefulness,
what finally works in the public interest and in the general good, and in behalf of the general good.
Well, does it have to be a general good? Because this seems to leave room for a tyranny of the
majority. I should think that Thomas Aquinas certainly stood behind the proposition that
law is an ordinance of reason promulgated by him, by one who is responsible for the general good.
Suppose George says, I don't know about the general good, but I think this is awful for me.
Now John Stuart Mill is quite consistent here. Liberty extends to a liberty of conscience,
because anyone may be wrong and certainly may be wrong at the level of basic moral precepts.
Everyone has a right in virtue of his own autonomy and dignity to frame a form of life that makes
sense to that person. Now there are limits on this, and the limit asserted by John Mill, and most
in the traditional liberal tradition, is this. Your actions are permitted. They're freely expressed.
They are not to be constrained by the coercive power of the state or the coercive power of
majorities, as long as they do not represent harmfulness to others. That is, the liberty has
to be expressed in such a way as not to limit the liberty of others, and particularly a limitation
of the liberty of others that takes the form of actually harming others. Well, suppose one wants
to end one's life as this wonderful passage in Mill's essay on liberty, in which Mill says, look,
you certainly will stop this person long enough to satisfy yourself that he understands the
gravamen of the action that he's prepared to take. He's got to, you want to satisfy yourself
that he knows what he's doing, but having satisfied oneself, you have to let this person decide for
himself. Whose life is this anyway? And this liberal position, which I haven't conducted polls
on this, but I would guess that if you asked citizens of the United States a series of questions,
whether they think this particular political philosophy is right or wrong, and you gave
them Kant and Hegel and so on, of course, Mill is the one that most people would say, well,
yeah, I mean, sure, this is really quite, quite obvious, which is to say, not that Mill is right,
but that our own understanding of the state has been shaped very much by that rhetoric of freedom
that that is just in Mill's essay on liberty.
Well, what happens just in case what Mill takes to be a measure of utility is utterly optimistic.
Is it really the case that left to one's own devices, free to choose any course of action that
one wishes, are free to adopt any moral code that makes sense to one, provided, of course,
that we don't inflict harm on anybody else? That indeed is the general tendency to find
forms of life that are elevating and enriching and perfecting and self-improving and the like.
That is, would you say that to the extent that we've lived in very much a John Stuart Mill social
and political world, at least for the past 20 or 30 years, that we have vindicated John Stuart
Mill's optimism? That indeed, in enjoying the widest range of personal liberties,
probably since Gomorrah, do I display a certain prejudice here? I hope not. Gomorrah came to
mind. I don't know quite why it came to mind, but I do think that we probably have a record
of personal liberty that's almost unmatched, at least in recorded history, is the evidence
to this effect that thus liberated from traditional modes of authority, from the moral
impositions of the paternalistic state, the moralistic state, we have shown that John Mill got
it right. We are inclined by nature to make ourselves into ever better beings, to perfect
ourselves in a manner of speaking, to find forms of life that are ever richer and ever more meaningful.
I think the best thing is to say that that is a rhetorical question and not to be insolent enough
even to suggest an answer to it.
