Lecture 44, Marxism, Dead but Not Forgotten
I've titled this lecture, Marxism, Dead but Not Forgotten, and I think here perhaps there
are echoes somewhere within me of an American boy of the 1950s discovering that if it's
Marxism it's bad and the like. It's very difficult to bring a balanced, entirely neutral
perspective to bear on Karl Marx or Marxism. We do associate much of the second half of
the 20th century politically with the writings and teachings of Karl Marx, and I think in
this we probably either pay him much too much credit or we heap far too many libels on him,
much of what comes down to us as Marxism is by way of Mao Tse-Tung and Lenin and Stalin
and the like, and it matches up very, very poorly with things that Marx quite systematically
developed in his writings. I'm also somewhat reluctant to talk about Karl Marx in a series
of lectures titled Great Ideas in Philosophy, chiefly because Karl Marx was quite assiduous
in declaring that he was not a philosopher. Indeed, he had a certain, well I don't want
to call it a contempt for philosophy, but he thought that philosophy had an expiration
date on it. He thought that philosophical speculation was really an activity that goes
on because of the undeveloped nature of societies, because of the purely habitual modes of social
organization that a successful scheme of social revolution would put an end to, and that in
fact once you finally put society on a footing that bore some relationship to reality, philosophical
speculation would go the way of tarot cards and astrology. Well of course we do have tarot
cards and astrology, so I'm not quite sure I want to use that as an example, but the
point I want to make being that Karl Marx regarded himself as a social scientist. He
regarded himself as making contributions chiefly to economic theory and social theory.
He regarded his method and his motive explanation as drawn from the sciences and not philosophy
and specifically not philosophy. Nonetheless, his ideas have animated philosophical discourse
almost since the time they were recorded on paper, and there are whole departments until
quite recently in central Europe and in what used to be called the Soviet Union, departments
of philosophy, that were just departments doing glosses on one or another Marxist tract
or work by Marx and Engels. So there is no doubt that whatever it was Marx thought he
was doing, his principal contributions will be to that part of the history of ideas in
which we find philosophy itself. Now his contributions as a scientist, social or otherwise, I would
declare to be, again perhaps disclosing a bias, negligible if coherent. It's not very
easy to go from these voluminous writings to anything that would even be testable in
the ordinary sense of a scientific proposition being testable. So Newton thought his greatest
achievement was lifelong celibacy, and I don't think he was a good judge there, and Marx thought
of himself as not being a philosopher but a kind of scientist, and I don't think he
was a particularly good judge there. It is true, however, that he pays rather little
attention to systematic philosophies, and he pays rather little attention to what we recognize
to be some of the abiding problems in philosophy. For example, the mind-body problem is surely
an abiding problem in philosophy. How is human nature to be understood? Is it ultimately
a congruence of biological, physiological processes, the brain being centrally responsible
for thought, action and the like, or is there something of transcendence about our humanity
such that we rise above the level of mere material? Now when Marx looks at an issue like
that, you can almost feel his impatience as he sets out to write, that why in the times
he lives in, anybody would pause to consider a matter of that kind, simply amazes him.
The European Revolutions of 1848, of course he was right in the middle of all this, with
class revolts and the whole place going up in smoke, the idea of sitting around and asking
a question like that would have, I'm sure, struck him as an example of how a feat thought
and thinkers had become by mid-19th century. He does pause, I think it's in the Holy Family,
he does pause to say, well if you have to take a position on a question like that, oh
well, Gascendi got it right, and of course let's recall what Gascendi's position was.
It was an essentially materialistic theory of mind, a physiological theory of mind.
We also know that Karl Marx's doctoral dissertation was on, Democratus and Epicurus, he was at
least early on very interested in materialistic philosophies in that sense of materialism,
and surely taking on a project like that for a doctoral dissertation shows not only an
interest in questions of that kind, but already a certain allegiance to a particular approach
to solving problems of that kind. Nonetheless, if we were to classify Marx as a materialist,
it would be a different kind of materialist. It would be what he himself referred to as
a dialectical materialist. More in the tradition of Hegel, Marx and Engels claim to have, quote,
stood Hegel on his head, close quote, but they were both early admirers of and intellectual
disciples of Hegelian philosophy, and the difference between a dialectical materialism
and the sort I've already spoken of in lectures in this series is that the latter tends to be
grounded in mechanistic considerations, considerations that would be quite at home with
Newtonian science, Galileo science, the atomism of Democratus or Epicurus and the like, a kind of
bang bang efficient cause materialistic theory as to how things come about and how they work.
Dialectical materialism, you'll recall from the lecture on Hegel, a dialectical process is rather
different. Here you have opposing tendencies, the thesis and antithesis, out of this irreconcilable
tension, some kind of synthetic ontological production comes about. Now, let's go back to
Hegel for a moment. Of course, Hegel does this at a transcendent level. It's not the level of
mere earthly materiality. There is an absolute ego, an absolute idea that is the engine, the
force behind these historical developments. It's reason realizing itself in human history. So,
the Hegelian scheme is a cosmic scheme based on some abstract rational or intelligent precept
that does its silent work in the world and historical processes now become emblems, as it
were, or bits of evidence of what's taking place behind the scenes. Now, Marx is going to leave
that whole field of absolute egos and absolute ideas and the like and attach himself, however,
to a dialectical materialism in which the events of the social and political world are brought
about by factors which, at base, are economic. They have to do with the movement of goods, with
the actual productive resources of a society. The engine of change is grounded in the economics
of a society. Now, in this, there's a reversal of the traditional way of looking at how systems
and institutions come about. Let's go back to Aristotle for a moment, who says that he understood
in a certain way the polis precedes both the person and the family. On an Aristotelian account,
a state is set up with its laws and institutions in order to achieve certain ends. For Aristotle,
these would be the ends of virtue. For Thomas Aquinas, the law is an ordinance of reason promulgated
by one who has the good of the community at heart or who is responsible for the good of the
community. And so, what you would be doing is writing laws, whether you were a Roman emperor
or a canon lawyer in the Christian world, you'd be writing laws to cedar with that certain worthy
ends were produced, the ends of virtue, the ends of Christian conscience and the like, and the
economics of the situation would be in the surface of those objectives. The understanding being that
people engage in trade or go fishing and the like, so that something else can be brought about,
something else that matches up with their basic humanity. Now, of course, the Marxist version
turns this quite around. What you begin with are the productive resources that a tribal enclave,
a small community or an entire empire, might claim for itself. This inevitably recruits the
physical power of a laboring class. The laboring class becomes the instrument by which production
becomes possible. Now, in the process, things are produced. How do we safeguard the property
rights, the possessory rights of those who are the beneficiaries of this production? By writing
certain laws. The laws are answerable to certain class considerations within that community. If you
take an institution like the institution of capitalism, this works in an almost mechanical
way. Suppose we want to accumulate capital, which is what capitalism is all about. We want to
accumulate wealth. Now, the way you accumulate wealth is by seeing to it that you can sell something
for a price that exceeds the cost of producing it. Well, what this means, of course, is that the cost
of producing it, which is primarily the cost of labor, has to be kept as low as possible relative
to the price that will be charged for the product in question. The difference between the cost of
the labor involved in producing something and the price that is won in selling it just is the
profit. This is what you're trying to amass. Now, suppose it turns out that everybody in the world
can make shoes. Well, of course, if everybody in the world can make shoes, then nobody has to buy
shoes. Well, suppose only some people in the world make shoes. Well, if it turns out that a large
number of people in the world make shoes, you have far too many shoes for the number of feet in the
world. You begin to see then that the price you'll be able to get for a pair of shoes drops as the
supply becomes entirely disproportionate vis-a-vis the need for the item. So within a capitalist
system, it becomes necessary to control the means of production to make sure that production does
not significantly outstrip need. This requires an accumulation of power, power over what? Power
over the primary mode of production. What is the primary mode of production? Labor. So what you
now have is the formation of distinct classes. You've got the formation of a laboring class, but
the laboring class now is understood to be a kind of device. It's like an assembly line or like a
system of pulleys. Labor is something that makes things like machinery makes things. You've got to
keep this. I don't want to gild the lily here. You have to keep it in good repair and you've got to
see to it that it is capable of being replenished. That's what wages are all about. The wages aren't
paid out of some consideration of obligation or decency. Wages become the means by which labor is
preserved. Indeed, wages become the means by which labor reproduces itself. You form a laboring class
which in almost clone-like fashion is kept in such a condition of life that its offspring are
likely to enter the same mode of employment, engage in the same productive enterprises, and be kept at
a subsistence or slightly above subsistence level in order for the productive resources of the society
to be used to their fullest. Now, if you're at the top of the food chain, so to speak, in this
enterprise, you've got to see to it that your interests are protected. Your interests are protected
chiefly by law. So there is a hand-in-glove relationship between those who are most successful at
forming capital and commanding the productive resources of the community and those who are
responsible for writing and indeed implementing the laws. They are mutually serving. They are serving
each other, serving important ends. Indeed, the legislative and executive activity within such a
context might just be another one of the tools, well, yes, one of the tools of the exploitation of the
laboring classes. The reaction to unionization in the 19th century was the sort of datum that Marx
could adduce in support of this proposition. The idea that the law is being used fairly to distribute
resources and to compensate persons in proportion to the value of their work was simply violated seven
days a week, everywhere Marx looked, everywhere in the European world. And as far as he could tell, with
the exception, I might pause to note, with the exception of feudal society for which Marx had
considerable sympathy and recorded a kind of restrained approval. Now, this itself is, I think, an
interesting sidelight on the theory. I've already given one quite substantial pup to the whole medieval
period. I did it again, I think, by way of Gothic architecture. I better be careful, or I'm going to
start reciting passages from John of Salisbury. But what Marx found in feudal society was a system in
which the pattern of dependencies was rather more homogeneous. The feudal Lord is not amassing
capital. He's not amassing power. He's seeking to attain a kind of status compatible with a certain
religious worldview. And what he's out to do is to preserve what has been achieved. To do this, he
recognizes not only the need for labor, but the very nobility of labor. He's within a society in
which class structure is not a measure of a person's worth, but a reflection, rather, of what the
divinely intended order of the cosmos. Now, Marx does not go up in a balloon over these things, and
he's not setting out to reestablish the feudal estate and fiefdoms and all that. But for all the
criticism that he heaps on modern economic systems and on modern society itself, he does pause in
his writings to make comparisons with a feudal mode of economy and social organization. Those
comparisons are always to the advantage of the feudal society, its economics, and its and its
mode of social organization. Well, according to the labor theory of value in capitalism, labor
produces more than than what is paid for it. And the surplus or remainder or difference yields
capital. Now, that's economics 101. Of course, you've got to have buyers out there for this stuff,
don't you? I often wonder what Marx revived and traipsed through a contemporary shopping mall,
might say. I mean, he might just sort of smile ear to ear and declare himself vindicated. It is the
case on the theory anyway, it is the case that this system, this economic and social system, like
the shark who allegedly dies unless it swims, although I don't think that's actually true, it
must grow. It must grow to survive. That is, unlike a feudal mode of organization, the the
progressive capitalistic mode of acquisition of wealth, the formation of capital has to grow,
which means it has to create appetites. It has to create appetites for products. Since the basic
necessities of life finally can be satisfied one time around. How many shoes do you need? How much
food has to be in the larder? How many shirts can you get through a week with? So forth. How many
toothbrushes? How many cars can you cram into that garage? Well, put up another garage and then
another garage. In order for this to grow, you finally have to start producing things that are
unrelated to considerations of survival and a basic and decent form of life. So you must create a
consumer, a consumerism, you must create a consumer ethos. And to do this, of course, you have to
rely on certain characteristics of individuals that render them ever more pliable, ever more
concerned with considerations of status and class. Class structure is an integral part of a
capitalist economy, because it has to do with the most basic impulse, and that is one self identity,
one self image, one sense of fellowship and worth. Now the model for this kind of psychology marks
the first straws from the history of religions. Marx declares religion to be, famously, declares
religion to be an opiate of the masses. I've sometimes said to classes, to students, to classes,
to groups of students, I want to be careful about using the term class in this lecture, referring
to anything academic, to groups of students that, in fact, for the better part of three quarters
century. Marx's teaching, as rendered by Mao Stalin Lennon and company, really functioned as an
opiate of the masses. That is, that is staggeringly large numbers of persons put up with a form of
life that many people would have revolted against and put up with it not merely because they were
tanks in the street, but they thought that form of life was a necessary stage in an evolutionary
process that would bring about the truly Marxist state. Now this is a kind of self-numbing, a
kind of intellectual numbing that religion has rarely achieved, or rarely achieved with that
degree of political success. But what did Marx have in mind in condemning religion as an opiate
of the masses? Well look, what's the principle basis upon which you mount the barricades and
insist that everything has to be changed, or you're really going to use all the firepower that
you've got, you're going to break every window inside the light. What's going to stop you from
doing that? Well of course the first thing is if you are convinced that your current situation is
but an instance in an immense sea of time, and that all the important things are going to happen
after this purely meager, earthly interval, you have already become tolerant of your situation
in life. Do you see? One thing that religion achieves is it redirects focus from the here
and now to the there and then, and the there is untouchable and the then is unreachable until
you perform that necessary act of
