I've noted repeatedly that the themes and issues that have governed the choice of lectures
in this series are the problem of knowledge, the problem of conduct, and the problem of
governance.
And of course, different figures have attached themselves more to one than two others of those.
And if we take these to be at the very center of philosophical concern, then great ideas
in philosophy will come from people who are not academic philosophers or people who lack
PhDs in philosophy, Socrates and Aristotle and Plato are three people who did not have
either PhDs in philosophy or tenured positions in philosophy departments.
Sigmund Freud, of course, needs no introduction as an architect shaping contemporary sensibilities
regarding the nature of knowledge, why we behave the way we do, the form that the political
and social world we live in takes.
He has profoundly influenced thought across the board in aesthetics, literary criticism,
moral philosophy, and indeed philosophy.
And so I do want to devote at least one lecture to what I've called the Freudian world.
I don't know how many of us are actually knowingly, consciously, and happily living in it, but
dimensions of contemporary thought and institutional life and so forth are so in the thrall of
the Freudian world view that it would be very hard to find something utterly non-Freudian
in contemporary life.
You'd probably have to go to quantum physics and abstract mathematics and so forth.
You certainly couldn't even go to modern music and escape the influence of this chap who
begins, nonetheless, with a fairly modest agenda.
He went to the University of Vienna Medical School, fully intending to devote himself
to a life of scientific research, medical and basic biological research.
There isn't anything before he gets there, anything in his life, to suggest the kind
of contribution that he's going to make, except if you want to regard his extremely
troubled family life and childhood as a forerunner of what he would end up doing, that.
But that certainly wasn't, that wasn't a conscious attempt on his part to prepare himself to
develop psychoanalytic theory.
At the University of Vienna, he comes under the influence of one of the significant scientists
of that period, Ernst Brugger, who is a professor with whom Freud actually does some original
research and who recognizes Freud as having great promise as a research scientist.
Now let me just say a couple of words about Ernst Brugger's own scientific background.
Early on in his own scientific education, he became associated with one of the great
figures in 19th century physiology, Johannes Müller.
And indeed, when Ernst Brugger was in Johannes Müller's laboratory, he was there with three
others who would become luminaries in German scientific thought in the biological sciences,
Dr. Ludwig and Du Bois Raymond, and the most famous of the four, Hermann von Helmholtz.
Now those four were fairly satisfied that the future of the biological sciences was
pretty much dictated by discoveries in physics and the physical sciences.
In the 1830s, leading textbooks in physiology still tended to treat life as a special phenomenon
not reducible to physics and chemistry, that there was some élan vitale, some life-giving
force or principle that always would elude the anatomical blowpipe, the Bunsen burner
and the like.
That position generally is referred to as vitalism.
And Johannes Müller, who wrote the authoritative treatise in human physiology, though not himself
an avowed explicit vitalist, certainly includes in that handbook on human physiology traces
of the traditional vitalistic perspective.
There's evidence to suggest that these four young Turks, so to speak, actually formed
a kind of compact blood oath, you know, that kind of thing, scouts on a sort of thing,
resolving that they would never accept any statement in the biological sciences that
was not grounded in the physical and chemical sciences, that the core sciences, the core
physical sciences, constituted the basis upon which biological phenomena were to be
understood, studied and explained.
Now I say of the four, surely the one who achieved the greatest celebrity was Hermann
von Helmholtz.
And indeed one of Helmholtz's early contributions after this oath was formed was at the meeting
of the annual meeting of the Prussian Academy of Sciences, in which he gave a short, trenchant
and absolutely marvelous presentation.
He tells us right at the beginning of this presentation what his remarks of the day are
intending to establish.
He says, what I want to get across is this, for the longest time, people have struggled
valiantly to create a perpetual motion machine, something which geared right with the right
balances, the right three and one oil and all that, once you got it going it would keep
going, once you got the weights right and so forth.
And he says, the burden of my remarks today will be to establish that the failure to achieve
such a device is not based on some technical limitation, the failure is based on the fact
that you can't have a perpetual motion machine, you just can't and he will develop the arguments
why.
Well, some of you may already have guessed what the title of that lecture was, the title
of that lecture translated into English was on the conservation of energy.
And what Helmholtz was establishing in that lecture and what other conservationist principles
by mid-19th century established is this, that within a closed system the energy content
is constant, you can vary the form it takes, but that indeed at the end of the day you
get no more than you started with, that's the whole conservationist perspective.
I mention this because when we get to Freud's theory of hysterical symptoms as conversion
reactions, that the hysterical blindness or the hysterical paralysis or the hysterical
deafness is just the physical manifestation of something occurring at the level of psychic
energy, we see conservationist notions surfacing in Freudian theory, that indeed Freud's repression
theory of hysteria is part and parcel of a more general conservationist physics not
only picked up at the knee of Ernst Brueger, but obviously part of the general scientific
ethos during the time of Freud's education.
So I do want to say that Freud is not only ever the scientist, but he is always in touch
with leading developments in science, a fine work by Frank Salloway titled Freud, Biologist
of the Mind, really makes the case very, very well how close Freud was in his thinking,
to the best scientific thinking of the time, and of course how consistent he was in attempting
to ground psychoanalytic theory in more basic scientific principles.
Well what other scientific theories were around in Freud's time that might in some small way
ha ha ha influenced his thinking, certainly not just conservation laws and physics, but
that other development referred to as the theory of evolution.
This had a profound influence on Freud as it had a profound influence on Carl Marx.
Darwinian theory was the opening of a window that the whole perspective on the natural
world changed.
We now had, as I said in a previous lecture, design without a designer, and the design
features were coming about as a result of raw, brutal, daily, biological conflict and
collision that indeed it was not a peaceable kingdom, it was a kingdom the creatures of
which took the form they did in the process of a self-serving, selfish commitment to survive,
that that was the bottom line.
The individual organism does this through modes of self-gratification and procreatively
achieves the same for the species as a whole.
This is all written in the thick book of evolutionary theory.
By the time you're a student of the University of Vienna in the 1880s, this is not a topic
for debate anymore.
It may be getting debated hotly in cafes in and around Vienna and so forth, but to the
scientific community, whatever was wrong in Darwin was more or less in the footnotes,
not in the main point, do you see?
And so Freud more or less accepts evolutionary theory as a starting point for any general
theory about human nature.
And that much, I think, has to be put in the credit column for Darwin's influence on the
world, hard to imagine anything like psychoanalytic theory except in the wake of evolutionary
theory.
Now I say Freud's ambitions were fairly modest to begin with.
He wanted to be a research scientist in medicine and have an academic position at Vienna.
Vienna was probably the most Catholic city in Europe.
The University of Vienna was surely the most Catholic university, perhaps outside the Pontifical
Gregorian, a few other places, and it was fairly clear that Freud, as a Jew, was going
to face a fairly low ceiling as far as academic prospects were concerned.
He was already contemplating marriage and a family, and so with some reluctance he enters
medical practice rather than taking on a full-time academic life.
So he's going to go off and practice neurology, which is what he was trying to do.
So what kinds of patients will he see as a neurologist?
Well, he'll see patients not unlike the patients seen today by neurologists.
People come in complaining of a headache that won't go away, or there seems to be a sudden
change in their visual sensitivity, or they wake up in the morning and one of their extremities,
the left arm, has reduced mobility, or they've got out of bed and they seem to be dragging
a leg behind them, or one of their pupils is dilated, et cetera, et cetera.
So they might have a region of the body completely bereft of sensation.
Now what Freud knew, and all neurologists at the time knew, is that some of these symptoms
are directly traceable to neuropathies, that is, there's actually a lesion or insult of
some sort in the nervous system producing symptoms of this kind, but that some symptoms
took a form that could not possibly be accounted for on the basis of anything we know about
the anatomy of the nervous system.
The textbook example is so-called glove anesthesia, that as the patient comes in and has lost
all sensitivity in the hand as it would be covered by a glove.
Whatever the glove would cover, that's where the sensitivity is lost.
Now we know the nervous distribution to the arm and hand, and the nervous distribution
from the brachial plexus down will not give you an anesthesia of the hand.
You can't just knock out the hand.
So you already are looking at a symptom that is not a bona fide neurological symptom.
It's some other kind of symptom, a symptom of some other kind of condition.
Generically, these things were referred to as hysterias, do you see?
This would be an hysterical anesthesia.
There were hysterical paralysis, hysterical blindness and the like.
Hysteria takes its name from the Greek word for uterus.
Before the 19th century, it was widely thought that conditions of this kind attach themselves
only to women, and generally as part of the complexities of their reproductive biology,
do you see?
Now, Freud was not the one who turned things around on that.
I'll mention a few minutes, Sharco had a lot to do with it, but even before Sharco, medical
practitioners knew that the hysterias did hit men and good and hard, though they all
already recognized the tendency of men not to show up with complaints like that, but for
women to do so.
But I say one of Freud's tasks then is just distinguishing between hysterical symptoms
and bona fide neuropathies.
Now he has a chum, an older graduate, not much older, Joseph Breuer, graduate of the
University of Vienna, who's also practicing neurology in Vienna, and they meet and they
compare notes and the like.
I won't drag this out, it's not a lecture in Freudian psychology, but one thing that
Breuer mentions is he's got this very precocious patient, a young woman, very, very bright
and so forth, who has credited him with the genius of coming up with a talking cure because
she finds that after she spends an hour talking to him about things, there's a considerable
remission of her symptoms, her hysterical symptoms, and something this Dr. Breuer is
doing for me.
I just talked to him for a while and I feel much better.
Now Freud and Breuer are going to reduce this to a series of systematic observations in
their patient population, satisfying themselves enough that they've got the right idea to
publish a book before the 19th century ends, an 1896 book by Freud and Breuer called Studi
and Uber Hysterie, Studies of Hysteria, in which the theory is advanced that hysterical
symptoms are the outcome of repression, that the patient has taken something at an unconscious
level now, the patient is putting certain wishes or desires or tendencies in a place
not reached by consciousness, presumably because of the content of this, and as a result of
repressing this, has blocked up or caused to be slowed or prevented, otherwise the proper
movement of psychic energy within the system, the price paid for this blockage, this repression
is the symptom.
It's a kind of hydraulic theory in a manner of speaking, that you stop things from getting
expressed at one level and they pop out somewhere else, do you see, you set the piece of paper
on fire and what you get is heat, light and ash, the total energy content is the same
but the form of it changes, so you've got the repression theory of hysteria which already
presupposes a quite active unconscious life.
The question that naturally arises is what kind of thought or wish or desire would be
of such a nature, that the patient's psychology would keep it out of mind at the price of
lost sight or lost sensitivity or lost movement, seems to be a hellish price to pay, so obviously
what's getting repressed must involve fairly high stakes, issues or thoughts or wishes,
do you see.
What might these, well all we have to do is consult the nature of human nature as produced
by evolutionary theory, the nature of human nature is drawn from the nature of all animate
nature, that is to say we are animals, we are evolutionary products of processes taking
place in the animal kingdom and we know that indeed that very heritage of ours guarantees
that at the level of the individual everything will be done to promote survival, everything
will be done to enhance pleasure and minimize pain and in the process we will engage in
such procreative activities as to guarantee the survival of the species as a whole.
So what you have de novo now is a creature that is self-regarding, selfish, self-protecting,
do you see, hedonistic, impelled by instinctual forces designed to gratify.
That is the pleasure principle, that de novo we come into the world designed in such a
way as to enhance pleasurable experiences and minimize those that are in any way painful.
Pleasure is the sensation nature endows us with so that we do what we have to do to survive,
do you see.
It works like this, why does an infant suck a nipple, not because the infant has read
a nutritional treatise or a handbook or knows about crab cycles and the like, if you hang
a strain gauge on the cheek of an infant you find out it takes an awful lot of work to
drain a bottle, it's really quite effortful, hourly wages would probably have to be astronomical
to keep somebody doing this unless of course it created a kind of sensual pleasure.
So the infant sucks for reasons Freud says that at the bottom are expressions of, this
went over very very well in Victorian medical society, infantile sexuality, that that precious
little wonderful little creation of love is in there pleasing itself in one of those well
known sensual ways.
And as you move through these Freudian stages of psychosexual development you find that
what shifts is the mode of gratification.
Gratification remains the constant goal, it's just how one achieves sensual gratification
that changes.
The culmination of this through the oral stage and the anal stage, the culmination of
this is adult heterosexual sexuality.
Now you might ask yourself, why is it that adults do engage in heterosexual sexuality?
Very few people do this on chiefly demographic grounds, that is to say well the replacement
ratio being what it is, we've got to bring new life about because so many people are
dying and it turns out to be our duty this year to have another child, we've checked
with the demographers, that's not what's going on.
Everyone knows what's going on, what's going on is people do for pleasure what nature requires
for success.
So adult heterosexual sexuality in virtue of the fact that it yields a kind of pleasure,
a particular needed kind of pleasure, serves the purposes of nature.
Now all this is at the level of the pleasure principle.
What sort of world would we have if human beings simply labored in the service of the
pleasure principle 24 hours a day?
Now some of you are saying to yourselves, well I suspect it would be the world we have
and in that I think you would be rather curmudgeonly.
In fact most of the time we conduct ourselves in a way that denies us certain pleasures,
indeed we even write laws that will punish those who act solely according to the pleasure
principle which is to say that in order for there to be an integral society the pleasure
principle has to yield and this creature designed by nature to gratify itself, to please itself,
to avoid punishment, to be self-ish.
This creature has to become civilized and socialized and acculturated.
That is to say the pleasure principle has to come face to face with what Freud calls
the reality principle.
Do you see here the Hegelian dialectic in yet another manifestation?
As you see the Hegelian dialectic in its Marxist manifestation, the idea being that this ego,
this self, the self that we recognize in the mirror, the sorts of people we regard ourselves
as being, each of us singly, how we regard each other is the reconciliation of two quite
opposing forces, forces of a pleasure principle, forces of a reality principle.
The pleasure principle arises from what is most basic and instinctual in our animal nature
described by Freud.
He gets working on us from the earliest moments to fashion a being that becomes a tolerable
member of society, so society can preserve itself, and that is through the education
and acculturation of the conscience, the development of a conscience.
It's the world that begins each day with no, no, don't stop, do you see, to a creature
that is constantly saying at the unconscious level, now, me, now, now, and out of that
comes this, I say this, not quite reconciled entity, life never being as pleasurable as
we know it could be, and indeed are never quite measuring up to what social expectations
would be if we were merely mechanical products of socialization.
So out of the tension between the id and what Freud calls the superego, there emerges the
ego.
The ego is that synthesis out of the thesis-antithesis sort of, sort of dialectic.
Well, this puts a new light on the problem of knowledge, the problem of conduct, the
problem of governance, and so forth.
What we've got now is not an Aristotelian perfectionist scheme for the form of life
we should live, the idea that if we attach ourselves to lives of virtue, things get,
we develop a character in ourselves that's right.
This isn't the world of cleavus and bito and so forth.
This is a world in which things simply aren't going to work out.
The first lesson to be learned is that the tensions here are to some extent relaxable,
but they are not eliminable.
That indeed, the demands of society being what they are, it is necessarily the case
that the life we live will not be an authentic life, which is to say we will not act as our
own truest and most basic impulses and instincts would have us act.
We begin the compromise from the earliest possible time, and to make sure that these
compromises are made, we have parents.
We have institutions set up to do it.
Now parents, of course, have us doing things and not doing things based on what parents
take to be good reasons.
So parents might tell children, don't do this until you're married and don't do that
and don't do this, and they might tie it into basic religious precepts or certain ethical
precepts and the like.
Of course, these very religious precepts, these very standards and social customs themselves
are the outgrowth of processes that are essentially unconscious processes.
You do some kind of rationalizing after the fact.
Well we tell our children that there should be no sexual intercourse until marriage and
that's because then something is recited from scripture or from the Baltimore Catechism
and the like, but that's not what's actually going on here.
That's what's going on at the conscious superficial level, the surface level of society.
What actually is going on here is that institutions and practices are forming that move people
toward, move youngsters toward heterosexual modes of sexual gratification for the purpose
of securing the needs and interests of society itself.
Whether you're dealing with a tribal community or the fashionable east side of New York,
whether it's the Oxbridge crowd or something radically different, the institutional and
social arrangements are designed in such a way as to secure the interests of the society
at large and those interests are finally and basically of a biological Darwinian nature.
How does this collectivity make it?
Now it may take on a variety of institutional, tribal, religious, customary forms, but once
you read through the symbolism, you see that the same thing is going on in all of these
places.
Well now this is quite a bizarre theory when you think about it, I mean here's the gothic
raised to a power of ten, this is something that you'd expect to come from Mary Shelley
or to be painted by Henry Fusely and unconscious things and people waking up with paralysis
because they've had these hard thoughts that they can't face, what kind of thought would
that be?
Ah well, what kind of thought would that be?
Well as Junior is moving toward heterosexual sexuality, the obvious target of his affections
will be the source of his pre-existing gratifications, that of course is mother, and so what Junior
has to learn in no uncertain terms is that mother is off limits and so we have this whole
theory of the edible complex in which the socialization of sexuality requires redirecting
the sexual energies to a socially accepted target, this can be a profoundly traumatic
experience in the life of the developing young man.
You step back from this and say, is he kidding, I mean this is something that I'm not even
sure this should be thought, let alone written, and indeed Freud was castigated by his contemporaries.
I think perhaps less for the sexual content of the theory than for the fact that it was
so theoretical itself.
He's writing at a time when Ernst Mach and the whole positivist movement in science is
now in full.
Science means you are not doing metaphysics, science is an essentially observational enterprise,
science provides general testable and refutable laws, and here comes this product of the University
of Vienna Medical School talking about edible complexes and totem poles and all that, so
he was going to be in for criticism I should think, even with the sexual content muted
or removed.
And anyway what evidence is there for this unconscious, do you see?
And here Freud says that the royal road to the unconscious is through the interpretation
of dream symbols, that the dream world is the world in which wishes are fulfilled.
This is the closest we ever come to facing up to what our real desires and wishes are.
But in fact if we saw them in all their reality we'd never be able to sleep.
So there's a kind of censoring mechanism that puts into symbolic form something that
it doesn't, you see here's the bottom line, the bottom line is life doesn't work.
The dream doesn't quite work.
The symbolism is enough to let you sleep, but because it's symbolism you're not really
dealing with the reality of it all anyway, so it's another one of these compromises.
So the persistent dream of turning the corner and being tripped up by little puppies, the
policeman do you see, the keystone cop who's tripped up by little pets, is the persistent
dream of the chap who thinks his younger siblings have enjoyed the affection of his father far
more than he has.
Or that he will trip up authority.
The same chap has other anti-authoritarian, he's working through this eatable tension
over and over again, homosexuality as adopting a female passivity rather than face the possible
castration threats that go along with the eatable conflict.
So this is all I say very, very gothic and very imagistic, very, very powerful.
Of course it does turn around that that Delphic requirement that we should know ourselves,
that Nothay Seow Thong.
I should think that whoever actually inscribed Nothay Seow Thong on the temple to Apollo
at Delphi did not have in mind three or four years of psychoanalytic psychotherapy at $125
to $200 an hour.
Knowing myself and knowing what sort of being one was, was really part of a self-perfectionist
form of life in which you would come to terms with what virtue requires and commit yourself
to beauty and truth and justice and all that.
Well Freud gives us a rather different account of what it would mean to know oneself.
It begins first of all with recognizing oneself as a biological entity in a natural world
where resources and possibilities and conflicts and struggles and challenges are of such a
nature that we face peril 24 hours a day, that to deal with these perils we have to
come equipped.
Natural variations have to produce an entity that is capable of gratifying itself.
What we find in pleasure and what we find in the avoidance of pain just turns out to
be the necessary requirements for a creature that will survive.
But societies too have resources available by which they survive and these are resources
of repression, education, indoctrination, manipulation and the like.
This conflict cannot be avoided as long as one lives in society one faces this.
The most you can do is make the best of a bad situation.
The future is always darker than we suspect and this is part of what it means to come
to grips with a reality that at the unconscious level is ever present and at the conscious
level we work so hard to conceal.
What a very pretty picture. I wonder if it's true.
