Lecture 46, Yankee Thought in a World of Mystery, The Radical William James
I've titled this lecture on William James, the first of two on William James's Yankee
Thought in a World of Mystery, and William James surely is the quintessential Yankee philosopher.
I can't imagine another culture and country producing William James, and if so, it would
come very close to David Hume's definition of a miracle as the suspension of a law of
nature.
James does come along in a World of Mystery.
He comes along when the American philosophical world is featuring the American Hegelian
movement, and Hegelian thought and romanticism are fixtures, not only in the thinking parts
of America, but in what at the time was probably the most intensely thinking part of America,
namely New England, transcendentalist movements, and back to nature movements.
This is a World of Thoreau and Emerson and the like.
These are not perspectives that James will reject by any means, but James himself is
going to bring this characteristically Jamesian view to bear on all this.
Now, when I say a World of Mystery, is this just an academic thinking that the world at
large concerns itself with the sorts of things that academics concern themselves with?
Well, let me read you a passage from a 1907 article, magazine article, that Professor Henry
Jones would be writing in England.
And what he's commenting on is how Hegelian thought has overtaken English thought and
the English universities, how this epidemic is spreading almost without surcease, almost
without challenge.
Here's the passage, there are ellipses throughout, but here's the main point.
He says, quoting now Harbhaus, he says, the Rhine has flowed in the Thames.
Do you see, you already get this sense of some spreading epidemic, the Rhine now has
flowed into the Thames.
Here's the warning note.
He says, Carlisle introduced it, bringing it as far as Chelsea.
We've got Carlisle now with this Rhine-like Prussian philosophy invading Chelsea of all
places.
Then Jowett and Thomas Hill Green and William Wallace and Lewis Nettleship guided the waters
into the Isis, do you see, so good grief, Oxford no less.
They have passed up the mercy.
They pollute the Bay of St. Andrews and swell the waters of the Cam.
The stream of German idealism has been diffused over the academical world of Great Britain.
The disaster is universal.
This is a world of deep and only suggestive mystery that William James is entering, and
it's a world that he's going to try to set a right through clear, pragmatic, practical,
basic, Yankee thought, a confidence in the evidence of sense, a firm belief that for
all its faults, common sense is about the best thing we've got going for us, and in
thorough, radiant fashion, the belief that when philosophy and science conflict directly
with the central precepts of common sense, it better be science and philosophy that give
way.
So here's James, here's the project.
The project is to rescue thought from the seductions of the worlds of mystery.
Well, James didn't get here all of a sudden.
He got here in a rather plodding way.
For a number of years he thought that his future would be as a painter, and in fact
he did show some promise, and he studied with very, very capable painters.
As with most people from his class, he was born into a very, very wealthy family, born
in New York, a wealthy family now settled in New England.
And travel was in the cards for him, and he did do some traveling to find oneself, to
see where one's interests really lie.
Of course, he had a brother who engaged in that kind of travel and never got over it,
a chap you may have heard of by the name of Henry James.
Later in life, Bill would write to Henry and say, look, you better come back, you better
come back home.
You're becoming a stranger in your own land.
What are you doing over there?
You're going to become a Brit if you don't look out, and indeed Henry James would get
a British citizenship, would have a flat in Chelsea and a house outside of...
Well, William James had no intention of settling in any country but the United States.
He did go on a long expedition with Agassiz, whom he greatly admired.
He thought he'd give a look at the world of nature and pursue naturalistic studies, found
it absolutely exhausting, though he found Agassiz a very interesting chap.
Finally, he writes to his father from Europe, and he says, well, there are some lectures
going on in Germany given by these chaps Helmholtz and Wundt, and I think I'll take them in.
And indeed, he now gets himself interested in experimental and scientific psychology.
He thinks this may be the way to go.
He comes back, he completes his medical training at Harvard.
He becomes an instructor giving courses as early as 1875 in physiological psychology and
indeed actually presiding over some experiments.
There are questions about whether Wundt or James deserves the title of the first academic
experimental psychologist.
James was bit touchy on this subject, insisting that he didn't really get the credit he deserved
for that.
Of course, the work of his that every psychologist knows about is the principles of psychology,
which he promised his publisher in two years and which actually took him a dozen years
to complete.
It remains perhaps the classic treatise in academic psychology.
It's a good read to this day.
Where it's overtaken by history is not all that important.
The perspective is wonderful and rich.
It's a documented work, it's loaded with footnotes, he knows everything that's going
on in the world of psychological thought.
He takes out of that world of thought what is most worthy of his attention, treats it
fairly and in an unbelievably winning way.
He's got to be the best writer in that family and I say that as an admirer of Henry James.
But after he completes the principles of psychology, almost all of his writings now will be philosophical
and they will be concerned chiefly with the grounding of our knowledge, the basis upon
which we accept things as true, what the right attitude should be toward our experiences
of the world, what the right attitude should be toward issues of verification, the vindication
of theories, their falsification and the like.
He will also address himself to the ethical and indeed spiritual dimensions of life for
reasons that grow out of this radical empiricism of his and I am going to want to say a few
words right now about what it means to be a radical empiricist.
It's quite trendy indeed, it's quite compromising to say well of course a lot of the things
we know, we know as a result of experience, there are some things we can't know by way
of experience, these being sort of abstract like Nitzian or Cartesian sorts of things
and anyway the senses really can deceive us from time to time but by and large I'm certainly
willing to use my senses in most of the ordinary practices of life.
This I say is a position that is as boring as it is probably faultless.
That's not what a radical empiricist is.
John Locke is not a radical empiricist.
When John Locke says that the mind is furnished by experience and then starts talking about
certain original acts of the mind and starts sounding a bit like Descartes, that's not
a radical empiricism.
How about religious experiences and visions?
How about premonitions that are reliably experienced by people?
Even an out of body experience, perhaps a near death experience, what would James say
about this?
James is consistent.
What radical empiricism requires is this.
No set of experiences has an authority superior to some other set of experiences.
It is not the business or province of science or philosophy to declare which experiences
are legitimate.
The business of science and philosophy is to come to terms with experience as it is
had, experience as it is reported, no experiences off limits and find a set of experiences that
don't match up very well with the received wisdom of science or philosophy and that signals
a problem for science and philosophy.
Experience is under no obligation to justify itself before some court that is allegedly
more authoritative.
That is the consistent position of William James.
If it figures in the human imagination in a reliable way, it is to be dealt with and
the best bet is to deal with it on its own terms.
Hence, James' famous critique of associationist thought in philosophy, a form of thought we
find in Aristotle and in Locke, famously in David Hume, I would go so far as to say
infamously in John Stuart Mill.
That notion being that the mind is an essentially corpuscular domain in which very, very elemental
sorts of things become associated by repetition and contiguity, etc., and they form somewhat
larger clusters and through association still other larger clusters and to lo and behold
you actually haven't.
James says, how did philosophy ever come to a view like that?
It surely could not be on the basis of experience.
Nobody has ever had an experience of that kind.
For example, suppose we line up a half dozen people and we give each of them a word on
a card.
Nobody can see anybody else's cards only his own.
You can't get a sentence out of something like that.
Nobody has a sentence.
Not one of them has a sentence, do you see?
And this is what the theory of association calls for, that in fact you've got A and then
B and then C and then D and that these entirely independent events through some kind of machinery,
some kind of mechanical or gravitational or associative mechanism or process somehow gets
held together.
Who knows the result of all this?
Is there any authorizing intelligence that's integrating all this?
James says, quote, this argument that he's advancing, against associationists has never
been answered.
It holds good against any talk about self-compounding amongst feelings, against any blending or
complication or mental chemistry in the absence of a supernumerary principle of consciousness.
The mind-stuff theory in short is unintelligible.
The mind-stuff theory is unintelligible because what it does not include is what James calls
a supernumerary principle of consciousness.
You've got to have an intact, alert, attentive, willful being who draws upon the resources
of the world and frames ideas, not as corpuscles, nobody ever had an experience like that.
And you can't just have sort of an empty can that becomes filled up with corpuscles
held together mindlessly.
No, there has to be a supernumerary, there has to be an authenticating, integrating intelligence.
You can't get the mind out of this game is the bottom line.
Now the mind is not going to be treated as some sort of Cartesian substance or entity,
look inside and you see a mind.
It's going to be treated as a process, no doubt, you see as a process, but nonetheless
a process not only as real as anything else, but the process on which something ever gets
classified as real.
He puts the case yet another way, quote, the class of phenomena which the associationist
school takes to frame its theory of the ego are feelings unaware of each other.
The class of phenomena the ego presents are feelings of which the later ones are intensely
aware of those that went before.
No shuffling of unaware feelings can make them aware.
What's James's point here?
James's point is that in the stream of consciousness, the ideas that we have invariably look back
on those that preceded them and ahead to those that are to come.
There is a continuity of thought, a continuity of mental life that is not only not captured
by the mind stuff theory, but associationism and the mind stuff theory simply can't deal
with this, can't deal with the continuity of thought, can't deal with the central characteristics
of thought that experience reveals immediately.
For example, every thought is someone's thought, that is every thought is owned.
Communism makes no provision for the owner.
The David Hume thing about the parade formation, one element leaves, another one takes over,
the parade remains intact.
There isn't anybody viewing this parade, there isn't anybody whose parade this is.
James is not trying to rescue some Judeo-Christian substance theory, James is reflecting on the
nature of his own experience, experiences the rule here and says just a minute.
These thoughts are mine and any theory of ideation is going to have to take account
of the fact that it's my thought, not just a thought, my thought, centrally my thought,
do you see?
And he's satisfied that the traditional Anglo-European approach to these, the mental chemistry approach,
the associationist approach, shuffling together, just misses this entirely.
The other characteristic of thought is that it inevitably includes the element of selection.
The world is a world of incessant stimulation.
We don't see and hear at all, we couldn't.
We pick out things that we're going to look at.
We pick out things based on what we judge to be in our interest to pick out.
Again, you have to have a psychologically active dynamic mental life in the first instance
for these experiences to take the shape and form that they do.
And any developed philosophy of mine is going to have to come to grips with this.
It's going to have to come to grips with those conscious processes that, on which we erect
notions of will, attention, selectivity, and the like.
Where does this consciousness come from?
Suppose you consult evolutionary theory, which itself is a kind of progressive, associational
sort of theory.
James is this way and that way about evolutionary theory.
I mean, a few more words will be spent on that.
But suppose you take evolutionary theory.
Now let's say we're conscious.
What do we want to say about other primates?
Well, they're conscious too.
Let's just say they're conscious too.
Darwin has a continuity theory, according to which anything we find at the level of human
psychology will be approximated to some degree further and further down in the phylogenetic
series.
We're finally going to get to some creature that has a bit less consciousness.
Suppose you get one even simpler than that that has even less consciousness.
Are you solving this problem of consciousness?
Suppose you got down to some minimal level of consciousness, assuming this is some quantizable
sort of thing that you really can have consciousness, do you see, which is a arguable point to say
no more on the subject.
No, the problem is there in its full glory the minute you've gotten it all.
He offers us an amusing example of this, a play that was making the rounds in James's
day called Midshipman Easy, and in this play there's a young servant girl who becomes pregnant
out of wedlock, and her defense, when she's finally approached by her employers and others
for this event, her defense is that, well, sir, it's a very small baby, do you see.
Now what James wants to say is that you don't explain consciousness by pointing to earlier
manifestations of it, which somehow are very small consciousnesses, do you see.
It's the same problem all over again.
When we turn this back again to evolutionary theory, we see that the notion of survival
now takes on a radically different character.
That is, there are two ways you can consider survival of the fittest, or revolutionary
pressures conducing to adaptive behavior.
One is that there is some sort of process or force going on somewhere in nature, do
you see, natural selection, whatever it is, and it's sort of playing on the attributes
of animals such that some of those attributes are picked out for propagation, and others
of those attributes become the basis upon which the species is eliminated.
That's one view.
But James says, what happens now when you consult again the authoritative realm, which
is the realm of experience?
Ah, he says.
We treat survival as if it were an absolute end existing as such in the physical world,
a sort of actual should be.
We forget that in the absence of some such super-added commenting intelligence, the reactions
cannot be properly talked of as useful or hurtful at all.
The moment you bring consciousness into the midst, survival ceases to be a mere hypothesis.
No longer is it, if survival is to occur, dot, dot, dot, it has now become an imperative
decree.
Survival shall occur.
Survival ends now appear for the first time upon the world stage.
James says, intentionality, interest, selectivity, consciousness, self-consciousness, this is
what experience turns up as real.
And a philosophy of mind, a philosophy of nature unable to come to terms with that must
be defective.
Now, I think here it's worth noting that James' criticism is not unlike what the criticism
of the romantic idealists were, going back to Gersh's critique of Newton's theory of
light.
Newton's optical theory tells us everything about light except what we see, do you see?
And the argument now is that the scientific reductionist approach is a one-sided affair
that can only explain the natural world by traducing it into something entirely unnatural.
James is part of that tradition.
He's not immune to it.
He derives benefit from the romantic idealist critique of reductionistic science.
At the same time, he's not buying into Hegelian philosophy.
I mentioned in an earlier lecture this quip of William James that every time the Hegelians
refer to the absolute ego, they sound like they're going up in a balloon.
James doesn't want to feature or promote an anti-scientific agenda.
He wants science to come to terms with its own promises, and the promise of science is
a study and explanation of the world that is known and knowable.
That centrally includes every aspect of experience that is reliable, recorded in the daily life
of sensate, attending, selecting conscious human beings.
So the summons is to a kind of realism on the part of science and indeed a common sensory.
Now when he sees how mental life is examined, he discovers something quite important, and
I should say that in this, William James not only was ahead of his time, but I'm inclined
to think he was ahead of our time.
William James recognizes that there is this connection.
It's almost, it is a worrisome connection.
In fact, it's almost a quite dangerous connection between what you are prepared to say about
a phenomenon and the method you have chosen to examine it.
There's this tendency, a quite strong penchant, to assume that the phenomenon just is whatever
your method of investigation turned up about it.
Now let me illustrate this through a stock experiment in psychology.
Oh, there's going to be at least 15,000 students this term doing an experiment of this sort.
You sit people down in front of a memory drum, sort of thing Ebbinghaus might have used.
James knows about all this.
You sit people down in front of a memory drum and they look in a little rectangular window
and they see a pair of words.
They might say, see, let's say, apple house and pairs of words keep coming up.
There might be 30 such pairs.
Now after the students have seen each of these pairs once, next time the drum comes around,
it gives you apple and the question is, do you remember that that's the word that went
with house?
And you keep doing these pairings until the students correctly can give you every associate
errorlessly on, let's say, two complete repetitions.
So what you've learned is this.
Some number of repetitions is required for people to remember 30 paired associates.
You see, you now might bring them in a day later, a week later, and a month later and
show how long it takes to get them to top them back up to their terminal performance.
You measure the amount of savings, which is to say the reduced number of trials needed
to get them back to where they were at their best as a result of their having learned it
and you're doing a classic memory study.
You can actually plot savings as a function of time and so forth.
I say this fills up psychology books and has filled up psychology books since the last
decades of the 19th century.
Now that's fine, do it.
Does anybody actually remember things this way?
Has anyone ever set himself or herself a task by setting up a memory journal like?
Is it the case that the way we remember that apple goes with house is through that frequent
repetition?
Now look here, it may be and in some instances it surely is the case that we remember ever
more vividly as a result of repetition.
But if the only method you ever used to examine memory were a method that only incorporated
associationistic principles and then you concluded from your studies that memory must be associationistic,
you would be committing what William James famously called the psychologist's fallacy.
The psychologist's fallacy generally is assuming that a natural phenomenon is of a certain
kind because your method of inquiry was able to examine only that feature of it or examine
it only in that way.
The fallacy of assuming that what goes on in reality is just what mimics what was going
on in your experiment given the method that you were choosing.
And I say in this, I think James is perhaps ahead of his time.
Now I mentioned that William James not only sounds in passages like Thomas Read but that
there are debts to Thomas Read and he actually read Read in the French during his European
travels and would comment very favorably, approvingly, on the common sense realism of
Thomas Read.
And I think it would be fair to say that in this regard James was picking up a tradition
that had largely been lost during the heyday of John Stuart Mills.
I mentioned in the lecture on John Stuart Mill, Mill's very influential examination
of Sir William Hamilton's philosophy in which one of the principal casualties was Thomas
Read.
In that work Mill identified Read with Kant and others in what he called the intuitionist
school, treating common sense principles as a kind of intuition.
And I do think one of the reasons that Read fell out of favor was because of the perceived
success of John Stuart Mill's critique of the intuitionist school and I think the wrongful
assignment of Read to that school.
James is picking up pretty much, I don't want to say where Read left off, James is
picking up the Readian baton and he's voting for the following.
The proper method of investigation is a scientific method of investigation that takes the facts
where it finds them.
That is you don't develop a theory that excludes facts as a condition of the theory working.
You develop a theory that is capable of meeting the facts on the facts own terms.
Secondly, what constitutes a fact is any reliable representation in experience.
That is facts do not become facts through the authority of scientific or philosophical
systems, but through the actual engagement of human beings with the world in which they
live.
Now what about common sense principles?
Well James speaks directly of common sense principles and he does so in a context that
is quite congenial to let's say evolutionary theory in the broader, I'm inclined to say
softer sense.
Challenges human and otherwise face challenges daily.
Common sense is the means by which we come to terms with those challenges to be skeptical
about common sense is to be skeptical about that one resource that is most serviceable
as we go about trying to meet the challenges and overcome the obstacles of daily life.
It turns out however that the challenges to one are not the same as the challenges to
all.
The kind of creature you are determines what is of greatest interest to you.
James illustrates this in a particularly winning way.
He says, I sit in my chair and I have a book on my lap and my eyes are moving across its
pages.
I'm engrossed in this literature, do you see?
Sitting in front of me is my dog and he's looking up at me and probably can't make
heart and a hair of the fact that my eyes keep moving across these pages.
James even pauses to reflect on a tribal community that was once very kind in rescuing a minister
and the ship has come in that can now bring the minister back and he's so appreciative
that he asks the tribal chief, is there anything I can do for you after all you've done for
me?
And the chief says, yes, would you leave me your eye medicine?
What is that?
The minister had a little breviary with him or a little Bible of some sort with him and
would sit and fill the hours by reading it and of course the tribal chief didn't thought
that he was moving his eyes back and forth as a kind of eye medicine.
Now James says that as my dog sees me sitting in the chair, my eyes moving back and forth,
what he says, of course, what my dog is saying is doesn't this chap realize that in a matter
of minutes he could have the stick in the air?
Now what are we to say about the dog who just can't wait for the stick to be in the air
and James who just can't wait to get to the next chapter?
Do we want to say that one set of those experiences is inauthentic and the other authentic or
do we want to say that there are different interests that will express themselves in
different attentive selections in different conscious processes devoted to something that
is uniquely important to a given species, uniquely important to a given person in a
given context under particular circumstances in life and to try to wash this out with allegedly
general laws that become lawful only by ignoring the facts of daily life is not to prosecute
the agenda of philosophy or science but to engage in a species of self-deception.
Where to be empiricists says James in the radical sense.
We are to accept the contents of our own conscious life, not consciousness as something we see
when we look inside the head, James is satisfied that at the end of the day we come to grips
with the fact that we are fire and clay, that there is a brain and an embodiment that our
biology is ever with us, there seems to be a set of conscious mental processes that fire
like are not easily encapsulated into the husk of the body or found in the biological
details, that this tuness in one is an inevitability to be dealt with by philosophy and science
but that neither philosophy nor science can advance by denying the reality of either as
an attempt to celebrate the other or establish its hegemony.
So James is a practical, common sense, experience-based American philosopher wanting to get on with
the show, taking the facts where he finds them, leading him to a pattern of thought that will
go in any direction that experience reliably points to.
He's not going up in a balloon and he's summoning some of his American colleagues back to earth
there having gone up in a balloon and having very little to show for it.
Good old Bill James.
