Let me carry on with William James from his radical empiricism to his pragmatism and pluralism.
And as pluralism is now one of the preferred words in our active social life, I'm going
to try to make some distinctions between what contemporary commentators mean by pluralism
and what James meant by it.
James's pluralism is essentially an epistemological position, but more on that later.
To begin, the practical side of William James's philosophy begins with his functionalism.
And functionalist theories of mind are bound today.
And an essentially functionalist psychology was put in place largely by James's principles
of psychology and would actually form the foundation for, of all things, American behaviorism.
For all of the criticism that John B. Watson would levy against his predecessors, James's
arguments for functionalism are very much in the background of Watson's own thought.
So I want to pick up some of these themes that we find in James's diverse writings.
Now what do we mean by functionalism?
James takes the position, it's at once a common sense position and also a quite subtle metaphysical
position.
In James, it's a common sense position that the creatures of nature having undergone an
evolutionary history over a course of many, many, many millennia, obviously are fitted
out to deal with the environment as it is, as it is generally found, as the particular
creatures find it.
We know, for example, that the organs of the body serve specific functions, digestive,
respiratory, and the like.
Well, the question that naturally arises then is if we're to develop a philosophy of mind
or a science of mental life, are we not going to have to address what the functions of mind
are?
I would say an explanation of the mental is inextricably bound up with an understanding
of what the mental is for.
So with James, it's not going to be a sort of arid enterprise of determining what particular
faculties there are, the Bundian, well, really more the Titianarian program of dividing the
mind up into sensations and images and feelings, no.
It's going to be a functionalist approach to mind.
What does mind do?
What is it for?
What is it you achieve with mind that you couldn't achieve without it?
It's a famous brief treatise by James on the question, does consciousness exist?
And of course, the answer James serves up is yes and no, it depends on what you mean
by consciousness.
If you think of it as a kind of medieval substance, some immaterial, spaceless, massless, but
nonetheless ontologically real thing, no, that doesn't exist at all.
But if you think of it as this flow of ideas, this stream of perceptions and thoughts and
feelings, this process by which a supernumerary intelligence knits together experiences over
a course of time, consciousness is indubitable to doubt that you've got to have it.
I mean, he's not doing Descartes here, but he's not doubtful about consciousness as a
process.
Well, the question that arises immediately for a Jamesian is, well, then what's it for?
After all, could animals not, could you not imagine an animal kingdom capable of surviving,
adapting, achieving certain things, taking in food, engaging in procreative activity,
coming in out of the rain, going toward the sunlight?
Couldn't all this be done automatically?
Couldn't it be done robotically?
What is the function of consciousness?
What is it that consciousness could achieve that could not possibly be achieved without
it?
Now, James circles this question.
He jumps in and answers it and then jumps back.
I think somewhat fearful that maybe he seems to be giving a final answer to it, but there's
one approach James takes to it that I've always found quite interesting, and that is a neuropsychological
approach.
He says, look, the brain is an incalculably complicated organ.
It's made up of millions of cells, and it's on the air constantly, and we're sensitive
to every little fluctuation in the environment.
This is an organ that has a hair trigger sensitivity.
For goodness sake, left to its own devices, it would be popping off constantly.
Mind as such, mental processes, conscious processes, should be understood as having
one function, the regulation of the activity of the brain itself.
This is a kind of interesting dualism.
I don't know that James ever would have allowed himself the title of a formal philosophical
dualist interactionist and the like.
He's much too much a homebody for that kind of highfalutin talk.
But there certainly is a dualist functionalism in his philosophy of mind in that, now understand,
this is not mind as a thing, controlling a brain as a thing.
This is mental operations, keeping in line a system that otherwise gets out of line.
And how does it do this?
It does this through the processes of the will, processes of attention, processes of
selection.
If the nervous system was simply turned on the air automatically, what would stop it
from picking up everything and anything, nothing?
On what basis would it ever arrive at some coherent picture of the world?
No basis at all.
It would be like taking a photographic emulsion, room size, hanging it on the wall and opening
up the windows and letting the affairs of the world come in.
What you would get is a blooming, buzzing confusion of things.
Why is it this doesn't happen?
It doesn't happen because our functions include selection, attention, and the will.
In fact, on the matter of the will, James says, here's a case where I'm prepared to
let nature produce something that really doesn't await experience and the like.
Nature here might actually come up with something novel.
There seems to be, indubitably, a volitional element in our mental life that we choose
to pick out certain things and react to them.
And James is prepared to take this in good, readian, common sense fashion as something
that's just part of the constitution of our nature.
It is not subject to some kind of reductive explanation.
It's got to be there to get the game going at all.
Science and philosophy simply have to accept that and make the best of it.
Now when he gets to this matter of the will, however, he does see it as involving choices
from what is available.
So the reservoir of what is available does have to be put in there.
This is not something that nature can present ready made.
He develops then what he calls himself an idiomotor theory of the will, which initially involves
only reflexes.
Now let me try to make this clear if I can.
James's idiomotor theory assumes that initially the behavior of infant organisms, human and
otherwise, is under reflex control.
Basic patterns of reflex adaptivity to painful stimuli, pleasurable stimuli, and eye blink
when a puff of air is directed at the cornea, removing a limb from a sharp object or a hot
object and the like.
However, these arrangements that exist between the experience and the reflex response to
it continue to exist as what might be called idiomotor elements of a sort.
That is, there is a reflex reservoir of behaviors tied to specific stimulus events.
James has to put this kind of reservoir of possibilities in place so that selectivity
has something to select from.
In the course of a lifetime of experiences, and as we gain ever more purpose of control
over our behavior, the particular behaviors that are available to us now become the volitional
version of what initially was reflexive.
We move toward and away, the hand goes up or comes down, we look this way or that way,
we blink our eyes intentionally or otherwise.
But intentionality itself is the characteristic of actions that already are there potentially.
What makes them volitional actions is that we are choosing these and not those.
Initially he says, this is set down in the reflex repertoire of the organism and it subsequently
becomes part of the volitional repertoire.
So it's not a disembodied will, literally, it's not volition as separated from the body.
It's volition being brought to bear on bodily resources, idiomotor connections that are
in place as a result of early experience and natural endowments and then mature and ripen
and become ever more refined and ever more adaptive.
But he says, even with all this put in place, and I think the quote here is worth giving,
he says, even with this in place, nature may, I say, indulge in these complications.
So he's prepared to offer a non-reductive, original and natural endowment which itself
is not the gift of experience.
Nature may indulge in these complications.
Now James' pragmatism is tied to his functionalism and pragmatism is a philosophy that has been
libeled by more than one secondary source.
Critics of pragmatism claim, I don't know where in the pragmatist literature they get
this, that pragmatism is the vulgar view according to which if something works it's true and
therefore you'd have no way of distinguishing between competing scientific worldviews if
both of them led to practical success.
The textbook illustration of this would be Ptolemae and Copernicus.
The Ptolemaic view is a view according to which the center of things is the earth and
the sun goes around the earth.
The Copernican view has the sun at the center and the earth going around it.
But of course as regards navigation, finding your way home at sea, knowing where in the
sky the sun is going to appear, you can do the same with Ptolemae that you can do with
Copernicus.
In fact until fairly recently in the history of science there wasn't too much to choose
from practically between the Ptolemaic and the Copernican view.
And so critics of pragmatism would say well therefore on pragmatic grounds you'd have
no basis to choose one over the other.
This I think very substantially short changes both William James' version of pragmatism
and that of a person with whom he was closely associated, Charles Sanders Purse, whose view
was sufficiently different and even to the point of controversy between the two, sufficiently
different from William James' that Purse actually preferred to refer to his position as pragmatistic
James' being pragmatism.
With James, let me just get this advertisement in for good old Thomas Reid, both James and
Purse acknowledged a debt to Reid and the recognition that Reid had seen a lot of what
they are trying to bring about as the right remedy for a skeptical and wayward philosophy.
Now pragmatism on James' account matches up with James on the question of interest.
The will expresses itself in behalf of what we take to be our highest interests.
What we do, we do in behalf of our highest interests.
We are not simple reflex machines.
There is an incessant stream of consciousness, a stream of thought that relates us to the
world around us that exposes certain possibilities for action and we have to choose from among
those possibilities and the grounds of choice sooner or later and sooner is better.
The grounds of choice sooner or later must match up with just the highest interests of
a creature of a certain kind.
For the puppy in front of us, the stick in the air may qualify.
Given our nature, it could be the book in our lap.
But for the creature whose interests are not served by his actions, survival is in doubt
and the world becomes a perilous place.
Now does this boil down to if it works, it's true?
No that's not what the pragmatic theory of truth is.
The pragmatic theory of truth asks this question.
What criterion or standard would you apply to any proposition such that you would be
prepared to declare it true?
Now what are your options?
Well you might say it's the conclusion of a valid syllogism and if the syllogism is valid
and the major and minor premise are true necessarily the conclusion is true.
That is a formal logical relationship in which the terms might be A, B and C and may match
up with nothing that ever existed in the world or ever could exist in the world.
So from the point of view of a striving, surviving, thoughtful, selective, attentive being, that's
simply textbook stuff.
It's fine but it doesn't match up with the requirements of daily life.
So that's not the standard you bring to bear on something.
Newton comes along and says all bodies attract each other dot, dot, dot, dot, why do you
accept that?
Well you accept that because it matches up quite accurately with certain observations
you're in a position to make.
Why do you accept something is true because it matches up with certain observations that
you've made?
Why do you accept something is true because it matches up quite quantitatively with observations
you make at a quite precise and measured level of observation?
This has to be because you sense a fundamental tie between the evidence of sense and the
practical, needful affairs of life that you don't question the aptness of testing a proposition
against the evidence of experience because the evidence of experience just is the ultimate
evidence that you have.
Sooner or later you're going to bring the issue to the level of what at least in principle
can be.
Now, James does not regard this as a source of deception, he regards this as a veritable
principle of human nature and probably animal nature as well.
The lowly caterpillar that crawls across a thousand leaves until it finds the one that's
right for its diet and sit there pondering these things, this is tied up with getting
through the day and getting through life.
This isn't evidence of a weakness, it's evidence of a certain aptness between the sensory and
conscious mental equipment that we have, the functions served by that equipment and the
purposes and possibilities of life.
Now, let me rehearse this.
Why is it we accept a Newtonian or Einsteinian vision of the world?
Now, in case you're thinking well for goodness sake, quantum physics, quantum electrodynamics
is based on propositions and principles that not only are not subject to experience but
they violate everything we take to be true about experience.
What would James say about that?
The pragmatic theory of truth is not based on the proposition that nothing is true in
science or elsewhere until it matches up with some concrete experience.
What it does say however is that the ultimate court in which competing theories vie for
our attention and our allegiance, the ultimate court is the court in which are located our
highest interests, our highest interests.
Our highest interests are to be distinguished from the moment to moment interests that we
might have and moment to moment interests are served by pragmatic considerations but
considerations I'd be inclined to call vulgar pragmatic or low level pragmatic considerations.
I'm thirsty, I better go over and get something to drink, that kind of thing, that's useful.
But James is tying pragmatism to the long range highest interests of the creature and
in this particular case of course the creature is the human creature.
So what does that tell us?
Now if you are listening to this lecture or worse watching it or even worse actually
attending it you might be saying to yourself well I'm not sure what my highest interests
are I mean I might be a pum-pum, zoonie, obey a man, mufti, Muslim, Christian, Jew, Democrat,
Republican, I might be a boy scout or a girl scout, I might root for the Yankees, I do
root for the Yankees.
Now the highest interests can't be the same under all of these descriptions and states
and possibilities.
Suppose my highest interests are of a certain sort but does that mean I know it for example?
Does a baby know its highest interests?
Aren't my highest interests changed?
Aren't my highest interests sort of produced by the magic wand of the philosopher and you
know once the philosopher puts the wand away all of this stuff disappears?
I've got daily interests, I've got weekly and even annual interests but I'll be tempted
if I know what my highest interests are.
It's also contingent, it's also dynamic, it changes, it depends on how you look at
the thing do you see?
Oh I see.
So you mean that there might not be a last word on this, you mean that this might be
one of those enterprises in which we grope and strive and do our best but there's always
more, there's always more to be said, there's always more to be seen, there's always another
way of looking at this and there's always another way this will look at yet other things.
You mean there might be actually a plurality of possibilities here?
That the universe properly understood is not a block, do you see?
It's not a solid block, known once and for all.
Measure its length, its width, its height, its weight and its density and that's the
last word on the universe.
No says James, that's not the universe.
Any science that tells you it is that kind of universe is a false and fraudulent science.
The universe is bigger than our science, it's dynamic, it's changing, I don't think James
could have guessed that it was expanding.
But the reason the universe must always be changing is because we're always going to
be looking at it from a different perspective.
There were times we looked at it with the naked eye, there are other times we looked
at it through a telescope, then a radio telescope, then goodness knows what, maybe from an Apollo
capsule, do you see?
And depending on how you look at it, how you view things, certain possibilities arise
that here to for had not been seen.
And once you now come to take gauge and take the measure of these new possibilities, yet
new thoughts begin and yet new possibilities, new ways of regarding things set in.
And this is going to be as true in physics as it is in psychology or philosophy of mind
or governance and the like.
So James' radical empiricism, which leaves room for the great welter and variety of
experiences to dictate the next point in the stream of consciousness, inevitably will give
rise to his conception of a pluralistic universe.
This is the way James himself defines pluralism.
For pluralism, this is a quote for pluralism, all that we are required to admit as the constitution
of reality is what we ourselves find empirically realized in every minimum of finite life.
Briefly, it is this, that nothing real is absolutely simple, that each relation is one
aspect, character or function, way of its being taken or way of its taking something else.
Let's look at it again.
Briefly, it is this, that nothing real is absolutely simple, that each relation is one
aspect, character or function.
Do you see one way of being taken or way of its taking something else?
So the block universe we see is mythic and paralyzing.
Nothing real, including and especially the universe, is absolutely simple.
Now that's James's pluralism.
Does that mean anything goes?
Is this, of course, one of the very influential philosophers of our own time, Professor Richard
Rorty, is quite well known for acknowledging that the received truths, perspectives, core
beliefs, attitudes and the like of a given community are products of that community's
overarching culture, habitual modes of conduct and so forth, and that there really isn't
any way of a given culture functioning as a referee or authority on the worthiness of
some radically different culture and the like.
He believes or has argued that what the most we can hope for is a certain solidarity within
our own culture and that we have a right, every single culture has a right to exercise
certain prejudices in its own behalf.
And that what we forfeit here is something we never could have had in the first place.
We forfeit objectivity and what we get in return for it, he says, is a kind of solidarity.
Objectivity is surrendered, solidarity is achieved.
Well this isn't the occasion nor is there time to examine Richard Rorty's thinking on
this subject, but I do want to contrast what I take to be William James's thought on matters
of this kind with what I take to be the burden of Richard Rorty's thesis.
James's pluralism is not tied in any special way to considerations of culture.
It is tied, however, to considerations of highest interests.
And in that there is all the difference, because the question that then arises, which
brings us right back to Plato and Aristotle, the question that then arises is this.
Is it just in the nature of being the sort of being that is a human being that the highest
interests are going to be far more similar than they are different?
And that in fact it really is possible, not for one culture to serve as a referee or to
authorize the convictions and practices of another culture, but for one to step outside
the context of any given culture to ask what kind of culture is right for beings of a certain
kind.
Now I do want to pause on this point because it's a vitally important point.
It's particularly important in the context of our own social and political life at the
close of the 20th century.
The Nazi Party was prepared to bring about a certain kind of culture, a certain political
regime, which according to the architects of that regime, must to last for a thousand
years.
That's what the promise was.
There is, I'm told, and this chiefly by way of newspapers and bad movies, I'm told that
there is a highly integrated culture, a criminal culture, which has been referred to as the
mafia, that these are actually bands of families that have joined together for the purpose
of gaining profit illicitly.
I say I have no direct knowledge of such an operation, but my imagination certainly can
reach a possibility.
I do know that there is a culture that has absorbed into its membership any number of
people, proud to refer to themselves as members of the Ku Klux Klan.
They attend rallies wearing white sheets, they set fires, and they've been responsible
for acts of violence against innocent others, their activities being openly and not openly,
but transparently criminal and villainous.
Now are we to understand that it is simply not possible, coming from a given culture,
to bring some kind of moral criticism to bear, that is in order to bring a moral criticism
to bear on the Nazis or the Ku Klux Klan, you'd sort of have to be operating from within
the system, understanding its objectives in its own terms, and understanding further that
once you were in that system, you wouldn't have the resources, cultural and otherwise
available, to adopt the perspective of somebody, let's say, who is a sister of charity or
some such.
Now if I may speak personally for a moment, I think any social theory or moral theory
based on that proposition becomes in a certain respect a self-refuting thesis, because in
fact it has eliminated the very resources by which it might defend its own claims.
That is one might say that, one might ask, I don't mean to criticize Professor Rorty
because I haven't taken the pains of developing his argument at all and his influence is such
that his argument should be read and thought about, but I say just using him as an example
here, one could say to Professor Rorty, what are the grounds on which one should attach
any credibility or validity to this position that you've been developing? That is, are
you prepared to assert that standards of logical coherence are applicable here? Do I actually
already have to be a Rortyite even to understand what you're saying? Is it possible for you
to find a philosophically defensible position that isn't so inextricably bound up with your
own cultural values as merely to express them or to repeat them? Do you follow? That is
to say, if you accept that degree of cultural relativism, you've lost the very epistemic
resources required to evaluate claims of that kind, because the evaluation has to proceed
in a context that is not obeisant to any particular cultural form. It isn't culture-free
itself, it comes from what in other contexts I've been prepared to call, and I say this
with a modest posture and head looking toward the ground, the culture of thought, particularly
the culture of refined, self-disciplined, systematic thought, a culture first and quite
fully developed by the ancient Greek philosophers and those whom they taught. James's pluralism
is not a relativism of the modern stripe. What it is is a fallibilism, and that's something
rather different. There's all the difference in the world between claiming that the complexities
and organicity, the evolving nature of reality being what it is, we're never going to have
the last word on anything that really counts. We must conduct ourselves in such a way as
to record our recognition of what our highest interests are, but all bets are off on the
question of whether we'll ever perfectly correctly identify those and match up our behavior to
them. Between a view like that and one that says, no, no, these interests are simply culturally
specified, they have no standing outside a given culture, they can't be assessed by
a different culture, it's all really relative. Anything you are prepared to say against the
mafia or against the Nazis simply reflects a particular pattern of a cultureation to
which you've been exposed, and there really is no moral Archimedean point that you can
occupy such as to move a moral argument to the level of a set of true propositions.
Well, William James was nothing if not a realist. And as a realist and a radical empiricist, he
had to take the facts of human experience where he found them. The facts of human experience
includes centrally, a religious dimension to human life, a spiritual dimension to human life,
witnesses varieties of religious experience, a striving in human nature, an attempt to
perfect oneself, needs that go well beyond the immediate needs of body and individual soul,
needs of a social nature, his discussion of the self in its social manifestations is quite
revealing on this point. And so James is far from the relativist, far from the situationist.
A fallibilist doesn't deny that there is some absolute point of focus on which human interests
converge. A fallibilist simply says that given the limitations of our resources, the shortness
of life and the complexity of the situation, be suspicious when anybody tells you he's
got the answer to these things. Good old Bill James.
