This is the final lecture in a series of 50 in which I plan to offer tongue-in-cheek
sometimes for theories of the good life. I think anyone who has endured 49
lectures on topics in philosophy certainly has a right to hear a few words
about the good life which to some extent might be the life we live when we're not
sitting through 49 lectures in philosophy. I also think that the 50th
lecture is either the right time or 49 lectures too late for some sort of
apologia. In case it hasn't dawned on anybody and how astonishing it would be
if it hasn't, in case it hasn't dawned on anyone, 30 minutes on the
issues and persons that we've addressed in the course of these lectures certainly
would constitute grounds for a libel action or defamation of character and
the like. The point of the lectures was to introduce those who are interested in
philosophy and more generally in the history of ideas to a set of
ideas that have had an animating and vitalizing impulse on thought across
the board. And so those who've attended all the lectures or listened to all the
lectures know that an important place has been given to Goethe and Schiller's
lectures on the aesthetic, letters on the aesthetic education of man. We
generally don't regard Goethe as a figure in the history of philosophy less
Schiller. I've talked all too briefly about the Federalist Papers and about
the ideas of people like Madison and Jay and Hamilton. These are not people
who figure in any regular way in courses in philosophy or even in books on the
history of ideas. Nonetheless, what I've chosen, the people I've chosen, the
notions I've chosen, are so built into the very fabric of deep thought, of an
essentially philosophical nature, that it seemed to me entirely apt to include
them. In fact, so much so that, at least as I now approach my dotage, I begin to
think that any course in political philosophy that will feature Plato and
Aristotle and Machiavelli and will not include the Federalist Papers is
probably worthy of all the criticism that I would be prepared to heap
on it. And I should think that any course in philosophy of science that
features the writings of Bacon and Newton and says almost nothing about what's so
deeply troubled Goethe and those in the wake of Goethe's achievement is also
only giving one side of a story. And indeed, like most instances, one side of
a story is hardly a story at all. It's really more in the form of a kind of
propaganda. So if you've been tolerant and patient, this is the time for me to
tell you that your tolerance and patience was deployed properly. I think that
the issues and people discussed, though to some extent outside mainstream
considerations in some places very much deserved the attention that they
received, which is just another way of saying that courses of lectures like
this suffer or benefit from what William James meant by selection. And these
selections match up with what one takes to be our highest interests. And so I've
tried to include what reaches or might presume to reach our highest interests.
Four theories of the good life. Well, what are those theories? Are there only four?
I recall giving a series of lectures, 48 great ideas, great ideas in psychology
and 48 lectures. And I wasn't quite sure that psychology had 48 great ideas.
I even teased my masters at the teaching company by saying that I thought
there were certainly four ideas. Could I do each of them 12 times? And then, of
course, we have 50 lectures on great ideas and philosophy. Now, there I'm
rather more comfortable that you certainly wouldn't have to do five of
them 10 times. But are there only four models of the good life? Maybe there are
12 or 13. Maybe I won't even get to the ones that match up most directly with
what listeners and viewers have in mind. It does seem to me that the ones
traditionally advanced by the most influential philosophers really can be
boiled down to four. There is famously Aristotle on the contemplative life.
And Aristotle here is taking a page from that Socratic maxim, according to
which the unexamined life is not worth living. So there surely is that that
contemplative life, life on the Isle of the Blessed, I shall have a few words to
say about that. That's a candidate form of life. It's a candidate for being
described as a... Well, it's the active life. Same Aristotle will give us that
one, not to mention a whole legion of philosophers, some of them stoic, some
of them medieval, for goodness' sake. Get out of the armchair, stop that
anthalosceptic form of self-inquiry and go into the world and do something for
goodness' sake. Life, after all, is something to be lived, not just thought
about, the active life. Let's be fair about these things. There's also a
fatalistic model of the good life. The good life is something that you're
extremely lucky if you end up living any part of your life in. It's highly
unlikely a priori that you or anybody else will know an uninterrupted good
life. You're likely to suffer the slings and arrows about rage as fortune, and
if you decide to take arms against a sea of troubles, look out, because you're
probably almost certainly going to lose. Anyway, keep your nose clean, keep your
shoulder to the wheel, and nine times in ten things won't work and be happy over
the one tenth of the times where things do work. In any case, it is written. So how
it's going to work out is sort of pre-established. It's faded. I'm always
reminded of this. When some of you may have seen or read Lawrence of Arabia,
which was quite a spectacular motion picture many years ago, and look up
Lawrence of Arabia if you don't know who he is, but here he is now leading an
entire throng through the desert, and it was extremely unlikely that anyone
would get through. He gets out on the other side, and he has a Muslim
attendant, and one of his people has been left in the desert, and Lawrence gets
back on his horse. He's going to go back in and retrieve this person and save
him, and his faithful assistant comes and says, it is written that no one shall go
into the desert twice and come out. And there's Lawrence sitting up on that
horse. He might just as well be Apollo. He's got this clear, cold, calculating,
Hellenic confidence. And he looks down at this chap and says, not derisively, but
with a kind of pained patience, he says to him, nothing is written. In he goes,
and he rescues the fellow. He comes out with him, you see. Some sort of fracar
breaks out in the camp, and the chap he saved is killed. And his friend now comes
over to him, his aide comes over to him, and Maria shores him, and says, that's
all right. Don't let it trouble yourself. But it was written. Well, there is this
sense of inevitabilities when we undertake great and massive projects that
somehow the future is already known at some level, and the most we can do is
give it a good try. And that's what I mean by a fatalistic perspective,
being the perspective you need for the good life. I don't want to emphasize
the fatalistic element, but I want to use the fatalistic element to get at
resignation as an essential property in the good life. And of course, we
immediately turn to certain of the later Stoics as the model for this. I often
repeat that line of epic, epic teetuses in the face of a tragedy experienced by
one of his friends. Never say of anything that I have lost it. Only that I have
given it back to you say that that the things we have, we have for the moment
life itself is a transitory sort of thing. One can be joyous and appreciative
and respectful for the very fact of it while recognizing all the time that it
is something that will have to be given back, that it's simply in the cards. And
that element of resignation then becomes what guides one through the perilous
and vexing seas of life. The good life then is just coming to grips with
inevitabilities. What it means to live a good life is to be realistic about one's
chances. There's that. Well, and then of course, there is hedonism. Now, H. L.
Menken, not a philosopher as the textbooks would have it, insisted that the
right definition of puritanism is the haunting feeling that someone somewhere
may be happy. And indeed, hedonists are constantly being cuffed about as debauches,
people you certainly would, you'll change the sheets after they stay at your
house. You'll surely count the knives and forks when they leave. These are people
who are up to no good. The only thing they can think of 24 hours a day is
pleasing themselves. Now, this is not what a hedonistic position on the good
life is all about. I did mention this in connection with Epicurus' own teachings
on this subject. Hedonists, if they're really true to the school, idonai is
desire, do you see? What is it? One desires. Well, certainly one desires,
among other things, one desires. And of course, the surest route to suffering is
desire, the unrequited desire, wanting what you can't have, wanting what you
shouldn't have, wanting what hurts, what punishes, what deprives, what restricts,
what constrains, what transforms in the wrong direction. So the true hedonist is
not out for any and every pleasure. The true hedonist is trying to track that
narrow path between pain and pleasure, never wanting a pleasure so much that its
deprivation constitutes pain, and never avoiding pain so assiduously as to miss
out on every and any conceivable pleasure. Nonetheless, the grounding of this
form of life is some state of comfort, as it were, some state of security, some
reduction in anxiety and confusion. Some peace is what it is. The hedonistic life
true to the school is a peaceful life, a life of tranquility, a life in which one
has removed oneself as much as possible from threatened harm, from real harm. And
within that now protected context is able to search out such pleasures as will
not forfeit the sanctuary itself. What form of life do saints choose? Let's
consider this for a moment. Very recently, the world has lost Mother Teresa. I
think by most accounts, if Mother Teresa isn't a saint, then I don't know who
would be a saint. Now, sometimes we think of saints as persons who in the ethical
domain have engaged in what ethicists call super-erogatory actions, which is to say
actions above and beyond the call of duty. That is to say, from an ethical point of
view, what Mother Teresa has done with her life is almost unbelievable, but of
course, none of us is morally at fault for not having lived Mother Teresa's form
of life. What she has done is above and beyond the call of duty. Now, we certainly
have an obligation to provide such help as we can when we come across people
desperately in need of help. I mean, someone victim of an automobile accident
lying there in the middle of the street. There's a phone box right on the wall.
You've got a quarter in your hand. What sort of a blagger or dastardly person
would you be, not to go so far as to go over and dial 411 or ring up a hospital
and the like? Now, you certainly aren't going to quit your job and leave your
family and don the robes of poverty and go and pick dying people up out of
trash cans and give them a final hug and caress and kiss and alert them to the
dignity that was always theirs in the final moments of life. I mean, that's the
sort of thing saints do. That at least is the way I go about justifying my
otherwise useless existence. Now, if you actually ask someone like Mother Teresa
whether she thinks she is engaged in what ethicists call a super erogatory form
of life or activities, she probably would, well, I suspect she might not know
what you're talking about. I don't think that anything I've ever heard her say
would lead me to conclude that she thinks she's doing something beyond the
call of duty. I think she thinks she's doing what one is supposed to do. She
thinks that what she's doing is quite right, actually, that there isn't
anything deeply sacrificial about it. In fact, it's a source for, in her life,
she claimed that it was a source of continuing joy and pleasure, that as
she would love the most suffering of God's children, she would love God
himself, that she was respecting and expressing appreciation for the gift of
life, et cetera, et cetera. So the one thing I would want to note here is that
when it comes to saints and when it comes to heroes, we reflect on saints and
heroes as if they were saintly and heroic, and I think we have every reason to
do that, but they don't reflect on themselves as saintly and heroic. It's a
rare day indeed that when a medalist pinned on someone for valor in battle and
he's asked to say a few words, he begins by saying, well, let me tell you how I
became a hero. This isn't the way heroes talk. They usually say things, it's
entirely disarming, by the way. They usually say things like, well, I don't
know what the fuss is all about. I mean, it was, sometimes they, in the modern
patois, they say, well, it was my job. You know, it's my job to go into a
burning building with timber falling over, the likelihood of my getting out
alive being almost zero because the cat's in there. I mean, that's my job.
That isn't anybody's job, et cetera. Now, so one thing I would say as regards,
as regards theory, people whose lives very often strike us as emulable are
people living lives that don't match up very well either with a life of
contemplation or a hedonistic life or a fatalistic life or even a life of
activity as one is inclined to think of activity the first time activity is
mentioned. The lives they're living are not essentially political, for example.
They're not civic in the restricted sense. There's something utterly selfless
about these lives that we nonetheless come to regard as exemplary, perhaps not
exemplary as in if I could only get myself to do it, I'd start living that
life, but exemplary as in think of how I would have lived my life if I were as
good as that person. That's usually what one, what means by that.
Well, this has to do with how we think about ourselves and others, but of
course, on a very famous theory, how we think about anything depends on brain
activity and the programming that we've gone through, life's experiences, the
cultures out of which we, that mold us, you see, they were constructed by
essentially linguistic and cultural resources and there surely would be a
world in which Mother Teresa might be regarded as foolish for spending a life
doing that sort of thing. And why would anybody run into a burning building
under any circumstances? Now, if all this is just the result of a conditioning
history, if it's just the result of certain grammatical nuances or fallacies
and the like, then perhaps the best life of all, depending on the culture you're
in, is to specify what sort of life you would wish you were living and then have
the scientists put your brain in a vat and play that sort of life into it. There
you are. You want to be Mother Teresa? You'll be Mother Teresa. We already have
people suffering from various forms of psychosis, forms of paranoid schizophrenia,
where they do think they are other people. They might think they're Jesus or
Napoleon and the like. Now, presumably, if that can happen as a result of disease,
it can be produced by scientific means, somewhere down the road, not next year,
but maybe a hundred years from now. And so the question that arises, and it must
arise anytime, any version of either a hedonistic or a contemplative or an
active or a fatalistic model is asserted as the good life. The question that arises
is this. Every one of those lives can be created by brain stimulation. Presumably,
you could find centers which, when triggered, have people doing Fermat's
last theorem. After all, how did Fermat do Fermat's last theorem, except by way of
brain activity? So presumably, whatever was going on in Fermat's brain could be
made to go on in somebody else's brain. Similarly with activity, everyone in this
room, everyone listening to this lecture, almost everyone anyway, has had a dream in
which they've been doing things. Now, they weren't doing things. They were dreaming of
doing things. You might be dreaming of riding a bicycle or dreaming of taking an
airplane. You aren't actually riding a bicycle or taking an airplane, yet in the
realm of experience and the knowledge that you have access to, that's precisely
what you're doing. Well, if that can be brought about by a dream, it can be brought
about by stimulating the brain. So again, the argument is, suppose you had the
option. Suppose indeed you could be given any life of your choosing played into
you. What are the grounds on which you wouldn't do it? I'm not going to answer
that question. I'm offering it not as a rhetorical question, but as a question
that should be dealt with. What's the basis upon which you would forfeit a life
that is frustrating, in which desires remain unrequited, in which you cannot
achieve the level of excellence or goodness or decency, the basis upon which
nonetheless you would choose that life, over a life in which by way of direct
activation of the brain, all of these desiderata would be achieved. Suppose you
say, well, of course, in this latter case, they wouldn't be anything I earned,
wouldn't be anything I was responsible for. Well, suppose I said there's also a
responsibility center. Do you say hasn't been found yet? But if you stimulate that,
then everything else going on in your experience, you now assume you were
responsible for. I would ask all students interested in philosophy as a general
guide to address the question, if you would not accept that kind of life, why
would you not accept it? And the reason I think this is an important question is
it raises the possibility that the esteem that others hold us in, the esteem
in which we hold ourselves, the experiences of pleasure that we have when we
regard ourselves as having accomplished something, may finally not be the core
desires of the good life. Because if all that could be produced in us and produced
in us reliably and regularly, and yet we would not choose that mode of having the
experience, then there must be something missing there. Aristotle, when he moves
toward the notion of eudaimonia, you see, that everything is done for the sake of
something else, which is done for the sake of something else, but it's not an
infinite regress. Ultimately, you get to the point where that is done for its own
sake, and not in order to secure anything else, but because it is desired in and of
itself, and he says that is what we mean by eudaimonia, translated as happiness or
flourishing and the like. You see, I'm suggesting that we do the same kind of
analysis at this point. If those experiences, if that recording of the
esteem in which one is held, if that self-recording of the esteem in which one
holds oneself in virtue of one's accomplishments, if all that actually could
be brought about synthetically, then your refusal to accept it on those terms
means there must be something else. And of course, the question is, what is that
something else? And does one find that in the search for happiness? Is one
fated never to know it? Does one reach it by contemplation, or is it found in the
external world through a life that is active?
Cleobas and Bito, those two young worthies, pulling their mother to the
temple of Hera as if they were a pair of ox themselves, sweating the whole five
miles and probably tearing up the soles of their feet, their sandals having been
ripped by the rough roads. There their mother is, imploring the goddess Hera to
see to it that her sons die the happiest of men, and Cleobas and Bito never
awaken. They die the happiest of men. Solon thinks they've died the happiest of
men. Solon coming out of that, well, Solon, as reported by Plutarch, having
come out of that Hellenic tradition, in which the esteem in which you are held
by others, you are standing within the polis, how men and women who are decent,
how men of virtue come to regard you, the pride they take in the fact that you
were one of them, that to know all that is finally what it means to be happy.
Well, Cleobas and Bito, if indeed they derived eudaimonia from that, if in dying
in that state, they left the world having lived the right kind of life, the good
life. Of course, they're not conscious of how they are remembered. They just
went to sleep, didn't they? Do you see? So this isn't something you can play
into their brains because it isn't something they even know about. So you
see, living the good life then, if the Cleobas, Bito, models the right model,
maybe living a life that you don't know is a good life. It may be living life as
a certain kind of being, as a certain kind of person. Indeed, whether you're
particularly happy with it or not. Now, I wasn't there to interview Cleobas and
Bito just before they fell asleep. One of them might have said to the other,
my goodness, what an exhausting pull that was. I've got new sympathy for oxen and
Bito might have said, yeah, you can't even get a lemonade in this town. You
know, you'd think they could put up a temple to Hera someplace where there'd
be some outdoor takeaway stand of one sort or another. But nonetheless, Mum had
to get here on time. And the only way she was going to get here on time is if we
brought her and thank goodness for her sake that she got to where she wanted
to be to do what was so important to her. They might have been saying in effect
that we want what is good for her for her sake. And in that, they would have
been expressing themselves as her true friends, Tillaeophilia, a completed
friendship where you want what is good for others, for the sake of others, for
what is so good in them as to warrant that. So Cleobas and Bito might actually,
though I don't mean this in the Freudian sense, God knows, and if God doesn't know
it, no one knows it, Cleobas and Bito might in fact have been living the good
life unconsciously. I prefer to say, unselfconsciously. I think one of the
lessons that comes from the lives of saints and heroes is that when a saintly
and heroic life is lived, it's not lived self-consciously in saintly and heroic
terms. In fact, it's not lived self-consciously at all. It's lived in a way
that's conscious of others, their needs, their desires, their desserts. The good
life very often turns out to be a life of service, a life of... And the problem
with having that played in to the nervous system, you see, is that you know
what the game is already. If the position you've taken is, my life can't be a good
life unless I've actually served the legitimate interests and needs of others,
then playing in and hallucination, according to which I'm doing that, simply
defeats the whole project. That isn't going to work at all. It's not that I want
to experience the sensation of having done it. It's that I want to do it. And
that means that first off, one has to determine what is in the best and
abiding interest of others. And I don't know how anybody can do that except
through what is finally a contemplative mode of life. And then, of course, it's
a matter of getting out there and doing it. And I don't know how anybody can do
that except by way of what finally is an active form of life. You have no promises
in advance as to how your actions will succeed or not succeed or even how
they'll be perceived. They may be misperceived. Some very good people have
been crucified for doing good things, do you see? So you have to take an
essentially fatalistic position that, although you do not know what the future
will bring, you do know what your duties are. And the great and exalting pleasure
that comes from enlarging the possibilities in the lives of others has
to meet the fundamental objectives of the hedonistically inclined individual.
Indeed, there must be great joy and pleasure in the life of a mother Teresa.
There must be that deep sense of satisfaction that a hero has, knowing
not that he's a hero, but that he has saved a life. Well, of course, this all
gets to fairly, I mean, one could become nearly sentimental of considerations of
this kind of one-word careful. And I find any time I have this penchant toward
sentimentality, and the answer to the question, well, what's wrong with
sentimentality? They're not sentiment now. What's wrong with sentimentality is the
usual effect of inflationary pressure on it. By inflation, you depreciate the
value of the thing. The thing that's wrong with sentimentality is that it
depreciates the value of sentiment. Well, I say one can have the right kind of
sentiment about these prospects for the good life and recognize at some level
that entities that find life satisfying in these terms have transcended at
least in their aspirations the realm in which their own materiality is located.
It just seems to be the case that once one adopts this perspective, according
to which a life is good, in virtue of the contribution it makes to others, not
for the experience that comes from being acknowledged, but for the experience
created in others, that once one begins to think that way, one begins to lose
one's consciousness of material being, and one enters a rather different realm.
I think it's a spiritualistic realm, and William James referred to this in a
rather trenchant passage. He says, the spiritualistic reader may believe in the
soul if he will, whilst the positivistic one who wishes to give a tinge of mystery
to the expression of his positivism can continue to say that nature in her
unfathomable designs has mixed us of clay and flame, of brain and mind, that the
two things hang indubitably together and determine each other's being, but how
or why no mortal may ever know. Thanks.
We hope you've enjoyed these lectures from our great courses series. Our courses
are now available to order online. Visit our website at www.teachco.com, or you may call
our customer service representatives at 1-800-TEACH-12. That's 1-800-832-2412. Thank you.
