Welcome to the fifth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Our last two lectures have been about the conservation of energy, which is one of the
fundamental laws of nature.
We saw that there were many types of energy.
There's kinetic energy, there's potential energy, there's heat.
There's also chemical energy and electrical energy and nuclear energy and so on.
And energy may change form or be transferred from place to place, but energy cannot be
created or destroyed.
We also saw that this fundamental law is one of the most battle-tested principles of physics.
It stood up even in the face of revolutionary discoveries, a search for better and better
sources of energy.
Energy to move things around, to produce light and heat and so on.
So a perpetual motion machine that produces energy for free would be a technological boon.
On the other hand, there is energy all around us.
For example, a bath hub full of water at room temperature, lukewarm water, there's lots
of heat energy in that bath tub.
How much heat energy is there?
Well, if you cool the bath tub from room temperature, say, down to just above freezing, you would
extract from that bath tub about 25 million joules of energy.
So let's imagine a machine that could extract that, so it does not go against the conservation
of energy.
It simply transforms heat in the tub into useful work.
Nevertheless, there's something about the machine I described that sounds too good to
be true, and it's a good rule that something that sounds too good to be true probably is.
In fact, what I have described is called a perpetual motion machine of the second kind.
It's a device that extracts heat and turns it into work and does nothing else.
Now our previous perpetual motion machines, the ones that produced energy from nothing,
were perpetual motion machines of the first kind.
But now we have a new kind, perpetual motion machine of the second kind.
Such a machine is impossible, and the fact that it is impossible leads us to our next
great principle of physics.
The second law of thermodynamics.
Our story begins with a young French engineer named Saadi Carnot.
Carnot was born in 1796 into a political family.
His father is a mathematician and a soldier, and he's an important figure in the French
Revolution.
And Carnot's father, for a time, was actually Napoleon's minister of war.
And Carnot's nephew, who's actually named after him, later went on to become president
of the French Republic at the end of the 19th century.
Carnot himself grows up in a time of revolution and upheaval, the period of the late French
Revolution.
And so he goes into the army.
He serves the French army as a military engineer.
So for a brief period during his life, basically in the 1820s, he can turn away from military
pursuits and concentrate on his love of science.
Now Carnot becomes fascinated by the steam engine.
Now we've all heard about the steam engine.
In the steam engine, you heat up water by burning wood or coal or something.
You heat up water and you turn it into steam.
And the pressure of the steam pushes pistons.
And those pistons in turn turn a shaft, turn wheels.
You can do useful work.
For example, you can pump water out of mine shafts.
That was an early application of steam engines to drain the water that would leak into mine
shafts.
Only later on did they put steam engines on wheels or in boats and make locomotives and
steamships.
So that's clearly doing work, lifting water out of the mine shaft.
Now remember Benjamin Thompson's cannon boring experiment, that turned work into heat.
So now we see that the steam engine turns heat from the fire into work.
How could we design more efficient steam engines?
And Carnot realizes that you cannot answer such questions without a theory.
So in 1824, Carnot publishes a book.
It's called Reflections on the Motive Power of Fire.
At this book, it's a brilliant and original work.
It's not a large book.
The English translation that I read is just over 100 pages long.
And it's not a terribly complicated book.
Carnot writes for a wide audience and for the most part uses very simple mathematics.
And steam engineering in Carnot's day is still in its infancy.
Carnot lacks lots of data about how steam engines actually work.
Nevertheless, Carnot's book is a work of genius.
And it's all the more amazing because Carnot believes in the old caloric theory.
He believes that heat is an intangible fluid which can flow from place to place, not itself
a form of energy.
And despite this, despite having a faulty theory of heat, Carnot's superb insight and
careful reasoning guide him through the arguments.
And he is profoundly right in his main conclusions.
Carnot sees the steam engine as an example of a heat engine.
A heat engine is a device for turning heat into work in our present terms.
So we're going to explain this using our ideas about energy, where we realize that heat is
a form of energy.
This is more correct than the old fashioned caloric language that Carnot used, but the
explanation is still very similar to his.
So a heat engine extracts some heat, which we'll call QH, Q is a traditional symbol
for heat, QH from something hot, like the fire in the coal box.
So the engine extracts some heat from that.
And the engine produces a work output, which we can call W. So the engine will lift some
weights or it will make something go.
Now if all of QH was turned into W, then we could call that QC into something that's
cooler.
For example, the surroundings, the exhaust from the steam engine or heat from a condenser
or radiator.
This QC, the heat that's just gotten rid of, is called waste heat.
The waste heat must exist.
See this is Carnot's brilliant insight.
The steam engine depends not just on the hot coals in the fire box, but it also depends
on the relatively cool surroundings of the engine.
It's the temperature difference that makes things work.
So here's an analogy.
A water wheel uses running water to turn a shaft and do useful work, like grind corn
or something.
Just having water is not enough to use a water wheel.
If you just put a water wheel out in the middle of a lake, you don't get any work out.
What you need is a difference in height.
You need a place to get water up here and you need a place to put water down there.
We obtain work from the flow of water from the upper level to the lower level.
If all the water is at the same level, we can't use the water to do any work.
In a similar way, Carnot says, it's the flow of heat from hot to cold that the heat engine
uses, diverting in modern language some of that energy as work.
Carnot says, what could be the most efficient possible heat engine?
What's the most efficient possible heat engine?
And he says, the most efficient possible heat engine is one that can operate in reverse.
What happens when you operate a heat engine in reverse?
Well, in a heat engine in reverse, work goes reversed in this way.
So how efficient is the heat engine?
The efficiency is the percentage of the heat energy that's transformed into work.
And Carnot realizes that this depends on the temperature difference between hot and cold.
For a small temperature difference, not much would be a perpetual motion machine of the
second kind.
Now as brilliant as this is as a general theory of heat engine, Carnot realizes that this
is not just about steam engines and heat engines.
Carnot says that whenever heat produces motion, this analysis applies.
For example, when the sun heats the ground, it produces temperature differences between
the ground and the air.
And those temperature differences cause air to move.
It produces winds.
So Carnot says the theory of heat engines applies to the weather.
Carnot's book is revolutionary.
Although as Carnot, in a way, he again gets involved in politics.
He again serves in the military.
He's a Democrat in the Revolution of 1830.
So he has to sort of abandon his physics pursuits.
And then he died of cholera in 1832 in his mid-thirties, which is a tragedy.
Not only because we were deprived of his brilliant insights, but because his great book was mostly
ignored during his lifetime.
It was only very slowly that other scientists began to realize that Carnot's book contains
the seeds of a new science.
And that's the new science of thermodynamics, the science of energy and energy transformations.
So a quarter of a century after Carnot's book in 1850, the German physicist Rudolf
Clausius combines Mayer and Jules' work on the conservation of energy with Carnot's
insights, and he proposes the first and second laws of thermodynamics.
And the first law we've already seen, the first law states that energy is conserved.
It cannot be created or destroyed, it can only change from one form to another.
And the second law of thermodynamics says heat cannot flow spontaneously from cold to
hot, from a low temperature to a high temperature.
And really that's an impossibility principle, it is impossible for heat to flow spontaneously
from a cold object to a hot object.
Now of course with a refrigerator, we can force heat to go from a cold object to a hot
object, but we have to do work in order to make that happen.
Now the very next year, William Thompson, who's remembered to history as Lord Kelvin,
who's an English physicist, Kelvin posed an alternative formulation, one that's completely
equivalent to Clausius's formulation.
And for Kelvin, the first law states that energy is conserved, and thus a perpetual
motion machine of the first kind is impossible.
And Kelvin's version of the second law is that a perpetual motion machine, a new quantity,
a new basic quantity, into physics.
He coined the name entropy for this new quantity.
And his version of the new second law is that the total entropy of an object and its surroundings
can never decrease.
The total entropy of an object and its surroundings can never decrease.
So what is entropy?
Now Clausius gave a mathematical definition, but even he found it difficult to explain
in words what entropy was.
So let's see if we can make a first attempt at it.
Entropy is a property of an object, like its mass or its energy or its volume or its temperature.
It's a property of an object.
And entropy measures how available that object's energy is for doing work, or rather how unavailable
it is.
So let's imagine two objects, and they have the same total energy content, but they have
different entropy.
The object with the lower entropy has its energy in a form that is more available for
doing work.
But the one at a higher entropy has its energy in a form that is less available for doing
work.
So let's suppose this object has a high energy because it's located way up high.
It has a high potential energy.
Potential energy is a low entropy form of energy.
We can easily extract this potential energy using pulleys or levers and get almost 100%
of that potential energy out as useful work.
Now the other object has a high energy because it's hot.
And heat energy is a...
Now Clausius's version of the second law says that entropy increases.
And that means that energy becomes less available over time.
The energy is still there, but we can't extract it and control it as well to do work.
Now entropy is a curious and tricky quantity.
And this explanation is very provisional, but I'll tell you, we will return to the concept
of entropy more than once in this lecture and in others to come, and we're going to
gain deeper insight each time.
So we haven't finished with the story of entropy.
All right, so how do you change the entropy of an object?
Well one way you can change the entropy of an object is just to add heat.
When you add some heat to the object, its entropy increases.
And it turns out that if that object is already hot, it's already at a high temperature, its
entropy will only increase a little bit.
And if the object is cold, if it's at a low temperature and you add some heat, its entropy
will increase a lot.
And the entropy will decrease the same amount if we extract that heat.
So the first thought experiment, let's think about a perpetual motion machine of the second
kind.
So what do we do?
First we extract some heat.
So the entropy of that object from which we extracted the heat, that entropy goes down.
When we turn that heat into work, that doesn't affect the entropy of anything.
The total entropy decreases, and that's against the second law.
And so a perpetual motion machine of the second kind is impossible, which was indeed Kelvin's
form of the second law.
So let's consider a second thought experiment.
Let's imagine heat flow.
Could you have heat flow from a hot object to a cold object?
Well, let's see.
The heat extracted from the hot object causes its entropy to go down.
But because it's hot, the entropy only goes down a little bit.
And when you add the heat to the cold object, the entropy goes up.
And because it's a cold object, the entropy goes up a lot.
So there's a net change in the entropy.
The entropy increases.
That's possible.
How about going the other way, from cold to hot?
Well, if you extract entropy from the cold object, its entropy goes down quite a lot.
And you add that heat to the hot object, its entropy goes up, but only by a little.
So the net change in entropy is that the overall entropy decreases.
And that's impossible, which is, of course, the clausiest form of the second law of thermodynamics.
And we can also apply the second law to heat engines.
We can figure out the efficiency of Carnot's ideal heat engine, for example, operating
between two temperatures, a hot temperature and a low temperature.
And we get a definite formula for that ideal efficiency, a formula that Carnot did not
have, was not able to find.
So entropy is a tremendously important idea.
But it's also rather odd and mysterious.
And they don't know exactly what it means yet.
Indeed, Clausius and the others of his day did not know what it meant.
So there are some far-reaching consequences of our discussion so far.
For example, the Earth itself is a heat engine.
Energy comes in from the hot sun.
And that energy is radiated away into the cold of outer space.
The Earth radiates in all directions.
So all movement and life on the Earth is powered by this temperature difference.
Remember from the last lecture, the fundamental fact about astrophysics that the sun is very
bright and hot.
But in other directions, we get the other fundamental fact of astrophysics that the sky is very
dark and cold.
And it's that temperature difference that allows for saw, therefore, what he called
the heat death of the universe.
Helmholtz envisioned a far distant future when all the temperature differences, the
temperature difference between the stars and outer space, for example, all those temperature
differences have evened out.
And without such differences, no work is possible.
All life would have ceased.
And once you reach the heat death of the universe, nothing much happens, forever.
Which is a melancholy prospect.
But as Helmholtz says, it's inevitable.
It's a consequence of the first and second laws of thermodynamics.
Now the second law of thermodynamics introduces something new to film the film backwards.
For example, look at the planets all moving backwards around the sun, actually, that motion
looks just as reasonable.
The planets follow exactly the same laws.
The laws governing planetary motion, these laws of Newtonian mechanics, make no real
distinction between the past and the future, served whether or not you go forward or backward.
The energy stays constant.
But the second law is different.
The second law states that entropy can only increase.
And if we run the film backward, the entropy decreases, which is wrong.
Heat would flow from cold to hot, which is wrong.
So the second law makes a distinction between the past and the future.
The maximum entropy heat death lies in the future.
So there's this asymmetry between past and future.
And that asymmetry is sometimes called the arrow of time.
Which way does time point?
It points to the future.
Now the arrow of time is actually one of the most commonplace facts about our experience.
But it's in fact quite mysterious, quite deep and mysterious.
And in fact, several different arrows of time, several different distinctions between past
and future have been studied.
So one of them we've mentioned is the entropy arrow.
Entropy increases toward the future.
But there's also a psychological arrow of time, a biochemical process, which involves
energy changes that process is governed by the second law.
And the way brain processes work is that they record memories of the past rather than the
reverse.
Unrecord memories of the future.
So that means that the entropy arrow of time probably is responsible for the psychological
arrow of time.
And there are other arrows, including what we might call the cosmic arrow.
The whole universe, you may have heard, the whole universe is expanding.
The galaxies are getting farther and farther apart.
And the expansion seems set to continue without end into the future.
So there's a definite arrow here.
The future is when the universe is bigger.
So how is the cosmic arrow of time related to the entropy arrow of time?
How is the cosmic expansion related to the increase in entropy?
And that's a fascinating question, but I have to tell you that no one knows for sure what
the connection between those is.
All right.
The theme of the second kind is impossible.
And it also led to the strange but important concept of entropy.
We saw that we can regard the Earth itself as a kind of heat engine operating between
the hot sun and the cold of space.
And we saw that the universe appears destined for a long, slow heat death in which life
will no longer be possible.
Because of the second law of thermodynamics, because of the tendency of entropy to increase,
the past and the future are fundamentally different directions for time.
But what is entropy?
What does entropy mean?
Is there a deeper way to understand it?
Well, next time we're going to discuss a rather comical thought experiment proposed by James
Clairke Maxwell.
In this thought experiment, he envisioned a microscopic being with a peculiar sense of
humor.
And this thought experiment of Maxwell's led to more than a century of puzzlement and
controversy about thermodynamics.
So is Maxwell's little demon, is it a fatal challenge to the second law, or is it the
second law's ultimate defense?
The answer, next time, I'll see you then.
