Welcome to the eleventh lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time, relativity tells us that nothing can travel faster than the speed of light.
It is impossible.
Now, that's very inconvenient for science fiction writers.
And the reason is that space is 0.3 light-years distant,
a light-year being the distance that light will travel in one year of time.
So if a spaceship cannot travel faster than the speed of light,
it will need years and years to travel between the stars.
I mean, think about it. Suppose Captain X jumps into his spaceship.
There's not a moment to lose, he cries, and set a course for Alpha Centauri,
maximum speed, and then 4.3 years later he arrives.
It's not a very good way to maintain dramatic tension.
So lots of science fiction writers and movie makers have assumed that there's a way around the cosmic speed limit.
So, for example, there's the movie Forbidden Planet, one of the most spectacular movies of 1956.
And it's one of the best of the old-time science fiction movies.
And in this movie, spaceship C57D travels from Earth to the planet Altair IV,
which is the fourth planet around the star Altair.
And Altair is a real star. It's about 17 light-years from Earth.
But the crew of the C57D makes the trip in just over one year.
How do they do it? They say they go through hyperspace.
Or take an even more famous example, Star Trek.
Star Trek is more than a movie or a TV show. It's a phenomenon.
There are at least five TVs, and it happened to me, that taught me this.
One time, I gave a talk on black hole physics to an audience of very bright high school students who were especially good in science and mathematics.
And after my talk, I took questions and hand went up, and a young man asked the question,
what if you grabbed a black hole with a tractor beam?
Now, a tractor beam is a Star Trek device. It's kind of a ray gun that grabs things.
And so I had to admit to him, I don't know what a tractor beam is.
I don't know how it works. I don't know whether such a thing exists.
And so I wasn't able to answer his question.
Of course, his question presumed that the Star Trek reality was the real reality.
Well, anyway, in Star Trek, the Starship Enterprise explores strange new worlds throughout the galaxy.
And how does it do this? Well, it travels at hundreds of times the speed of light.
Well, how does it do this? Well, it travels at warp speed using its warp engines.
Well, jumping through hyperspace or going at warp speed, not withstanding,
it turns out that faster than light travel is impossible.
Why? Let's find out.
OK, our statement is that nothing can travel faster than light, faster than the speed C.
Nothing? That is no thing.
But actually, this statement depends on what we mean by a thing.
There are some things, so-called, that can and do go faster than light.
For example, the speed C is the speed of light in empty space.
But in a transparent medium, in water or glass or something, light itself moves slower than C.
Why? Well, there's an interaction between the light wave and the atoms in the material,
and that causes the wave to propagate at a slower speed.
So, for example, in water, waves of visible light travel only at about 75% of C.
But the fact that the light waves have slowed down does not change the fundamental speed limit of the universe.
So it's possible for particles to travel through water faster than 75% of C, faster than waves of visible light.
And not only is it possible, it happens all the time.
Now, when that happens, it's sort of like a plane that flies faster than sound.
When a plane does that, it produces a shock wave, a sonic boom.
And there's a light equivalent.
It's called Cherenkov radiation, named after Pavel Cherenkov, the Russian nuclear particles from the reactor,
going faster than light in the water.
Faster than light, but not faster than C, the speed of light in empty space.
Okay, so that doesn't really count.
How about, is there something that goes actually faster than C?
Well, let me give you a kind of a trivial example, and then we'll do something more serious.
In the trivial example, let's imagine we had two straight edges, and they're overlapping at a very thin angle, a narrow angle,
only a degree or two, and maybe like the blade of a pair of enormous scissors.
The blades of the scissors kind of overlap in this way.
And let's focus on the point where the two straight edges intersect, the point of intersection.
Now, if we slide the blades sideways, or sideways this way, the point of intersection
scoots along the straight edges very rapidly, much more rapidly than the blades move,
maybe faster even than the speed of light.
Of course, the point of intersection is not really a thing.
It's merely a point defined by a geometrical relationship, the overlap of the scissor blades.
And as the scissor blades move sideways, that point changes, but there's nothing really there.
Okay, so this one really doesn't count.
So how do we sharpen this statement to say that no thing can travel faster than C?
You represent the pulse of light by kind of a bump.
The light is brightest in the middle, and it's dimmer before and after.
So if you were to see that pulse of light, it would brighten and then dim over a very short interval of time.
And the pulse is sort of a bump.
And most of the energy of the pulse is in the central part, where the light's brightest.
Now, if the tube is empty, it contains empty space, then the pulse travels down the tube at a speed C.
So a certain length of time, it'll reach the far end of the tube.
Now, let's consider a tube that contains a transparent medium, like water or glass.
Now the pulse travels at a slower speed.
So this pulse that travels to the medium lags behind the first pulse, the empty space pulse.
It lags behind it, and this is okay.
It's okay to go slower than C.
Now there are certain very special materials, special light media, and certain special frequencies of light,
which exhibit something called anomalous dispersion.
And without going into the details, what happens to the pulse as it travels through the anomalous dispersion medium
is that the pulse actually bunches up.
The initial wide pulse becomes a narrow pulse.
The light flash turns on and off more rapidly.
And indeed anomalous dispersion is actually how you can make very, very short light pulses that are sometimes used in experimental physics.
And so if you compare this light pulse to the light pulse that traveled through the empty tube,
the center of the emerging pulse can actually arrive ahead of the center of the empty space pulse.
And the center is where most of the energy in the pulse is.
So it looks like light energy, in this case through the anomalous dispersion medium,
light energy is going faster than C.
Indeed, you'll sometimes read about such experiments in the newspaper.
Let me get a headline.
Scientists make light travel faster than the speed of light.
And the center of the pulse might travel two times or ten times or even a hundred times the speed C.
So have we violated the speed limit?
Has energy traveled faster than the speed of light traveled faster than C?
Well, there's a sense in which the emerging pulse is not exactly the same energy.
The anomalous dispersion medium both absorbs and emits energy as the pulse passes.
So it's not exactly the same energy in a certain sense.
But there's a much more important point.
The important point is that when you do this, yes, the center of the pulse can arrive faster,
but this only happens because the pulse gets narrower.
If you look at the leading edge of the pulse, the leading edge of the light pulse never goes faster than C.
The leading edge.
Well, what is at the leading edge?
I'll tell you what's at the leading edge.
News.
The news that a pulse is coming.
When the leading edge reaches you, that's when you know that a light pulse is on its way.
The leading edge has the information in the light pulse.
The real principle is that it is impossible for information to travel faster than the speed of light.
We mean, of course, the empty space speed of light C.
Information.
Messages cannot be transmitted faster than C.
Starship Enterprise cannot travel faster than C because it carries information.
If nothing else, the message, here comes a starship.
Notice, once again, the crucial idea is information.
To find out why, we need to dig just a little deeper into Einstein's relativity.
Okay, here's an important effect of relativity.
It's called time dilation.
And many of you may have heard of this.
The simple version is to say that a moving clock runs slowly.
And this is actually an observed fact of nature.
It's not just a speculation.
For instance, moving atoms and molecules are observed to vibrate more slowly than they would if they were at rest.
And unstable particles.
Particles that will...
There are some really bad science fiction movies.
And I won't mention names, except to say that one episode of Star Trek does include something about like this.
In the science fiction movies, the characters will say,
we're traveling near light speed.
Look, our watches are running slowly.
Einstein was right.
This is just stupid.
Because, of course, the time dilation phenomenon affects everything, not just wristwatches.
It affects the biochemical processes in the body.
It affects brain function.
It affects aging.
So the human observer is slowed down exactly the same amount as the wristwatch.
The human observer would observe the watch ticking at the regular speed.
In fact, there's nothing wrong with the watches.
The space time view of this focuses on the world line of the clock.
Let's imagine the world line of a clock.
And as the clock ticks, those ticks of the clock are events along the world line.
They're little dots along the line in space time.
And we can make these ticks one second apart.
Let's suppose that the clock ticks each second.
And one second, of course, is 300 million meters in space time.
So the clock at rest, its world line is straight and vertical.
And you have the tick events along the world line.
Tick, tick, tick, tick.
For a moving clock, the world line is tilted.
And in the space time diagram, these ticks appear more widely spaced.
Tick, tick, tick.
So that looks wrong.
But remember, space time distance is not the same as Euclidean distance in our diagram.
We've pointed this out before.
And so in both cases, the ticks along the world sees that when her clock reads zero,
that's simultaneous with Bob's clock reading zero.
When her clock reads two, that's simultaneous with Bob's clock reading one.
When Alice's clock reads four, that's simultaneous with Bob's clock reading two, and so on.
That's in fact what it means to say that Alice sees Bob's clock running slowly.
Now Bob can also draw a diagram of the same space time, but his diagram looks a bit different.
In his diagram, he's at rest.
His world line is vertical. Alice's world line is tilted over to the side.
She's moving to the left very rapidly.
And they synchronize their clocks when they pass each other, both at zero.
And so what Bob sees is that Bob's clock reading zero is simultaneous with Alice's clock reading zero.
Bob's clock reading two is simultaneous with Alice's clock reading one.
Bob's clock reading four is simultaneous with Alice's clock reading two, and so on.
Bob sees Alice's clock running slowly.
Now, this seems kind of paradoxical. Alice sees Bob's clock running slowly.
Bob sees Alice's clock running slowly.
Whose clock is really running slowly, both?
Neither one.
Really, the problem here is language.
Let's state it carefully.
Alice and Bob disagree about which clock ticks are simultaneous.
We saw that last time.
Different observers will disagree about what things are simultaneous to each other.
Therefore, they can disagree about whose clock is running slowly.
Each of them, in their own coordinate system,
each is right.
Both clocks are functionally normally, exactly as a clock should.
Both observers see the same space time,
though they use different space and time coordinates to describe it.
So that's how time dilation works.
What does this have to do with sending messages faster than light?
We'll imagine that Alice and Bob could send faster-than-light signals to each other.
Let's imagine the impossible thing.
And let's suppose that Alice...
Uh-oh.
So let's keep going.
So after Bob gets his signal when his clock reads two,
he replies a little bit later when his clock reads three,
and he uses the same sort of faster-than-light signaling apparatus that Alice uses.
And so Alice receives the signal he sends when her clock reads two.
In other words, she receives Bob's reply before she sent the original message.
Using Bob as a relay, Alice can send a message into her own past.
She has a time telegraph.
Sending messages faster-than-light
lets you send messages back in time.
And that opens the way to all of the paradoxes,
the grandfather paradox, the telegraph paradox.
And since we can't have a time telegraph, an information time machine,
then we can't have a faster-than-light telegraph.
We can't send messages faster-than-light.
The point here is that relativity connects space and time.
Motion in space affects how observers measure time.
And that makes a link between faster-than-light and backward in time.
And since any object carries information, at least here's the object,
no object can travel faster-than-light.
These ideas change our conception of the future and the past.
So our conventional idea about time is that time is like a line.
And now, the present, is a point on that line.
The future lies to one side of the line.
The past lies to the other.
And everything is either now or the past or the future.
But let's think about space-time again.
Space-time, we can imagine the event here and now.
Right here, right now.
That's an event in space-time, a point in space-time.
And my world-line obviously passes through that event.
I'm here, I'm at this moment.
So my world-line passes through the event here and now.
Now, because I cannot travel faster-than-light,
the future of my world-line must lie inside the future light cone of that present event,
the here-and-now event.
That light cone contains all parts of the universe that I can visit.
It contains all parts of the universe that I can have any effect on,
because a cause and effect link is an information link.
This cause or that cause produces this effect or that effect,
and this link can be used to send a message.
So, in a sense, the future of the here-and-now event lies entirely within the future light cone.
If I produce a light flash now,
my future lies within that bubble of light spreading outward at sea.
I can never catch up to the bubble. I can never get outside the bubble.
That's what the future is.
Well, what about the past?
Well, the only events that could have an effect on me here and now lie inside the past light cone of the here-and-now event.
The past light cone contains the past of here and now.
I should imagine a contracting bubble of light from all directions that reaches me here and now.
And the past lies entirely within that bubble.
Now, if you look at the diagram, you can't help but notice that there's a lot of space-time
that is neither future nor past.
There are events that are too early and too far away,
that is to say that it's still too early and they are too far away for them to have had any influence on the here-and-now.
And they're also too far away for the here-and-now event to have any influence on them.
So they're neither in the past because they cannot have had any influence on me
and they're not exactly in the future. I can't have any influence on them.
They're what we might call elsewhere.
So how do we understand this? Well, here's an analogy.
Imagine that you are a 16th century king of Spain.
And yes, you're king of Spain, but you also possess an empire in South America.
Yet, it takes months to send and receive news using sailing ships and overland travel.
So given that it takes months to send and receive news from your empire,
how should you think about this week's events in Peru?
Well, it's too late for you to have any effect on them.
In that sense, they might as well already have happened. It's too late to change them.
On the other hand, it's too soon for them to have had any effect on you.
In that sense, they might as well not have happened yet.
In some ways, modern telecommunication is almost instantaneous.
That almost, however, is very important.
So today's events in Peru can affect and be affected by Spain
almost at once.
But let's imagine a science fiction premise.
Let's imagine that you're the ruler of a far-flung interstellar empire.
It's almost simultaneous, but you have to agree that some other observer
may disagree about them being simultaneous, but let's let that pass.
It's too late to change this week's events on Alpha Centauri,
and it's too early for them to affect you.
They're neither future nor past. They're in fact outside the light cone of here and now.
They are elsewhere, and the limitations here are not merely technological,
but they're a basic limitation imposed by physical law.
Okay, in relativity, the light cone structure of space-time is fundamental.
It's the light cone structure that tells us which events can influence which events.
That layout of the light cones is what we might call the causal structure of space-time.
The causal structure of space-time.
That causal structure, the light cone layout, controls how objects move
and how information can move in space-time.
And it's impossible to send messages faster than light.
And that means the information from an event must remain within its light cone,
within its future light cone in space-time, the 1915.
And among other things, the general theory of relativity is a revolutionary theory of gravity.
The general theory of relativity sees gravity as a distortion of space-time near a massive object.
And that distortion is so strong that nothing inside the black hole can get out.
And what do I mean by nothing? Of course, I mean no information.
So that's going to lead us to our next impossible thing.
It's impossible to escape from a black hole.
So escaping from a black hole next time.
I'll see you then.
