Welcome to the twelfth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time, we talked about the speed limit of the universe,
the speed C, the speed of light in empty space, 300,000 kilometers per second.
Well, it's the speed limit for what?
Well, it's the speed limit for sending messages.
It is impossible to send information faster than C.
And thus, it's also impossible for any object to travel faster than C.
And this is a consequence of Einstein's theory of relativity.
If you could send signals faster than C, then you could send signals back in time.
We regard this as impossible because of paradoxes.
We've looked at this from Minkowski's space-time point of view.
The event here and now is a point in space-time.
And this event has a light cone spreading out into the future and another into the past.
The world line of any particle here and now passes through this here and now event.
And the rest of the world line of that particle must lie within the future and the past light cones.
For me, this means that no matter what direction I travel, no matter how fast I go up to the speed limit C,
I cannot bend my own world line enough to get outside this light cone.
I'm trapped inside my future light cone.
Now, if I made a flash of light now, I would say that henceforth I'm trapped inside that expanding bubble of light.
But, of course, that doesn't seem so bad.
The light cone, the cone containing my future possibilities, continually expands.
It doesn't seem like I'm trapped at all.
But in this lecture, we're going to talk about a different sort of trap.
We're going to talk about a black hole, an object whose gravity is so strong that anything inside, even light itself, can never escape.
Now, actually, black holes were predicted more than 200 years ago by our old friend Pierre Simon Laplace.
Remember him from lecture 8.
And in 1798, Laplace wrote that if an object is massive enough, then light itself would not be able to escape from its surface.
Now, he was extending theories a little bit.
He was using Newton's concept of gravity, the physics of the Principia.
That was the best theory of gravity of the day.
But he was also assuming that light was affected by gravity, which was not known in his day for sure, but it turns out to be correct.
So Laplace concluded that the most massive objects in the universe might be invisible to us because light could not escape from them.
So let's take a look at this Laplacian-Newtonian black hole.
Let's start by thinking about the Earth.
If I throw an object upward, it goes up, and then it comes back down.
If I throw it faster, it goes up higher before turning around and coming back down.
But as you go farther and farther from the Earth, the Earth's gravity is weaker.
And so there is a speed called the escape speed, which is the speed to kilometers per second.
If you launch something at that escape speed, it will escape from the Earth and never come back.
So Laplace's idea was just to naively say a black hole, a dark star, would be one for which a body just like the Earth except the escape speed is bigger than sea, the speed of light.
Now it turns out this is not quite the right way to think about it.
First, the picture we have in our minds is that a light beam, if we shine a light upward, it would go up, but then it would turn around and come down.
And that's not the way it works, as we will see.
And second, imagine we had the Earth, but we had on the Earth a ladder a million kilometers high. This is possible in principle.
Then I could climb slowly up the ladder. I wouldn't have to go fast.
And at the top of the ladder, the escape speed from the Earth is a lot less. It's more than 10 times less.
In other words, the escape speed from the surface of the Earth is the speed to get away from the Earth in free flight with no additional work, no additional forces.
But if I have a ladder, I can escape without reaching escape speed.
So even if the escape speed were somehow greater than the speed of light, according to this picture, I should still be able to escape by climbing a ladder of some kind.
Now this is an example of what happens when you do a naive analysis, when you apply concepts that are just a little too naive to get at the physics.
What happens is that misconceptions arise. And in this case, our naive analysis is using Newtonian gravity to describe black holes.
We now know that Newton's theory isn't quite right, especially for extremely strong gravitational fields.
So we're going to have to do the work of refining our thinking.
And this involves translating highly mathematical theory into pictures and everyday language, but we're going to still try to be faithful to the physics.
So that's going to take a little work, but the rewards, the rewards of understanding and clarity will be worth it.
But for much larger areas, for a continent or a hemisphere, a flat map is not quite right, because the real shape of the Earth is, roughly speaking, a sphere.
It's a curved surface. And that curved surface cannot be squashed down into a flat map without distorting it.
There are different ways of doing that squashing. Different examples often follow great circles between the continents.
And if you look at this on a flat map, it looks crazy. It appears curved.
For example, if you fly from Chicago to Berlin, the airplane's path seems to bend far northward.
The path almost touches Greenland. Why are you flying way up in the Arctic?
Well, you aren't going out of your way. It turns out this is actually the straightest route.
It just looks like a curved route in the map projection.
And Einstein said that if you had a particle moving under the influence of gravity, the world line of the particle is one of these straightest paths in space-time.
But it appears curved to us. The particle goes up and down. It appears curved to us because of our map projection, like the great circle appears curved.
And it turns out that gravity is nothing more or less than the curvature of space-time.
Now, this curvature is produced by mass, and the curvature also affects how objects move through space-time.
It affects the shape of their world lines.
So the American physicist John Wheeler sort of summed up the general theory of relativity in a nutshell.
He said, matter tells space-time how to curve, and space-time tells matter how to move.
Okay, so Einstein developed his theory over a period of years, finally wrote down his final equations in late 1915.
And these equations, called the Einstein equations, relate mass and curvature.
And they're pretty sophisticated equations, and they're extremely difficult to solve.
In fact, Einstein himself only obtained approximate solutions at first.
The first real solution to Einstein's equations came just a month after Einstein published the equations.
And the first real solution was due to Karl Schwartzschild, who was a young German astrophysicist,
who at the time was serving on the Russian front during the First World War.
And amid the clamors of war and the artillery bombardments, he was able to work out the first real solution to Einstein's equations.
And he sent his solution to Einstein, who was delighted and very impressed with it,
and who passed it on and reported it to the German Academy.
Now, there's a sad post-script to this.
Schwartzschild, who was an immensely talented astrophysicist, died just a few months later in 1916
from a disease he contracted in the trenches of the Russian front.
And this is not the only example of a brilliant...
But the point mass part at the middle was viewed as a simple mathematical convenience.
Later on, however, physicists began to take Schwartzschild's point mass very seriously indeed.
Why?
So throughout the 1930s, astrophysicists began to ponder what happens to very massive stars at the end of their lives.
Well, what do I mean by the life of a star? A star is not exactly a living thing.
Well, of course, a star is a huge mass, so the radiation and heat from these hydrogen fusion reactions and so on
keep the star, if you will, inflated.
They provide the internal pressure that balances gravity.
Or put it another way.
A star is a gigantic thermonuclear explosion.
An explosion so gigantic that it is actually held together by its own gravity,
by the slight warping of space-time near its mass.
And because the explosion is held together, the explosion can actually continue for a long time.
It can continue for billions of years.
All right?
Well, what happens then when the fuel in the core is exhausted?
What happens when the hydrogen runs out?
What happens then is a story that can be very complicated.
What happens is that the interior of the star shrinks, and it gets hotter,
and then helium atoms begin to fuse together to form carbon and oxygen and heavier elements.
And that extra energy from helium fusion can cause the outer layers of the star to grow enormously.
In fact, some of the outer layers may explode out into space, and so on.
Then later on, maybe the helium will run out.
Working out this story is one of the great advice.
For stars like our sun, stars about as massive as our sun, or a little less massive,
the star will wind up as a white dwarf star.
Now, you have to imagine something the mass of the sun, but packed into the volume of the earth.
The earth is a lot smaller than the sun.
So the density of matter in a white dwarf star is a million times denser
than ordinary matter that we're familiar with.
And the star is kept from collapsing further, not by any nuclear reactions that are going on,
but by quantum forces among the electrons in the material composing the star.
And the star is called a white dwarf because typically it's still hot,
still white hot from its formation, but there are no more nuclear reactions inside.
And over billions and billions of years, the white dwarf will cool off,
and eventually these white dwarfs will become cold and dark.
But this takes so long that actually we don't think that the universe has lasted long enough
for there to be any cold and dark former white dwarfs yet.
We think that all the white dwarfs that have formed are still hot and bright.
Because it takes a really long time.
Alright, so white dwarf stars, that's a possibility.
But in the 1930s, the Indian astrophysicist Subramanian Chandrasekhar
calculated that very massive white dwarfs can't resist their own gravity.
This quantum electron pressure that holds the white dwarf up,
that provides the balance for gravity, is not enough.
And so he calculated what came to be called Chandrasekhar's limit.
White dwarfs with masses.
Well, a more massive star instead may form what's called a neutron star.
It's much smaller in size, and it's a little bit more massive than a white dwarf.
And the neutron star is not made out of ordinary matter that we're familiar with at all.
What's happened in a neutron star is that the electrons have been driven into the nuclei
by reverse beta decay.
All the protons in the nuclei have been turned into neutrons.
So the entire star is composed of nothing but neutrons.
The density is a density like the density of nuclear matter.
An atomic nucleus contains almost the entire mass of an atom, but in very little volume.
So the density of a neutron star is a million times greater than the density of a white dwarf star,
which is in turn a million times denser than ordinary matter.
So that's tremendously unthinkably dense material.
And the neutron star is kept from collapsing by the quantum forces among the neutrons.
And the neutron stars have a diameter of only a few tens of kilometers with more than about three solar masses.
Why not?
It's the same kind of problem we had with white dwarfs.
The quantum forces are not enough to resist gravity for stars that massive.
Well, there are lots of stars more massive than three solar masses.
What happens to them?
Well, the structure of a star throughout its life is a balance between forces.
There's internal pressure pushing outward.
There's gravity pushing inward.
And for these very massive stars at the end of their lives, gravity simply wins.
There is no force that can resist the collapse of the star.
And so Schwarzschild's mathematical picture of a point mass becomes a realistic description of the situation.
We get not an ordinary star at all, we get a black hole.
Okay, we still have a few things to explain.
Why is it that the star must collapse all the way to zero?
And exactly why do we call this black?
Oh, let's turn to those.
The distortion of space-time around a black hole is extreme.
And it requires some pretty heavy mathematics to describe that distortion exactly.
But we're going to get a qualitative picture.
We're going to look at the effect of that distortion on the way that light travels.
In other words, we want to know how does space-time curvature affect the layout of the light cones
in space-time, the light cone structure.
Remember what the light cones tell us.
They tell us what events can have a cause and effect relationship with each other.
They tell us whether information can travel between events.
The information from an event always stays inside its future light cone.
The event is trapped within its future light cone.
That's the real meaning of that you can't go faster than light.
So if we make a diagram, a space-time diagram for the Schwarzschild space-time,
the point mass is represented by a world line in the center.
And the warping of the space-time near the hole means that the light cones near this point mass
are tilted a little bit toward the mass.
Now, in this diagram, we'll also see these light cones get a bit narrower.
They won't be at 45 degrees anymore, but don't worry about that.
That's just our map projection.
We're drawing a flat space-time diagram for a curved space-time.
Okay, so if we go out to an event far from the hole, the tilt is small.
The effect of gravity on the light cone is negligible.
Light can go either toward the mass or away from the mass.
But as you move toward the hole, the light cones tilt more and more toward
the mass.
And so there's a place where all that changes.
There's a spherical surface in space, which would be a circle in our simplified diagram,
and therefore a cylinder in space-time.
And there's nothing really located at this surface.
It's defined just geometrically.
But at events inside this surface, the light cones are tilted entirely toward the center of...
inward.
We'll actually go closer to the center.
The light cone points inward.
So could information from this event ever reach outside?
No, it couldn't, because information must stay within the future light cone of the event.
So this spherical surface, marking the point where the light cones have tilted over far
is called the event horizon of the hole, event horizon.
And events that lie inside the event horizon are sort of over the horizon.
We can't see them.
The curvature of space-time hides them from us.
The geometry of space-time prevents information from reaching us from those events.
And so we usually regard this event horizon as the outer surface of the black hole,
but there's nothing there.
It's just a mathematically defined surface.
It's not like the surface of the Earth.
Okay, so let's imagine we send a probe into a black hole.
We, of course, remain at a safe distance, distant from the black hole,
and we monitor the probe's progress.
And the probe transmits regular radio signals to us once each millisecond.
So what happens?
Well, here's what we see.
We see the probe fall inward.
It accelerates toward the hole.
And then the probe approaches the event horizon.
Now the probe appears to slow down.
The probe's clocks are running more slowly.
And there's more and more time between those signals from the probe.
Why?
Well, it's a distortion of space-time.
Since the world lines of the outgoing signals sort of get more and more spread out
as they emerge from the region of distortion.
The radio frequency of the probe's signals gets lower and lower.
The intensity of those signals gets less and less.
And light from the probe?
Well, that light rapidly gets dimmer and it shifts toward the red end of the spectrum,
the longer wavelength, lower frequency end of the visible spectrum.
And what we see is that the probe fades from view just outside the event horizon.
There's a one last slowed-down radio signal that says,
everything's okay.
And we never see the probe cross the event horizon.
We never see it actually cross that surface.
And this fact led to some early confusion about the nature of black holes.
I mean imagine, but that's misleading.
Because for one thing, the star's surface fades from view very rapidly in a few milliseconds.
There's a last photon from the star, a last bit of light that comes out of the star to a probe.
We saw the probe approach the event horizon, but it never quite reaches it.
And light from it gets dimmer and shifts to the red and the probe fades away and disappears.
So what happens from the probe's point of view?
Does the probe have a geometrically defined surface in space?
What it is, however, is the point of no return.
Once the probe crosses the event horizon, it can never escape.
Okay, there are gravitational effects on the probe, gravity itself is not actually a problem for the probe,
because when you're falling, you don't feel gravity.
But one effect that is important is that gravity is going to be pulling the nose of the probe more strongly than its tail.
The nose is closer, gravity is stronger.
And that difference between the nose and the tail will tend to pull the probe apart.
Now the difference affects us here.
The earth is pulling my feet a little bit more strongly than my head.
But those effects can be very strong and they'll get stronger as you fall inward toward the hole.
They're called tidal forces, because in fact they're related to the reason for ocean tides,
the way the moon creates ocean tides on the earth.
There's a difference in force between one side and the other.
Alright, so the probe's being pulled apart, like a piece of taffy.
What's going to actually happen to the probe?
Well, when you get inside the hole, the light comes singularity, a kind of cusp in the universe of space time.
And the probe must be sucked into the singularity and be destroyed,
not because the gravity force is so great, but because the space time is so distorted in the vicinity.
This is why it is impossible to escape from inside a black hole.
And of course this all roads lead to Rome effect was also true for the collapsing stellar material that formed the black hole in the first place.
Once the star falls within its own event horizon, all of the mass must be squished into a central check out.
So do black holes really exist?
Almost certainly they do. There are lots of lines of evidence showing that they do.
There are many stars out there with a mass 10 or 20 or 30 times the sun mass.
Sun's mass, they use up their fuel very rapidly. What happens then?
They form black holes.
And early in the universe, everything was much closer together.
And there were some very large clumps of matter which could collapse and form very large black holes.
So how can we see black holes?
Well, we can't see them directly, but matter being pulled into the hole will be compressed and heated.
A black hole with a mass more than a million times the mass of the sun, a supermassive black hole.
There are black holes in the centers of many other galaxies, maybe even all other galaxies.
Okay, so we can't escape from a black hole for the same reason that we cannot escape our own light cone.
Once inside the hole, any object facetime to make like a shortcut to evade the apparent limitation of the speed of light.
Or more disturbingly, maybe we could twist that light cone structure around to make causal loops.
So does curved spacetime permit warp drive? Time travel? Are these things possible after all?
That's next time. I'll see you then.
