Welcome to the fifteenth lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Last time we introduced one of the most important ideas in physics, the idea of symmetry.
Symmetry is like a mirror that we hold up to the world.
In the mirror, the world is transformed in some way. It's shifted or reflected or rotated.
The mirror is a symmetry if it is impossible to tell the transformed universe from the original one.
Let me be more precise.
We say that the laws of physics have a symmetry if, when we compare the two worlds,
the original world and the transformed world, they behave in the same way, according to the same laws.
Last time we also introduced Emmy Nethers' wonderful theorem connecting symmetries to conservation laws.
Case, our question will be this.
Is it possible to tell the world in the mirror from our own?
If it's impossible, then the mirror represents a basic symmetry of nature.
The reflection somehow does not matter. It does not affect what is possible and what is impossible.
Can we tell the difference or not?
So how important is this story that we're about to tell?
Well, it touches on some of the most unexpected discoveries, some of the most shocking surprises in the whole history of physics.
And it includes a clue that may help us solve a basic puzzle about the cosmos, namely how the very atoms in our bodies could exist.
Okay, our first mirror is just an ordinary mirror.
A mirror that reflects space. It exchanges left and right.
This was, after all, our first idea of symmetry.
We said that some shapes look the same if we flip them over.
So let me give you a physicist's name for this kind of reflection.
Parity.
Parity is a reflection of space through some plane.
So for example, suppose we reflect my own body.
You imagine a vertical plane passing through the middle of my body.
Everything on the left goes to the right e-mirror.
Would it be possible to tell the difference between the reflected world and our own?
Actually, this was the theme of the 1969 British science fiction movie Doppelganger,
which is known in the United States as Journey to the Far Side of the Sun.
And in this movie, two astronauts travel to a mysterious planet orbiting the sun exactly opposite to the Earth,
exactly on the other side of the sun.
And when they get there, they find that it's a perfect mirror image of our own planet.
It's a planet that has the same places, the same people, the same things, the same books, the same signs,
but everything is reflected.
The inhabitants of the planet have internal organs, heart and liver and so on,
that are reversed from the way they are arranged in our bodies.
Everything is reflected.
To borrow a phrase from Lewis Carroll, this is truly a trip through the looking glass to the world in the mirror.
Now, this movie was actually very easy to film.
No special effects were needed.
They just filmed it on the real Earth, and then they flipped the film over.
And you couldn't tell the difference.
You couldn't tell that it wasn't actually a planet where everything was really backward, really reflected.
Why not?
Because the reflected world appears to follow the same rules as our own world,
the laws of gravity, of chemistry, of light, of sound, all of these work in just the same way.
So, you can't really tell for sure just by looking that we haven't reflected the video image of this lecture.
So, are the laws of physics exactly the same for the world in the P mirror, the parity mirror?
It seems so.
So, for example, let's suppose we have two electrons, the two negatively charged electrons, and they're coming toward one another.
And these two electrons repel each other.
So, the paths of the electrons bend away from each other, and the particles go off in different directions.
So, let's take a look at that in the mirror.
In the mirror, everything appears to follow the same laws of motion.
The electrons approach, they repel each other, they fly apart.
So, Newton's laws of motion and the laws of electric forces work exactly the same way in our world and the reflected world.
Now, until the middle of the 20th century, it was assumed by almost everyone that parity, reflection in space, was a true symmetry of nature.
Everyone thought that the laws of physics made no distinction between left and right.
They thought that if you studied a film of any physical process, then it would be impossible to tell whether the film had been flipped over.
The behavior of the system would be just the same.
But then, in 1956, two physicists shocked the physics world.
These were Chen Ning Yang of the Institute for Advanced Study at Princeton and Tsongdao Li of Columbia University.
They realized that parity was not an exact symmetry of the laws of nature.
Yang and Li realized that nuclear forces, in particular, the force responsible for beta decay of nuclei,
nuclear forces do make a fundamental distinction between left and right.
And Yang and Li's theory was confirmed almost at once in a wonderful experiment by Chen Xiong Wu at Columbia.
So, let's take a look at her wonderful experiment.
Remember, beta decay, we talked about that in lecture four.
Some unstable atomic nuclei decay by emitting a fast electron, also known as a beta particle,
and, as we saw, a very hard-to-detect neutrino.
So, in Wu's experiment, we're dealing with cobalt-60.
The cobalt-60 nucleus contains 27 protons and 33 neutrons.
And it's unstable.
The average lifetime of a cobalt-60 nucleus is a few years.
So, when cobalt-60 decays, one of the neutrons turns into a proton, and now it's a stable nickel nucleus, nickel-60,
and an electron and a neutrino come zipping out in different directions.
So, let's follow the electron, which is easiest to see.
Which way does the electron go?
Is it equally likely to go in any direction, or does it have a bias?
Well, it turns out that the cobalt-60 nucleus has a spin.
You can picture that as the nucleus rotating about an axis like a planet.
And so, suppose we have our cobalt-60 nucleus, and we arrange so that it's rotating so that it's north pole, if you will.
If it's like a planet, its north pole points in the vertical direction upward.
The nucleus is rotating left to right, and up pretty well.
And this is what Woo did.
So, to a rough approximation, all of the nuclei are rotating, if you will, east to west.
Here's the observation.
If we line up the nuclei in this way, most of the electrons from beta decay come out upward toward the north pole.
That is to say, the electrons in beta decay tend to follow what we might call a right-handed rule.
If we curl the fingers of our right hand in the direction that the nucleus is spinning,
then the electrons are more likely to come out in the direction of the thumb,
and much less likely to come out in the opposite direction, down or south.
There's a bias in the physics of beta decay.
The direction of the electron is related to the spin of the nucleus.
Okay?
Now let's look at the situation in the P mirror, the parity mirror, the mirror that reflects left and right.
That east to west rotation of the nucleus is reversed.
It's now the other way.
It now goes west to east, as it were.
But the electrons in the mirror are still going upward.
Remember, only left and right are reversed, not up and down.
So the mirror nuclei appear to follow the opposite rule in beta decay,
not a right-handed rule, but a left-handed rule.
In the mirror, if the nucleus is rotating around according to the fingers of your left hand,
then the electrons tend to come out along the thumb, in the direction of the thumb.
So the nuclei in the mirror do not behave the same way as real nuclei.
It is possible to tell the difference between them to do distinguish between left and right.
Parity is not a true symmetry of the laws of physics, as everyone had supposed.
Now this was such a tremendous and unexpected discovery that gang and Lee were awarded the Nobel Prize the very next year, 1957,
which is almost unheard of.
Einstein had to wait 15 years for his Nobel Prize.
But this was obviously important, and they got it the very next year.
Okay, so much for parity.
The next kind of mirror that we want to talk about is a little different.
It's not a reflection in space, but a reflection in the properties of matter.
The new mirror is called charge conjugation, the C mirror.
And basically what the C mirror does is it turns matter into antimatter and vice versa.
So what's antimatter?
Well, antimatter was predicted in 1927 by the English physicist Paul Dirac.
He was trying to bring together Einstein's relativity and quantum theory mathematically,
and as a consequence of his work, he predicted that there should exist particles that are like electrons, but opposite in electric charge.
They have the same mass as electrons, but opposite charge.
They're positive electrons, and they came to be called positrons.
And positrons were discovered just a few years later in 1932 by Carl Anderson of the United States.
And as the theory was extended, Dirac's theory was extended, a strange and surprising picture began to emerge.
For every type of particle, there must be an antiparticle.
The antiparticle has the same mass, but it has opposite electric charge and so on.
Some other properties are also opposite.
Now, a particle and an antiparticle running into each other can annihilate one another and release their energy,
and generally the energy comes out as high-energy photons.
Antimatter is matter made out of these antiparticles.
So electrons have antiparticles, the anti-electrons, also known as the positrons.
Which are particles in the nucleus, which have positive charge, correspond to antiprotons, which have negative charge.
Neutrons correspond to anti-neutrons.
Now, neutrons are electrically neutral.
They're either positively charged or negatively charged, but neutrons and anti-neutrons are still different particles.
They're different in some other properties, as we'll see later.
And so, every kind of particle has an antiparticle, and we could in principle have anti-matter atoms,
hydrogen, and a few atoms of anti-helium.
But that's it.
So why is matter so common and anti-matter so rare?
This is actually a profound mystery.
Why should matter be so much more common than anti-matter?
Well, maybe that's not true.
Maybe that's only true in our local neighborhood.
Could it be that some distant object that we see in the universe, some far-off star or galaxy, could that actually be made out of anti-matter?
Maybe.
On the other hand, if some places in the universe have lots of matter,
and other places in the universe have lots of anti-matter, there should be place opening.
So the most likely explanation is that everything that we see out in the universe really is made of matter,
and anti-matter is just extremely rare.
Why is the universe like that?
Why is the stars or planets or life?
Okay, so let's take a look in this sea mirror, the mirror that turns matter into anti-matter and vice versa.
What would the world look like in the sea mirror?
What would the world look like if everything were made of anti-matter?
Actually, I apart in just the same way.
Now, we, of course, are giving this lecture on Earth.
Everything here is made of matter.
But if this lecture had been recorded on an anti-matter planet, it would look pretty much the same.
Just by watching this video, it's impossible to tell whether you're watching a professor or an anti-professor,
a professor in the sea mirror world.
Or is it impossible to tell?
Actually, the world in the sea mirror is slightly different.
It's just like parity. It's not really an exact symmetry of nature.
So to explain how it's different, let's return to the beta decay experiment of Qin Sheng Wu.
But we'll do it this time with anti-matter, anti-cobalt-60.
Now, this is an experiment we've never actually done.
It would be very hard to make this kind of anti-matter, but it will serve as an illustration.
Now, our previous situation involved a cobalt-60 nucleus composed of protons and neutrons.
We aligned the spin by a magnetic field so that it rotates left to right,
and the electrons from the cobalt-60 tend to be emitted upward toward the north pole, according to a right-handed rule.
So what if we look at the experiment with a cobalt in the sea mirror,
the mirror that changes matter to anti-matter and vice versa?
Well, now we have an anti-cobalt-60 nucleus made of anti-protons and anti-neutrons,
and it's spinning in just the same way because the anti-matter mirror doesn't affect how things are moving.
It just affects what they're made of.
And so in the mirror, this anti-cobalt-60 nucleus will decay by emitting a positron.
It's what you might call anti-beta decay.
And in the mirror, the positrons are going upward the same as the electrons in the original experiment
that we haven't changed any directions.
So that's the mirror world.
That's how the experiment looks in the sea mirror.
But how does that experiment look in the real world?
Suppose we had real anti-matter, and we really did this experiment.
Which way would the positrons really go?
Now, as I said, we have not actually done this particular experiment.
Nobody has made any anti-cobalt atoms in their particle accelerators and looked at their beta decay.
But we do have a pretty solid theory about the properties of anti-matter,
and we've done closely related experiments on anti-protons and anti-neutrons to back up our theory.
So we have a pretty good idea what would really happen in the decay of real anti-cobalt-60.
It turns out that the positrons would be emitted in the opposite direction.
They would be emitted down rather than up.
It turns out that anti-matter follows a left-handed rule for beta decay.
Not a right-handed rule.
So the mirror picture, the picture of the experiment in the sea mirror, is wrong.
That means that if I were to do some nuclear physics experiments here in the classroom,
you could tell just by watching very closely the difference between a matter and an anti-matter world.
You could just look closely at beta decay and see which way the particles go, up or down.
Now maybe you've noticed something.
Both the P-mirror parity in space and the C-mirror charge conjugation, matter versus anti-matter,
have the same effect on beta decay.
In both cases, they change the handedness of the rule from right to left or left to right.
So what happens if you look at the world through both mirrors?
What we might call the C-P mirror.
The C-P mirror swaps left and right and it exchanges matter for anti-matter.
In the C-P mirror, things really do look the same.
So on one side we have cobalt 60, spinning as before, and the electrons mostly go upward.
That's a right-handed rule.
If you curl the fingers of your right hand, the electrons tend to follow your thumb.
On the other side is the C-P reflected experiment.
The anti-cobalt 60 nucleus, it's an anti-cobalt 60 nucleus because of the C part of the mirror,
it now spins the other way because of the P part of the mirror.
But because anti-matter follows the opposite rule, a left-handed rule, the positrons do mostly go up.
So the laws of beta decay look the same in the C-P mirror.
And in the years after Yang and Lee's discovery, it seemed that even if P mirrors and C mirrors were not real symmetry of nature,
at least the combination C-P was.
But alas, even C-P is not an exact symmetry of nature.
The world in the C-P mirror is slightly different.
And this was discovered in some very clever experiments by James Cronin and Val Fitch in 1964.
It's an extremely subtle thing having to do with particles called K-Masons.
Now essentially, these K-Masons have the remarkable and strange ability to turn into their own antiparticles.
And the anti-Ks can turn back into Ks.
But these two processes, particle turns, as Cronin and Fitch did,
it is possible to tell the difference between the real world and the world in the C-P mirror.
Okay, that brings us to our third and final mirror. We'll call it T.
The T mirror reverses time.
It exchanges future and past. It runs the movie backward on the universe.
Now, it does not seem that this could possibly be a symmetry.
We saw back in lecture five that the second law of thermodynamics fixes an arrow of time,
a definite direction from past to future.
Entropy always increases.
So if you run the movie backward, it is easy to tell the difference.
The entropy goes down in the reversed movie.
However, the second law is always about huge numbers of particles.
And also, the second law is only a statistical law.
It only says that it is unlikely for entropy to decrease, not that it is strictly impossible.
So consider our two electrons again.
Okay, remember, the electrons approach, they repel each other and they fly off in different directions.
Now look at the same process in the T mirror.
Again they approach, again they repel each other and they fly apart.
This interaction between the electrons makes exactly as much sense as the original.
The basic laws appear the same.
In fact, it's impossible to tell just by looking at the movie of two electrons
whether the movie has been run backward.
The fundamental laws here, the laws of motion of electric and magnetic fields and so on,
are called just the same in the T mirror.
That's a bit of a paradox.
And no one is quite sure how to solve it.
The universe seems to have time symmetric laws on the microscopic scale,
but its large scale behavior is not at all the same in the T mirror.
And how this happens is still a bit of a mystery.
Okay, so is the T mirror a symmetry of the fundamental laws?
Are the laws really the same in the T mirror?
Now it turns out it's hard to do the same kind of delicate test that we did for C and P and the combination C-P.
And so there are no direct observations to contradict T mirror symmetry.
However, we are pretty sure that T is actually not an exact symmetry of the laws.
And the reason has to do with relativity and quantum theory.
Together, those two great principles imply a basic principle, a mathematical theorem.
And that theorem says that the combination of all three of the mirrors, C, P and T,
must be an exact symmetry of nature.
In other words, if we switch left and right and we exchange matter and antimatter
and we reverse the direction of time, all of the laws should be exactly the same.
And so by looking at the behavior of individual particles,
it would actually be impossible to tell that this triple reflection had taken place.
So if the C-P mirror changes the laws a little bit, then the T mirror must change the laws too,
because the C-P T mirror is perfect.
Okay, we've looked at three mirrors for the world.
We've looked at P, parity, switching left and right.
We've looked at C, charge conjugation, switching matter and antimatter.
And we've looked at T, time reversal, switching past and future.
Each mirror is nearly perfect. The basic laws look almost the same.
None of them gives a quite perfect image of the world, though.
It's always possible to distinguish the real world from the reflected world.
But the combination of all three, C-P-T, is a perfect mirror.
A universe that is reflected in space, made of antimatter and run backwards in time,
sounds quite different from our own.
But as far as we know, on the microscopic level, that universe and ours follow identical laws.
It is impossible to tell the difference.
Now, one of the biggest surprises here, and one of the great surprises,
section is a symmetry for the laws of geometry.
A shape and its reflection are basically the same.
They have the same angles, the same lengths.
A shape and its reflection are congruent.
But three absolute sizes is not a big deal.
Big and small triangles have exactly the same geometrical properties.
But in the laws of physics, absolute size matters a lot.
We'll see that a law of nature, first discovered by Galileo almost 400 years ago,
explains how the size of an object helps determine its physical properties.
We'll find out for...
