Welcome to the 21st lecture of our course on the physics of impossible things.
Now for the last few lectures we've been discussing quantum physics.
We started out in lecture 17 listing three important features of quantum theory.
The first is wave particle duality.
Everything quantum has both wave and particle properties.
And the second is indeterminacy.
The laws of quantum theory predict probabilities only,
for the world has a fundamentally fuzzy, indeterminate character.
The third basic feature of quantum theory is quantum entanglement.
Quantum particles can have a kind of direct connection to one another,
even if they are separated by a great distance.
And since then, since we introduced quantum theory, we've seen some pretty weird things.
We've seen how the laws of the quantum realm change our ideas of the possible and the impossible.
Things that seem possible in classical Newtonian physics are actually impossible.
And other things that seem impossible turn out to be possible after all.
In our last lecture, we saw how thinking about impossible things,
particle reaction based on those first two features of quantum theory,
wave particle duality and indeterminacy.
This time, I want to open up that third aspect of the theory, quantum entanglement.
So for our particles, we'll pick photons, particles of light.
And we will only consider pairs of photons, two photons at a time.
And we'll think about one specific kind of entanglement between the photons.
But even such a special example will allow us to open up some pretty significant mysteries in quantum physics.
Okay, so photons have a special property called polarization.
So if you think of light as a wave, then polarization represents the plane of the wave's vibration.
So if the wave is going straight ahead, the electric field oscillation is actually in a perpendicular direction
to the direction of propagation of the wave.
It can be up and down or right and left or diagonal at some angle.
And this direction of the electric field disturbance is the polarization of the light.
Now, ordinary light is usually a mixture of different polarizations.
But in some cases, for example, if you have light reflecting at a shallow angle off of a surface,
it can be more strongly polarized.
And in fact, this is how polarizing sunglasses work.
The glare reflected from a road or from the surface of water or from any horizontal surface is generally polarized
side to side horizontally.
That's the direction the electric field is oscillating in.
And the sunglasses are filters that block horizontally polarized light.
So the sunglasses knock out about 50% of all light,
but they knock out a lot more than 50% of the reflected glare off the ground.
Now, this wave property of polarization is also a property of the individual photons,
each photon, in other words, is associated with a direction in space,
a direction that is perpendicular to the motion of the photon.
And the polarization of the photon tells us whether or not it goes through a polarizing filter,
like the lenses of our glasses.
So we're going to call a polarizing filter a polarizer.
And a polarizer is typically a sheet of plastic that contains tiny crystals
that are all lined up in one direction.
So here's how polarization works.
Let's suppose the photon has vertical, up and down polarization.
If our polarizer is turned in the vertical direction, then the photon is transmitted, for sure.
It passes right through the polarizer.
If the polarizer, on the other hand, is turned in the horizontal direction,
the photon is blocked, for sure.
So what about an intermediate direction?
Suppose we tilt our polarizer to be diagonal.
Then the photon might be blocked, or it might not.
It might be transmitted.
We can only predict the probabilities of being blocked or passing through.
It's the usual thing in quantum mechanics.
Quantum mechanics only predicts probabilities.
So for example, if a polarizer is set at 45 degrees diagonally,
then the vertically polarized photon will go through with a probability of 50%.
And if it does go through, actually, afterward, its polarization is diagonal.
The polarizer actually changes the photon.
The photon forgets its old polarization.
Now one of the consequences of these rules is that we can't actually determine
the polarization of one photon.
The best we can do is make a measurement on the photon.
We can set our polarizer at some angle,
and we can see if the photon goes through the polarizer or not.
And yes, our choice of angle does help to determine what will happen.
So this means that the measurement result tells us something,
but to generate photons in pairs.
And one common way of doing this is to take a crystal of a material called
beta barium borate, or BBO.
And BBO is a material with so-called nonlinear optical properties,
and nonlinear is kind of a buzzword.
It simply means that the crystal affects incoming light in ways that are not simply
proportional to the intensity of the light.
So that's all I mean by a nonlinear optical crystal.
So let's suppose we take the BBO crystal and we shine a very intense
ultraviolet laser beam on the crystal.
Well, some of the laser photons are absorbed by the crystal and produce pairs of photons.
And each one of the pairs has exactly half of the energy of the incoming ultraviolet photons.
And the two photons go off in different directions.
And it turns out that the polarizations of these photons are entangled with each other.
So what does that mean?
Well, suppose we set up two polarizers, one for each outgoing photon.
And let's line them up at the same angle, parallel to each other.
Then the photons show a remarkable property.
The polarizations of the two photons are always exactly opposite to each other.
That is, if one of them goes through its filter,
the other one is always blocked on its side and vice versa.
If it's blocked on one side, it always goes through on the other side.
In other words, if we make parallel observations of the photons,
parallel vertically or diagonally or horizontally,
the photons always give opposite results.
They always act as if their polarizations are perpendicular to each other.
And we could do it a little differently.
If we arrange the two polarizers at a 90-degree angle to each other,
for example, one of them's vertical and one's horizontal,
the photons then will always do the same thing.
They'll always both go through or they'll both be blocked.
And again, they act as if their polarizations are perpendicular to each other.
Okay, well, what happens if the polarizers are set at an angle to each other?
Well, then the probabilities of the various things that might happen depend on that angle.
And the details of this are a little beyond the scope of this lecture,
but luckily we can do without them.
Now this is all rather strange.
The photons do not know what measurements we're going to make.
So how do they manage to disagree with each other,
no matter what it is that we measure?
Do they somehow communicate with each other instantaneously?
Well, that seems unlikely.
Common sense suggests something else is going on.
Now, be warned.
Whenever we use the phrase common sense in a discussion of quantum mechanics,
we are on very opposite ways at parallel filters.
It says, well, if the filter is vertical, then you go through and you stop and so on.
Now we don't know what the instructions are.
The instructions are hidden from us.
We can only predict probabilities, but the photons know and that's enough.
So the common sense theory is that the photons act together
because they have already decided together how to act.
Entanglement, in other words, is nothing more than prior agreement between the two photons.
And indeed, this is what Einstein thought.
Einstein was one of the first physicists to think deeply about quantum entanglement.
And in 1935, Einstein and Nathan Rosen and Boris Podolski,
a triumvirate collectively called EPR,
wrote a paper on quantum entanglement, one of the first.
And the EPR paper had an argument, the EPR argument.
They said that the correlations between entangled particles
must mean that the particles have already decided how to behave in experiments.
Quantum mechanics, though, only predicts the probabilities of doing this or that.
So quantum mechanics, therefore, is not the whole story according to EPR.
Quantum mechanics must be an incomplete theory of the physical world.
Well, the EPR argument that said that quantum mechanics had to be incomplete
was very influential, but it was not quite airtight.
And just how non-airtight the EPR argument was was made clear 30 years later
by the Irish physicist John Bell.
Bell was actually able to take the EPR argument and turn it on its head.
You see, the common sense view, the EPR view,
is that the two photons, having first made a mutual agreement, so to speak,
then act independently based on that agreement.
And Bell was able to show that this concept, this idea, had definite mathematical consequences.
And then Bell was able to show that the quantum mechanics of entangled particles
was actually inconsistent with those consequences.
In other words, Bell was able to show that the common sense view, the view of EPR,
could not possibly be correct.
Einstein's view of quantum mechanics was simply wrong.
Now Bell's theorem, Bell's proof, was a remarkable discovery.
And it's one of the deepest surprises in the history of science, I think,
from a purely philosophical point of view, the question of what the world is really like,
it's a pretty significant result.
What it means is this.
In the quantum world, either measurement results are not predetermined at all,
that is to say the quantum world is really and truly indeterminate,
or two entangled particles must exchange instantaneous measurements, or instantaneous messages,
whenever measurements are made on the two particles.
Either the results are indeterminate, or they must communicate instantaneously.
And Bell showed that one or the other of these, or maybe both, must be true.
In later years, Bell himself leaned toward the instantaneous messages point of view.
He said quantum mechanics is fundamentally non-local.
In the quantum world, in other words, according to Bell, what happens over here
can have an instantaneous real effect on what happens over there.
Now the notion that photons might be exchanging instantaneous messages sounds pretty exciting,
but let's be very careful about that.
Does, and one of each pair gets sent to my friend Alice over here,
and the other gets to Bob, sent to Bob over there.
And Alice and Bob might be millions of miles apart.
The entanglement relation doesn't depend on distance.
So Alice sets her polarizer in the vertical direction,
and she notes that, let's say, her photon passes through the polarizer.
Then instantaneously, Bob's photon will have horizontal polarization.
It happens instantaneously.
Does that mean that information has traveled faster than light?
Has a signal been sent faster than light?
Well, actually not.
And in one case, Bob gets one polarization.
In the other case, a perpendicular polarization.
A choice is nature's choice, a random choice,
a choice that has nothing to do with any message that Alice might want to send.
With different results for her experiment,
Bob's photon might be diagonal to the left or diagonal to the right,
each with 50-50 probability.
Call that situation, situation number two.
The point here, I'm afraid, is that Bob cannot tell the difference
between situation number one and situation number two.
They look just the same.
Why? Why can't he tell them apart?
It's because he cannot actually determine the polarization of his photon.
All he can do is make a measurement.
So he sets up his polarizer to see whether his photon goes through it.
But both situation number one and situation number two
look exactly the same in any measurement that Bob might set up.
In both situation number one, which is the 50-50 situation vertical and horizontal,
and situation number two, 50-50 diagonal and other diagonal,
both those situations look the same.
The odds are 50-50 whether his photon goes through the polarizer.
Okay, so Alice's choice of measurement doesn't affect anything that Bob can observe,
which is too bad.
So what's Bob going to do?
Can we somehow get some communication happening here?
Well, about 1980, a rather clever guy, an American physicist named Nick Herbert,
had an interesting idea.
He said, suppose you could exactly duplicate a photon.
Suppose you had what came to be called a quantum cloning machine.
The cloning machine takes in a single photon,
and then it somehow manufactures two or three or a hundred photons
with exactly the same polarization.
It just duplicates the polarization of the photon.
So with a cloning machine, what could Bob do?
What if he had a cloning machine? What could he do?
He could take his photon, the photon he gets from Alice,
or the photon that he gets from the pair that he and Alice share,
and he could take his photon and make 100 copies.
And then he takes that 100 copies of his photon,
and he sends all 100 through a vertical polarizer.
So what happens?
Well, let's suppose that Alice has chosen a vertical direction for her polarizer.
Then Bob's photon will either be vertical or horizontal.
So after he copies it, he has 100 vertical photons or 100 horizontal photons.
So when it gets to his vertical polarizer, they either all go through
or they are all blocked.
That's situation one.
In situation one, the light either all goes through or it's all blocked.
But now let's suppose Alice had chosen the diagonal direction for her polarizer.
So that means Bob's photon would either be left diagonal or right diagonal polarized photons.
So after he copies it, he has 100 photons.
And the 100 photons are either diagonal one way or they're diagonal the other way.
In this case, each photon has about a 50% chance of getting through the polarizer.
So he's got 100 of them, so about 50 photons go through and 50 are blocked.
That's situation number two.
About half the light goes through his polarizer.
So the two situations now look different at Bob's end.
By using the cloning machine to make copies,
message from Alice to Bob is not limited by the speed of light.
The entanglement effect is instantaneous.
So Alice and Bob could be millions of miles apart and perform their measurements at almost the same moment.
And therefore given a pair of entangled photons and a cloning machine,
if Bob can copy his photon, then Alice can send Bob a message faster than light.
And remember where that leads.
If you can send a message faster than light, you can send it back in time.
And if you can do that, you can create a time telegraph paradox.
You can make self-contradictory causal loops in space-time.
Okay, so Nick Herbert wrote up his idea about how to use a cloning machine to communicate faster than light
and he submitted it to a physics journal.
And the editors sent it out to another physicist for review
to recommend for or against publication of the paper.
And reviewers are usually anonymous in these cases,
but in this case we happen to know who it was.
It was the Israeli physicist Asher Parris.
And Parris read the paper and he said,
We know that we can't send information faster than light,
so the paper must be wrong somehow.
However, somebody needs to pin down exactly why it is wrong.
So we should publish the paper and get some people thinking about it.
And so that's exactly what the editors did.
Asher Parris, who was a friend of mine, was a very quantum mechanic,
it is impossible to build a machine that perfectly duplicates a quantum particle.
Therefore, Nick Herbert's cloning machine is an impossible thing.
It cannot use quantum entanglement, therefore, to send messages faster than light.
So here is another inhabitant of our increasing zoo of impossible things,
the quantum of those.
You know, what I find amazing about this story is why it is impossible.
See, the no-cloning theorem has nothing to do with relativity or time travel,
it is simply a fact of quantum theory.
You can view it, in fact, as a statement about information.
The problem is not that there's no energy to create a duplicate photon,
you can have an external energy source for the cloning machine.
The problem is information.
The polarization of the photon carries a sort of information,
that we might call quantum information.
And the no-cloning theorem essentially says that this quantum information cannot be perfectly copied.
In the familiar classical Newtonian world, copying information is easy, there's nothing to prevent it.
But the laws of the microscopic world, the quantum world, are very different.
Especially about information.
In the quantum world, perfect copying of quantum information is impossible.
That's a remarkable story.
Because of that fact, because of the uncopyability of quantum information,
quantum entanglement cannot be used as the universe from causal paradoxes.
It safeguards the cause and effect structure of reality.
Now, we've described what an entanglement is,
and we've used the special example of a pair of entangled photons.
There are many other kinds of entanglement, there's kinds of entanglement that involve many, many particles,
but this has been our example to begin to understand what it means.
In this example, we've seen how entanglement challenges some of our basic ideas about the world.
We've seen how entanglement almost leads to communication faster than light,
with all of the paradox that such communication would entail.
But here's the point, it only almost leads to faster than light communication.
But we can never quite use quantum entanglement, as strange as it is, to send messages that we choose.
The impossibility of quantum cloning bars the way and prevents the paradoxes.
So, I think this is an example of how the laws of physics fit together in a quite wonderful way.
Now, what makes those laws work?
What is it that enforces those laws in the universe?
This is a deep and mysterious question.
But I think it may be possible to give at least part of an answer to that question.
So in the next lecture, we'll be talking about electromagnetism.
We'll be talking about electric charges, electric and magnetic fields.
We'll talk about how these charges and fields are governed by mathematical laws that appear to apply everywhere and for all time.
But next time, we're going to imagine a miracle.
We're going to imagine that the laws of electromagnetism can be suspended, can be repealed over a limited region of space and time.
That will be our miracle. In that limited space, anything goes.
But we will show that even if we allow such a miracle, there are some things that are still impossible.
Some kinds of laws can be enforced, in other words, even in places where they do not apply.
So the curious case of electromagnetic miracles.
That's next time. I'll see you then.
