This video introduces functions and their domains and ranges.
A function is a correspondence between input numbers, usually the x values, and output numbers,
usually the y values, that sends each input number to exactly one output number. Sometimes a
function is thought of as a rule or machine in which you can feed in x values as input and get
out y values as output. So a non-mathematical example of a function might be the biological
mother function, which takes as input any person and gives as output their biological mother.
This function satisfies the condition that each input number object person in this case
gets sent to exactly one output person, because if you take any person they just have
one biological mother. So that rule does give you a function, but if I change things around
and just use the mother function, which sends to each person their mother, that's no longer
going to be a function because there are some people who have more than one mother, right? They
could have a biological mother and adopted mother or a mother and a stepmother or any
number of situations. So since there's at least some people who you would put it as input and then
you'd get like more than one possible output, that violates this rule of functions. It would not be a
function. Now most of the time we'll work with functions that are described with equations,
not in terms of mothers. So for example, we could have the function y equals x squared plus one.
This can also be written as f of x equals x squared plus one. Here f of x is function notation
that stands for the output value of y. Notice that this notation is not representing multiplication.
We're not multiplying f by x. Instead, we're going to be putting in a value for x's input
and getting out a value of f of x or y. For example, if we want to evaluate f of two,
we're plugging in two as input for x either in this equation or in that equation. Since
f of two means two squared plus one f of two is going to equal five. Similarly, f of five means
I plug in five for x. So that's going to be five squared plus one or 26. Sometimes it's useful
to evaluate a function on a more complicated expression involving other variables. In this
case, remember, the functions value on any expression is just when you what you get when you
plug in that whole expression for x. So f of a plus three is going to be the quantity a plus
three squared plus one. We could rewrite that as a squared plus six a plus nine plus one,
or a squared plus six a plus 10. When evaluating a function on a complex expression, it's important
to keep the parentheses when you plug in for x. That way, you evaluate the function on the whole
expression. For example, it would be wrong to write f of a plus three equals a plus three
squared plus one without the parentheses, because that would imply that we were just
squaring the three and not the whole expression a plus three. Sometimes a function is described
with a graph instead of an equation. In this example, this graph is supposed to represent
the function g of x. Not all graphs actually represent functions. For example, the graph
of a circle doesn't represent a function. That's because the graph of a circle violates the vertical
line test, you can draw a vertical line, and I'll intersect the graph in more than one point.
But our graph at left satisfies the vertical line test, any vertical line intersects the graph and
at most one point. That means it's a function, because every x value will have at most one y
value that corresponds to it. Let's evaluate g of two. Note that two is an x value. And we'll use
the graph to find the corresponding y value. So I look for two on the x axis, and find the point
on the graph that has that x value. That's right here. Now I can look at the y value of that point,
looks like three, and therefore g of two is equal to three. If I try to do the same thing to evaluate
g of five, I run into trouble. Five is an x value, I look for it on the x axis, but there's no point
on the graph that has that x value. Therefore, g of five is undefined, or we can say it does not
exist. The question of what x values and y values make sense for a function leads us to a discussion
of domain and range. The domain of a function is all possible x values that make sense for that
function. The range is the y values that make sense for the function. In this example, we saw
that the x value of five didn't have a corresponding y value for this function. So the x value of five
is not in the domain of our function g. To find the x values in the domain, we have to look at
the x values that correspond to points on the graph. When we do that is to take the shadow
or projection of the graph onto the x axis, and see what x values are hit. It looks like we're
hitting all x values starting at negative eight and continuing up to four. So our domain
is the x's between negative eight and four, including those endpoints, or we can write this
in interval notation as negative eight comma four with square brackets. To find the range of the
function, we look for the y values corresponding to points on this graph. We can do that
by taking the shadow or projection of the graph onto the y axis.
We seem to be hitting all y values from negative five up through three. So our range
is wise between negative five and three, or an interval notation negative five three
with square brackets. If we meet a function that's described as an equation instead of a graph,
one way to find the domain and range are to graph the function. But it's often possible to find the
domain at least more quickly by using algebraic considerations. We think about what x values
it makes sense to plug into this expression, and what x values need to be excluded because they
make the algebraic expression impossible to evaluate. Specifically, to find the domain of a function,
we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero, since we can't divide by zero.
We also need to exclude x values that make an expression inside a square root sign negative,
since we can't take the square root of a negative number. In fact, we need to exclude
values that make expression inside any even root negative, because we can't take an even root of
a negative number, even though we can take an odd root like a cube root of a negative number.
Later, when we look at logarithmic functions, we'll have some additional exclusions that we
have to make. But for now, these two principles should handle all functions we'll see. So let's
apply them to a couple examples. For the function in part a, we don't have any square root signs,
but we do have a denominator. So we need to exclude x values that make the denominator zero. In other
words, we need x squared minus four x plus three to not be equal to zero. If we solve x squared minus
four x plus three equal to zero, we can do that by factoring. And that gives us x equals three or
x equals one. So we need to exclude these values. All other x values should be fine. So if I draw
the number line, I can put on one and three and just dig out a hole at both of those. And
my domain includes everything else on the number line. In interval notation, this means my domain
is everything from negative infinity to one together with everything from one to three together
with everything from three to infinity. In this second example, we don't have any
denominator to worry about, but we do have a square root sign. So we need to exclude any x values
that make three minus two x less than zero. In other words, we can include all x values for
which three minus two x is greater than or equal to zero. Solving that inequality gives us three is
greater than or equal to two x. In other words, x is less than or equal to three halves. I can
draw this on the number line, or write it in interval notation. Notice that three halves is
included. And that's because three minus two x is allowed to be zero, I can take the square root of
zero, it's just zero. And that's not a problem. Finally, let's look at a more complicated function
that involves both a square root and a denominator. Now there are two things I need to worry about.
I need the denominator to not be equal to zero. And I need the stuff inside the square root sign
to be greater than or equal to zero. From our earlier work, we know that the first condition
means that x is not equal to three, and x is not equal to one. And the second condition
means that x is less than or equal to three halves. Let's draw both of those conditions
on the number line. x is not equal to three and x is not equal to one means we've got everything
except those two dug out points. And the other condition x is less than or equal to three halves
means we can have three halves and everything to the left of it. Now to be in our domain and to be
legit for our function, we need both of these conditions to be true. So I'm going to connect
these conditions with an and. And that means we're looking for numbers on the number line that are
colored both red and blue. So I'll draw that above in purple. So that's everything from three halves
to one, I have to dig out one because one was a problem for the denominator. And then I can continue
for all the things that are colored both, both colors red and blue. So my final domain is going
to be, let's see, negative infinity up to but not including one together with one, but not including
it to three halves and I include three halves since that was colored both red and blue also.
In this video, we talked about functions, how to evaluate them, and how to find domains and ranges.
This video is a brief introduction to increasing and decreasing functions based on their graphs.
In this first example, I've graphed two lines. The first line is an increasing function.
Because as the x values go from left to right, the y values are going up.
This can be written more formally by saying if x two is bigger than x one, these are supposed to
be x values. So that means that x two is some x value that's to the right, so that it's bigger.
The next one. So whenever we have an x value x two that's bigger than x one, increasing means
that f of x two has to be bigger than f of x one, so that the y values are getting bigger
when the x values are bigger. The second line is an example of a decreasing function.
Because here as the x values increase from left to right, the y values are going down.
So again, we can write this more formally by saying that whenever we have an x value x two
that's bigger than x one, for example, this might be x two and this might be x one, then
the y value f of x two is less than f of x one this time, because here, when we have a bigger x
value, we want to have a smaller y value to be decreasing. This second example gives the graph
of a function that's increasing in some places, but decreasing in others. This part of the graph,
here, the function's decreasing, because as the x values increase from left to right, the y values
go down. Over here, we also have a part of the graph where the function is decreasing. Now, this
part of the graph, the function's increasing, because as x goes from left to right, the y values
are going up. I'll mark that one in green for increasing. And finally, on this part of the
graph, the functions neither increasing nor decreasing is completely flat or constant.
Now, we're asked to describe the intervals on which the graph is increasing or decreasing.
So we describe those intervals in terms of the x values. It wouldn't make sense to describe them
in terms of the y values, because the y values can be the same for different parts of the graph,
but the x values are always unique. To describe where this function is decreasing,
that's for x values between negative four and negative two, and between four and seven.
I can write this using inequalities as negative four less than x less than negative two,
four less than x less than seven. It's not important whether I use less than or less than
or equal to signs here. I'm going to use less than or equal to signs at the end points of the
function's domain, where the function stops existing altogether. And I'll use strict less
than signs, just where the function starts or stops decreasing in the middle of its domain.
But again, that's not important. To describe where the function is increasing,
that's for x values in between negative two and one. So I can write that as an inequality as negative
two less than x less than one. I can also describe these intervals in interval notation. So that would
be close bracket negative four negative two open bracket, a cup sign for union, and then four comma
seven for the decreasing part and the increasing part is negative two comma one. I'm going to modify
my graph just a little bit now by putting arrows on the end. When I have arrows instead of
dots or just hard stops, that signifies that the function continues in the same direction forever.
So if I write it like that, then the place where the function is increasing is still the same,
it's still going to be from x values going from negative two to one. But now the decreasing part
of the function extends further. So this section, these x values extend all the way out to infinity
and it we assume that it keeps going keeps decreasing here. So I would write that as
for infinity. And similarly, the left part, I would write as negative infinity, negative two,
because the function is going on forever in this direction to set x values go all the way to negative
infinity on that chunk. So when talking about increasing and decreasing parts of functions
based on graphs, the thing to remember is that x is going to be heading from
left to right. As long as you do that increasing just means that y goes up. Decreasing means that
y goes down. And if you're describing the intervals, you have to do that in terms of x values.
This video is about identifying maximums and minimums for functions from their graphs.
We'll start with some definitions.
A function f of x has an absolute maximum at the x value of x equals C, if the y value
at x equals C is as big as it ever gets. We can write this more precisely by saying that
f of C, that's the y value at x equals C is bigger than or equal to f of x, that's the y value at
some other x value. For all x values in the domain of f, that biggest y value f of C is called the
absolute maximum value for f. And the point with an x value and a y value given is called an
absolute maximum point. If I have a graph of a function, then the absolute maximum value
f of C is the highest value that function ever achieves. And the absolute maximum point
is the point where it achieves that value. Now it's possible for a function to have more than one
absolute maximum point, if there happens to be a tie where that highest value is achieved.
But a function can only have at most one absolute maximum value.
A function f of x has an absolute minimum at x equals C, if the y value
at x equals C is as small as it ever gets. We can write this more precisely by saying that
f of C is less than or equal to f of x for all x values in the domain of f.
The y value f of C is called the absolute minimum value of f. And the point C f of C
is called an absolute minimum point. In the graph of f of x,
f of C is now the lowest y value that the graph ever achieves. And the point C f of C
is the point where it achieves this very low y value. For example, this function
has an absolute minimum value of about negative eight. And it has an absolute minimum point
with coordinates three negative eight. If this function stops here and has domain from x values
just from zero to four, then the function will have an absolute maximum value of 10
achieved at the point with coordinates for 10. If however, the function keeps going on forever,
then it will have no absolute maximum value at all.
Absolute maximum minimum values can also be called global maximum and minimum values.
A function f of x has a local maximum at x equals C. If the y value at the x value of C
is bigger than any y values nearby, it doesn't have to be the biggest y value anywhere in the domain.
There's bigger y values up here. It just has to be the biggest y value nearby,
or more precisely, in an open interval of x values around C.
We can write this by saying that f of C is bigger than or equal to f of x for all x values
in an open interval around C. The y value f of C is called a local maximum value for f,
and the point with coordinates C f of C is called a local maximum point.
A function f of x has a local minimum at x equals C, if f of C is less than or equal to f of x
for all x values in an open interval around C. The y value f of C is called a local minimum value,
and the point with coordinates C f of C is called a local minimum point.
A function might have many local minimum values.
In this example, assuming that the domain is from zero to four, we have a local minimum point
at x equals three, because this point here is the lowest point anywhere nearby. It also happens
to be an absolute minimum point. Turning our attention to local maximum points, this function
has a local maximum point at one, two, say, because this point here is the highest point
anywhere nearby, even though it's not the highest point anywhere in the domain since
they're highest points, higher points over here. So we have a local max point at one,
two, which is not an absolute max. Different sources use different conventions as far as
whether the point four, 10 up here counts as a local maximum point or not. Some sources do
consider it a local maximum, since it's the highest point anywhere nearby. But other sources
say that it doesn't count as a local maximum, for the technical reason that you can't get an
open interval of values around four, because the function is not defined in an open interval around
four, because its domain stops at four. So I'll just write this as a caution that some sources
do not consider
for 10 to be a local max point, because f is not defined in an open interval
around x equals four. Local maximum and minimum values can also be called relative maximum and
minimum values. Please pause the video for a moment to mark all local maximum minimum points
on the graph of this function, as well as all absolute maximum points.
The function has a local max point here, at the point with coordinates approximately say 2.7,
3.3. It's a local max point, because it's the highest point anywhere nearby. There's a local min
point right here, at the point with coordinates two, two, since this is the lowest point anywhere
nearby. If this point actually existed, it would also be a local min point, as well as an absolute
min point. But this drilled out circle means that point is not actually part of the graph.
So there's no local min point here, and no absolute min point. The point here, with coordinates 0,4,
is considered by some sources to be a local max point. But by other sources, it's not considered
a local max point, since the function is not defined in an open interval around zero.
Turning our attention to absolute maximum min points, while there's no absolute max point,
since the function keeps going up and up and up forever. There's also no absolute min point,
because the function just keeps going down and down a little by a little and never actually
achieves the lowest value. Now, if we're talking about local max and min values, that's just the
y values of the local max and min points. So there's a local max value at this y value of 3.3.
And there's a local min value of two, this points y value. There are no absolute max or
min values for this function. In this video, we defined absolute and local max and min
points and values. This video is about symmetry of graphs and functions.
We say that a graph is symmetric with respect to the x axis, if
the graph has mirror symmetry with the x axis as the mirror line. This graph here is an example.
Here is the mirror line. Notice that the point five, three is on this graph. And so it's mirror image
and so it's mirror image five negative three is also on the graph. Similarly, the point
two two is on the graph and its mirror image two negative two is on the graph. For any point
x y on a graph, its mirror image when you flip over the x axis will have coordinates,
the same x coordinate, and the opposite of the y coordinate. Therefore, we can say that
a graph is symmetric with respect to the x axis. If whenever a point x y is on the graph,
the point x negative y is also on the graph. We say that a graph is symmetric with respect to
the y axis if it has mirror symmetry with the y axis as the mirror line. This graph is symmetric
with respect to the y axis. Here is the mirror line. Notice that the point with coordinates two
three is on this graph. It's mirror image, which is also on the graph has coordinates
negative two three. So the same y coordinate, but the opposite x coordinate. And in fact,
if I take any point with coordinates x y, and I want its mirror image with the y axis as a
mirror line, I'm going to get a point with the same height, the same y coordinate, but the opposite
x coordinate. So I can say that a graph is symmetric with respect to the y axis. If whenever
a point x y is on the graph, the point negative x y is also on the graph. Finally, a graph is
symmetric with respect to the origin, if it has 180 degree rotational symmetry around the origin.
This means that if I spin it by 180 degrees, the graph should line up exactly with itself.
Rotating a graph by 180 degrees is the same thing as turning it upside down. So one way to see if
a graph has symmetry respect to the origin is to turn it upside down and see if it looks exactly
the same. This one does. Playing around with points, I noticed that the point
one negative two is on this graph. If I rotate that point around the origin by 180 degrees,
I get to the point with coordinates negative one two. If I start with the point on the graph
with coordinates two three, and I rotate by 180 degrees, I get the point with coordinates
negative two negative three. And in general, if I start with a point x y, and I rotate that 180
degrees around the origin, I get the point with coordinates negative x negative y. So we can say
that a graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. If whenever a point x y is on the graph,
the point negative x negative y is also on the graph. Please pause the video for a moment and
decide which of these graphs are symmetric with respect to the x axis, the y axis, and the origin.
Some graphs may have more than one type of symmetry. Graph a is symmetric with respect to the origin.
Because if you rotate it by 180 degrees, that is, you turn it upside down, it looks exactly the
same. It does not have any mirror symmetry. So it's not symmetric with respect to the x axis or the
y axis. Graph B does have mirror symmetry. I'll draw on the two mirror lines. So it's both symmetric
with respect to the x axis, and symmetric with respect to the y axis. It also looks exactly
the same upside down. So it's also symmetric with respect to the origin. Graph C is symmetric
with respect to the y axis, but has no other symmetry. And graph D is symmetric with respect
to the x axis with no other symmetry. We use the words even and odd to describe functions whose
graphs have certain kinds of symmetry. A function is even if its graph is symmetric
with respect to the y axis. Remember that being symmetric with respect to the y axis
means that whenever a point x y is on the graph, its mirror image negative x y is also on the graph.
That is, the y values corresponding to x and negative x are the same. Using function notation,
I can write these points as the points with coordinates x, f of x, and negative x, f of
negative x, since the y value of her function is given by f of its x value. So we can say that a
function f of x is even if f of negative x equals f of x for all x values in its domain.
The function has the same height at x and negative x. For example, we can see that function f of x
equals x squared plus three is even. And one way to see this is by looking at its graph,
which looks pretty much like the graph I've drawn. And noticing that its graph is symmetric
across the y axis. But we can also check that this function is even algebraically
without knowing anything about its graph. All we have to do is check that f of negative x is equal
to f of x. So if we plug in negative x for x into this formula, that's negative x squared plus three,
but negative x squared is the same thing as x squared. And so this is exactly the same thing
as f of x. And the property of being even is satisfied. We say that a function f of x is odd
if its graph is symmetric with respect to the origin. Recall that a graph is symmetric with
respect to the origin means that whenever a point x y is on the graph, it's 180 degree
80 degree rotation point, negative x, negative y is also on the graph. That is,
the graphs y value at x, and the graphs y value at negative x are the opposites of each other,
same magnitude, but opposite sign. If we use function notation for the coordinates of these
points, this one is x, f of x. And this one is negative x, f of negative x, right, because
the y value for a function at the x value of negative x is just f of negative x. So for a
function to be odd, we see that f of negative x, that y value has to be the opposite of f of x,
the other guy's y value. A function f of x is odd if f of negative x is the negative of f of x
for all x in its domain. Let's look at this example, we could draw its graph and verify
the functions odd by seeing that rotational symmetry around the origin on its graph. But we
can also figure it out algebraically by checking to see that f of negative x is equal to negative
of f of x. So let's plug in negative x for x in the formula for f that gives us five times negative
x minus one over negative x, that simplifies to negative five x plus one over x. And we can see
that that is actually the negative of five x minus one over x by factoring out a negative sign,
which is negative f of x. So the property for being odd holds. In this video, we talked about
symmetry with respect to the x axis, symmetry with respect to the y axis, and symmetry with
respect to the origin. Functions that are symmetric with respect to the y axis are even
functions, and functions that are symmetric with respect to the origin are odd functions.
There's no word for functions that are symmetric with respect to the x axis. And that's because
if your graph is symmetric with respect to the x axis, it's not going to be a function.
This video gives the graphs of some commonly used functions that I call the toolkit functions.
The first function is the function y equals x. Let's plot a few points on the graph of this
function. If x is zero, y zero, if x is one, y is one, and so on, y is always equal to x,
doesn't have to just be an integer, it can be any real number. And we're connecting the dots,
we get a straight line through the origin. Let's look at the graph of y equals x squared. If x is
zero, y is zero, so we go through the origin again, if x is one, y is one. And if x is negative one,
y is also one. The x value of two gives a y value of four and the x value of negative two gives a
y value of four also. Connecting the dots, we get a parabola. Notice this this function
is an even function. That means it has mirror symmetry across the y axis, the left side looks
like exactly like the mirror image of the right side. That happens because when you square a
positive number like two, you get the exact same y value as when you square its mirror image x value
of negative two. The next function y equals x cubed, I'll call that a cubic. Let's plot a few
points when x is zero, y is zero, when x is one, y is one, when x is negative one, y is negative one,
two goes with the point eight way up here and an x value of negative two is going to give us
negative eight. If I connect the dots, I get something that looks kind of like this.
This function is what's called an odd function, because it has 180 degree rotational symmetry
around the origin. If I rotate this whole graph by 180 degrees, or in other words, turn the paper
upside down, I'll get exactly the same shape. The reason this function has this odd symmetry
is because when I cube a positive number and get its y value, I get and cube the corresponding
negative number to get its y value, the negative number cubed gives us exactly the negative of
the the y value we get with cubing the positive number. Let's look at the next example, y equals
a square root of x. Notice that the domain of this function is just x values bigger than or
equal to zero, because we can't take the square root of a negative number. Let's plug in a few
x values, x is zero gives y is zero, x is one, square root of one is one, square root of four is two.
And connecting the dots, I get a function that looks like this.
The absolute value function is next. Again, if we plug in a few points,
x is zero goes with y equals zero, x is one gives us one, the absolute value of negative one is one
to two is on the graph and the absolute value of negative two is two. I'm ending up getting
a v shaped graph. It also has even or mirror symmetry.
y equals two to the x is what's known as an exponential function. That's because the variable
x is in the exponent. If I plot a few points,
two to the zero is one, two to the one is two, two squared is four, two to the minus one is one
half. I'll plot these on my graph. And let me fill in a few more points. So let's see,
two cubed is eight, that's way up here. And negative two gives me one fourth, one eighth.
Connecting the dots, I get something that's shaped like this.
You might have heard the expression exponential growth, when talking about, for example, population
growth. This is function is represents exponential growth, it grows very, very steeply. Every time
we increase the x coordinate by one, we double the y coordinate.
We could also look at a function like y equals three to the x or sometimes y equals e to the x,
where e is just a number about 2.7. These functions look very similar. It's just the bigger base
makes us rise a little more steeply. Now let's look at the function y equals one over x.
It's not defined when x is zero, but I can plug in x equals one half, one over one half is two,
one over one is one, and one over two is one half. If I connect the dots, I get this shape
in the first quadrant, but I haven't looked at negative values of x, when x is negative,
one over negative one is negative one, one over negative a half is negative two.
And I get a similar looking piece in the third quadrant. This is an example of a hyperbola.
And it's also an odd function, because it has that 180 degree rotational symmetry.
If I turn the page upside down, it'll look exactly the same.
Finally, let's look at y equals one over x squared. Again, it's not defined when x is zero,
but I can plug in points like one half or x, let's see one over one half squared is one over one
fourth, which is four. And one over one squared, one over two squared is a fourth. It's pretty much
like the previous function, it's just a little bit more extreme rises a little more steeply,
falls a little more dramatically. But for negative values of x, something a little bit different
goes on. For example, one over negative two squared is just one over four, which is a fourth.
So I can plot that point there. And one over negative one squared, that's just one.
So my curve for negative values of x is going to lie in the second quadrant,
not the third quadrant. This is an example of an even function.
Because it has perfect mirror symmetry across the y axis.
These are the toolkit functions. And I recommend you memorize the shape of each of them.
That way you can draw at least a rough sketch very quickly without having to plug in points.
That's all for the graphs of the toolkit functions.
If we change the equation of a function, then the graph of the function changes or transforms
in predictable ways. This video gives some rules and examples for transformations of functions.
To get the most out of this video, it's helpful if you're already familiar with the graph of some
typical functions, I call them toolkit functions, like y equals square root of x, y equals x squared,
y equals the absolute value of x and so on. If you're not familiar with those graphs,
I encourage you to watch my video called toolkit functions first before watching this one.
I want to start by reviewing function notation. If g of x represents the function the square root
of x, then we can rewrite these expressions in terms of square roots. For example, g of x minus
two is the same thing as the square root of x minus two. g of quantity x minus two means we plug
in x minus two everywhere we see an x. So that would be the same thing as the square root of
quantity x minus two. In the second example, I say that we're subtracting two on the inside of the
function because we're subtracting two before we apply the square root function. Whereas on the
first example, I say that the minus two is on the outside of the function, we're doing the square root
function first and then subtracting two. In this third example, g of three x, we're multiplying by
three on the inside of the function. To evaluate this in terms of square root, we plug in the entire
three x for x and the square root function. That gives us the square root of three x. In the next
example, we're multiplying by three on the outside of the function. This is just three times the square
root of x. Finally, g of minus x means the square root of minus x. This might look a little odd
because we're not used to taking the square root of a negative number. But remember that if x itself
is negative, like negative two, then negative x will be negative negative two or positive two. So
we'll really be taking the square root of a positive number in that case. Let me record which of these
are inside and which of these are outside of my function. In this next set of examples, we're using
the same function g of x a square root of x. But this time we're starting with an expression with
square roots in it and trying to write it in terms of g of x. So the first example, the plus 17 is
on the outside of my function, because I'm taking the square root of x first, and then adding 17. So
I can write this as g of x plus 17. In the second example, I'm taking x and adding 12 first, then
I take the square root of the whole thing. Since I'm adding the 12 to x first, that's on the inside
of my function. So I write that as g of the quantity x plus 12. Remember that this notation means
I plug in the entire x plus 12 into the square root sign, which gives me exactly square root of x
plus 12. In this next example, I'm doing the square root first and then multiply by negative 36. So my
minus 36 multiplication is outside my function. I can rewrite this as minus 36 times g of x.
Finally, in this last example, I take x multiply by a fourth and then apply the square root of x.
So that's the same thing as g of one fourth x, my one fourth x is on the inside of my function.
In other words, it's inside the parentheses when I use function notation.
Let's graph the square root of x and two transformations of this function.
y equals the square root of x goes through the points 0011 and 42, since the square root of
four is two, and looks something like this. In order to graph y equals the square root of x minus
two, notice that the minus two is on the outside of the function. That means we're going to take
the square root of x first and then subtract two. So for example, if we start with the x value of zero
and compute the square root of zero, that's zero, then we subtract two to give us a y value of negative
two. An x value of one, which under the square root function had a y value of one, now has a y
value that's decreased by two, one minus two is negative one. And finally, an x value of four,
which under the square root function had a y value of two, now has a y value of two minus two or zero,
its y value was also decreased by two. If I plot these new points, zero goes with negative two,
one goes with negative one, and four goes with zero, I have my transformed graph.
Because I subtracted two on the outside of my function, my y values were decreased by two,
which brought my graph down by two units. Next, let's look at y equals the square root of quantity
x minus two. Now we're subtracting two on the inside of our function, which means we subtract
two from x first and then take the square root. In order to get the same y value of zero as we
had in our blue graph, we need our x minus two to be zero. So we need our original x to be two.
In order to get the y value of one that we had in our blue graph,
we need to be taking the square root of one. So we need x minus two to be one,
which means that we need to start with an x value of three.
And in order to reproduce our y value of two from our original graph, we need the square root
of x minus two to be two, which means we need to start out by taking the square root of four,
which means our x minus two is four. So our x should be up there at six.
If I plot my x values with my corresponding y values of square root of x minus two,
I get the following graph. Notice that the graph has moved horizontally to the right by two units.
To me, moving down by two units makes sense because we're subtracting two. So we're decreasing
y's by two units. But the minus two on the inside, that kind of does the opposite of what I expect.
I might expect it to move the graph left. I might expect the x values to be going down by two units.
But instead, it moves the graph to the right because the x units have to go up by two units
in order to get the right square root when I then subtract two units again.
The observations we made for these transformations of functions
hold in general, according to the following rules. First of all, numbers on the outside of the function,
like in our example, y equals the square root of x minus two, those numbers affect the y values
and result in vertical motions, like we saw. These motions are in the direction you expect,
so subtracting two moves just down by two. If we were adding two instead, that would move us up by two.
Numbers on the inside of the function, that's like our example,
y equals the square root of quantity x minus two, those affect the x values and result in a
horizontal motion. These motions go in the opposite direction from what you expect. Remember,
the minus two on the inside actually shifted our graph to the right. If it had a plus two on the
inside, that would actually shift our graph to the left. Adding results in a shift, those are
called translations, but multiplying like something like y equals three times the square root of x,
that would result in a stretch or shrink. In other words, if I start with the square root of x,
and then want to graph y equals three times the square root of x, that stretches my graph
vertically by a factor of three, like this. If I want to graph y equals one third times the square
root of x, that shrinks my graph vertically by a factor of one third. Finally, a negative sign
results in reflection. For example, if I start with a graph of y equals the square root of x,
and then want to graph y equals the square root of negative x, that's going to do a reflection in
the horizontal direction because the negative is on the inside of the square root sign. A reflection
in the horizontal direction means a reflection across the y axis. If instead, I want to graph
y equals negative the square root of x, that negative sign on the outside means a vertical
reflection, a reflection across the x axis. Pause the video for a moment and see if you
could describe what happens in these four transformations. In the first example, we're
subtracting four on the outside of the function. Adding and subtracting means a translation or
shift. And since we're on the outside of the function that affects the y values, that's moving
us vertically. So this transformation should take the square root of graph and move it down
by four units. That would look something like this. In the next example, we're adding 12 on the
inside. That's still a translation, but now we're moving horizontally. And so since we go the
opposite direction we expect, we are going to go to the left by 12 units. That's going to look
something like this. In the next example, we're multiplying by three and introducing a negative
sign, both on the outside of our function. Outside our function means we're affecting the y values.
So and multiplication means we're stretching by a factor of three, the negative sign means we reflect
in the vertical direction. Here's stretching by a factor of three vertically, before I applied
the minus sign. And now the minus sign reflects in the vertical direction. Finally, in this last
example, we're multiplying by one quarter on the inside of our function. We know that multiplication
means stretch or shrink. And since we're on the inside, it's a horizontal motion. And it does the
opposite of what we expect. So instead of shrinking by a factor of one fourth horizontally, it's
actually going to stretch by the reciprocal, a factor of four horizontally. That'll look something
like this. Notice that stretching horizontally by a factor of four looks kind of like shrinking
vertically by a factor of one half. And that's actually borne out by the algebra, because the
square root of one fourth x is the same thing as the square root of one fourth times the square root
of x, which is the same thing as one half times the square root of x. And so now we can see
algebraically, that a vertical shrink by a factor of one half is the same as a horizontal
stretch by a factor of four, at least for this function, the square root function.
This video gave some rules for transformations of functions, which I'll repeat below.
Numbers on the outside correspond to changes in the y values, or vertical motions.
Numbers on the inside of the function affect the x values and result in horizontal motions.
Adding and subtracting corresponds to translations or shifts.
Multiplying and dividing by numbers corresponds to stretches and shrinks.
And putting in a negative sign corresponds to a reflection, a horizontal reflection,
if the negative sign is on the inside, and a vertical reflection, if the negative sign is on
the outside. Knowing these basic rules about transformations empowers you to be able to
sketch graphs of much more complicated functions, like y equals three times the square root of x
plus two, by simply considering the transformations one at a time. This video introduces piecewise
functions. A piecewise function is a function who's defined in pieces by two or more different rules
that apply for different x values. The rule for calculating this function is you calculate
negative x squared, if x is less than one, but you calculate negative two x plus three, if x is
greater than or equal to one. So if we want to find f of negative two, well, negative two is less
than one. So the first rule applies. And we compute f of negative two by plugging in negative two
for x in the first rule. So that's negative four. Next, if we want to find f of one,
well, one is right on the border in between the two rules. But because we have a greater than or
equal to here, when x is equal to one, we apply this rule. And so we can plug one into the formula
negative two x plus three, so that's negative two times one plus three, which gives us one as our
output. Finally, if we want to compute f of three, since three is bigger than or equal to one,
the second rule applies, and we plug three into that rule. That gives us an answer of negative three.
To graph f, it makes sense to also draw the graph in pieces. First, I'm going to draw the graph of
minus x squared. Just x squared would be a parabola opening up. So minus x squared is a parabola
opening down goes through the points negative one, negative one and one negative one. So it looks
something like this. Now I've drawn the whole parabola, but the rule actually only applies
when x is less than one. So I'll keep the part of the parabola when x is less than one, and I'll
erase the part of the parabola when x is greater than or equal to one. I'll leave an open circle
here when x equals one, since that point is not included in this definition either. Next, I'm going
to draw the second piece, the line y equals minus two x plus three. So that's a line with slope
negative two and intercept y intercept three, so it goes through this point zero three. And then it
goes over by one and down by two. So it goes through the point one one over by one down by two.
And I can continue and draw this straight line.
Again, we only want part of this graph, the part where x is greater than or equal to one. So I'll
erase the part where x is less than one, this part here. This time, I'm going to leave a closed
circle where x is equal to one, since that point is included on that graph. When drawing this graph,
it's good to think about what happens when x equals one, the border point, both in the
second rule, where we actually include that point, and in the first rule, where we don't
actually include that point, but we kind of have to draw it in order anyway to draw the open circle
here. Now the last question asks us if this function is continuous. The informal definition of
continuity that I'm going to use is that a function is continuous if you can draw the whole
thing without picking up your pencil. In this case, we can't, because we have to pick up our
pencil to get from the jump here up to here. So this function is not continuous, it's got a
discontinuity when x is one, which is exactly the border port between the two rules. Often,
piecewise functions will have discontinuities, where they transition from one rule to the next.
However, it's possible to have a piecewise defined function that has no discontinuity,
if the two pieces happen to line up perfectly. For example, if we've changed the function's
definition slightly, I'll call it g of x's time to still be the negative x squared,
when x is less than one, but this time, negative two x plus one, if x is bigger than or equal to one.
Then when we graph it, the parabola piece will look the same. But the linear piece will be two
units lower than before. And so it'll actually start right here at one negative one and go down,
and our function will be continuous. That's all for this introduction to piecewise functions.
The inverse of a function undoes what the function does. So the inverse of tying your shoes
would be to untie them. And the inverse of the function that adds two to a number
would be the function that subtracts two from a number. This video introduces inverses and
their properties. Suppose f of x is the function defined by this chart. In other words, f of two
is three, f of three is five, f of four is six, and f of five is one. The inverse function for f,
written f superscript negative one x undoes what f does. Since f takes two to three,
f inverse takes three back to two. So we write this f superscript negative one of three is two.
Similarly, since f takes three to five, f inverse takes five to three.
And since f takes four to six, f inverse of six is four. And since f takes five to one,
f inverse of one is five. I'll use these numbers to fill in the chart. Notice that the chart of
values when y equals f of x and the chart of values when y equals f inverse of x are closely
related. They share the same numbers, but the x values for f of x correspond to the y values
for f inverse of x. And the y values for f of x correspond to the x values for f inverse of x.
That leads us to the first key fact, inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x.
I'm going to plot the points for y equals f of x in blue.
Next, I'll plot the points for y equals f inverse of x in red. Pause the video for a moment and see
what kind of symmetry you observe in this graph. How are the blue points related to the red points?
You might have noticed that the blue points and the red points are mirror images over the mirror
line, y equals x. So our second key fact is that the graph of y equals f inverse of x can be obtained
from the graph of y equals f of x by reflecting over the line y equals x. This makes sense because
inverses reverse the roles of y and x. In the same example, let's compute f inverse of f of 2.
This open circle means composition. In other words, we're computing f inverse of f of 2. We compute
we compute this from the inside out. So that's f inverse of 3, since f of 2 is 3, and f inverse
of 3, we see as 2. Similarly, we can compute f of f inverse of 3. And that means we take f of f
inverse of 3. Since f inverse of 3 is 2, that's the same thing as computing f of 2, which is 3.
Please pause the video for a moment and compute these other compositions.
You should have found that in every case, if you take f inverse of f of a number, you get back to
the very same number you started with. And similarly, if you take f of f inverse of any number,
you get back to the same number you started with. So in general, f inverse of f of x is equal to x,
and f of f inverse of x is also equal to x. This is the mathematical way of saying that f and
inverse f inverse undo each other. Let's look at a different example. Suppose that f of x is x cubed.
Pause the video for a moment and guess what the inverse of f should be. Remember, f inverse undoes
the work that f does. You might have guessed that f inverse of x is going to be the cube root function.
Now we can check that this is true by looking at f of f inverse of x, that's f of the cube root of
of the cube root of function, which means the cube root function cubed, which gets us back to x.
Similarly, if we compute f inverse of f of x, that's the cube root of x cubed,
and we get back to x again. So the cube root function really is the inverse of the cubing
function. When we compose the two functions, we get back to the number that we started with.
It'd be nice to have a more systematic way of finding inverses of functions besides guessing
and checking. One method uses the fact that inverses reverse the roles of y and x. So if we
want to find the inverse of the function f of x equals five minus x over three x, we can write it
as y equals five minus x over three x, reverse the roles of y and x to get x equals five minus y
over three y, and then solve for y. To solve for y, let's multiply both sides by three y,
bring all terms with y's in them to the left side, and all terms without y's in them to the
right side, factor out the y and divide to isolate y. This gives us f inverse of x as five over three
x plus one. Notice that our original function f and our inverse function f inverse are both
rational functions, but they're not the reciprocals of each other. And in general, f inverse of x is
not usually equal to one over f of x. This can be confusing, because when we write two to the minus
one, that does mean one over two, but f to the minus one of x means the inverse function and not the
reciprocal. It's natural to ask if all functions have inverse functions. That is, for any function
you might encounter, is there always a function that is it is its inverse? In fact, the answer is no.
See if you can come up with an example of a function that does not have an inverse function.
The word function here is key. Remember, that a function is a relationship between x values and y
values, such that for each x value in the domain, there's only one corresponding y value.
One example of a function that does not have an inverse function is the function f of x equals x
squared. To see that the inverse of this function is not a function, note that for the x squared
function, the number two, and the number negative two, both go to the number four. So if I had an
inverse, it would have to send four to both two and negative two. The inverse would not be a function.
It might be easier to understand the problem. When you look at a graph of y equals x squared.
Recall that inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x and flip the graph over the line y equals x.
But when I flip the green graph over the line y equals x, I get this red graph. This red graph
is not the graph of a function, because it violates the vertical line test.
The reason that violates the vertical line test is because the original green function
violates the horizontal line test and has two x values with the same y value.
In general, a function f has an inverse function, if and only if the graph of f satisfies the
horizontal line test, i.e. every horizontal line intersects the graph in at most one point.
Pause the video for a moment and see which of these four graphs satisfy the horizontal line
test. In other words, which of the four corresponding functions would have an inverse function?
You may have found that graphs a and b violate the horizontal line test. So their functions
would not have inverse functions. But graphs C and D satisfy the horizontal line test. So these
graphs represent functions that do have inverses. Functions that satisfy the horizontal line test
are sometimes called one to one functions. Equivalently, a function is one to one,
if for any two different x values, x one and x two, the y values f of x one and f of x two
are different numbers. Sometimes this is said, f is one to one, if whenever f of x one is equal
to f of x two, then x one has to equal x two. As our last example, let's try to find p inverse
of x, where p of x is the square root of x minus two drawn here. If we graph p inverse on the same
axis as p of x, we get the following graph, simply by flipping over the line y equals x.
If we try to solve the problem algebraically, we can write y equal to square root of x minus two,
reverse the roles of y and x and solve for y by squaring both sides and adding two.
Now, if we were to graph y equals x squared plus two, that would look like a parabola. It would
look like the red graph, we've already drawn together with another arm on the left side.
But we know that our actual inverse function consists only of this right arm.
We can specify this algebraically by making the restriction that x has to be bigger than or equal
to zero. This corresponds to the fact that on the original graph for the square root of x, y was
only greater than or equal to zero. Looking more closely at the domain and range of p and p inverse,
we know that the domain of p is all values of x such that x minus two is greater than or equal to
zero, since we can't take the square root of a negative number. This corresponds to x values
being greater than or equal to two, or an interval notation, the interval from two to infinity.
The range of p, we can see here is greater than or equal to zero, since we can't take the square
interval from two to infinity. The range of p, we can see from the graph is all y values greater
than or equal to zero, or the interval from zero to infinity. Similarly, based on the graph,
we see the domain of p inverse is x values greater than or equal to zero, the interval from zero to
infinity, and the range of p inverse is y values greater than or equal to two, or the interval
from two to infinity. If you look closely at these domains and ranges, you'll notice that the domain of
p corresponds exactly to the range of p inverse, and the range of p corresponds to the domain of p
inverse. This makes sense, because inverse functions reverse the rules of y and x. The domain of f
inverse of x is the x values for f inverse, which corresponds to the y values, or the range of f.
The range of f inverse is the y values for f inverse, which correspond to the x values, or the
domain of f. In this video, we discussed five key properties of inverse functions.
Inverse functions reverse the roles of y and x. The graph of y equals f inverse of x is the graph
of y equals f of x reflected over the line y equals x. When we compose f with f inverse,
we get the identity function y equals x. And similarly, when we compose f inverse with f,
that brings x to x. In other words, f and f inverse undo each other.
The function f of x has an inverse function, if and only if the graph of y equals f of x
satisfies the horizontal line test. And finally, the domain of f is the range of f inverse,
and the range of f is the domain of f inverse. These properties of inverse functions will be
important when we study exponential functions and their inverses logarithmic functions.
There are different ways of describing the size of an angle. This video explains how to convert
between them. Angles are commonly measured using either degrees or radians. If we're talking about
degrees, then a full circle by convention is 360 degrees. A half circle then would be 180 degrees.
And if I wanted to do say a third of a circle, that would be a third of 360 degrees or 120 degrees.
If we're using radians instead, then going all the way around the circle
is called two pi radians. The two pi was chosen because that's the circumference of a circle
with radius of one. A half circle is then half of two pi radians, which is pi radians.
And if I wanted to do say a quarter of a circle, that would be a quarter of my two pi radians,
a quarter of two pi is pi over two. To convert between degrees and radians, it's handy to use
the fact that 180 degrees corresponds to pi radians. Both of these represent half of a circle.
Let's convert negative 135 degrees to radians. Now you might be wondering, what does a negative
angle even mean? Well, by convention, if we go in the counterclockwise direction,
that's considered a positive angle. And if we go in the clockwise direction,
that's considered a negative angle. To convert negative 135 degrees to radians,
I could multiply by pi radians per 180 degrees. Notice that the degrees cancel here. And I end up
with negative 135 pi over 180 radians. That simplifies to negative three pi over four radians.
Or if I convert pi to a decimal, that's negative 2.3562 radians up to four decimal places. But
usually if the answer is a simple fraction times pi, it's better to leave it in that form rather
than convert it to a decimal. I can also go the other direction and convert radians to degrees.
Five pi over four radians. Now, again, I need to use the fact that pi radians is 180 degrees. But
if I write it like this, with radians on the top, and degrees on the bottom, then the radians won't
cancel. So that doesn't work. Instead, instead, I need to multiply by 180 degrees over pi radians,
so that I can cancel the radians that way, the radians cancel. And I get five pi times 180 over
four pi degrees. Now the pies also cancel. And this simplifies to 225 degrees. Converting seven
radians to degrees is similar. I need to multiply by 180 degrees over pi radians. If I work out seven
times 180 over pi on my calculator, I get 401.07 degrees up to two decimal places.
Notice that my answer, a little more than 400 is more than 360 degrees. So this is more than a full
circle. That makes sense, since seven radians is more than two pi radians, since pi is itself a
little more than three. Sometimes angles are given in terms of degrees, minutes and seconds, as in
32 degrees, 17 minutes, and 25 seconds. A minute is defined as one sixtieth of a degree.
A second is defined as one sixtieth of a minute. But since a minute is itself one sixtieth of a
degree, this is one sixtieth of one sixtieth of a degree, or one over 3600 of a degree.
You can also think of this by saying that they're 60 minutes in one degree,
and they're 3600 seconds in one degree.
Let's convert this number of degrees, minutes and seconds to a decimal number of degrees.
We know that we have 32 degrees plus 17 minutes plus 25 seconds.
I'm going to copy down the 32 degrees, but I need to convert the minutes to degrees.
I know that there's 60 minutes in one degree. If I want the units to cancel, I better put the
degrees on the top. So one degree corresponds to 60 minutes. Similarly, if I want to convert
seconds to degrees, 25 seconds, I know that they're 3600 seconds in one degree. I want the degrees to
end up on the top and I want the seconds on the bottom to cancel with the 25 seconds. So I need
to write it this way. Okay, now I can write this as 32 degrees plus 17 over 60 degrees plus 25 over
3600 degrees. And because the minutes canceled, and the seconds canceled. If I add this all up on
my calculator, I get 32.2903 degrees up to four decimal places. I can also go the other direction
and convert a decimal number of degrees into degrees minutes and seconds. I'm starting out
with 247 degrees, plus a decimal number of degrees left over. If I want to convert 0.3486
degrees to minutes, well, I know that I have 60 minutes in one degree. This time I want the
minutes on the top and the degrees on the bottom, so that my degrees will cancel. So I just multiply
my decimal by 60. And I end up with 20.916 minutes. Let me copy this down. And now I'm going to take
the 0.916 minutes and convert those to seconds. So I know that they're 60 seconds in one minute.
So canceling my units again, I just multiply by 60, which gives me 54.96 minutes. I can copy this down
as is, or I can round off my seconds and get 247 degrees, 20 minutes, and 55 seconds.
Converting between different ways of measuring angles is all about unit conversion. To convert
between radians and degrees, we use the fact that pi radians corresponds to 180 degrees.
To convert between minutes and seconds and degrees, we use the fact that 60 minutes
corresponds to one degree, and 60 seconds corresponds to one minute.
If you have a circle, a piece of the circumference is called an arc. And
a wedge of pi for that circle is called a sector. This video explains how to calculate
the length of the arc and the area of the sector in terms of the angle and the radius of the circle.
The circumference of a circle is given by the formula, the circumference equals 2 pi
times the radius. Let's use that to solve the following problem. A circular pool has a radius
of 8 meters. Find the arc length spanned by a central angle of 2.5 radians. So this angle
from the center of the circle is supposed to be 2.5 radians. I've drawn the angle as a little bit
less than half the circle because half the circle would be pi radians, which is 3.141 radians.
So I want to find the length of this arc. I know that the total circumference is going to be 2 pi
times 8 meters. But I just want a fraction of the circumference. The arc length I want
is going to be given by the fraction of the circle that the angle makes times the circumference of
the circle. The fraction of the circle that I want is given by the ratio of 2.5 radians
over the total number of radians in the circle, which is 2 pi radians. Multiply that by this
circumference, which we said was 2 pi times 8 meters. Notice that the two pies cancel.
And I'm left with just 2.5 times 8 meters, which is 10 meters. In general, the arc length that's
related to the angle it spans by considering the arc length to be the fraction of the circle
you get by taking the angle over the total angle of the circle of 2 pi times the circumference,
which is 2 pi r. Since the two pies cancel, as they did in our example, that means that arc length
is given by theta times r. Here, r is the radius of the circle. And theta is the angle. It's
important to note that theta needs to be measured in radians, not degrees for this to work. That's
because when I took this ratio, I was using 2 pi radians for the total measure of the circle. So
it's important that theta also be in radians. The area of a circle is given by the formula
pi r squared, where r is the radius. Let's use that fact to find the area of the sector of a
circle of radius 10 meters that spans an angle of pi over six radians. We know that the total
area of the circle is given by pi times 10 meter squared, or 100 pi meter squared.
But we just want a fraction of that area to give us the area of our sector.
So we want to take the fraction of the circle that the sector makes times the area of the circle.
Well, the fraction of the circle is given by the angle of pi or six over the total angle in the
whole circle of two pi. And we'll times that by the 100 pi meter squared. That simplifies
to 100 pi over 12 meters squared, or 25 thirds pi meters squared. As a decimal, that's 26.18
meters squared up to two decimal places. In general, if you want to find the area of a sector,
you can take the fraction of the circle that the sector spans out times the area of the circle
pi r squared. Notice that the fraction of the circle is given by the angle that the sector makes
in radians, divided by the two pi radians in the circle.
Since the pies cancel, we can simplify this formula by saying the area is given by theta
over two times r squared, where theta is the angle of the sector in radians. Again, it's
important that this angle be in radians, since that's how we're doing our fraction of our circle
comparison. As usual, r represents the radius of the circle. Notice that if you don't have your
angle in radians, if it's in degrees instead, not a big deal, because we can always convert from
degrees to radians first, before using our formula. In this video, we saw that for a sector of angle
theta given in radians, the arc length is given by the formula theta times r. And the area of the
sector is given by theta over two times r squared, where r is the radius of the circle. This video
defines linear and radial speed for a rotating circle and explains how to convert between them.
Consider a spinning wheel. The angular speed is the angle it goes through in a unit of time. I can
write that as angle per time. The units will be something like radians per second, if the angle
is measured in radians and the times measured in seconds, or I guess we could do degrees per minute,
etc. The linear speed is the speed of a point on the rim of the wheel. So that is the distance
a point on the rim of the wheel travels in a unit of time.
I can think of that as distance per time. And so it has units of something like meters per second,
for example, or it could be feet per minute, etc. Suppose we have a ferrous wheel with radius 20 meters,
that's making one revolution every two minutes. We want to find its angular speed and the linear
speed of a point on its rim. Now the ferrous wheel is going one revolution every two minutes. So
that's one half revolution per minute. I want to I want to find the angular speed, which is the
angle it goes through in a unit of time. I've already got a unit of time in the denominator
minutes, but I've got to somehow convert revolutions to angle. So my angular speed is
one half revolutions per minute. One revolution, I'll put that on the bottom, so the units will
cancel out, one revolution is going through an angle of two pi radians. That means my angular speed
is going to be one half times two pi radians per minute, or pi radians per minute. So that's
the linear speed, the speed of a point on the rim. Well, the wheel is going pi radians per minute.
I got to somehow convert radians into distance. So I know that when I go to pi radians, so that's all
the way around the circle, I'm going all the way around the circle. So I'm going all the way around
the circle, I'm going all the way around the circumference and distance. So that would be
two pi times the radius or two pi times 20 meters. The two pies cancel, as do the radians. And I'm
left with 20 pi meters per minute. Let's review how we got from angular speed to linear speed in
order to get a more general formula. I'll call the angular speed, omega looks like a w, and I'll
call the linear speed V. In the previous problem, we found the linear speed V by starting with the
angular speed, omega, and multiplying it by the circumference divided by two pi. That's because
the point on the rim travels the whole circumference as it goes through an angle of two pi all the way
around the circle. So I'll write that down here, circumference over two pi. But since I know that
my circumference is given by the formula two pi r, and the two pies cancel, as they did in the
previous problem, that shows that the linear speed is the angular speed times r, where r is
the radius of the circle. In this video, we defined linear speed and radial speed, and found that
linear speed was radial speed times the radius of the circle. This video introduces the trig
functions, sine, cosine, tangent, secant, cosecant, and cotangent for right triangles.
For a right triangle, with sides of length a, b, and c, and an angle theta as drawn, we define
sine of theta as the length of the opposite side over the hypotenuse. The side that's opposite to
our angle theta has measure a and the hypotenuse is this side here with measure C. So that would be
a over C for this triangle. cosine of theta is defined as the length of the adjacent side
over the length of hypotenuse. This side here is the side adjacent to theta. Of course, the
hypotenuse is also adjacent to theta, but it's special as the hypotenuse. So we don't think of
it as the adjacent side. So that would be b over C tangent of theta is the opposite side length
over the adjacent side length. So that would be a over b. The mnemonic to remember this
is so catoa, that's sine is opposite over hypotenuse, cosine is adjacent over hypotenuse,
and tangent is opposite over adjacent. In fact, there's a relationship between tangent and sine
and cosine, namely, tangent of theta is equal to sine of theta over cosine of theta. If you
want to see why that's that's because sine of theta over cosine of theta is given by sine,
which is opposite over hypotenuse, divided by cosine, which is adjacent over hypotenuse.
If we compute these fractions by flipping and multiplying
the hypotenuse length cancels, and we just get opposite over adjacent, which is by definition
tangent of theta. There are three more trig functions that are defined in terms of sine,
cosine and tangent. First of all, they're secant of theta by definition, that's one over
cosine of theta. So it's going to be one over the adjacent over the hypotenuse, which is the
hypotenuse over the adjacent, which in this triangle is C over B.
cosecant of theta is defined as one over sine theta. So that's one over the opposite
over the hypotenuse, which is the hypotenuse over the opposite. And for this triangle,
that's going to be C over a. Finally, cotangent of theta is defined as one over tan theta. So
that's going to be one over opposite over adjacent, flip and multiply, I get adjacent over
opposite for which in this case is B over a. So notice that the values for cotangent,
cosecant and secant are the reciprocals of the values for tangent, sine and cosine, respectively.
Let's use these definitions to find the exact values of all six trig functions for the angle
theta in this triangle. I'll start with sine of theta, that's opposite over hypotenuse.
Well, for this angle theta, the opposite side is down here and has measured to the hypotenuse
has measure five. So sine theta is two over five. cosine theta is adjacent over hypotenuse,
but I don't know the value of this side length. But fortunately, I can find it using Pythagorean
theorem. So as I have a right triangle here, I know that a squared, I'll call the this side
length a plus b squared, where b is this other leg of the triangle is equal to c squared, where c is
the hypotenuse. So here I have a squared plus two squared equals five squared, which means that a
squared plus four equals 25, a squared is 21. So a is plus or minus the square root of 21. But
since I'm talking about the length of a side of a triangle, I can just use the positive answer.
Returning to my computation of cosine theta, I can write it as adjacent, which is the square root
of 21 over hypotenuse, which is five. tangent theta is the opposite over the adjacent. So that's
going to be two over the square root of 21. To compute secant of theta, that's one over cosine
theta. So that's going to be one over square root of 21 over five, which is five over the
square root of 21, the reciprocal of my cosine value. cosecant theta is one over sine theta,
that's going to be the reciprocal of my sine, so five halves. And cotangent theta is one over
tan theta. So it's going to be the reciprocal of my tan value, square root of 21 over two. Finally,
we'll do an application. So if we have a kite that's flying at an angle of elevation, that's the
angle from the horizontal of 75 degrees, with a kite length string of 100 meters, we want to find
out how high it is. I'll call the height y. Well, we want to relate the known quantities, this angle
and this hypotenuse, to the unknown quantity. The unknown quantity is the opposite side of our
triangle. So if we use sine of theta equals opposite over hypotenuse, then we can relate these known
amounts sine of 75 degrees to our unknown amount y, which is the opposite and our known amount of 100
meters. solving for why this gives that y is 100 meters times sine of 75 degrees, we can use a
calculator to compute sine of 75 degrees, be sure you use degree mode, and not radiant mode,
when you type in the 75. When I do the computation, I get a final answer of 96.59 meters up to two
decimal places. Notice that we're ignoring the height of the person in this problem.
To remember the definitions of the trig functions, you can use the mnemonic
Soca Toa, and the fact that secant is the reciprocal of cosine, cosecant the reciprocal of sine,
and cotangent the reciprocal of tangent. In this video, I'll use geometry to compute the sine and
cosine of a 30 degree angle, a 45 degree angle, and a 60 degree angle. One way to compute the
one way to compute the sine of a 45 degree angle is to use a right triangle with a 45 degree angle.
This particular right triangle has a hypotenuse of length one.
Since all the angles of the triangle have to add up to 180 degrees, and we already have 90 degrees
and 45 degrees. The remaining angle must also be 45 degrees. So we have an isosceles triangle
with two sides the same length. I'll call that side length a. If we want sine of 45 degrees,
let's use this 45 degree angle here, then sine is opposite over hypotenuse. So if I can figure
out how long this side length is, I'll be able to compute sine of 45 degrees. Now the Pythagorean
theorem says this side length squared plus that side length squared equals the hypotenuse squared.
So we have that a squared plus a squared equals one squared. Alright, that is two a squared equals
one. So a squared is one half, and a is plus or minus the square root of one half. Since we're
talking about the lengths of sides of triangles, I can just use the positive square root.
It's customary to rewrite this as the square root of one over the square root of two,
which is one over the square root of two, and then rationalize the denominator by multiplying
the top and the bottom by the square root of two. That gives me a square root of two in the numerator,
and the square root of two squared in the denominator, which is the square root of two over
two. So these side lengths are the square root of two over two. Now I can figure out the sine
of 45 degrees by computing the opposite over the hypotenuse. That's, I'm looking at this angle,
so opposite is square root of two over two, hypotenuse is one.
So the sine of 45 degrees is the square root of two over two cosine of 45 degrees is adjacent
over hypotenuse. That's this side length over this hypotenuse. So that's the square root of two
over two over one again. What would happen if instead of using this triangle with hypotenuse one,
we use this triangle, also a 45 45 90 triangle, but with hypotenuse five, not quite drawn to scale.
Please pause the video for a moment and repeat the computation with this triangle.
This time I'll call the side lengths B, Pythagorean theorem tells me B squared plus B squared equals
five squared. So two B squared equals 25. And B squared equals 25 over two. B is going to be
the plus or minus the square root of 25 over two. Again, I can just use the positive version.
And so B is the square root of 25 over the square root of two, which is five over the square root of
two rationalizing the denominator, I get five root two over two. Now sine of my 45 degree angle
is opposite over hypotenuse, which is five square root of two over two divided by five.
That simplifies to the square root of two over two as before. And a similar computation shows
that cosine of 45 degrees is also squared of two over two as before. This makes sense because
sine and cosine are based on ratios of sides. And since these two triangles are similar triangles,
they'll have the same ratios of sides. To find the sine and cosine of 30 degrees,
let's use this 30 60 90 right triangle with hypotenuse one. If we double the triangle
we get an angle of 30 here, so a total angle of 60 degrees here. And this angle is also 60 degrees.
So we have a 60 60 60 triangle, that's an equilateral triangle, all side lengths are the same.
Since this side length has length one. This side length is also one.
This entire side length is one, which means the short side of our original triangle has length one
half. Going back to my original triangle, let's use the Pythagorean theorem to find the length
of its longer side x. Pythagorean theorem says x squared plus one half squared equals one squared.
So x squared plus a fourth equals one x squared is three fourths. And so x is plus or minus the
square root of three fourths, use the positive version, and get the square root of three over the
square root of four, which is the square root of three over two. Now using our original triangle
again, let's compute the sine of this 30 degree angle here. We know that sine of 30 degrees is
opposite over hypotenuse. The opposite of this angle is one half and the hypotenuse is one.
So we get a sine of one half over one, which is one half cosine of 30 degrees is adjacent over
hypotenuse. So that's the square root of three over two divided by one. To find sine of 60 degrees
and cosine of 60 degrees, we can actually use the same green triangle and just focus on this
upper corner angle of 60 degrees instead. So sine of 60 degrees,
opposite over hypotenuse, but this time the opposite to this angle is a square root of three over two.
Cosine of 60 degrees, adjacent over hypotenuse gives us one half.
I'll summarize the results in this table below. Notice that a 30 degree angle corresponds to
pi over six radians since 30 degrees times pi over 180 is pi over six. Similarly, 45 degrees
corresponds to pi over four radians and 60 degrees corresponds to pi over three radians.
I recommend that you memorize the three numbers one half root two over two and root three over two
and the fact that one half and root three over two go together.
And root two over two goes with itself. From that information, it's not hard to reconstruct
the triangles. You know that a 45 45 90 triangle is an isosceles triangle. So it must have
the side lengths where the same number goes with itself. And a 30 60 90 triangle
has one side length smaller than the other. So the smaller side must be one half and the
larger side must be root three over two since root three is bigger than one. And so root three over
two is bigger than one half. Doing a visual check, you can easily fill in the angles,
the smaller angle must be the 30 degree angle, and the larger one must be the 60 degree one.
In this video, we computed the sine and cosine of three special angles, 30 degrees,
45 degrees, and 60 degrees. This video defines sine and cosine in terms of points on the unit
circle. A unit circle is a circle with radius one. Up to now, we define sine and cosine and tangent
in terms of right triangles. For example, to find sine of 14 degrees in theory, you could draw a
right triangle with an angle of 14 degrees, and then calculate the sine as the length of the opposite
side over the length of the hypotenuse. But if we use this method to try to compute sine of 120
degrees, things go horribly wrong. When we draw this 120 degree angle, and this right angle,
there's no way to complete this picture to get a right triangle. So instead, we're going to use a
unit circle, that is, a circle of radius one. The figure below illustrates how right triangles
and the unit circle are related. If you draw right triangles, with larger of hypotenuse one,
with larger and larger angles, then the top vertex sweeps out part of a unit circle.
Let's look at this relationship in more detail. In this figure, I've drawn a right triangle
inside a unit circle. The hypotenuse of the triangle is the radius of the circle, which is one.
One vertex of the right triangle is at the origin. Another vertex of the right triangle
is at the edge of the circle. I'm going to call the coordinates of that vertex a
b. Now the base of this right triangle has length a the x coordinate, and the height of the right
triangle is b the y coordinate. If I use the right triangle definition of sine and cosine of theta,
this right here is the angle theta, then cosine of theta is adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's
a over one, or a. Notice that a also represents the x coordinate of this point on the unit circle
at angle theta from the x axis. I'll write that down. For sine of theta, if I use the right triangle
definition, that's opposite over hypotenuse. So b over one, which is just b. But b also represents
the y coordinate of this point in the on the unit circle at angle theta. For tangent theta,
if we use the right sine triangle definition, it's opposite over adjacent. So that's b over a.
I can think of that as the y coordinate of the point over the x coordinate of the point.
Now for angles theta that can't be part of a right triangle, because they're too big,
they're bigger than 90 degrees, like now I'll call this angle here theta. I can still use this
idea of x and y coordinates to calculate sine and cosine of theta. So if I just mark this point
on the end of this line at angle theta, if I mark that to have coordinates x and y,
then cosine theta, I'm still going to define as the x coordinate of this point, sine theta as the y
coordinate, and tangent theta as the ratio of the y coordinate over the x coordinate.
When we use this unit circle definition, we always draw theta starting from the positive x axis
and going counterclockwise.
Let's use this unit circle definition to calculate sine cosine and tangent of this angle phi.
In our figure, we have a unit circle, and these numbers are supposed to represent the x and y
coordinates of this point on the unit circle at the end point of this line segment that lies at
angle phi from the positive x axis. Sine phi is equal to the y coordinate. Cosine phi is equal to
the x coordinate. And tangent of phi is given by the ratio of the two,
which works out to negative 0.3639 up to four decimal places.
This video gives a method for calculating sine cosine and tangent in terms of the unit circle.
Starting from the positive x axis, you draw the angle theta going counterclockwise.
You look at the coordinates of the point on the unit circle where that angle ends.
And cosine of that angle theta is the x coordinate, sine of theta is the y coordinate,
and tangent of theta is the ratio. This video gives three properties of the trig function
sine and cosine that can be deduced from the unit circle definition.
Recall that the unit circle definition of sine and cosine for an angle theta
is that cosine theta is the x coordinate, and sine of theta is the y coordinate for the point
on the unit circle at angle theta. The first property is what I call the periodic property.
This says that the values of cosine and sine are periodic with period two pi. And what that means
is that if you take cosine of an angle plus two pi, you get the same thing as just if you took
cosine of the angle. So when we write this down, we're assuming that theta is measured in radians.
If we want to measure theta in degrees, the similar statement is that cosine of theta plus
360 degrees is equal to cosine of theta. We can make the same statements for sine,
sine of an angle plus two pi is equal to sine of the original angle here, the angle being measured
in radians. If we want to measure the angle in degrees, the statement is that sine of theta plus
360 is equal to sine of theta. We can see why this is true from the unit circle definition
of sine and cosine. This is our angle theta, then theta plus two pi, the plus two pi adds
a full turn around the unit circle to our angle. So we end up at the same place.
Theta, and theta plus two pi are just two different names for the same location on the unit circle.
And since sine and cosine give you the y and x coordinates of that point on the unit circle,
they have to have the same value. Similarly, if we consider an angle theta, and an angle theta
minus two pi, the minus two pi means we go the other direction around the unit circle, clockwise,
clockwise, we still end up in the same place. And therefore, cosine of theta minus two pi,
the x coordinate of that position is the same thing as cosine of theta, sine of theta minus two pi
is the same thing as sine of theta. The same statements hold if we add or subtract multiples
of two pi, for example, cosine of theta plus four pi is still the same thing as cosine of theta.
This time, we've just gone two turns around the unit circle and still gotten back to the same place.
So if we want to find cosine of five pi, that's the same thing as cosine of pi plus four pi,
which is the same thing as cosine of pi. Thinking about the unit circle, pi is halfway around the
unit circle. So cosine of pi means the x coordinate of this point right here. Well, that point has
coordinates negative one zero. So cosine of pi must be negative one. If I want to take sine of
negative 420 degrees, or that sine of negative 360 degrees, minus 60 degrees, which is the same thing
which is the same thing as sine of minus 60 degrees. Thinking about the unit circle, minus 60
degrees means I start at the positive x axis and go clockwise by 60 degrees. That lands me about
right here. And so that's one of the special angles that has an x coordinate of one half,
a y coordinate of negative root three over two. And therefore sine of negative 60 is negative
root three over two, the y coordinate. The next property I call the even odd property.
It says that cosine is an even function, which means that cosine of negative theta is the same
thing as cosine of theta. While sine is an odd function, which means that sine of negative theta
is the negative of sine of theta. To see why this is true, let's look at an angle theta.
And the angle negative theta, a negative angle means you go in the clockwise instead of counter
clockwise direction from the positive x axis. The coordinates of this point by definition
are cosine theta sine theta, whereas the coordinates of this point
are cosine negative theta, sine of negative theta.
But by symmetry, these two points have the exact same x coordinate. And therefore cosine of theta
must equal cosine of negative theta. While their y coordinates have the same magnitude,
but opposite signs, this one's positive and this one's negative.
Therefore, sine of negative theta is the negative of sine of theta.
Let's figure out if tan of theta is an even or odd function.
Well, we know that tan of negative theta tangent by definition is sine over cosine.
Well, we know that sine of negative theta is the negative
of sine of theta, whereas cosine of negative theta is cosine of theta.
Therefore, we're getting negative sine theta over cosine theta, which is negative tan of theta.
Since tan of negative theta is the negative of tan of theta, tan theta is an odd function.
The last property on this video is the Pythagorean property, which says that cosine of theta squared
plus sine of theta squared is equal to one. A lot of times this property is written with the
shorthand notation, cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. But this notation,
cosine squared theta just means you take cosine of theta and square it. This property is called the
Pythagorean property because it comes from the Pythagorean theorem. Let me draw a right triangle
on the unit circle. I'll call this angle theta. So the coordinates of this endpoint here are
cosine theta, sine theta. Since this is supposed to be a unit circle,
since this is supposed to be a unit circle, the hypotenuse of my right triangle has length one.
The base of my right triangle is just cosine theta, same thing as the x coordinate of this point.
And the height of my triangle is the y coordinate of the point sine theta. Now the Pythagorean
theorem says that this side length squared plus that side length squared equals one squared.
Since one squared is the same thing as one, that gives me the Pythagorean property.
The Pythagorean property is handy for computing values of cosine given values of sine and vice
versa. In this problem, we're told that sine of t is negative two sevenths, and t is an angle that
lies in quadrant three. When we say the angle lies in quadrant three, that means the terminal
side of the angle lies here in quadrant three. One way to find cosine of t is to use the fact that
cosine squared t plus sine squared t is equal to one. That is cosine of t squared plus negative two
seventh squared is equal to one. I can write this as cosine of t squared plus four,
forty ninths is equal to one. And so cosine of t squared is equal to one minus four forty ninths,
which is 45, forty ninths. Taking the square root of both sides, that gives me the cosine t
is plus or minus the square root of 45 over 49. That's plus or minus the square root of 45 over
seven. Now, since we're in the third quadrant, we know that cosine of t, which represents the x
coordinate of this point, must also be negative. Therefore, cosine of t is going to be negative
squared of 45 over seven. It's also possible to solve this problem using the Pythagorean
theorem for right triangles directly. If we look at the fact that sine of t is negative two sevenths
and ignore the negative sign for now, we can think of this information as telling us that we have a
right triangle angle theta, whose opposite side is two, and whose hypotenuse is seven.
If we call this side here a, then Pythagorean theorem says this a squared plus two squared
is seven squared. So a squared plus four is 49. So a squared is 45. And a is plus or minus the
square root of 45. Since I'm worrying about a triangle, I'm going to use the positive value.
Now, cosine of t is going to be adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's going to be the square root
of 45 over seven. Now I go back to thinking about positive and negative signs. And I noticed that
since I'm in the third quadrant, my cosine needs to be negative. So I just stick a negative sign in
this alternative solution uses many of the same ideas as the previous solution,
and ultimately gets us the same answer. This video gives three properties of trig functions.
The periodic property, the even odd property, and the Pythagorean property.
This video is about the graphs of sine and cosine.
I want to graph the functions y equals cosine t and y equals sine t, where t is in radians.
I'm going to think of this being the t axis, and this being the y axis. One way to do this is to
plot points. So I'll fill in this chart using my knowledge of special angles on the unit circle.
These points will be easier to graph if I convert them all to decimals.
Now I'll plot the points for cosine and connect the dots to get a graph of y equals cosine t from t
equals zero to t equals two pi. To continue the graph for t values less than zero or bigger than
two pi, I could plot more points, or I could just use the fact that the cosine values repeat.
If I add or subtract two pi to the my angle t, I'll be at the same place on the unit circle,
so my cosine will be exactly the same. Therefore, my values of cosine, which are represented by
my y values on this graph, repeat themselves. For example, when my t value is two pi plus pi
over six about like here, it's cosine is the same as the cosine of just pi over six. So I'll
take this dot here and repeat it over here. Similarly, the one t is like two pi plus pi over
four, I get the same value of cosine is when it's just pi over four. So this dot is going to repeat.
And I can continue repeating all my dots. This one repeats over here at two pi plus say pi over
three. And so my whole graph will repeat something like this. It also repeats on this side, something
like this. Since subtracting two pi from my t values will also give me the same value of cosine.
We can also plot points to get a graph for sine and extend it by repetition.
And extend it by repetition.
Going forward, I'll usually write the function sine and cosine as y equals cosine of x and y
equals sine of x. When I write it this way, notice that x now refers to an angle, while y refers to
a value of cosine or sine. That's a different meaning of x and y compared to when we're talking
about the unit circle, where x refers to the cosine value and y refers to the sine value.
Now let's look at some properties of the graphs of sine and cosine.
The first thing you might notice is that the graph of cosine and the graph of sine are super
similar to each other. In fact, you can think of the graph of cosine as just being the graph of
sine shifted to the left by pi over two. So we can write cosine of x as the sine function
of x plus pi over two, since adding pi over two on the inside moves the graph horizontally to the
left by pi over two. Or we can think of the graph of sine as being constructed from the
graph of cosine by shifting the cosine graph right by pi over two. That means we can write sine
of x as equal to cosine of x minus pi over two, since subtracting pi over two on the inside shifts
the cosine graph to the right by pi over two. Next, let's look at domain and range. The domain
of sine and cosine is all real numbers. I'll write that as negative infinity to infinity,
but the range is just from negative one to one. That makes sense, because sine and cosine come
from the unit circle. The input values for the domain come from angles. And you can use any
number as an angle positive negative as big as you want, just by wrapping a lot of times around
the circle. The output values for the range that is the actual values of sine and cosine come from
the coordinates on the unit circle. And those coordinates can't be any bigger than one or
any smaller than negative one. So that gives us our range. As far as even and odd behavior,
you can tell from the graph, here's cosine, that it's symmetric with respect to the y axis. And so
it must be even. Whereas the graph of sine is symmetric with respect to the origin and must
be odd. The absolute maximum values of these two functions is one and the absolute minimum value
is negative one. We can also use the words midline amplitude and period to describe these
two functions. The midline is the horizontal line halfway in between the maximum and minimum points.
Here, the midline is y equals zero. The amplitude is the vertical distance between a maximum point
and the midline. You can also think of the amplitude as the vertical distance between a
minimum point and the midline, or as half the vertical distance between a min point and a max
point. For the cosine function and sine function, the amplitude is one. A periodic function is a
function that repeats at regular horizontal intervals. The horizontal length of the smallest
repeating unit is called the period. For y equals cosine of x, the period is two pi. Notice that the
period is the horizontal distance between successive peaks, or maximum points, or between
successive troughs, or minimum points. Algebraically, we can write cosine of x plus two pi equals cosine
of x and sine of x plus two pi equals sine of x to indicate that the functions repeat themselves
over an interval of two pi and have a period of two pi. In this video, we graphed y equals cosine of x
and y equals sine of x. And observe that they both have a midline at y equals zero, an amplitude
of one, and a period of two pi.
Sine use of all functions are functions that are related to sine and cosine by transformations,
like stretching and shrinking and shifting. This video is about graphing these functions.
Let's start by graphing the function y equals three sine of two x. This function is related to
the function y equals sine x. So I'll graph that first. Now the three on the outside
stretches this graph vertically by a factor of three. While the two on the inside
compresses it horizontally by a factor of one half. If instead I want to graph y equals three
sine two x plus one, this plus one on the outside shifts everything up by one unit.
Let's compare the midline amplitude.
And period of our original y equals sine x, our transformed y equals three sine two x and our
further transformed y equals three sine two x plus one. The original sign has a midline
at y equals zero, an amplitude of one and a period of two pi.
For the transformed function, y equals three times sine of two x, the two on the inside
shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half. So it changes the period of two pi
into a period of one half times two pi, which is pi. Since the two on the inside only affects x values
and horizontal distances, it doesn't affect the midline, which is a y value, or the amplitude,
which is a vertical distance. But the three on the outside does affect these things. Well, in
particular, it affects the amplitude, since everything is stretched out vertically by a
factor of three, the amplitude of one gets stretched to an amplitude of three. Now,
the midline doesn't actually change because multiplying a y value of zero by three is still a y
value of zero. Now, on the third function, we've taken the second function and added one on the
outside. So that shifts everything up by one. Therefore, instead of having a midline at y equals
zero, we now have a midline at y equals zero. So we have a midline at y equals zero, and we
therefore, instead of having a midline at y equals zero, we now have a midline at y equals one.
The amplitude doesn't change, though, it's still three, because shifting everything up by one doesn't
affect the distance between the midline and the and the maximum point. Also, the period is still
pi, since the period is a horizontal measure, and adding one on the outside only affects vertical
things. Next, let's graph the function y equals three times sine of two times quantity x minus
pi over four. This function is very closely related to the first function we graphed on the previous
page, that was y equals three sine of two x. In fact, if we give the name f of x to that function,
and maybe we can call g of x, this other function, then we can get g of x by taking f of x and
plugging in x minus pi over four in prex. In other words, g of x is f of x minus pi over four.
This relationship gives me an idea for graphing g of x the function we want to graph. We can first
graph f of x, we already did that on the previous page, and then we can shift its graph
to the right by pi over four, because that's what you do when you subtract a number on the
inside of a function. So here's the graph of y equals three sine two x. Recall that it's just
the graph of sine stretched vertically by a factor of three and shrunk horizontally by a factor of
one half. Now to graph the function that I want, I'm going to shift this graph over by pi over four
to the right. Notice that since I had my function written in factored form, I could just read off
the horizontal shift. But if I had written it instead, as y equals three sine two x minus pi
over two, which is algebraically equivalent, it would be easy to get confused and think that I
needed to shift over by pi over two. So it's best to factor first before figuring out what the shift
is, we're factoring out the coefficient of x. If instead we wanted to graph this function,
same as the one we just graphed, it's just with a minus one on the outside, that minus one would
just bring everything down by one. Let's take a moment to look at midline amplitude and period
for the original parent function y equals sine of x, and our final transformed function
y equals three sine of two times quantity x minus pi over four minus one.
Our original sine function has midline at y equals zero amplitude of one and period of two pi.
For our transformed function, the three on the outside stretches vertically, so it makes the
amplitude three. The minus one on the outside shifts everything down by one. So it brings the
midline y equals zero down to y equals negative one. The two on the inside,
shrinks everything horizontally by a factor of one half. So the period becomes one half times two
pi, which is pi. Finally, there's a horizontal shift going on.
Our transformed function shifts to the right by pi over four. This horizontal shift is sometimes
called the phase shift. The function we just analyzed was y equals three sine two x minus
pi over four minus one, which could also be written as y equals three sine two x minus pi over two
minus one. This is a function of the form y equals a sine b x minus c plus D,
where B is positive. If we have a function of this form or the similar function with cosine in it,
then we know that the midline is going to be at y equals D. That's because the original midline of
sine or cosine at y equals zero gets shifted up by D. We know that the amplitude is going to be
a because this a multiplied on the outside stretches everything vertically by a factor of a
to be a little more accurate, we should say the amplitude is the absolute value of a
in case a is negative. If a is negative, then that amounts to a vertical reflection or reflection
over the x axis. We know that the period of the original sine or cosine is two pi. And we know
that this factor of B amounts to a horizontal shrink by a factor of one over B, or I guess it
could be a horizontal stretch by a factor of one over B, if B is less than one. So because we're
starting with a period of two pi, and we're multiplying by one over B, our new period is going
to be two pi over B. The trickiest thing is the horizontal shift. And to get that right, I like
to factor out this B for my equation. So instead of writing y equals a cosine b x minus c plus D,
I'm going to write y equals a cosine B times quantity x minus C over B plus D. Similarly,
if it's a sine function, I write y equals a sine B times x minus quantity C over B plus D.
Then I can read off the horizontal shift as C over B. And that'll be a shift to the right
if C over B is positive and a shift to the left if C over B is negative. This might seem backwards
from what you're used to, but it's because we have that minus sign there. So if C over B is
positive, we're actually subtracting on the inside. So that shifts right, if C of B over B is negative,
minus a negative is actually adding something. And that's why it shifts it to the left.
So as one final example, say I wanted to graph y equals one third cosine of one half x plus
three minus five, that would have a midline at y equals minus five, an amplitude of one third,
a period of two pi divided by one half, which is four pi, and a horizontal shift.
Hmm, better rewrite this. A horizontal shift of six units to the left.
The horizontal shift is sometimes called the phase shift.
And that's all for graphs of sine and swivel functions.
This video is about graphing the trig functions tangent, secant, cotangent and cosecant.
To gain an intuition for the graph of y equals tangent of x, I think it's handy to look at
the slope of a line at angle theta on the unit circle. The slope of this line is the rise over
the run. But the rise is given by sine of theta. And the run is given by cosine of theta. So the
slope is given by sine theta over cosine theta, which is simply tan of theta. So if I want to graph
y equals tan of x, I can think of x as being the angle and y as being the slope of the line
at that angle. Notice that if the angle is zero, the slope is zero. But as the angle increases
towards pi over two, the slope gets bigger and bigger heading towards infinity.
As the angle goes from zero towards negative pi over two, the slope is getting negative
and heading towards negative infinity. At exactly pi over two and negative pi over two,
we have a vertical line. And so the slope is undefined.
Using this information, let's graph a rough sketch of y equals tan x. Remember, we're thinking of x
as the angle and y as the slope, we're going to go between an angle of negative pi over two and pi over
two. So we said that the slope was zero, when the angle is zero, and then it heads up towards
positive infinity as we go towards the angle goes towards pi over two with an undefined value
at pi over two, it goes negative heading towards negative infinity as the angle heads towards
negative pi over two, also with an undefined value at negative pi over two. You can also verify
that for angles slightly bigger than pi over two, we have the same line
as for angles that are approaching negative pi over two. And therefore, this picture repeats.
And it turns out that tangent is periodic
with period
not two pi like sine and cosine, but just pi. The period of pi makes sense because if you take
a line and rotate it by 180 degrees, it's the same line with the same slope and therefore has the
same value of tangent. In this graph of y equals tan x, notice that the x intercepts
are at values of x of the form negative two pi negative pi zero pi two pi, etc.
You can write that as pi times k, where k is an integer, that is a positive or negative
whole number or zero. This makes a lot of sense because tangent of x is sine of x over cosine
of x. And so you're going to get x intercepts. That's where y is zero, which is where the
numerator is zero. And sine x is zero at values of the form pi to pi, and so on.
From the graph, you can see the vertical asymptotes are at values like negative three pi over two,
negative pi over two, pi over two, and three pi over two. These values can be written as
pi over two times k, where k is an odd integer. Again, this makes sense from the definition
of tangent since the vertical asymptotes will occur where the denominator is zero and cosine x is
zero at numbers like negative pi over two, pi over two, three pi over two, and so on. The domain of
tangent is the exact case for which it's defined. So that's going to be everything except for the
vertical asymptotes, we can write that as x such that x is not equal to pi over two times k for k
and odd integer. The range or the y values go all the way from negative infinity to infinity.
And the period as we mentioned previously is pi. Since the smallest repeating unit
has a horizontal width of pi. To graph y equals secant x, I'm going to remember that secant
is one over cosine. So if I start with a graph of cosine, I can take the reciprocal of the y values
to get the graph of secant. The reciprocal of one is one, the reciprocal of zero is undefined. So
I'm not going to have a value at pi over two, negative pi over two, three pi over two, or negative
three pi over two. When I take the reciprocal of numbers, just less than one, I'm going to get
numbers just greater than one. But if I take the reciprocal of positive numbers, getting close to
zero, I'm going to get really big positive numbers going up towards infinity. Similarly, on the other
side. Over here, I have numbers close to zero but negative. So their reciprocals will be negative
numbers heading towards negative infinity. The reciprocal of negative one is negative one.
And similarly here. So I'm getting kind of positive and negative buckets and upside down
buckets as the graph of my secant. Notice that secant has a period of two pi, which makes sense
since cosine has a period of two pi. It has a range that goes from negative infinity to negative one
inclusive. And from one to infinity, that makes sense because the range of cosine is between
one and negative one. And we're taking the reciprocal of those values. The domain is everything
except for the vertical asymptotes. Now the vertical asymptotes are where cosine is zero.
So that is at values of the form pi over two, three pi over two, etc. That's values of the form
pi over two k, where k is an odd integer. So the domain is going to be x values such that x is not
equal to pi over two k, for k, an odd integer. The x intercepts of secant, well, it doesn't have any,
because you can't take one over something and get the number zero for your y value.
We've seen the graphs of y equals tan x, and y equals secant x. This is the graph of y equals
cotangent x. It looks similar to the graph of tangent x is just a decreasing function instead
of an increasing one, and it has its vertical asymptotes, and its x intercepts in different places.
Finally, this green graph is the graph of y equals cosecant x. It's related to the graph
of sine x since cosecant is one over sine x. And in fact, if I draw the graph of sine x in between,
you can see how it kind of bounces off because it's the reciprocal.
I encourage you to memorize the general shape of these graphs. You can always figure out the
details by thinking about how they're related to the graphs of cosine of x and sine x.
This video is about the graphs of transformations of tangent secant cotangent cosecant. Before I
graph this fancy function, I'm going to graph the related parent function y equals cosecant of x.
Recall that cosecant of x is one over sine of x. So the graph of cosecant of x has a vertical
asymptotes where sine of x is zero. That puts the vertical asymptotes at pi to pi, zero, and so on.
Cosecant of x is one where sine is one. So here. And so it looks something like this.
Now, when I graph my fancy function, I know that the two on the outside does a vertical stretch
by two, the plus one shifts up by one. The pi means everything shrinks horizontally
by one over pi. And so the period, instead of being two pi, like it is for cosecant,
it's going to be two pi divided by pi, which is two. Finally, this pi over two has to do with a
horizontal shift. But in order to see by how much we horizontal shift, we need to factor out the pi
first. So if I rewrite my function as two times cosecant pi times x plus a half plus one, I can
see that the horizontal shift is one half to the left. Let me do those transformations in pieces.
First, I'll do the vertical motions. So I'll leave the horizontal axis as is. I'll stretch by a factor
of two. And now I'll shift up by one. Next, I'll worry about the horizontal motion. Instead of a
period of two pi, I'm going to have a period of two. But in addition, everything is going to be
shifted left by one half. So instead of having my vertical asymptotes at zero pi, two pi, and so on,
they would be at zero, one, two, and so on, except everything's shifted over by one half. So that
means the vertical asymptotes will actually be at negative a half, a half, one and a half, and so
on. Another way to find the vertical asymptotes is by noting that cosecant is one over a sign. So
therefore, cosecant pi x plus one half does not exist when sine pi x plus one half equals zero,
i.e. when pi times x plus one half is equal to a multiple of pi. Canceling the pies and solving
for x, that's when x is some number minus a half. So those are exactly the values of say one half,
three halves, five halves, and so on that we've drawn. So once we've got the vertical asymptotes in
place, we can see that our graph fits in between them. This purple piece got shrunk horizontally
and shifted by a half. So it ends up hugging the x axis. I'll draw it in right here.
And all the other pieces also get shrunk horizontally and shifted. So my final graph
looks something like this. In this next problem, we're given the graph and we need to find the
equation. The shape of the graph and the fact that it's increasing tells us it must be a tangent
graph. But y equals tan x by itself would have a period of pi. Let's check what our graph has a
period of. We need to find the horizontal width of one complete cycle. It's probably easiest to
measure if I sketch in the vertical asymptotes, which seem to run from an x value of negative three
to an x value of one. So that's a horizontal distance of four. So our graph might be something
more like tan of b x, where pi over b has to be four. That means that pi equals four b. And so b is
pi over four. So our graph is probably more closely related to y equals tan of pi over four x.
But if it were exactly y equals tan of pi over four x, then that middle point right here would be at
the origin. And instead, that middle point is at negative one one. That means my tangent graph is
is shifted left by one and up by one. The left by one I can accomplish by writing x plus one,
when I have the pi over four factored out the up by one, I get by writing a plus one on the outside.
Now, it's possible there might also be a vertical stretch factor out front. An easy way to check for
that is by plugging in x equals zero, and seeing whether what kind of number out in front I might
need to get this y intercept of two. So I'm going to write y equals a tan pi over four quantity x plus
one plus one, plug in the point zero two. So that's two equals a tan pi over four zero plus one plus
one. And I can solve for a since tan of pi over four is just one, this equation simplifies to two
equals a times one plus one, which means that a has to be one. So in fact, this equation here is our
final answer for this graph. To summarize, if we have a function of the form y equals a tan bx minus
c plus D, the number a accomplishes a vertical stretch. The number B changes the period
from pi to pi over B, the number D shifts vertically by D. And finally, to figure out what the number C
is, we have to rewrite our equation in factored form factoring out the B. And so we see that there's
a phase shift right by C over B. The same things hold if instead of tangent, we have a graph of
cotangent. We can say the same things for a graph of secant and a graph of cosecant. The only thing
to be careful of is that B now changes the period from two pi to two pi over B, simply because the
original period of secant and cosecant is two pi, whereas the original period of tan and cotan is just
pi. If you know what the original graphs of tan secant cotangent and cosecant look like, you can
use your knowledge of transformations to graph more complicated functions. This video defines the
standard inverse trig functions, sine inverse, cosine inverse, and tan inverse. In this crazy
looking graph, please focus first on the thin black line. This is a graph of y equals sine x.
The graph of the inverse of a function can be found by flipping the graph of the original function
over the line y equals x. I've drawn the flipped graph with this blue dotted line.
But you'll notice that the blue dotted line is not the graph of a function because it violates the
vertical line test. So in order to get a function that's the inverse of y equals sine x, we need to
restrict the domain of sine of x. We'll restrict it to this piece that's drawn with a thick black line.
If I invert that piece by flipping it over the line y equals x, I get the piece drawn
with a red dotted line here. And that piece does satisfy the vertical line test. So it is in fact
a function. Although regular sine x has domain from negative infinity to infinity, our restricted
sine x has domain from negative pi over two to pi over two. It's, it's range is still from negative
one to one, just like the regular sine x, because I've taken the biggest possible piece
of the graph, whose flipped version is still a function. The inverse sine function
is often written as arc sine of x. And since inverting a function reverses the roles of y and x,
it reverses the domain and the range. So arc sine of x, the inverse function has domain
from negative one to one and range from negative pi over two to pi over two,
which seems plausible from the graph. Now an inverse function undoes the work of a function.
So if the function sine takes angles theta to numbers x,
then the inverse sine or arc sine takes numbers x to angles theta.
For example, since sine of pi over two is one arc sine of one is pi over two.
And in general, the output of arc sine of x is the angle between negative pi over two and pi over
two, whose sine is x. y is equal to arc sine x means that x is equal to sine of y. But since
there are many angles y whose sine is x, right, they all differ by multiples of two pi, we specify
also that y is between negative pi over two and pi over two. That was the whole point of doing this
domain restriction in order to get a well defined inverse value. There's an alternate notation
for inverse sine. Sometimes it's written as sine to the negative one of x.
But this notation can be confusing. So be careful. In particular, sine to the negative one of x
does not equal one over sine of x. One over sine of x, the reciprocal function is another word for
cosecant of x. But sine to the negative one of x is another word for arc sine of x, the inverse
which is not the same thing as the reciprocal function.
Let's go through the same process to build an inverse cosine function.
We start with a graph of cosine of x. We flip it over the line y equals x to get the blue dotted
line. But the blue dotted line is not a function. So we go back and restrict the domain for our
original cosine of x to just be between zero and pi. The resulting red graph now satisfies the
vertical line test. So it's a proper inverse function. Our restricted cosine has domain from
zero to pi and range from negative one to one. And so our inverse function arc cosine has domain
from negative one to one and range from zero to pi. Since cosine takes us from angles to numbers,
arc cosine takes us from numbers back to angles. For example, cosine of pi over four is a square
root of two over two. So arc cosine of the square root of two over two is equal to pi over four.
Arc cosine of x is the angle between zero and pi whose cosine is x.
In other words, y equals arc cosine of x means that x is equal to cosine of y.
And y is between zero and pi. Since otherwise there'd be lots of possible answers for an angle y
whose cosine is x. The alternative notation for arc cosine is cosine inverse.
And again, we have to be careful. Cosine to the negative one x is not the same thing
as one over cosine of x. One over cosine of x is also called secant of x.
Cosine to the negative one x means arc cosine, the inverse function, and these two things are not the
same. Finally, let's take a look at inverse tangent function. Here's a graph of tangent
in black, these vertical lines aren't really part of the function, they're just vertical asymptotes.
So in order to get an actual function, when we flip over the line y equals x,
we take just one piece of the tangent function. Here we've taken the piece marked in black.
When we flip that over the line y equals x, we get this piece in red, which is actually a function
because it satisfies the vertical line test. Now you might ask, would it be possible to pick
a different piece of the tangent function to invert? And the answer is yes, we could do that.
And on another planet, maybe mathematicians do that. But on our planet, we use the convention
that we pick this piece of tangent to invert, which is kind of a convenient choice since it's
centered here around the origin. In the previous two examples, our choice of restricted domain for
sine and per cosine was also a convention that led to a conveniently defined inverse function.
In any case, based on our choice, our restricted tan function has domain from negative pi over two
to pi over two. We don't include the endpoints in that interval, because our restricted tan
function has vertical asymptotes at negative pi over two, pi over two, so it's not defined there.
The range of our restricted tan function is from negative infinity to infinity.
Therefore, arc tan of x has domain from negative infinity to infinity and range
from negative pi over two to pi over two. Once again, tangent is taking us from angles
to numbers. So arc tan is taking us from numbers to angles. For example, tangent of pi over four
is one. And therefore arc tan of one is pi over four. So arc tan of x means the angle between
negative pi over two and pi over two, whose tangent is x. y is equal to arc tan x means that x is
equal to tangent of y. And that y is between negative pi over two and pi over two.
The inverse tan function can also be written as tan to the minus one of x. And once again,
tan inverse of x means the inverse trig function arc tan of x. And it's not equal to one over
tan of x, which is called cotangent of x.
And that's all for this video on the three basic inverse trig functions.
Sin inverse x, also known as arc sine of x, cosine inverse x, also known as arc cosine x and tan
inverse x, also known as arc tan x. This video is an introduction to solving trig equations.
Let's start with the equation to cosine x plus one equals zero. I want to find all the solutions
in the interval from zero to two pi, and then get a general formula for all solutions, not just
those in that interval. Let me start by rewriting this equation to isolate the tricky part, which is
cosine of x. So I'm going to write two cosine x equals negative one, and then divide both sides
by two. Now I'm looking for the angles x between zero and two pi, whose cosine is negative one half.
Since negative one half is one of the special values on the unit circle,
I can use my knowledge of the unit circle to see that the angle between zero and two pi
must be either two pi over three, or four pi over three. My answer needs to include both of these
values. There are no other spots on the unit circle whose cosine is negative one half. But there are
more angles, because we can always take one of these angles and add multiples of two pi to it.
So if I want to find all solutions, I can take these two principle solutions,
two pi over three, and four pi over three, and simply add multiples of two pi to them.
For example, two pi over three plus two pi or two pi over three minus two pi, two pi over three plus
four pi, and so on. A much more efficient way to write this is to write two pi over three plus
two pi times K, for K, any integer, that is any positive or negative whole number or zero.
Similarly, I can write four pi over three plus two pi K
to capture all solutions based on the principle solution four pi over three by adding and
subtracting multiples of two pi. This is my final solution.
Next, let's look at a Triggy equation involving tangent. As usual, I'm going to start out by
cleaning things up and isolating the tricky part, which in this case is tangent.
So let me add tangent to both sides. That'll give me three tan x equals the square root of three.
And so tan x is the square root of three over three. The square root of three over three looks
suspiciously similar to value the value of square root of three over two, which is a special value
on my unit circle. So my suspicion is that my unit circle will again help me find this value of x
without a calculator. Recall that tan x is sine x over cosine x. So I'm looking for angles on the
unit circle between zero and two pi, where the ratio of sine over cosine will give me
square root of three over three. I actually only need to look in the first quadrant and the third
quadrant, because those are the quadrants where tangent is positive. And I really only need to
look at angles whose either sine or cosine has a square root of three in it. So by trial and error,
I can see that tan pi over six, which is sine pi over six over cosine pi over six,
will give me one half over root three over two. That's the same thing as one half times two over
root three, which is one over root three. If I rationalize that, I get root three over three.
So that value works. If I try tan of pi over three instead,
I get root three, which is not equal to root three over three. So pi over three doesn't work.
Similarly, I can work out some the values in the third quadrant, and see that seven pi over six
works. But four pi over three does not. So my answer to part a includes just the two values,
pi over six, and seven pi over six. Now, if I want to find all solutions, not just those
in the interval from zero to two pi, I noticed that I can take one of these principal solutions,
and add multiples of two pi to it, because that'll give me the same angle.
So I get pi over six plus two pi k, and pi over six, sorry, seven pi over six plus two pi k for
k, any integer. This is a correct answer, but it's not as simple as it could be.
Notice that seven pi over six over here on the unit circle is exactly pi more than pi over six.
So instead of taking both of these and adding multiples of two pi to them,
I could get all the same answers by just taking one of them and adding multiples of pi to it.
So a more efficient answer is to say that x equals pi over six plus pi times k
for k, any integer. This will still capture all the same solutions, because when k is even,
I'll get this family of solutions. And when k is odd, I'll get this family. For example, when k is one,
pi over six plus one times pi is just the original seven pi over six.
If you think about the fact that tangent has a period of pi, instead of two pi, it makes a lot
of sense that you should be able to write the solutions in this form. In this video,
we solved basic trig equations by first isolating sine or tangent, or the same thing would work
with cosine, and then using the unit circle to find principal solutions.
Principal solutions are just solutions between zero and two pi.
And then adding multiples of two pi to these principal solutions to get all solutions.
For tangent, we notice that it was equivalent to just use one principal solution
and add multiples of pi instead of two pi. In a previous video, we looked at trig equations
that could be solved using the unit circle. In this video, we'll solve trig equations that
don't involve special values on the unit circle, and require a calculator instead to solve.
Let's look at the equation to cosine t equals one minus cosine t.
As usual, I'll start by simplifying and isolating cosine. Adding cosine to both sides, I get three
cosine t equals one, dividing by three gives cosine t equals one third. Now, one third is not one of
my special values on the unit circle. But I can locate it approximately, cosine represents the x
value of a point on the unit circle. So I'm looking for a point on the universe circle whose x
coordinate is approximately one third. So maybe right here, and the symmetric angle right here,
those are angles in the first and fourth quadrants. To get a decimal approximation
for one of these angles, I can take our cosine of both sides of my equation.
This gives me t equals our cosine of one third, which using my calculator on radian mode,
I get a decimal approximation of 1.2310 up to four decimal places. It's important to use
radian mode here. Since by convention, the answers to trig equations are expected to be in radians
unless otherwise specified. It's also important to notice that these two equations are not precisely
the same thing. Since cosine t equals one third has infinitely many solutions.
If we don't restrict to a certain interval, and even if we restrict to the interval zero to two
pi, it still has two different solutions. On the other hand, our t equals our cosine of one third
has only one solution. And that solution lies between the angles of zero and pi.
So this angle here, the 1.2310 radians must be giving us this angle, since it's got to be an
angle between zero and pi. And to get the other angle, this one, we can use the symmetry of the
situation. This angle and this angle are the same size. So to get all the way around to here,
we can go all the way to pi minus our 1.2310 radians. Using our calculator again, we can compute
that two pi minus 1.2310 radians is equal to 5.0522 radians. So our two solutions on our interval
from zero to two pi are given by 1.2310 and 5.0522 radians. Let me emphasize that we found the
second solution by taking two pi minus the first solution. Now it's straightforward to find all
solutions. We can just take our two principal solutions and add multiples of two pi.
It could be helpful to look at this solution graphically.
To solve our equation cosine t equals one third, we want to know where this graph
of y equals cosine of t intersects the horizontal line at y equals one third.
This intersection point here corresponds to our first solution of 1.2310 radians.
This intersection point here corresponds to our second solution. Notice that it occurs at a t
value that's two pi minus this t value here. And all the other intersection points correspond to
those first two intersection points shifted over by multiples of two pi. Next, let's look at the
equation for sine x minus one equals two. I'll start by rewriting this as four sine x equals three,
which is equivalent to sine x equals three fourths. Although three fourths is not a special value on
the unit circle, we can still use the unit circle to get oriented and see how many solutions
there should be in the interval from zero to two pi. Since sine represents the y coordinate of a
point on the unit circle, we're looking for points on the unit circle whose y coordinate is three
fourths. So that might be three fourths might be about here. So that would be an angle about right
here, and about right here. So in the first and second quadrants. Let's take the arc sine of both
sides to find one of those angles. I'm getting one of the angles to be arc sine of three fourths,
which my calculator says is 0.8481 radians. That must be this angle here. To get the other angle,
I can use symmetry. Since this angle here, you can get by going a full pi minus my previous angle.
Pi minus 0.8481 is equal to 2.2935. So that's my second angle.
Notice that this time, to get the second angle, we use pi minus the first angle.
Not to pi minus the first angle, like we did for cosine. Once again, we can find all solutions
simply by adding multiples of two pi. We can also locate these solutions on a graph of sine.
We're looking for where the graph of y equals sine of x intersects with the horizontal line at y
equals three fourths. And we can see that we have these two solutions.
Where the second one, its x value is pi minus the x value of this one. And then we have all these
additional solutions that we can get by shifting over by positive and negative multiples of two
pi from the first two. Finally, let's solve the equation tan x equals four.
If we simply take x to be tan inverse of four,
which is 1.3258 radians, we'll get a single solution.
But thinking about the graph of tangent and intersecting that graph with the horizontal
line y equals four, we see that there should actually be two solutions in the interval from zero
to two pi. This makes sense because the period of tangent is pi.
So any one solution will get repeated by intervals of pi. It also makes sense by thinking about the
unit circle tangent, which can be thought of as the slope of a line at angle theta takes on all
positive real values, both in the first quadrant and the third quadrant. So there are going to be
two places on the unit circle where the tangent is four. We've already found this one.
To find the other one, we just need to add pi.
This gives us our answer for the interval zero to two pi, and we can add multiples of two pi to get all
other solutions. Or if we want to be more efficient, we can just write the first solution
plus multiples of pi instead of two pi. Because these two solutions differ by exactly pi,
taking the first solution and then adding multiples of pi will capture all solutions,
corresponding to both of these principle solutions.
To summarize, to find all solutions to cosine t equals m, we need to find first cosine inverse of m,
then take two pi minus this solution and add multiples of two pi to both of those.
To find solutions to the equation, sine t equals n, we can start by taking sine inverse of n,
using pi minus this, and adding multiples of two pi.
To find all solutions to tangent t equals p, we can take t equal tan inverse of p and
tan inverse of p plus pi and add multiples of two pi. Or we can just take tan inverse of p
and add multiples of pi. Although the examples that we saw were more simple than some, because
for the examples we saw, the inverse trig function always landed us in the first quadrant. These
methods will work more generally. That's all for this video on solving trig equations that
require a calculator. This video is about identities involving trig functions, like sine and cosine.
But I want to start with some examples that just involve quadratic functions.
If I want to find the solutions to this equation, I can rewrite it x squared minus six x minus seven
equals zero, factor it x minus seven times x plus one equals zero, set the factors equal to zero,
x minus seven equals zero, or x plus one equals zero. And that gives me the solutions x equals seven
or x equals negative one. Next, let's look at this more complicated equation.
I'm going to try to solve that for x by multiplying out the right hand side.
Next, I'll combine terms on the right hand side. So that gives me x squared minus six x
on both sides. Well, x squared minus six x is equal to x squared minus six x. That's true no
matter what I plug in for x. And therefore, all values of x satisfy this equation.
We can say that the solution set is all real numbers.
The second equation is called an identity because it holds
for all values of the variable. The first equation on the other hand is not an identity
because it only holds for some values of x and not all values.
Please pause the video for a moment and try to decide which of the following three equations
are identities, that is, which of these equations hold for all values of the variable.
To start out, you might want to test them by plugging in a few values of the variable and
see if the equation holds. The first equation is not an identity.
It does hold for some values of x. For example, if x equals zero, then sine of two times zero
is zero, and two times sine of zero is also zero. So it does hold when x is zero.
However, when x is say pi over two, then sine of two times pi over two, that's the same thing as
sine of pi, which is zero, but two times sine of pi over two, that's two times one or two.
And zero is not equal to two. So the equation does not hold for x equals pi over two.
Since it doesn't hold for all values of the variable, it's not an identity.
The second equation is an identity. You can build some evidence for this by plugging in numbers,
for example, cosine of zero plus pi, which is negative one is the same thing as negative of
cosine of zero. You can also check, for example, that cosine of pi over six plus pi is the same
thing as negative cosine of pi over six. But even if we check a zillion examples, that's just
evidence, it's not a proof that the identity holds, we could have just gotten lucky with the
values we picked. We can build a little bit stronger evidence by looking at graphs.
I'm going to put theta on the x axis. And if I graph y equals cosine of theta plus pi,
that's just like the graph of cosine shifted over to the left by pi. On the other hand,
if I graph y equals negative cosine theta, that's the graph of cosine theta,
reflected across the x axis, which gives us the exact same graph.
So graphing both sides gives us strong evidence that this equation is an identity,
it holds for all values of theta. Now the strongest evidence of all would be an algebraic
proof, which we'll do later in the course, once we have a formula for the cosine of a sum of two
angles. In the meantime, let's look at equation C. It turns out equation C is an identity.
And we could build evidence for it again by plugging in values for x or by graphing the
left side and the right side separately and checking to see that the graphs coincided.
But for this example, I'm going to go ahead and do an algebraic verification.
In particular, I'm going to start with the left side of the equation,
and rewrite things and rewrite things until I get to the right side of the equation.
The first thing I'll rewrite is secant and tangent in terms of their constituent functions,
sine and cosine. Since secant of x is one over cosine x and tangent of x is sine x over cosine x,
I can rewrite this expression as one over cosine x minus sine x times sine x over cosine x.
I can clean up those fractions and write this as one over cosine x minus sine squared x
over cosine x. Now I notice that I have two fractions with the same denominator.
So I can pull them together as one minus sine squared x over cosine x.
Next, I'm going to rewrite the numerator one minus sine squared x using the Pythagorean identity
that says that cosine squared x plus sine squared x equals one. And therefore,
one minus sine squared x is equal to cosine squared x, just by subtracting sine squared x from both
sides. So I can replace my numerator one minus sine squared x with cosine squared x
and canceling one cosine from the top and from the bottom. That's the same thing as cosine of x,
which is the right hand side that I was trying to get to. So a combination of a bunch of algebra
and the Pythagorean identity allows me to prove that this equation is true for all values of x,
it's an identity. The best way to prove that an equation is an identity
is to use algebra and to use other identities like the Pythagorean identity
to rewrite one side of the equation till it looks like the other side.
The best way to prove that an equation is not an identity is to plug in numbers
that break the identity that is make the equation not true. Now, if you're just trying to decide if
an equation is an identity or not, and not worried about proving it, then I recommend plugging in
numbers or graphing the left and right sides to see if those graphs are the same.
Recall that an identity is an equation that holds for all values of the variable.
This video states and proves three identities called the Pythagorean identities.
The first one is the familiar cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one.
The second one says tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared theta.
And the third one goes cotangent squared theta plus one equals cosecant squared theta.
Let's start by proving that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one.
I'll do this by drawing the unit circle with the right triangle inside it.
By the definition of sine and cosine, the x and y coordinates of this top point
are cosine theta and sine theta. The hypotenuse of my triangle is one, since that's the radius
of my unit circle. Now, the length of the base of my triangle is the same thing as the x coordinate
of this point. So that's equal to cosine theta. The height of this triangle is the same thing as
the y coordinate of this point. So that's sine theta. Now, the Pythagorean theorem for right
triangles says this side length squared plus that side length squared is equal to the hypotenuse squared.
So by the Pythagorean theorem, we have that cosine theta squared plus sine theta squared
equals one squared. I can rewrite that as cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one,
since one squared is one and cosine squared theta is just a shorthand notation for cosine theta squared.
That completes the proof of the first Pythagorean identity, at least in the case when the angle
theta is in the first quadrant. In the case when the angle lies in a different quadrant,
you can use symmetry to argue the same identity holds. But I won't give the details here.
To prove the next Pythagorean identity tan squared theta plus one equals secant squared theta,
let's use the first Pythagorean identity, which said that cosine squared theta plus sine squared
theta equals one. I'm going to divide both sides of this equation by cosine squared theta.
Now I'm going to rewrite the left side by breaking apart the fraction
into cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta over cosine squared theta.
Now cosine squared theta over cosine squared theta is just one. And I can rewrite the next
fraction as sine of theta over cosine of theta squared. That's because when I square a fraction,
I can just square the numerator and square the denominator. And sine squared theta is
shorthand for sine of theta squared, similarly for cosine squared theta.
Now on the other side of the equal sign, I can rewrite this fraction as one over cosine theta
squared. Again, that's because when I square the fraction, I just get the one squared, which is one
divided by the cosine theta squared, which is this. I'm almost done.
Sine theta over cosine theta is the same thing as tangent theta.
And one over cosine theta is the same thing as secant theta. Using the shorthand notation,
this says one plus tan squared theta equals secant squared theta, which after rearranging
is exactly the identity that we were looking for. The proof of the third
for that green identity is very similar. Once again, I'll start with the identity cosine
squared theta plus sine squared theta equals one. And this time I'll divide both sides by sine
squared theta. I'll break up the fraction on the left. And now I'll rewrite my fractions as cosine
theta over sine theta squared plus one equals one over sine theta squared. Cosine over sine can be
written as cotangent. And one over sine can be written as cosecant. That gives me the identity
that I'm looking for. We've now proved three trig identities. The first one, we proved using the
unit circle and the Pythagorean theorem. The second and third identities, we proved by using the first
identity and a bit of algebra. The sum and difference formulas are formulas for computing
the sine of a sum of two angles, the cosine of a sum of two angles, the sine of a difference of
two angles, and the cosine of a difference of two angles. Please pause the video for a moment to
think about this question. Is it true that the sine of a plus b is equal to the sine of a plus the
sine of b? No, it's not true. And we can see by an example, if we plug in say a equals pi over two
and b equals pi, then the sine of pi over two plus pi is the same thing as a sine of three pi over
two, which is negative one, whereas the sine of pi over two plus the sine of pi is equal to one plus
zero, which is one negative one is not equal to one. So this equation does not hold for all values
of a and b. There are a few values of a and b for which it does hold. For example, if a is zero and
b is zero, but it's not true in general. Instead, we need more complicated formulas. It turns out
that the sine of the sum of two angles a plus b is given by sine of a cosine of b plus cosine of a
sine of b. The cosine of a plus b is given by cosine a cosine b minus sine a sine b.
I like to remember these with a song, sine cosine cosine sine cosine cosine minus sine sine.
Please feel free to back up the video and sing along with me.
I encourage you to memorize the two formulas for the sine of a sum of angles and the cosine of a
sum of angles. Once you do, it's easy to figure out the sine and cosine of a difference of two
angles. One way to do this is to think of sine of a minus b as sine of a plus negative b,
and then use the angle sum formula. So this works out to sine cosine plus cosine
sine. And now, if I use the fact that cosine is even, I know that cosine of negative b is cosine of
b. And since sine is odd, sine of negative b is negative sine of b. So I can rewrite this as
sine of a cosine of b minus cosine of a sine of b. Notice that this new formula for the difference
is the same as the formula for the sum is just that plus sign turned into a minus sign.
We can do the same trick for cosine of a minus b, that's cosine of a plus minus b,
which is cosine a cosine minus b minus sine of a sine of negative b. Again, using even an odd
properties, this gives us cosine a cosine b plus sine a sine b. Once again, the formula for the
difference is almost exactly like the formula for the sum, just that minus sign has switched to a
plus sign. Now let's use the angle sum formulas to find the exact value for the sine of 105 degrees.
Now 105 degrees is not a special angle on the unit circle. But I can write it as the sum
of two special angles, I can write it as 60 degrees plus 45 degrees. Therefore, the sine of 105 degrees
is the sine of 68 plus 45. And now by the angle sum formula, this is sine, cosine, cosine,
sine. And I for my unit circle, I can figure out that sine of 60 degrees is root three over two,
cosine of 45 degrees, root two over two, cosine of 60 degrees is one half, and sine of 45 degrees
is root two over two. So this simplifies to root six plus root two over four.
For our last example, let's find the cosine of v plus w, given the values of cosine v and cosine
w, and the fact that v and w are angles in the first quadrant. Remember, to compute the cosine
of a sum, we can't just add together the two cosines, that wouldn't even make sense in this case,
because adding point nine and point seven would give something bigger than one,
and the cosine of something's never bigger than one. Instead, we have to use the angle sum formula
for cosine. So that goes cosine of v plus w equals cosine, cosine, minus sine, sine. Now,
I'm already know the cosine of v and the cosine of w, so I could just plug those in. But I have
to figure out the sine of v and the sine of w from the given information. And one way to do that is
to draw right triangles. So here I'm going to draw a right triangle with angle v,
and another right triangle with angle w.
Since I know that the cosine of v is point nine, I can think of that as nine over 10,
and I can think of that as adjacent over hypotenuse in my right triangle. So I'll
decorate my triangles adjacent side with the number nine and the hypotenuse with 10.
Similarly, since I know that the cosine of w is point seven, which is seven tenths,
I can put a seven on this adjacent side, and a 10 on this hypotenuse.
Now the Pythagorean theorem, let's me compute the length of the unlabeled side.
So this one is going to be the square root of 10 squared minus nine squared,
that's going to be the square root of 19. And here I have the square root of 10 squared minus
seven squared. So that's the square root of 51. I can now find the sine of v as the opposite
over the hypotenuse. So that's the square root of 19 over 10. And the sine of w
will be the square root of 51 over 10. Because we're assuming v and w are in the first quadrant,
we know the values of sine need to be positive. So we don't need to jimmy around with positive
or negative signs in our answers, we can just leave them as is. Now we're ready to plug into our
formula. So we have that cosine of v plus w is equal to point nine times point seven minus the
square root of 19 over 10 times the square root of 51 over 10. Using a calculator, this works out
to a decimal approximation of 0.3187. This video gave the angle sum and difference formulas
and use them to compute some values. To see a proof for why the sum formulas hold,
please watch my other video. Remember the angle sum formulas? Those are the formulas for computing
sine of a plus b and cosine of a plus b. I like to sing them sine cosine cosine sine
cosine cosine minus sine sine. This video gives a geometric proof of those formulas.
There are many great proofs of the angle sum formulas, but I'd like to share with you one of my
favorites for those who are interested. I'll write the angle sum formulas up here. So we'll
know what we're trying to prove. To prove these formulas, let me start by drawing an angle a
and an angle b on top of that.
Next, I'm going to draw a line perpendicular to this middle line. And I'm going to extend the top
line until it meets that perpendicular, making a right triangle. Finally, I'll draw a rectangle
around that right triangle that just touches its vertices. My rectangle is now divided up into
four right triangles. And I'm going to choose units of measurement so that the hypotenuse
of my middle triangle has length one. Now let's stop for a minute to think about the angles of
these other triangles. Since the top and the bottom edge of the rectangle are parallel lines,
and this hypotenuse is a transversal, this angle up here must have the same measure as a plus b
down here. Also, this skinny angle here must have the same measure as a down here.
Because this angle is 180 degrees minus 90 degrees minus this angle here. And this angle a is also
180 degrees, the measure of the angles in the triangle minus 90 degrees minus that same angle.
So I'll label this skinny angle with a. Next, let's figure out as many side lengths as we can.
Based on the middle right triangle with hypotenuse one, we know that this side length down here
must be cosine of b. Since adjacent over hypotenuse is cosine b. Similarly, this side length here
must be sine of b. Since opposite over hypotenuse is sine of b. Now we see that sine of b is the
of this right triangle, which means that this little side here has measure sine a times sine b.
That's because the opposite over the hypotenuse of this angle has to equal sine a.
A similar argument shows that this side has to have measure cosine a times sine b.
Please pause the video and take a moment to fill in the side lengths of this right triangle
and this right triangle. You should be getting sine a cosine b cosine a cosine b
sine of a plus b
and cosine of a plus b.
But remember, we have a rectangle here. So the opposite sides have equal lengths.
This tells us that sine of a plus b has to equal sine of a cosine of b plus cosine of a sine of b,
which is exactly the first angle sum formula. Also, cosine of a plus b, which is this side length,
is exactly the difference of this side length cosine a cosine b minus this side length sine of a
sine b. And that's the second angle sum formula. So I think that's a pretty great geometric proof
of the angle sum formulas. This video gives formulas for sine of two theta and cosine of two theta.
Please pause the video for a moment and see if you think this equation sine of two theta equals
sine theta is true or false. Remember that true means always true for all values of theta,
where false means sometimes are always false.
This equation is false because it's not true for all values of theta.
One way to see this is graphically. If I graph y equals sine of two theta,
that's like the graph of sine theta squished in horizontally by a factor of one half.
On the other hand, if I graph y equals to sine theta, that's like the graph of sine theta
stretched vertically by a factor of two. These two graphs are not the same.
So instead, we need a more complicated formula for sine of two theta.
And that formula is sine of two theta is two sine theta cosine theta.
It's not hard to see why that formula works based on the angle sum formula.
Recall that sine of a plus b is equal to sine a cosine b plus cosine a sine b.
Sine b. Therefore, sine of two theta, which is sine of theta plus theta is going to be sine theta
cosine theta plus cosine theta sine theta, simply plugging in theta for a and theta for b
in this angle sum formula. Well, sine theta cosine theta is the same thing as cosine theta sine theta.
So I can rewrite this as twice sine theta cosine theta. That gives me this formula.
There's also a formula for cosine of two theta. And that formula is cosine squared theta minus
sine squared theta. Again, we can use the angle sum formula to see where this comes from.
Cosine of a plus b is equal to cosine of a cosine of b minus sine a sine b. So if we want cosine
of two theta, that's just cosine of theta plus theta, which is cosine theta cosine theta minus
sine theta sine theta by plugging in theta for a and b.
This can be rewritten as cosine squared theta minus sine squared theta, which is exactly the formula
above. Now there are a couple other formulas for cosine of two theta that are also popular. One
of them is one minus two sine squared theta. And the other one is cosine of two theta is two
cosine squared theta minus one. You can get each of these two formulas from the original one
using the Pythagorean identity. We know that cosine squared theta plus sine squared theta
is one. So cosine squared theta is one minus sine squared theta. If I plug that into my original
formula, which I've copied here, so I'm plugging in instead of cosine squared, I'm going to write
one minus sine squared theta, I still have another minus sine squared theta. So that's the same thing
as one minus twice sine squared theta, which is exactly what I'm looking for. Similarly,
I can use the Pythagorean identity to write sine squared theta as one minus cosine squared theta.
Again, I'll take this equation and copy it below. But this time I'm going to plug in for sine
squared right here. So that gives me cosine of two theta is cosine squared theta minus the quantity
one minus cosine squared theta. That simplifies to two cosine squared theta minus one after
distributing the negative sign and combining like terms. So I have one double angle formula
for sine of two theta, and I have three versions of the double angle formula for cosine of two
theta. Now let's use these formulas in some examples. Let's find the cosine of two theta
if we know that cosine theta is negative one over root 10, and theta terminates in quadrant three.
We have a choice of three formulas for cosine of two theta. I'm going to choose the second one,
because it only involves cosine of theta on the right side. And I already know my value for cosine
theta. Of course, I could use one of the other ones, but then I'd have to work out the value of
sine theta. So plugging in, I get cosine of two theta is twice negative one over root 10
squared minus one, which simplifies to two tenths minus one or negative eight tenths, negative
four fifths. Finally, let's solve the equation to cosine x plus sine of two x equals zero.
What makes this equation tricky is that one of the trig functions has the argument of just x,
but the other trig function has the argument of two x. So I want to use my double angle formula
to rewrite sine of two x. I'll copy down the two cosine x, and now sine of two x is equal to two
sine x cosine x. At this point, I see a way to factor my equation, I can factor out a two cosine
x from both of these two terms. That gives me one plus sine x, and the product there is equal to
zero. That means that either two cosine x is equal to zero, or one plus sine x is equal to zero.
That simplifies to cosine x equals zero, or sine x is negative one. Using my unit circle,
I see that cosine of x is zero at pi over two, and three pi over two, while sine of x is negative
one at three pi over two. There's some redundancy here, but my solution set is going to be pi over
two plus multiples of two pi, and three pi over two plus multiples of two pi. This video proved
the double angle formulas sine of two theta is two sine theta cosine theta. And cosine of two
theta is cosine squared theta minus sine squared theta. It also proved two alternate versions
of the equation for cosine of two theta. This video is about the half angle formulas for computing
cosine of theta over two, and sine of theta over two. Cosine of theta over two is either plus or minus
the square root of one plus cosine theta all over two. To figure out whether to use plus or minus,
you need to know something about what quadrant the angle theta over two is. If you're expecting
cosine theta over two to be negative, then you're going to need the negative sign. You're expecting
this cosine to be positive. Then of course you want the positive sign since the square root of
something is always positive. Notice that this formula always makes sense, because the inside
of the square root sign is always going to be positive or zero, since cosine theta can't be
any more negative than negative one. We have a similar formula for sine of theta over two. And
that's plus or minus the square root of one minus cosine theta over two. Notice that the formulas for
both cosine of a half angle and sine of a half angle, both have cosine in them, they just differ
by the positive or negative sign in the inside of the square root. To see why these formulas hold,
let's recall the formulas for double angles. We know that cosine of two x is equal to two
cosine squared x minus one, or we can write cosine of two x as one minus two sine squared of x. Of
course, we can also write cosine of two x as cosine squared x minus sine squared x, but this one
won't be relevant to our discussion right now. So I'm going to start with this first formula.
And I'm going to make the substitution theta equals two x. That allows me to write cosine theta
is two cosine squared theta over two minus one, since if theta is two x, then x is theta over two.
So now I'm going to solve for cosine of theta over two. So I'll add one to both sides,
divide both sides by two,
and take the square root of both sides. That gives me that cosine of theta over two is going to be
plus or minus the square root of cosine theta plus one over two, which is the formula we're looking
for. I can carry a similar process out with the second formula. I'll substitute theta for two x,
which means that x is theta over two, that gives me cosine theta is one minus two sine squared theta
over two. Now I'll solve for sine of theta over two. I'll start by adding two sine squared theta
over two to both sides. Next, I'll subtract cosine theta from both sides. Next, I'll divide both sides
by two. And finally, I'll take the square root of both sides. That gives me sine of theta over two
is plus or minus the square root of one minus cosine theta over two, which is the formula I was
looking for. Now that we've got our formulas, and know where they come from, let's use them in an
example. Let's suppose that sine theta is four fifths, and theta is between pi over two and pi.
That means it's in the second quadrant. We want to find the exact values of cosine theta over two
and sine theta over two. Since theta is between pi over two and pi, theta over two will be between
pi over four and pi over two. So theta over two is somewhere in the first quadrant. That means
that cosine theta over two and sine theta over two will both be positive. Let me write down my
half angle formulas. And I know I could ignore the negative version and just use the positive
version. Now, unfortunately, I'm just given the value of sine theta, not cosine theta. So I can't
plug in directly. First, I have to use this value to figure out what cosine might be. I'll draw a
right triangle with angle theta. And since sine of theta is four fifths, I'll decorate the triangle
with a four and a five on the hypotenuse. That means that this side length is going to be five
squared, square root of five squared minus four squared, which is the square root of nine, which
is three. That means that cosine theta is going to be either plus or minus three fifths, because
it's adjacent over hypotenuse. Now, since I'm in the angle, the second quadrant for my angle theta,
cosine is actually going to be negative three fifths. Now I can plug into my formulas.
I get that cosine of theta over two is going to be the square root of one minus three fifths
over two. That simplifies to the square root of two fifths divided by two, which is the square
root of one fifth, or one over the square to five. sine of theta over two is the square root of one
minus cosine theta. So that's one minus negative three fifths over two. That's the square root of
one plus three fifths, or eight fifths over two, the square root of four fifths, or two over the
square root of five. In this video, we found formulas for the cosine of a half angle, and the
sine of a half angle, and use them in an example. Solving a right triangle means finding the lengths
of all the sides, and the measures of the angles, given partial information. In this example,
we're given the length of one side, and the measure of one angle, plus we know the measure
of this right angle is 90 degrees. We need to find the measure of the third angle, labeled
capital A, and the lengths of the two sides labeled lowercase b and lowercase c. To find the measure
of angle a, let's use the fact that the measures of the three angles of a triangle add up to 180
degrees. So that means that 49 degrees plus 90 degrees plus a is equal to 180 degrees. So a is
equal to 180 degrees minus 90 degrees minus 49 degrees, which works out to 41 degrees.
To find the length of the side B, we have a couple possible options.
We could use the fact that tan of 49 degrees, which is opposite over adjacent, is B over 23.
So B is 23 times tan 49 degrees, which works out to 26.46 units. Alternatively, we could use the fact
we could use the fact that tan of 41 degrees is 23 over B. Since now, if we're looking at the
angle here, 23 is our opposite and B is in our adjacent. That's a little bit harder to solve
algebraically. But we can write B tan 41 degrees equals 23, which means that B is 23 divided by
tan 41 degrees with a calculator that works out again to 26.46. The reason we want to use tan in
this problem and not say sine or cosine is because tan of say 49 degrees relates and the unknown side
that we're looking for B to the side that we know the measure of. If we had used sine instead, we'd
be saying that sine of 49 is B over C, and we'd have two unknowns, which would make it difficult to
solve. Next, to find the side length C, we can have a few options. We could use a trig function
again. For example, we could use the cosine of 49 degrees. That's adjacent over hypotenuse,
which is 23 over C. Solving for C, we get that C is 23 over cosine 49, which works out to 35.06 units.
Another option would be to use the Pythagorean theorem to find C. Since we know 23 squared
plus B squared equals C squared, in other words, that's 23 squared plus 26.46 squared
equals C squared, which means that C is the square root of that sum, which works out again
to 35.06. To review, the ideas we used were the sum of the angles
is equal to 180 degrees. We used facts like tangent of an angle being opposite over adjacent,
and similar facts about sine and cosine. And we use the Pythagorean theorem.
This allowed us to find all the angles and side lengths of the triangle, knowing just
the side length of one side and the angle of one of the non right angles to begin with.
In this next example, we don't know any of the angles, except for the right angle. But we know
two of the side lengths. To find the unknown angle theta, we can use the fact that cosine theta
is adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's 10 over 15. Cosine is a good trig function to use here,
because this equation relates our unknown angle to our two known sides. So we just have
one unknown in our equation to solve for. To solve for theta, we just take the cosine inverse
of 10 15ths, which is 0.8411 radians, or 48.19 degrees. To find the measure of angle fee,
we could use the fact that sine of fee is 10 over 15, and take sine inverse of 10 15ths,
but probably a little easier as just to use the fact that these three angles add to 180 degrees.
That tells us that fee plus 90 plus 48.19 is equal to 180, which means that fee
is 41.81. Finally, we can find x either using a trig function, or by using the Pythagorean theorem.
To find it using a trig function, we could write down something like tan of 48.19 degrees
is x over 10. To find it using Pythagorean theorem, we'd write down 10 squared plus x squared equals
15 squared. I'll use a Pythagorean theorem and find that x by doing the square root of 15 squared
minus 10 squared. That gives me an answer of 11.18. Notice that we use many of the same ideas as in
the previous problem. For example, the fact that the sum of the angles is 180, the Pythagorean theorem,
and the trig functions like tan, sine and cosine. We also use the inverse trig functions
to get from an equation like this one to the angle.
This video showed how it's possible to find the lengths of all the sides of a right triangle
and the measures of all the angles given partial information. For example, the measure of one angle
and one side, or from two sides.
Recall that solving a triangle means finding all the lengths of the sides and all the measures of
the angles from partial information. The law of cosines is a tool that can help us solve triangles
that are not necessarily right triangles. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem says that for our
right triangle, like this one, the length of the hypotenuse is related to the lengths of the sides
by the formula c squared equals a squared plus b squared. I like to think of the law of cosines
as a generalization of the Pythagorean theorem to triangles that are not necessarily right triangles.
Loosely speaking, the law of cosines says that c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared
plus a correction factor, where the correction factor depends on the size of the angle that's
opposite to side c. For this first triangle, on the left, the angle that's opposite to side c
is exactly a right angle. So we know that c squared is exactly equal to a squared plus b squared.
But in this next triangle, the angle opposite to side c prime is a little bit less than a right
angle. So we expect the side length c prime should be a little bit shorter than the side length c
in the previous triangle that had the same side lengths a and b for its legs. Therefore, c prime
squared should be less than a squared plus b squared. Or in other words, c prime squared
should equal a squared plus b squared minus a little bit. In this third triangle, the angle
opposite c double prime is a little bigger than 90 degrees. So this side length c double prime
should be a little bit longer than the side length c in the right triangle with the same size legs.
So c double prime squared should be bigger than a squared plus b squared. We can write this as c
double prime squared is equal to a squared plus b squared plus a little bit. The law of cosines
says precisely what this little correction factor is. It says that for any triangle with sides a,
b, and c, an angle capital C opposite side c side c squared is equal to a squared plus b squared
minus two a, b cosine angle C. Let's analyze what happens in this equation
when angle C is equal to 90 degrees less than 90 degrees and greater than 90 degrees.
If angle C is equal to 90 degrees, then cosine of angle C is equal to zero. So we have that c
squared is equal to a squared plus b squared, the ordinary Pythagorean theorem. If on the other
hand, angle C is less than 90 degrees, then from the unit circle, we know that cosine of c is positive.
So to a b cosine C is a positive number, and we'll be subtracting a little bit from our a squared
plus b squared, just like we saw in the picture. Finally, if angle C is bigger than 90 degrees,
then we can see from the unit circle that cosine of c is negative. So two a, b cosine
capital C is going to be less than zero. And we're going to be subtracting a negative number,
which means we're actually adding a little bit, just like we saw in the third picture.
When labeling a triangle, the convention is to use capital letters for the angles and lowercase
letters for the side lengths, and to put side a opposite angle a and so on. When we wrote the law
of cosines on the previous page, we wrote c squared equals a squared plus b squared minus two a b
cosine angle C. But it doesn't matter which side we call a, which side we call b, and which side
we call C, all that matters is that this angle is opposite to this side, and between these two sides.
So we could have just as easily written a squared is equal to b squared plus c squared
minus two b c cosine a. All we've done is replace C with a, a with b,
and b with C in our labeling scheme. Or instead, we could put the b squared on the left side and
write b squared equals a squared plus c squared minus two ac cosine b. We can use whichever of these
three forms is most convenient for the problem at hand. Let's use the law of cosines to find all
the side lengths and angles in this triangle. By convention, I'll call the side opposite to angle
a little a and the side opposite angle b little b. Notice that we know two side lengths and the
angle between them. So that's an s a s side angle side triangle. If we write down the law of cosines
with the unknown side, c squared on the left side, then we have all the values for the variables on
the right side. So let's plug them in. I'll use a calculator in degree mode to find that c squared
is equal to 44.44. Taking the square root, I get that C is equal to 6.67. Next, I'll use the law
of cosines to find the angle b. I'll need to use a version of the law of cosines that has cosine b
right here. That's the version that has little b squared on the left side. And goes b squared
equals a squared plus c squared minus two ac cosine b. I can plug in values for all my side
lengths. And now I can solve for cosine b. To do that, I'll subtract eight squared and 6.67 squared
from both sides. And now I'll divide both sides by negative two times eight times 6.67. Using a
calculator, this gives me that cosine of b is equal to negative 0.1172. The negative value of
cosine indicates that my angle b must be greater than 90 degrees, which agrees with a figure. Next,
I can take cosine inverse of both sides to get that b is equal to cosine inverse negative 0.1172,
which works out to 96.73 degrees. The last thing I need to do is solve for angle a. I could use the
law of cosines again, and work out angle a just like I worked out angle b here. But a simpler
thing to do is to use the fact that the sum of the three angles equals 180 degrees. In other words,
a plus 37 degrees plus 96.73 degrees equals 180 degrees. So a is going to be 180 minus 37 minus
96.73, which works out to 46.27 degrees. In the previous example, we were given two sides and the
angle between them. In this example, instead, we're given three side lengths. So I'll call this an s s s
side side side triangle. We need to find all three angles. Although there are a lot of computations
involved, the ideas are the same as in the previous problem. To find angle capital C, we need the form
of the law of cosines that has cosine of c on the right side, and little c on the left side,
to find angle a, we need the form of the law of cosines that has cosine a on the right side and
little a on the left side. And to find angle d, we need the form of the law of cosines that has
cosine of b on the right side, and little b squared on the left side. For each of
these three equations, I'll plug in the side lengths, solve for the cosines, and
use inverse cosine to find my angles. Notice that my three angles, 60 degrees,
32.20 degrees, and 87.79 degrees add up to just almost 180 degrees. The difference is just due
to a round off error. In fact, I could have saved myself some work by just finding the
measure of angle C, and the measure of angle A, and then subtracting them from 180 degrees
to get the measure of angle B. In this video, we stated the law of cosines,
and used it to solve some triangles. The law of cosines can be thought of as the
Pythagorean theorem with a correction factor to account for triangles that aren't right triangles.
Recall that solving a right triangle means finding all the lengths of the sides and all
the measures of the angles from partial information. The law of cosines is a tool that can help us
solve triangles that are not necessarily right triangles. Recall that the Pythagorean theorem
says that for a right triangle, like this one, C squared is equal to A squared plus B squared.
I like to think of the law of cosines as a generalization of the Pythagorean theorem
to triangles that are not necessarily right triangles.
Loosely speaking, the law of cosines says that C squared is equal to A squared plus B squared
plus a correction factor, where the correction factor depends on the size of the angle that's
opposite size C. In this first triangle on the left, the angle opposite to side C is a right
angle. So we know that C squared is equal to exactly A squared plus B squared.
But in the next triangle, the angle opposite to side C prime is a little bit less than a
right angle. So this side C prime should be a little shorter than A squared plus B squared.
I'll write C prime squared is equal to A squared plus B squared minus a bit.
In this third triangle, since the angle opposite to side C double prime is a little bit bigger
than 90 degrees, this side length should be a little bit bigger than A squared plus B squared.
So I'll write it as A squared plus B squared plus a little bit.
The law of cosines says exactly what this little correction factor is. It says that for any triangle
with sides A, B, and C, an angle capital C opposite to side C, C squared is equal to A squared plus B
squared minus two AB cosine of angle C. Notice that if the angle C is less than 90 degrees,
cosine of C is going to be a positive number.
And so we'll be subtracting a positive quantity, just like we saw in the picture above.
If, however, angle C is bigger than 90 degrees, then cosine of C is negative. So by subtracting
to AB cosine C, we're actually adding a little bit, and we get a longer side, as in this picture.
When labeling a triangle, the convention is to use lowercase letters for the side lengths
and uppercase letters for the angles, and to put angle A opposite side A and so on.
When we wrote the law of cosines on the previous page, we wrote C squared equals A squared plus
B squared minus two AB cosine C. But it doesn't matter which side we call A, which side we call
B, and which side we call C. All that matters is that this angle is opposite to this side
and between these two sides. So we could have just as easily written A squared equals
B squared plus C squared minus two BC cosine A, or B squared equals A squared plus C squared
minus two AC cosine B. We can use whichever of these three forms is most convenient for the
problem at hand. Let's use the law of cosines to find the side lengths and angles of this triangle.
By convention, I'm going to call the side opposite angle B side little B, and the side
opposite angle A side little A. Since we know two side lengths and the angle between them,
we have all the information on the right side of the law of cosines. So I'll plug that in
and use a calculator in degree mode to find that C squared equals 44.44. Taking the square root,
I get that C equals 6.67. Next, I'll use the law of cosines to find the angle B.
I'll need to use a version of the law of cosines that mentions cosine of angle B here. So it'll need
to mention side length little B here. So that'll be the form B squared on the left.
I'll get A squared plus C squared minus two AC cosine B on the right. I'll plug in values
for all my side lengths. And now I can solve for cosine B by subtracting 8 squared and 6.67
squared from both sides, and now dividing both sides by negative 2 times 8 times 6.67. Using a
calculator, this gives me that cosine of B is equal to negative 0.1172. The negative value
of cosine indicates that my angle B must be greater than 90 degrees, which agrees with the picture.
Next, I can take cosine inverse of both sides to get that B is equal to cosine inverse of negative
0.1172, which works out to 96.73 degrees. The last thing I have to do is solve for angle A.
I could use law of cosines again and work it out just like I did here for angle B.
But a simpler method is to just use the fact that the sum of the three angles is 180 degrees.
So A must be 180 degrees minus 37 degrees minus 96.73 degrees. This works out to 46.27 degrees.
In the previous example, we were given two sides and the angle between them.
In this angle, we're given instead three side lengths, and we need to find all three angles.
Although there are a lot of computations involved, the ideas are the same as in the previous problem.
To find angle C, we need the form of the law of cosines that has cosine of C on the right side.
To find capital B, we need to use the form of the law of cosines that has cosine of B
on the right side and little b on the left side. So it'll be b squared equals a squared plus c
squared minus 2ac cosine b. And to find angle A, we need little a squared on the left side
so that we'll get cosine of angle A on the right side. For each of these three equations,
I'll plug in the side lengths, solve for the cosine of the angle, and use inverse cosine to
find my angles. Notice that my three angles, 60 degrees, 87.79 degrees, and 32.20 degrees,
add up to almost exactly 180 degrees. It's just a tiny bit off due to round off error. In fact,
I could have saved myself some work by just finding the measure of angle C and the measure of angle
B, for example, and then subtracting their sum from 180 degrees to get angle A.
In this video, we stated the law of cosines and used it to solve some triangles. The law of cosines
can be thought of as the Pythagorean theorem with an adjustment factor to account for triangles
that aren't right triangles. The law of signs is a tool that can be used to solve triangles that
are not necessarily right triangles. It's especially useful when we know two angles and one side.
And it can also be used in the situation where we know two sides and an angle that's not between
them. The law of signs says that for a triangle with angles A, B, and C opposite to sides,
locates A, B, and C respectively, the sign of angle A divided by the length of side A
is equal to the sign of B over B, which is also equal to the sign of C over C.
Notice that we're taking the sign of the three angles and dividing by the three opposite side
lengths. Suppose we know that angle A is 55 degrees, angle C is 67 degrees, and side B is 20 degrees.
We want to solve the triangle, that is, find the lengths of the other sides and the measure
of the third angle. Since we know two angles already, we can find the third angle by subtracting
from 180 degrees. So angle B is 58 degrees. Now I can use the law of signs to find my
remaining side lengths. To find side A, I'll use the fact that sign of angle A over side
length A is equal to sign of angle B over side length B. Since I already know three of these
quantities, angle A, angle B, and side length B, I can plug in and solve for the unknown
side length A. To solve, I'll multiply both sides by A and then multiply both sides by 20 over the
sign of 58 degrees. That gives me that A is equal to 20 sine 55 over sine 58, which works out to
19.32. Please pause the video and use the same method to find side length C. This time, we need to
involve sine of C and side length C in our equation. And we could use either the B's or the A's,
since they're both known for the other side. I'll plug in values as I can and solve for C. C works out
to 21.71. In the previous example, we used the law of signs to find the side lengths of a triangle,
because we already knew the angles. In this next example, we're given some side lengths,
and we're going to need to solve for some angles. This can be tricky, because when we write down the
law of signs and start solving for an angle, we first solve for sine of the angle. But there can be
two plausible angles that both have the same sign. For example, if sine of the angle happens to be
one half, then the angle could be either 30 degrees or 150 degrees. In some cases,
this can lead to two possible triangles that both have the conditions given. When this happens,
and there are two possible solutions, I call this an ambiguous case. With that warning,
let's figure out the details of this example. Plugging in my given information into the law
of signs, I'll focus on this portion of the equation where there's only one unknown to solve for.
First, I'll solve for sine of A, which is 8 times sine 40 degrees over 7,
which works out to 0.7346. From the unit circle, I can see that there'll be two possible angles
with this sine, one in the first quadrant and one in the second quadrant. If I take sine inverse
of both sides of my equation, I get the solution in the first quadrant, which is 47.27 degrees.
Since this angle right here is 47.27 degrees, so is this angle here. And so the angle
that I want in the second quadrant, I can get by going 180 minus 47.27 degrees,
which works out to 132.73. One of these possible angles, it's an acute angle,
the other one at obtuse angle, but both are possible configurations. I'll sketch the possible
triangles. In both triangles, side length A and B are the same, and angle B is the same,
but everything else is different. We can continue to solve for the other angle
and side in each case. In the left side, I'll call this case one.
We can solve for angle C by taking 180 degrees minus angle B minus angle A.
That gives us an angle just over 90 degrees, 92.73 degrees. Now we can use either the law of
sines or the law of cosines to find the final side length C. I'll use the law of sines again.
So I'll plug in the value of angle C into this part of my equation
and solve for C to get C equals sine 92.73 degrees times seven over sine 40 degrees,
which works out to 10.88. For the right-hand triangle, we can carry out the same steps
to get angle C and now plug into the law of sines to get side length C.
We finish solving for the two possible triangles with these given side lengths and angle.
In this video, we used the law of sines to solve a triangle in two different situations. In the
first situation, we had two angles and the side between them. So that's an ASA triangle for angle
side angle. In that situation, we ended up just using the law of sines to solve for side lengths
and there was no ambiguity. In the second situation, we had a triangle where we knew two
side lengths and an angle that was not between them. So I'll call that SSA and in that case,
we did find two possible triangles that would work. The SSA situation doesn't always give two
possible triangles. Sometimes when you go through the two cases and figure out all the other angles
and side lengths, you'll get an impossible situation and the angle, for example, that's
has to be negative because the other two angles add up to more than 180 degrees.
But you do have to be on the lookout for two possible triangles when you're solving
a triangle with the SSA information given. This video describes some of the features of a parabola.
It's vertex, focus and directrix. I want to start by finding the equation of all points
that are equidistant the same distance from a point zero P on the y axis and the horizontal line
y equals negative P. I'm assuming here that P is positive for starters.
Certainly the origin will be among those points as it has a distance of P from the point
and P from the line. But the other points on the x axis will be closer to the line
than they are to the point. So if I want the set of points that are the same distance from the
point in the line, that's going to be a curve that curves upwards, something like this. So for
example, a point out here will be the same distance from the point as it is from the line.
So our intuition is suggesting that this set of points should be the shape of a parabola.
Let's confirm this with some algebra. If we take an arbitrary point with coordinates x y,
its distance from the point zero P is given by the distance formula x minus zero squared plus
y minus p squared. Its distance from the line y equals negative P is just given by its difference
in y coordinates. So that's going to be y minus negative P or y plus P.
Let me set these two quantities equal to each other.
And simplify, I can square both sides. To get on the left x minus zero squared with the same
thing as x squared plus y minus p squared equals y plus p squared. Now I'll distribute out that gives
me x squared plus y squared minus 2 p y plus p squared equals y squared plus 2 p y plus p squared.
The p squareds cancel out as do the y squareds. And I'm left with x squared equals 4 p y after
moving this negative 2 p y to the other side. I could also write this as y equals one over 4 p x
squared. And you might recognize this as the standard parabola y equals x squared, transformed by
vertically stretched stretching or shrinking it by this factor of one over 4 p. You might recall that
this lowest point of the parabola is called the vertex. This point here is called its focus. And
the line here is called the directrix. Notice that the number P in this equation represents the
distance between the vertex and the focus and also represents the distance between the vertex and
the directrix line. For this reason, if you're interested in the focus and the vertex, this form
of the equation might be more useful than the equivalent form, something like y equals ax squared,
where the that distance p is more hidden. Now so far, we've just considered the case when p is greater
than zero. Let's look for a moment at what happens when p is less than zero. Then when we draw the point
zero p is going to be below the x axis. And the directrix y equals negative p is going to be above
the x axis because we're taking the negative of a negative number makes it a positive y value.
Our parabola will also be upside down.
All the algebra works out the same, it's just in our equation, this coefficient of y will now be a
negative number instead of a positive one. Or if we write it in this other form, which might be more
familiar, our coefficient of x squared will be negative instead of positive, which signifies that
the parabola is pointing down. Since p is now a negative number, if we want to talk about distances,
we should write absolute value of p instead of p. Next, let's turn things sideways by looking at the
equation for all points equidistance from point p zero, on the x axis, here we're assuming for
starters that p is bigger than zero, and a vertical line at x equals negative p.
Our intuition suggests that this should be a parabola pointing sideways.
And we can work out the same algebra steps to get an equation for it.
Starting with an arbitrary point x, y, the distance from the point
p zero is going to be given by x minus p squared plus y minus zero squared. The distance from the
line x equals negative p is going to be given by the difference in x coordinates. So that's going
to be x minus negative p, or just x plus p. I'll set these two distances equal to each other,
square both sides like before, and simplify. This gives me the equation y squared equals four px,
which I could also rewrite as x equals one over four p y squared, or x equals a y squared,
where my a corresponds to my one over four p. Once again, if p is negative,
then my parabola will be pointing the opposite direction. But my equation will still be the
same, it'll just have a negative coefficient of x instead of a positive one, the negative number
being hidden inside this variable p. As before, the absolute value of p gives me the distance
between the vertex and the focus, and also gives me the distance between the vertex and the
directrix. Now let's find the equation for parabola with a vertex at some arbitrary point hk
instead of the origin, assuming that the parabola opens up or down. If the parabola had its vertex
at the origin, we know it would be given by the equation x squared equals four p y, or I could
rewrite that as y equals one over four p x squared. So this parabola should just be shifted
to the right by h and up by k. From transformations of functions, we know we can accomplish this
by sticking a x minus h on the inside, and putting a plus k on the outside. In other words,
we have y minus k equals one over four p times x minus h squared, or we can write this as x minus
h squared equals four p times y minus k. So this is the original with the vertex at the origin. And
here is the transformed by shifting right and up to have a vertex at hk. Notice that the equations
are exactly the same. It's just you stuck in a minus h and a minus k near the x and near the y.
This transform parabola will have its focus, a distance of p up from the vertex. So that's
going to be the point h k plus p. And it's going to have its directrix at a distance p down from
the vertex. So that's going to be the line y equals k minus p. Everything's the same for this other
parabola pointing downwards, we just have p is negative in that case. The same story holds for
the parabola is pointing right and left. The original equation, y squared equals four p x
gets transformed when we ship the parabola over into y minus k squared equals four p x minus h.
This time, the vertex is a distance p to the left or right of my vertex. So here it would be
h plus p k. And the directrix would be shifted over by p also from the vertex. So this would be
the vertical line x equals h minus p. It works the same way when the parabola is opening left
instead of right. It's just in this case p is negative. Let's use this information to find the
equation of a parabola with vertex at 24 and focus at negative 14. I'll start with a quick sketch,
which will help me see how the parabola is lined up. So here's the vertex at 24.
And the focus is at negative 14. So here's the focus here.
Now, since the parabola always hugs its focus, that means that this parabola must be pointing
left and look something like this. The directrix is going to be on the other side of the parabola,
the same distance as the distance between the vertex and the focus. Since this distance is
a distance of three to minus negative one is three, the directrix must be three units
over here to the right. And so that would be the line x equals five.
Since my parabola is open to the left, I know I need to use the form of the equation
y minus k squared equals four p x minus h, where h k is the vertex. So that's 24.
I also know that p is going to be negative. And since the absolute value of p represents
the distance between the vertex and the focus, I know that p must be negative three.
So filling on all these numbers, I get y minus four squared equals four times negative three
times x minus two. I'll simplify that to y minus four squared equals negative 12 x minus two.
In this video, we looked at special forms of the equation for a parabola.
The forms y minus k squared equals four p x minus h and x minus h squared equals four p y minus k.
In these equations, h k represents the vertex. And p's absolute value gives the distance
between the vertex and the focus and between the vertex and the directrix.
Parabolas in this form are opening right if p is bigger than zero and left if p is less than zero.
And parabolas in this form are opening up if p is bigger than zero and down if p is less than zero.
This video is about ellipses. Recall that a circle can be defined as a set of points
whose distance from a fixed point is a constant. Any ellipse can be defined as a set of points
such that the sum of the distances
from two fixed points
is a constant. The two fixed points are called focuses or foci.
And the sum of the distances to the two foci is the total length of the string,
which is held constant as I draw the ellipse. Let's examine the features of an ellipse in more
detail. In these pictures, the two black dots are the focuses or foci. The red line segment
that cuts through the middle of the ellipse in the long direction and passes through the foci
is called the major axis. The line segment that cuts through the middle of the ellipse
in the shorter direction is called the minor axis. And the two points at the tips of the ellipse,
where the major axis actually touches the ellipse, are called the vertices.
An ellipse could be elongated in any direction, but we'll only consider ellipses that are elongated
either in the horizontal direction, or the vertical direction. Let's find the equation of an ellipse
whose foci are at negative C, zero, and C zero, and whose vertices are at negative a zero,
and a zero. This will be an ellipse that's elongated in the horizontal direction.
For any point x y on the ellipse, the sum of the distance from x y to the first focus,
plus its distance to the second focus has to be some constant. And in fact,
it turns out that constant has to equal to a, I'll show you why. If you look at this point
right here on the far right tip of the ellipse, its distance from the first focus is going to be
two C plus a minus C. And its distance from the second focus is just going to be a minus C.
If you add up C plus C plus a minus C plus a minus C, you get exactly two a.
So let me write out my formulas for distances. The distance from a point x y to the first focus,
the point negative C zero is going to be the square root of x minus negative C squared
plus y minus zero squared. And the distance from x y to the second focus, the point C zero,
is going to be the square root of x minus C squared plus y minus zero squared. That
sum needs to add up to two a. After a fair amount of algebra, this simplifies to the expression
a squared minus C squared, x squared plus a squared y squared equals a squared times a squared
minus C squared. If we let b squared equal a squared minus C squared, then we can rewrite this
as b squared x squared plus a squared y squared equals a squared b squared. And dividing both sides
by a squared b squared, this gives us the form of the equation for the ellipse x squared over a
squared plus y squared over b squared equals one. Since we got b squared as a squared minus C squared,
it follows that b is less than a. In fact, b is half the length of the minor axis. In other words,
this point right here is the point zero b. And this point is the point zero negative b.
To see why this is true, let's draw these two right triangles. The sum of the side lengths
that I've drawn has to be the total length of the string. So that equals two a, which means each of
these side lengths must be a. Now the base of this triangle is C. So by the Pythagorean theorem,
this height squared must be a squared minus C squared. Since b squared is defined as a squared
minus C squared, this height must be b. To summarize, for a number a bigger than b,
the equation x squared over a squared plus y squared over b squared equals one represents
an ellipse that's elongated
in the horizontal direction, whose major axis terminates in the points minus a zero and a zero,
and whose minor axis terminates in the points zero b and zero minus b.
It's foci are at the points negative C zero and C zero. And the relationship between a b and c is
that b squared is a squared minus c squared. Equivalently, if we add c squared to both sides
and subtract b squared from both sides, we can write c squared equals a squared minus b squared.
The way I remember this is that the biggest of the three numbers a b and c is definitely going to
be a, since a is half the length of the major axis, which is bigger than half the length of
the minor axis, and definitely bigger than the length between the origin and one of the focuses.
Since a is the biggest, and we have a Pythagorean theorem relationship between a b and c,
the equation must be b squared plus c squared equals a squared, which can be rearranged to
either of these two equations. Now, what happens instead, if we have a bigger than b still,
but this time we're dividing y squared by the bigger number squared, and x squared by the
smaller number squared. Well, this basically reverses the roles of x and y in my equation.
And so we end up with the major axis on the y axis stretching between the points, zero a
and zero negative a, whereas the minor axis is going to be along the x axis, going in between
negative b zero and b zero, and the foci are going to be here on the y axis again.
So in this case, my ellipse is elongated in the vertical direction.
Our previous ellipses were centered at the origin. What if the ellipse is centered instead
at an arbitrary point hk? Well, then we need to shift everything over by h in the horizontal
direction and k in the vertical direction. So instead of the equation x squared over a squared
plus y squared over b squared equals one, we're going to have to have x minus h squared over a
squared plus y minus k squared over b squared equals one, where a is bigger than b. That's
for an ellipse elongated in the horizontal direction. If we want an ellipse elongated in the
vertical direction, we'll still take a bigger than b, but we'll reverse the roles of x and y. So this
becomes x squared over b squared plus y squared over a squared equals one for the center at the
origin. And to shift it over, we get x minus h squared over b squared plus y minus k squared
over a squared equals one. I'll draw some pictures below. With some thought, we can label key
points. For example, this vertex must be shifted over by an amount a since a is half the length of
the major axis. So it'll have coordinates h plus a k, whereas this vertex will be h minus a k. This
point up here should be h k plus b, and this one h k minus b. The foci are at h plus c k, and h minus
c k. We can label the points on the ellipse that's elongated vertically. Similarly,
let's write the equation of the ellipse drawn below, and then we'll find its foci.
Its major axis is in the vertical direction, right here. Its top vertex is at the point
for three, as bottom vertex is at the point for negative nine. Its center is halfway between
its two vertices, which is right here at the point for negative three. Finally, I can read off the
points at the end of the minor axis. So this one is at nine negative three, and this one is at negative
one negative three. Since my ellipse is elongated vertically, I know I have an equation of the
form x minus h squared over b squared plus y minus k squared over a squared equals one with a bigger
than b. My center is my point h k, and that's equal to four, negative three. A is half the
length of the major axis. So that's the vertical distance between this point and this point,
I can just take the difference of y coordinates and see that a is equal to six. B is half the
length of the minor axis. So looking at the difference in x coordinates of these two points,
I see that B is equal to five. Throwing that all into my equation, I get that x minus four squared
over five squared plus y plus three squared over six squared equals one. The foci are going to be
somewhere along the major axis, somewhere above and below the center. To figure out how far they
are, I need to use the fact that c squared is equal to a squared minus b squared. So in this case,
c squared is six squared minus five squared, which is 11, which means that c is a square root of 11,
which is a little bit bigger than three. So the two foci are distance of square root of 11 above
and below the center. And so they'll have coordinates
of four, negative three plus the square root of 11. And four, negative three minus the square
root of 11. This video detailed the anatomy of ellipse, including its major axis, its minor axis,
its vertices, and its foci. This video is about hyperbola.
You might recall that any ellipse is the set of points x, y, such that the sum of the distances
between x, y, and two fixed points called the foci is a constant. Well, a hyperbola is a set of
points x, y, such that the difference of the distances between x, y, and each of two fixed
points, called the foci, is a constant. In this picture on the left, the two blue lines
are the two branches of the hyperbola. The two red points are the focuses or foci.
So for a point x, y on the hyperbola, if I look at the distance from x, y to one focus,
and the distance from x, y to the other focus, the difference of those two distances
will be the same, no matter which point x, y on the hyperbola that I choose.
If I draw a line between the two foci,
that line is called the transverse axis. In this left picture, we have a vertical
transverse axis. And the hyperbola itself reminds me of a person lying down horizontally.
Now in the right picture, our transverse axis between the two foci is horizontal.
And the blue hyperbola itself kind of reminds me of a person standing up vertically.
It's possible for a hyperbola to be oriented other ways, besides horizontally and vertically,
but we'll only consider horizontal and vertical orientations in this video.
If you look at where the transverse axis intersects the blue branches of the hyperbola,
you'll find these two points. Those points are called the vertices. Notice that the vertices
are the two points on the two branches that are closest to one another. The point halfway
between the two vertices, it's also halfway between the two foci, is called the center of the hyperbola.
The two black dotted lines that I've drawn that form an x are not actually part of the hyperbola.
They're called the asymptotes. And you can think of them as guidelines for drawing the hyperbola,
because the hyperbola gets closer and closer to these asymptotes, but doesn't cross them.
We'll talk more about the asymptotes later.
Let's find the equation of a hyperbola with foci at negative c zero and c zero,
and vertices at negative a zero and a zero. This hyperbola will have its center at the origin.
From the distance definition of hyperbola, we know that if we have a point x y on the hyperbola,
then if we take the distance from that point to the first focus,
and the distance to the second focus, and subtract them, we should get a constant.
We're always taking the positive difference here. So if we're on the right branch, we'll take the
distance to the left focus minus the shorter distance to the right focus. And if we happen to be
on the left branch, then we would take the longer distance to the right focus minus the
shorter distance to the left focus. When we do the differences that way, we should always get
the same number. And in fact, that difference should equal to a, I'll show you why. The reason is,
if I take my point to be this vertex here, then its distance to this focus is exactly
c minus a because c is bigger than a. And this distance to that focus is going to be, well,
let's see, this is a, this is a, and this is c minus a. So that different distance will be a plus
a plus c minus a. Now I'm going to do the difference a plus a plus c minus a minus c minus a.
That simplifies to a plus c minus c plus a, which is to a. Now I'll focus on a point on the right
branch. And I'll actually write a formula for its distance to this point. That's the distance
formula. It's going to be x minus negative c squared plus y minus zero squared. That's the
longer difference distance. Now I subtract the shorter distance, which is the distance
to this focus. And there the distance formula gives me x minus c squared plus y minus zero
squared. That should always equal to a for any point on that right branch. I'll clean up the
inside of the square roots a little bit. After that, a chunk of algebra, which I won't do here
here, allows you to simplify this equation to c squared minus a squared times x squared minus a
squared y squared equals a squared times c squared minus a squared. Since this expression, c squared
minus a squared is appearing a couple times here, I'm going to give it a new name. I'm going to let
b squared b c squared minus a squared. Now I can rewrite my equation as b squared x squared minus
a squared y squared equals a squared b squared. And dividing both sides by a squared b squared
yields the equation x squared over a squared minus y squared over b squared equals one.
In this equation, notice that a represents the distance from the center to a vertex.
The quantity c is not directly in this equation, but it's related to a and b
by this equation, which can also be rewritten as c squared equals a squared plus b squared,
or if you prefer a squared equals c squared minus b squared. I remember this one. I remember that c,
which is the distance from the center to the focus, is the largest of the three quantities a b and c.
So you might be wondering, well, what does b represent? Well, I'm going to draw a box
whose center is at the center of my hyperbola that stretches out in a from either direction left
right and stretches up by b in either direction up and down. It turns out that the corners of
such a box will be exactly on these two asymptote lines. In other words, the slope of this asymptote,
its rise over its run is b over a. And for this asymptote that's slipping downwards,
its rise over its run is negative b over a. So I can actually write the equations of the asymptotes
for this hyperbola centered at the origin as y equals b over a x and y equals negative b over a x.
We did all this work for a standing up hyperbola with its transverse axis oriented horizontally.
Let me rearrange things and we'll see what changes if the hyperbola is oriented the other way.
In this case, where we have a vertical transverse axis,
the roles of x and y are completely switched. So our equation, which we could derive the same way
becomes y squared over a squared minus x squared over b squared equals one.
We still have the same formulas c squared equals a squared plus b squared. And the two related
formulas b squared equals c squared minus a squared and a squared equals c squared minus b squared.
A is still the distance from the center to the vertex. And C still represents the distance
from the center to a focus. Now our box will extend up and down by a units and left and right by b
units. So this time, the slope of the asymptote, the rise over the run is going to be a over b
for the line that's sloped up, and negative a over b for the line that's sloped down.
This means our asymptotes, which go through the center at the origin will be given by the
equations y equals a over b x and y equals negative a over b x. I want to point out that in this
notation, a is going with x in one form of the equation and y in the other form of the equation,
but it always goes with the positive term, the term that's added instead of subtracted, whereas b
goes with the negative term, the term that's subtracted. Which term is positive, the x squared
or the y squared determines the orientation of the hyperbola this way or that way.
So far, we've been considering only hyperbola centered at the origin, and we had these two
equations for them. If we center at an arbitrary point, hk instead, we just subtract h from the x
term and subtract k from the y term. The graphs are shifted over by h and up by k. And to get to
the vertices, we just start at the center and go left and right by a or up and down by a, depending
on which way the hyperbola is oriented. So the vertices here are at h plus a k and h minus a k,
whereas over here, the vertices are at hk plus a and hk minus a.
To get to the focuses, we have to go over by C, or up and down by C,
where c squared equals a squared plus b squared. Finally, the asymptotes
still have the same slopes as before. But this time, they have to go through the center, which is at
hk instead of zero zero, their equations are going to be given by y minus k equals b over a x minus h.
And y minus k is negative b over a x minus h. Or with the other orientation, the analogous thing,
y minus k equals a over b x minus h, and y minus k equals a over b negative a over b x minus h.
We've done all the abstract theory. Let's do one example with numbers. If we're given this
hyperbola, we can read off its center as six negative three. Since the x term is positive,
I'm going to let a be the square root of four, and b will be the square root of 25.
Since the x term is positive, and the y term is negative, the hyperbola is going to be oriented
standing up like this, with a horizontal transverse axis. The distance from the center to each vertex
is given by the number a, which is two. So the left vertex will have coordinates for negative
three, and the right vertex will have coordinates, eight, negative three. To find the foci, I need
to figure out c squared, which is a squared plus b squared, or four plus 2529. So c is the square
root of 29. I'll sketch ballpark position of my foci here. And the coordinates are going to be
at, let's see, the center is six, so six minus square root of 29, same y coordinate of negative
three, and six plus square root of 29, negative three. Finally, the asymptotes will form an x
going through the center with slope given by b over a, which is five halves, and negative b over a,
negative five halves. The equations for those lines will be y plus three, coming from the center,
equals five halves, x minus six, and y plus three equals negative five halves, x minus six.
This gives a decent rough sketch of the hyperbola. If I want to be a little more accurate, I could
also plot some points by plugging in values of x and solving for y or vice versa. In this video,
we gave two equations for hyperbolas, which one you use depends on how the hyperbola is oriented.
A has to do with the distance between the center and the vertex, the number c, which can be figured
out from the equation c squared equals a squared plus b squared, is going to represent the distance
from the center to the focus. And b and a together help determine the slope of the asymptotes.
This video introduces the idea of polar coordinates. Polar coordinates give an alternative way of
describing the location of points on the plane. Instead of describing a point in terms of its x
and y coordinates, those are the Cartesian coordinates of the point. When using polar
coordinates, we instead describe the point in terms of a radius r and an angle theta.
r is the distance of the point from the origin, and theta is the angle that radius line makes
with the positive x axis. Let's plot these points given in polar coordinates. So the eight here
is the value of the radius, and the negative two thirds pi is the value of the angle theta.
The negative angle means that I need to go clockwise from the positive x axis,
instead of counterclockwise like I normally would for a positive angle.
So here, a negative two thirds pi means that I need to go to this line right here. And the eight
of for the radius means I need to go eight lines out from the origin. So my point should be around
right here. The next point has a radius of five and an angle of three pi. The angle of positive
three pi means that I go counterclockwise starting at the positive x axis. Here, I've gone around by
two pi. And here, I've got an extra pi to make three pi. Now the radius of five means I need to go
five units out from the origin. So that puts me about right here. Notice that I could have also
labeled this point with the polar coordinates of five pi. There's more than one way to assign
polar coordinates to a point. The next point has an angle of pi over four, and a radius of negative
12. The negative radius means that I need to jump to the other side of the circle before I plot the
point. In other words, instead of plotting the point at an angle of pi over four and a radius of 12,
which would be about right here, I go to the opposite side of the circle and plot it at the same
distance from the origin, but 180 degrees or pi radians around the circle over here.
Now I could have also labeled this point using a positive radius of 12, and using an angle of pi
over four plus pi, or five pi over four. And in general, a point with polar coordinates of negative
r theta means the same point as the point with polar coordinates are theta plus pi. Adding pi
just makes us jump around to the opposite side of the circle. To convert between polar and Cartesian
coordinates, it's handy to use the following equations. First, x is equal to r cosine theta,
y is equal to r sine theta, r squared is equal to x squared plus y squared, which means that r
is plus or minus the square root of x squared plus y squared. And tangent theta is equal to y
divided by x. Let's see where these equations come from. If we draw a point with coordinates x, y,
and draw lines to make a right triangle, the height of that triangle is y, the length of the base
is x, and the hypotenuse has length r theta is the measure of this interior angle.
From trig, we know that cosine theta is equal to adjacent over hypotenuse. So that's x over r,
which means that x is equal to r cosine theta. Similarly, sine theta is opposite over hypotenuse,
that's y over r, which means that y is equal to r sine theta. That gives us the first two equations.
The Pythagorean theorem tells us that x squared plus y squared is equal to r squared, and that
gives us the third equation. Finally, tangent theta is opposite over adjacent. So that's y over x,
which is the fourth equation. To convert five negative pi over six from polar to Cartesian
coordinates, we just use the fact that x equals r cosine theta, and y equals r sine theta. So in
this case, x is equal to five times cosine of negative pi over six, that's five times square root
of three over two, and y is equal to five sine negative pi over six. So that's equal to negative
five halves. To convert negative one negative one from Cartesian to polar coordinates,
we know that negative one and negative one are x and y values. So we need to use the fact that
r squared is x squared plus y squared, that is, r squared is negative one squared plus negative
one squared, or two. Also, tangent theta is y over x. So that's negative one over negative one,
or one. Now there's several values of r and theta that satisfy these equations. r could be
squared of two, or negative the square root of two, and theta could be pi over four, or five pi
over four, or we could add multiples of two pi to either of these answers. But not all combinations
of r and theta get us to the right point. The point with Cartesian coordinates, negative one,
negative one, lies in the third quadrant. But if we use a theta value of say pi over four,
and an r value of square root of two, that would get us to the first quadrant. So instead,
we need to use the polar coordinates of square root of two, and five pi over four, or if we prefer
negative square root of two, and pi over four. We could also add any multiple of two pi to either
of these values of theta, and get yet another way of representing the point in polar coordinates.
This video talked about polar coordinates, and converting in between Cartesian coordinates
and polar coordinates using some familiar equations from trig.
This video introduces the idea of parametric equations. Instead of describing a curve as y
equals f of x, we can describe the x coordinates and y coordinates separately in terms of a third
variable, t, usually thought of as time. So we can write x as a function of t, and y as a separate
function of t. This is especially useful as a way to describe curves that don't satisfy the vertical
line test, and therefore can't be described traditionally as functions of y in terms of x.
A Cartesian equation for a curve is an equation in terms of x and y only. Parametric equations
for a curve give both x and y as functions of a third variable, usually t. The third variable
is called the parameter. As our first example, let's graph the parametric equations given here
on an x y coordinate axis. We'll do this by finding x and y coordinates that correspond to the same
value of t. For example, when t is negative two, you can calculate that x by plugging in negative
two for t gives you five, and y when you plug in negative two for t gives you eight.
Please pause the video for a moment and fill in some additional values of x and y for some additional
values of t. Your chart should look like this. And when we plot the x y pairs and connect the dots,
we get something like this. Notice that this point over here corresponds to a t value of negative two,
and this point over here corresponds to the t value of two. So if we think of t as time,
we're traversing the curve in this direction. To find a Cartesian equation for this curve,
we need to eliminate the variable t from these equations. One way to do this is to solve for t
in one equation, say the first equation. So two t is equal to one minus x, which means that t
is one half minus x over two, then we can plug that expression for t into the second equation
and get y equals one half minus x over two squared plus four, which simplifies to the quadratic
equation y equals one fourth x squared minus one half x plus 17 fourths. Let's try some more
examples. A table of values for the first example helps us draw the familiar graph of a circle
of radius one. This should come as no surprise, since the equations x equals cosine t and y equals
sine t are familiar from trig as a way of describing the x and y coordinates of a point on the unit
circle. Notice that when t equals zero, our curve lies on the positive x axis. And as t increases
from zero to two pi, we traverse the curve once in the counterclockwise direction.
A Cartesian equation for this unit circle is given by the equation x squared plus y squared
equals one. This follows from the trig identity cosine squared t plus sine squared t equals one
by substituting in x for cosine t and y for sine t. Please pause the video for a moment
to graph the second curve and rewrite it as a Cartesian equation.
A table of values should help you see that the graph is again a unit circle. But this time,
as t increases from zero to two pi, we actually traverse the circle twice in the clockwise
direction. I'll draw this with a double arrow moving clockwise. The Cartesian equation for this
graph is still x squared plus y squared equals one. And so we found two different
parameterizations for the same graph on the x y axis. Let's take a look at the third equation.
There's no interval of value specified for t here. So let's just assume that t can be any real number.
Now as t ranges from negative infinity to infinity, our y values, which are given by cosine t,
oscillate between one and negative one. Our x values are always the square of our y values.
So the graph of this curve has to lie on the graph of x equals y squared, which is a sideways
parabola. But our parametrically defined curve doesn't cover this whole parabola.
Remember that y is given by cosine of t. So y can only range between negative one and one.
And so we're only getting the portion of the parabola that I shade in here.
As t varies from say zero to pi, I traverse this parabola one time. And then as t goes from pi to
two pi, I go back again in the other direction. And as t continues to increase, I traverse this
parabola infinitely many times. The Cartesian equation for this curve is the equation x equals
y squared with the restriction that y is between negative one and one.
We've seen several examples where we went from parametric equations to Cartesian equations.
Now let's start with a Cartesian equation and rewrite it as a parametric equation.
In this example, y is already given as a function of x. So an easy way to parameterize this curve
is to just let x equal t, and then y is equal to the square root of t squared minus t, substituting
in t for x. The domain restriction in terms of x just translates into a restriction in terms of t.
I call this the copycat parameterization. Since we've successfully introduced the
new variable t, but t just copies whatever x does. In the second example, we could try setting x
equal to t, then we get 25 t squared plus 36 y squared is equal to 900. And solving for y,
we'd have y squared equals 900 minus 25 t squared over 36.
So y is plus or minus the square root of this quantity. This is a very awkward looking expression.
In fact, why is not even a function of t here because of the plus and minus signs.
So let's look for a better way to parametrize this curve.
Because of the x squared and the y squared, this equation is a good candidate for parametrizing
using sine and cosine. In fact, if we divide both sides of the equation by 900, we get
25 x squared over 900 plus 36 y squared over 900 is equal to one,
which simplifies to x squared over 36 plus y squared over 25 is equal to one.
If I rewrite this as x over six squared plus y over five squared equals one,
then I can set x over six equal to cosine of t and y over five equal to sine of t.
And I can see that for any value of t, x over six and y over five will satisfy this equation
simply because cosine squared plus sine squared equals one. This gives me the parameterization
x equals six cosine of t, y equals five sine of t, which is a handy way to describe an ellipse.
As a final example, let's describe a general circle of radius r and center hk.
For any point x y on the circle, we know that the distance from that point x y to the center
of the circle is equal to r. So using the distance formula, we know that the square root of x minus
x minus h squared plus y minus k squared has to equal r. Squaring both sides,
this gives us the equation for the circle in Cartesian coordinates. So for example,
if our circle has radius five and has center at the point negative three, 17, then its equation
would be x minus negative three, that's x plus three squared plus y minus 17 squared is equal to 25.
One way to find the equation of a general circle in parametric equations is to start with the
unit circle and work our way up. We know that the unit circle with radius one centered at the origin
is given by the equation x equals cosine t and y equals sine t.
If we want a circle of radius r centered around the origin instead,
then we need to expand everything by a factor of r. So we multiply our x and y coordinates by r.
If we now want the center to be at hk instead of at the origin, then we need to add h to all our x
coordinates and add k to all our y coordinates. This gives us the general equation for a circle
in parametric equations to match the Cartesian equation above. We can write our same example
circle in parametric equations as x equals five cosine t minus three, y equals five sine t plus 17.
In this video, we translated back and forth in between Cartesian equations
and parametric equations with a special emphasis on the equations for circles.
This video is about the difference quotient and the average rate of change.
These are topics that are related to the concept of derivative in calculus.
For a function y equals f of x, like the function who's graphed right here,
a secant line is a line that stretches between two points on the graph of the function.
I'm going to label this x value as a and this x value as b. So this point here on the graph is
going to have an x value of a and a y value given by f of a. The second point will have x value b
and y value f of b. Now the average rate of change for a function on the interval from a to b
can be defined as the slope of the secant line
between the two points,
a f of a and b f of b. In symbols, that slope m is the rise over the run or the change in y
over the change in x, which is the difference in y coordinates f of b minus f of a over the
difference in x coordinates b minus a. So this is the average rate of change.
To put this in context, if for example, f of x represents the height of a tree
and x represents time in years, then f of b minus f of a represents a difference in height or the
amount the tree grows. And b minus a represents a difference in in years. So a time period. So this
average rate of change is the amount the tree grows in a certain time period. For example, if it grows
10 inches in two years, that would be 10 inches per two years or five inches per year would be its
average rate of change, its average rate of growth. Let's compute the average rate of change for the
function f of x equals square root of x on the interval for one to four. So the average rate of
change is f of four minus f of one over four minus one. Well, f of four is the square root of four
of one square root of one. So that's going to be two minus one over three or one third.
Instead of calling these two locations on the x axis, a and b, this time I'm going to call the
first location just x and the second location x plus h. The idea is that h represents the horizontal
distance between these two locations on the x axis. In this notation, if I want to label this
point on the graph of y equals f of x, it'll have an x coordinate of x and a y coordinate of f of x.
The second point will have an x coordinate of x plus h and a y coordinate of f of x plus h.
A difference quotient is simply the average rate of change using this x x plus h notation.
So a difference quotient represents the average rate of change
of a function f of x on the interval from x to x plus h. Equivalently, the difference quotient
represents the slope of the secant line for the graph of y equals f of x between the points
with coordinates x f of x and x plus h f of x plus h. Let's work out a formula for the difference
quotient. Remember that the formula for the average rate of change could be written as f of b
minus f of a over b minus a, where a and b are the two locations on the x axis.
But now I'm calling instead of a I'm using x instead of b I'm using x plus h. So I can rewrite
this average rate of change as f of x plus h minus f of x over x plus h minus x.
That simplifies a little bit on the denominator. Because x plus h minus x, I can cancel the x's
and I get the difference quotient formula f of x plus h minus f of x over h.
The quantity h on this denominator looks like a single entity, but it still represents
a difference in x values. Let's find and simplify the difference quotient for this function given.
First, I'll write down the general formula for the difference quotient.
That's f of x plus h minus f of x over h. I'm going to compute f of x plus h first,
I do this by shoving in x plus h everywhere I see an x in the formula for the function.
So that's going to give me two times x plus h squared minus x plus h plus three.
Notice how I use parentheses here. That's important because I need to make sure
I shove in the entire x plus h for x. So the entire x plus h needs to be subtracted,
not just the x part. So the parentheses are mandatory.
Similarly, the parentheses here signal that the entire x plus h is squared as it needs to be.
I'm going to go ahead and simplify a bit right now. I can multiply out the x plus h squared.
I can go ahead and distribute the negative sign. So if I multiply out, I'm going to get x squared
plus xh plus hx plus h squared. Now I can distribute the two to get two x squared plus
two xh plus two hx plus two h squared minus x minus h plus three. These two terms are actually the
same. I can add them up to get four xh. And I think that's as simple as I can get that part.
Now I'm going to write out f of x plus h minus f of x. So that's going to be
this thing right here minus f of x. Again, I need to put the f of x formula in parentheses to make
sure I subtract the whole thing. I'll distribute the negative. And now I notice that a bunch of
things cancel out. So the two x squared and the minus two x squared add to zero, the minus x and
the x add to zero, and the three and the minus three add to zero. So I'm left with four xh plus
two h squared minus h. Finally, I'll write out the whole difference quotient by dividing everything
by h. I can simplify this further because notice that there's an h in every single term of the
numerator. If I factor out this h, h times four x plus two h minus one divided by h,
these two h's cancel. And I'm left with a difference quotient of four x plus two h minus one.
This difference quotient will become important in calculus. When we calculate a difference quotient
for smaller and smaller values of h, eventually letting h go to zero and ending up with an
expression that has no h is in it and represents the derivative or slope of the function itself.
In this video, we use the formula f of b minus f of a over b minus a to calculate an average rate
of change and the related formula f of x plus h minus f of x over h to calculate and simplify a
difference quotient.
