This walrus didn't get these dance moves on his own.
They came from Cab Callaway, a 1930s jazz superstar and band leader.
Do you see it now?
Cab was a source of endless inspiration for early animators
who transformed his dancing into that walrus and a ghost
and a very moonwalky old man of the mountain.
The old man of the mountain.
The way these moves got from real life to cartoon
was a breakthrough in technology and method.
It's an idea that forever changed animation
when an inventor took pictures that had just started to move
and made them dance.
As riveting as that was, early animation had a problem.
The first animated shorts didn't look right.
Don't focus on the drawing.
Look at the motion.
See how clunky his arm move is here
and how his shoulder doesn't move realistically?
Max Fleischer saw that problem too.
This is him, the inventor, blowing bubbles in some of the first films
that revolutionized animation.
And this is the clown that did it.
See how naturally Coco the Clown moves compared to the umbrella guy?
That's where the invention called the rotoscope comes in.
You can understand it from the patent application.
It was a way to film real movement to create better animation.
First, they filmed live action motion in the wild.
For Coco the Clown, they filmed Max's brother, Dave Fleischer,
dancing around in a clown costume on Max's roof.
He was in front of a white sheet for contrast.
The sheet actually blew around so much that Dave almost fell off the roof,
so don't try this at home.
That film gave them individual frames of Coco moving around,
like in the patent.
They used a projector hooked up to a car headlamp to amp up brightness
and it showed each frame on a screen with tracing paper.
Then they just played it back frame by frame, tracing what they needed.
It had the creativity of animation, but the precision of live action.
The results were astonishingly smooth and lots of people noticed.
The New York Times said Coco, the Inkwell man, leaps as a human being.
And it made sense. He was one.
Take Cab Callaway's performance.
Now, animators didn't have to guess what subtle movements came in the middle.
They had a filmed guide to every frame.
Later it helped out with Superman, using photos and film to model Lois, like here.
Gulliver's travels also had hyper real movement inspired by real motion.
When the patent expired, other animation studios followed.
But Fleischer's work was more than just one invention.
Now, these cartoons and other ones at the time are filled with tons of cringy stereotypes
that wouldn't pass muster today.
But the creativity, that, that is not dated at all.
Fleischer Studios invented the bouncing ball song,
where you can follow along with the lyrics.
Oh yes, there's a patent.
Max and Dave patented multi-plane animation as well.
See how they could film the main character moving
and separately move the background elements, like pictures and models.
This created depth and saved animators time.
It enabled gorgeous motion, like in this scene from Superman.
As it evolved, Fleischer Animation mixed all these technologies
with skilled artistry and improvisation.
And that's why rotoscoping is a versatile tool still,
whether it's inspiring some of the animation in early video games
or in its logical extension in motion capture,
where real movements are given over to animators fancy.
But even that undersells their achievements a little.
That cab Callaway Walrus cartoon, many of the mooch are,
is a Betty Boop cartoon.
But it is a work of art filled with infinite delights that tantalize.
Scratch that. It is straight up weird.
The best way possible.
Phones have lips, hinkerchiefs talk, ghost skeletons get drunk,
people scream, the list goes on.
When cab Callaway saw himself turned into a dancing walrus,
he fell to the floor laughing.
An invention made that work, but it was a different type of genius
that made cab Callaway fall to the floor.
You can patent a device, but you can't patent that.
That's it for this episode in this series about big changes to movies
that came from outside of Hollywood.
If there are any other animation examples you find striking,
let me know in the comments.
I do want to take a chance to underscore just how far outside of Hollywood
the Fleischer's were.
In addition to their New York studios, they had one in Miami, Florida.
And that is where Gulliver's Travels was actually made.
