This episode of Real Engineering is brought to you by the CuriosityStream and Nebula Bundle
Deal. Sign up now to watch the hour-long version of this video linked in the description.
If you were not paying attention, you may not have noticed the revolution happening
in the airline industry. The days of attempting to build bigger and bigger airliners like
the 850-passenger double-decker A380 and the 660-passenger Humt 747 are gone. The behemoths
are simply being outcompeted by a new generation of planes. Many mourn the slow demise of these
iconic planes, but you are benefiting from this change. The entire nature of air travel
has changed to benefit you and your needs. Your local airport has more direct flights
to distant lands than ever before, and the price of those tickets are cheaper than ever.
Connecting flights are becoming rarer and rarer as this new breed of plane takes over.
The plane at the forefront of this revolution? The 787 Dreamliner. A 30 billion dollar bet
on the future of the airline industry. Boeing sat at the poker table and pushed all their
chips forward. An all-in bet on a radical new future. And it paid off.
The 787 revolutionized not only how the airline industry operates, but how the future of planes
will be designed and built. This is the breakdown of the 787's materials. By weight, 55% of
the 787 is made from composite materials, like carbon fibre reinforced plastics, making
it the first commercial airliner made primarily with this new age material.
The 787 is rivalled only by the Airbus A350XWB introduced 4 years after the 787 in 2015. So,
why are composite materials so desirable for the airline industry, and how has the 787
made the most of their advantages?
Composite materials are made up of two or more materials. Take carbon reinforced plastics.
They are composed of extremely strong carbon fibres bound together by a plastic resin.
Carbon fibre, made up of thousands of tiny thin fibres of carbon, is incredibly strong
in tension. Up to 5 times stronger than steel, and one-fifth of its weight.
These tiny fibres can't create a solid part by themselves. This is an image of a human hair
beside a carbon fibre. The carbon fibre is the smaller one, and just like a human hair,
they can bend and flex and separate very easily. So, we need to first bind them together with
a plastic resin to form a solid material. Otherwise, they just form a strong but flexible
fabric. That flexibility as a fabric is exactly what makes composites so useful when creating the
precise and elegant curves of a plane. With the right tooling and designers, composite components
can be made into almost any shape imaginable. In the past, a disadvantage of making large
aircraft components from composites was the time taken to manually lay up parts, where layers of
carbon fibre and plastic resin had to be carefully constructed. It required skilled technicians,
and was inherently difficult to scale to the production quantities Boeing needed.
To get around this, Boeing uses automated tape laying to produce massive aircraft sections.
The 787's fuselage is created by wrapping a carbon fibre tape impregnated with a plastic resin
around a rotating mould of the fuselage. This machine precisely controls the overlaps of the tape
and the orientation of the fibres to ensure we are getting the most out of the carbon's tensile
strength to resist the internal pressure loads and the longitudinal bending loads the fuselage
will experience. One of the problems with this manufacturing method is that the part needs to
be placed inside an oven to cure the resin. This hardens the plastic and creates a solid
composite structure. Ovens the size of a wide body jet airliner fuselage are not exactly common,
and this is often the limiting factor on parts made this way, and requires massive upfront
investment to build a customised oven large enough to fit the part, but the benefits are well worth
The first and most obvious is the strength carbon fibre provides. Previous generation
airliners are typically pressurised to an equivalent of 8,000 feet. That's the same height as Mount
Olympus in Washington State. High enough that the lower pressure would reduce your oxygen intake
and your stomach will bloat as the air inside is higher pressure than the outside. This is
uncomfortable and exacerbates the effects of jet lag, but thanks to the 787 stronger fuselage
it can increase its internal air pressure to an equivalent of 6,000 feet, 25% lower in altitude
and about 7.3% higher in pressure. That may not sound like a lot, but it goes a long way
in making the journey more comfortable, and at the very least the person next to you won't be
farting as much. Less farting is always nice, but my favourite benefit of the stronger fuselage
is the absolutely massive windows. This is the 787 window, and these are windows of some equivalent
aluminium airliners. They are absolutely massive. In aircraft made primarily from aluminium,
having holes this large in metal panels would result in the build up of stress at the window
as the stress contours have to deviate around the window. This stress does not exceed the
material strength, but over repeated pressure cycles, tiny imperfections in the metal can grow
into even larger cracks and eventually fail. Holes this large in an aluminium airliner would
severely shorten the plane's flying career before it needed to be fixed or disposed of.
Kind of like how cracks in McGregor's leg shortened his career, but it's not a problem for the 787
thanks to composite's relative immunity to fatigue. You could kick Dustin Purir's kneecap
as many times as you like with carbon fibre shins. The carbon fibre construction provides plenty of
benefits for the airline operators too, because the fuselage is just one massive part. Boeing was
able to eliminate all joints and all the fasteners needed to join them together. The sections that
used to be made up of 1500 aluminium sheets riveted together using 40 to 50 000 fasteners
are now just one massive carbon fibre section. Carbon fibre strength to weight ratio already
makes the fuselage lighter, but eliminating joints and fasteners makes it even lighter again.
The reduced weight reduces fuel burn, but this fuselage is also incredibly aerodynamic
because it doesn't have thousands of little bumps and ridges all over it from those joints and
rivets. These surface imperfections make the plane's surface rough and cause it to disturb
more airflow, increasing parasitic drag. Composite materials help reduce drag in other ways too.
One of my favourite things about the 787 is its elegant wings. The main structural member of a
wing is the wingspan. Its primary role is to resist the upwards bending force during flight.
It's essentially just an i-beam, a shape optimised to resist bending loads. The wingspan of the 787
are constructed from carbon fibre composites, while the ribs, the structural members connecting
the two spares, and that support the wingskin are machined out of solid aluminium plates.
The structure, the rear and forward wingspan form with ribs running between is called
the wing box and it forms the main load bearing structure of the wing, while also being a literal
box for fuel to sit inside. The carbon fibre composite spare provides the wing fantastic
strength. Strength is quantified by the force required to completely fracture material,
but carbon fibre composites have another important quality that makes them perfect for aircraft
wings, their maximum elastic strain. There are two types of deformation, elastic and plastic
deformation. Elastic means the material will snap back into its original shape after the load is
removed, like an elastic band. Plastic means it will permanently deform and won't return to its
original shape once the load is removed, something we don't want to happen. This is permanent damage.
Carbon fibre composites can deform further before they strike this plastic deformation zone
at about 1.9%, while aircraft aluminium begins permanently deforming at less than 1%.
That means we can bend carbon composites further before we need to worry about permanently deforming
them, and that means we can make our wings super flexible. During flight, the wing tip of the 787
can move upwards by 3 meters. That sounds like a lot, but in order to get certified by the FAA,
every plane needs to be able to handle 150% of the plane's absolute maximum expected load during
flight for 3 seconds. And during that test, the 787's wing bent upwards by 7.6 meters. That's
a great deal of bending, despite carbon fibre composites being stiffer than aluminium, meaning
it takes more force to deform the same volume of material. But critically, 787 wings are not the
same shape as their aluminium counterparts. This ability to withstand greater bending allowed
engineers to make the 787's wings with a much higher aspect ratio. Aspect ratio is the ratio
between the wingspan and the mean cord, or wing width. A high aspect ratio would be a long skinny
wing like a glider, while a low aspect ratio would be a delta wing of a fighter jet. A traditional
airliner has an aspect ratio of about 9, like the 787's predecessor, the 777, but the 787
has a massive aspect ratio at 11. This is what causes the 787's wings to flex so much during
flight. Composites are actually stiffer than aluminium, but their ability to withstand
high deformation allowed the engineers at Boeing to create a much higher aspect ratio wing, a longer,
narrower wing that would bend more. But this comes with some huge benefits. The planes with the
highest aspect ratio are gliders. For an unpowered plane, the highest priority is minimizing energy
lost to drag. This allows the glider to stay in the air for extended periods with no engine.
These types of aircraft typically have aspect ratios greater than 30, and these aircraft have
the lowest drag penalties as a result of vortex drag. This is the drag caused by air mixing from
the high pressure zone under the wing with low pressure air above the wing, forming vortices
at the wing tip. By spreading the area of the wing over a longer span, we minimize the pressure that
drives this mixing at the wing tip, and thus minimize the energy lost to the vortices.
Normally, higher aspect ratio wings have lower internal volumes. For an unpowered glider,
this isn't an issue. But for a plane that needs that storage space for fuel, it is. Less storage
volume for fuel means lower range, and one of the primary goals of the 787 is to be an efficient,
long-range aircraft capable of allowing airliners to open new routes that were once deemed impossible.
Thankfully, modern planes like the 787 use a new kind of aerofoil, the supercritical aerofoil.
Older aerofoils look something like this, a reasonably symmetric design with a sharp nose,
and gentle curves on the upper and lower surface, and this is a supercritical wing.
The leading edge is blunter with a larger radius, the top is relatively flat,
and the lower portion has this strange cusp at the back. This aerofoil has much more useful
internal volume thanks to its blunt leading edge and larger thickness-to-cord ratio.
Helping solve our low internal volume problem associated with high aspect ratio wings,
the supercritical wing was first tested by NASA on a modified TF-8A crusader,
and you can really see the similarities in design ethos between the experimental plane's
sleek wings with the 787. But increased internal volume is not why NASA developed the supercritical
wing. NASA developed it to delay the onset of shockwave formation over the wings.
When air travels over a wing, the air on top accelerates. This means that even though the
plane itself might be travelling below the speed of sound, the air over the wing may break it and
create a shockwave. This shockwave decreases lift and causes an increase in drag. This kind of drag
is called wave drag, and planes need to fly below the speed this occurs at. The speed is called the
critical Mach number. The supercritical wing was designed to increase the critical Mach number.
The flat top of the supercritical wing means the air does not accelerate as much as it would over
a classic aerofoil. Of course, this causes a loss in lift because that fast-moving air is
causing a drop in pressure on top of the wing. To compensate, supercritical aerofoils have this
concave curvature underneath the wing, which causes an increase of pressure there to compensate.
This increase in pressure does not affect the critical Mach number, while the larger radius
of the leading edge increases the lift generated at higher angles of attack. This is because air
struggles to follow the tighter turns of a smaller radius leading edge, which causes earlier flow
detachment and stall. The larger radius delays this flow separation. This aerofoil shape changes
continually as you travel the length of the wing, twisting and curving in computer-calculated
precision, optimizing the wing shape to be as efficient as possible, and composites provided
the engineers with the confidence that these shapes could be manufactured. The skin is simply
laid down on a mold with automated tape-laying once again. We don't have to beat metal into shape
each and every time we want to recreate these delicate curves. The fibers of the wing have
even been laid in specific patterns to tailor the stiffness of the wing in different areas.
This means the wing deforms exactly as the 787's engineers wanted to as it gains speed.
So the wing shape actually changes during flight to better suit the needs at different speeds.
This is called aeroelastic tailoring and is the forefront of state-of-the-art aeronautical
engineering today. The 787 also features a novel device designed to reduce turbulent flow over
the tail of the aircraft. Two types of flow states exist in aerodynamics. Laminar flow occurs at low
velocities and is characterized by fluid layers flowing smoothly over each other in neat orderly
layers. Laminar flow is predictable and non-erratic and does not create significant drag. Turbulent
flow is far more common but still very little is known about how to predict its behavior.
It is very difficult to control because of the formation of small vortices called eddies in
the flow making the flow highly erratic. Turbulent flow occurs at higher flow velocities
and causes a significant increase in drag. At cruising speeds of 80 to 85 percent of the speed
of sound, turbulent flow is ultimately unavoidable but we can work to minimize it.
Boeing has developed a technology that helps them delay and control the formation of turbulent flow
called hybrid laminar flow control. Details on their implementation of the technology are sparse.
This technology is capable of reducing fuel burn by as much as 30 percent and so companies are
keeping their research extremely secretive to keep their competitive advantage. Here's what we know.
In the late 80s and early 90s, NASA and Boeing began investigating a suction system on the 757
that would draw in boundary layer air that is the layer of very slow moving air that clings to
the surface of moving objects. The outside skin was permeable to air through tiny perforations
too small for the naked eye to see. Manufacturing the permeable surface while also keeping the
tiny holes clear of debris is one of the many challenges with this technology. The outer and
inner skin were then attached to an elaborate plumbing system that was connected to a turbo
pump which sucked air from the boundary layer of air that would form along the plane's surface.
By doing this they could drastically delay and reduce the size of the turbulent flow
and in turn reduce the drag on the plane. There is no space for this ducting system
inside the wings of the 787 but from what we do know it is inside both the horizontal and
vertical tails. However the only clue of their presence are these tiny doors whose purpose
are a mystery to me with little to no information available online a testament of how advanced
this plane is. Composites give plenty of advantages but it does come with some disadvantages.
When we examine the plane's composition one material jumps out at me. 15% of this plane
is titanium that's much higher than normal. Titanium is an expensive material so they must
have had a good reason to use it over aluminium. Aluminium is typically corrosion resistant when
it's left on its own but when it is placed in direct contact with carbon fibre composites
something strange happens. The aluminium begins to corrode incredibly quickly. Something about
carbon fibre causes aluminium to oxidise and fall apart. Carbon fibre is like aluminium's kryptonite.
This phenomenon is called galvanic corrosion and it happens when two materials that have
dissimilar electric potentials or nobilities are placed in contact with an electrolyte like salt
water. If we look at the galvanic series which quantifies materials nobilities we can see that
graphite is very noble on the far end of the less scale while aluminium is quite far to the right.
When this occurs an electric potential forms between the two materials that causes the two
materials to trade electrons and ions which results in the anode being eaten away. This effect is made
even worse when the surface of the more noble material the cathode is very large in comparison
to the less noble material the anode. Say for example when carbon fibre composites are fastened
using aluminium fasteners. To avoid this corrosion the engineers needed to pick a material
closer to carbon in the galvanic series and the closest suitable metal was titanium.
This has been a huge source of cost in manufacturing. Boeing's production cost was higher than its
sales price for quite some time meaning they were making a loss on each aircraft sold.
This is fairly typical for new airliners as R&D and manufacturing tooling costs take time to recoup
and companies like Boeing typically spread these costs over a period of time on each plane instead
of just having a massive negative balance sheet in one year. But because the 787 was so radically
new these sunk development costs called deferred costs were expected to reach 25 billion before
Boeing even reached a break even point on each plane sold where the cost of manufacturing
equalled the sales price. In comparison the Boeing 777 reached 3.7 billion. To recoup costs as fast
as possible it was essential that Boeing reduced the cost of production and high on their list
was the elimination of titanium parts where possible. The frame around the cockpit windows for
example were initially made out of titanium but were changed to aluminium with a special
coating to prevent corrosion while some parts that were originally titanium were changed to
composites like the door frames. Other improvements were sought to make the manufacturing process
for titanium less costly. Many metallic parts used on aircraft start off as large blocks of metal
that have to be machined down into their final shape. This results in a ton of wasted metal
as the metal is gradually shaved away. Aircraft manufacturers quantify this wastage
with something called a buy to fly ratio and it's a huge source of increased manufacturing costs.
Cost that Boeing has tackled by collaborating with Norsk Titanium a titanium 3d printing company.
Now making 3d printed metal parts is not easy. Most titanium 3d printing involves a powder
titanium that is melted together using lasers. Researchers used high speed x-ray imaging to
visualize what happens during this process and found a lot of imperfections. The track
varies in height, the powder gets blasted away resulting in varying thickness and separated
tracks and even bubbles form causing pores in the metal. This creates parts with a lot of micro
imperfections and imperfections lead to decreased life as fatigue causes cracks to form.
We can visualize a materials fatigue strength by plotting on an SN curve which places the
magnitude of the alternating stress on the y-axis and the number of cycles it survived on the x-axis.
For traditional machined titanium it looks something like this whereas for 3d printed
parts it looks like this. 3d printed parts simply fail much sooner because of these tiny
imperfections. Norsk has worked to improve this. Instead of using laser centering with powder
Norsk have developed a revolutionizing painted wire based metallic 3d printing system for titanium
that they monitor with 600 frames per second cameras for quality control. These 3d printed parts are
then machined down into their final shape reducing the total titanium used by 25 to 50%
and their printing method is 50 to 100 times faster than the powder printing method.
This process resulted in the first ever FAA certified 3d printed structural components
and they first flew in the Boeing 787. This plane is truly innovative.
Titanium was not the only material Boeing worked on removing from the plane's construction to save
on cost. Copper once formed an important part of the 787's wing where it was laid down in thin
strips on the wing surface. This is not a typical design choice for aircraft wings and once again
it was influenced by the 787's composite construction because composite materials are
not good conductors. Carbon fibers are great conductors but problems arise because of the
plastic resin binding them together as this resin is an insulating material preventing the
passage of electricity which is a massive problem for planes as getting hit by lightning is not a
rare occurrence. One study calculated that lightning strikes occurred once every 3000
hours of flying between 1950 and 1975. A 787 was struck by lightning while taking off from
Upon landing in India 42 to 46 holes were found in the fuselage as a result of resistive heating.
The plane survived and was flown back to London for repairs with no passengers aboard but
composites vulnerability to this kind of damage is a drawback and the repair process is more
complicated than with aluminium. However this strike could have been much worse if the electricity
does not run smoothly along the surface of the plane and exit it may cause a spark in the fuel
tanks and cause an explosion. This kind of accident was not uncommon in the early days of the airline
industry. Pan Am Flight 214 was struck by lightning while it flew in a holding pattern waiting for
a lightning storm to pass at Philadelphia International Airport in 1967. Its left wing fuel
tank exploded causing the plane to barrel out of control to the ground in flames. Since then the
aviation sector has implemented rigorous safety measures and lightning protection tests to ensure
an accident like this could never happen again. Early 787 wings were designed with copper strips
to ensure the electrons had a path of low resistance along the surface of the wing ensuring
they wouldn't travel to the fuel tank and cause a spark while also preventing resistive heating
damage to the composite structure. Fasteners were sealed with an insulating material to stop electricity
from traveling down the metallic fastener into the fuel tank and the fastener themselves were
fitted with compression rings and a sealant to eliminate potential spark locations caused by
gaps and sharp edges. Finally the 787 has a nitrogen inerting system that fills the tank with nitrogen.
Ignition can't happen without oxygen. Boeing has since removed two of these protections in a cost
saving measure. Removing the copper mesh and insulating caps which drew concern and criticism
but Boeing argues that between the nitrogen inerting system and the other safety measures
these expensive features were not needed. Where composites couldn't be used other materials were
chosen. The leading edge of the wing and tail, the tail cone and parts of the engine cowling
were all made from aluminium or other metals. The leading edges of the plane needed aluminium
because of composites poor impact resistance. While composites have extremely high strength
they can be brittle on sudden impacts such as bird strikes which most commonly happen at the
leading edge of the wing or on the engines. Metals are able to deform on impact with a reduced chance
of fracture instead of shattering as composites would. Aluminium leading edges were also beneficial
for the purpose of deicing because it is a good thermal conductor. If you have ever flown on a
very cold day you may have seen a truck spray fluid onto the wings of the plane. This is deicing fluid
a heated mixture of glycol and water. It's needed because most planes aren't capable of deicing
themselves on the ground. The 787 can when fed with external power because it uses a new type
of deicing system. The 787 uses electrically heated blankets bonded to the surface of the slats
which are able to heat the surface of the wing and melt or prevent any ice formation
on the leading edge of the wing. Traditionally ice is prevented by extracting hot bleed air from
the engine and piping it to vulnerable areas such as the leading edge of the wing where ice buildup
could severely interfere with the wings operation. This draws valuable energy away from the engines
and increases fuel consumption while also requiring a complicated network of tubing
and exhausts which add weight and increases complexity of construction and maintenance.
The electric heating system is twice as efficient as the extracted bleed air system
as no excess energy is lost through venting air to the atmosphere and it also reduces drag
as the exhaust holes for the bleed air on the lower side of the wing create drag. The 787 is
actually the first commercial airliner that has eliminated this bleed air system which was a huge
technical challenge and required a complete redesign of several systems and an entirely new
engine. In our next video we are going to explore the incredible engineering behind the power systems
of the 787 exploring the advancements in the jet engine and the overall system architecture that
allowed the 787 to become the most efficient long-range airliner ever made. We will be releasing
that video here on youtube shortly but if you don't want to wait it's already on nebula ad-free or
if you are like me and like to sit back and watch longer videos we have created a special
hour-long version that combines both videos and has extra information that didn't fit into either
of the youtube versions. I've included links to both of these videos in the description for those
of you already subscribed to nebula or if you have yet to start supporting the channel there
you can sign up through the nebula and curiosity stream bundle deal for just 14.79 a year that's
just over one dollar a month but that one dollar has a gigantic impact on this channel because we
get to own and run our own streaming platform and that gives us the freedom to create what we want
how we want if you are a fan of this channel nebula is the best place to watch everything we make
when possible we upload our videos early to nebula and all advertisements are cut from the
nebula versions of our videos you can also get exclusive content from us like our logistics of
d-day series or you could learn about my life before youtube in low-spec gamers excellent
nebula exclusive podcast genesis where you can learn the story of how i quit my job in engineering
to start this channel how advanced was the youtube channel at that point that you were
confident enough to quit your job i don't think i'd uploaded anything at that stage i can't remember
wow you wait you quit before creating the youtube channel a little over one dollar a month
this is by far the best way to support this channel and you get something in return with
access to both nebula and all of the award-winning documentaries on curiosity stream like this
fascinating biography on neil armstrong's life narrated by harrison ford you can sign up to
this amazing deal by clicking on this button on screen right now or if you are looking for
something else to watch right now you could watch our last video on how vapor cones form on planes
or you could watch real sciences video on the insane biology of dragonflies
