polynomials are functions.
They look like equations.
They might sound like equations with that variable x
that perhaps caused people you know some distress,
x squared plus five,
three x cubed minus 27x minus 16.
Oftentimes, we set them equal to zero
and try to find the x's that give that root.
Now, that's a side question.
So I'll just speak to it for a second.
Why do we care about when equations like that
are equal to zero?
Sometimes that's because things are optimized
when polynomials are set to zero.
At any rate, polynomials are the function.
The idea of a function is it takes a number as an input
and it gives another number out.
We can think of exponentials as functions
that when they're given an input,
they raise something to a power.
For example, three squared is nine.
Three cubed is 27.
Three to the fourth is 81.
But what about three to the 3.5?
There might be circumstances that that comes up
and it's not just a simple task
to figure out what it is.
The sine of an angle is another ratio
of one side over another.
But that can be turned into a function too
and that function is very important
in figuring out all kinds of aerodynamic equations
and oscillating phenomena in the real world.
So we can say, given a number input,
what does sine give back?
So what is a polynomial
and how does it differ from an equation?
A function is a mathematical entity
that takes a number as input
and gives another number back as output.
So the easiest kinds of functions
to understand are polynomials.
A simple polynomial is x plus five.
A slightly more complicated polynomial
is two x cubed minus five x squared
plus 14x minus three.
For each of these, if you put a number in for x,
you could do some multiplications,
the number with itself and then with the coefficient
and when you were done,
you would get another number out, a function machine.
Now the difference between that and an equation
is when you set it equal to some number.
You probably did stuff like this in school
and maybe you found it fun
or maybe you found it frustrating,
but there is a reason for it
that I'll talk about in a moment.
A simple one would be x squared minus one equals zero.
You'd move the one to the other side
and get x equals one, that solves that equation.
You might have done harder equations
like x squared plus four x plus four equals zero.
Now you have to find the single or the pairs of x's
that solve that particular equation.
You probably weren't told at the time
why you were learning to do this.
The reason is that by solving equations,
sometimes you're finding the optimum,
the maximum or the minimum of something.
And optimizing problems turns out to be solutions
to many interesting problems in economics,
physics, chemistry and the like.
But let's stick with polynomials.
Polynomials are the nicest functions
because you can figure them out with pencil and paper.
Unlike sine, unlike exponential,
unlike logarithm or all these other functions
that are useful,
polynomials just rely on multiplying
a number times itself, some number of times,
and then times a few other numbers
and then adding them all together.
This is something that can be done with pencil and paper.
Multiplying is really just adding too,
and we have a nice way to figure out how to do it.
So, polynomials, considered as functions,
not as equations, are the nicest possible functions.
We multiply, we add, we get a new number.
