So, Brooke Taylor was a mathematician who, in 1712, published a theorem on how to do
this.
Now, he's most famous for coming up with the first error bound, and like all mathematicians
in the earlier centuries who received credit for things, there had been people before him
and people after him who had been playing with some of the ideas or maybe sharpened them
up a little bit, but any rate Taylor's theorem is Taylor's theorem because Brooke Taylor
got the important publishing piece.
So how did he do it?
In short, what Taylor and other people observed was the following, that if we understand the
instantaneous velocity, the derivative of a function at a single point, then we know what
the rate of change at that point is.
We know how fast things are changing.
So if that function is telling us position, it's telling us how fast we go because that's
how fast we're changing.
If the function is telling us velocity, the change in velocity is acceleration.
So we're figuring out acceleration.
If it's the amount of profit we're making, we're figuring out how our profit is changing
in a changing market.
What Taylor noticed is that if we take a derivative at a point and we know the rate of change,
then it turns out when we zoom in on that point and if we could magnify and sharpen,
then you can zoom in on a computer.
But imagine now just a microscope and we're zooming in closer and closer.
We just want to look at that one point, what the rate of change is there.
Then no matter how curvy the function started off looking, it turns into a straight looking
line.
And the more we zoom in, the straighter and straighter it looks.
And this is extraordinary because it says that the rate of change, the derivative turns
out just to be the slope of a straight line really close to that point.
So that doesn't tell you too much about anything that's nearby.
But if you take the derivative again and say, well, how does that change too?
So now I'm looking at the straight lines or the micro straight lines nearby.
How do they change as I keep zooming in?
And then how do those changes change?
In other words, we keep taking higher and higher derivatives at the same exact point.
We keep doing this process over and over and over again of zooming in and iterating, piling
it on top of one another.
How does the changes change?
How do the changes of the changes change?
How do the changes of the changes of the changes change?
And I know it sounds a bit silly to say, but each additional derivative that we take gives
additional information about the behavior of the function at that point.
What's not immediately obvious is that it also starts affecting the behavior of all the other
points around it too.
So the more information we have at one point starts giving us more and more information
about wider and wider swaths of numbers around it.
They all have to affect each other's behavior more and more.
And this again is, to me, is a mathematician and someone trying to understand how things
work.
It's extraordinary.
Typically, if I understand how something works in the world, I know all I need to know
about it.
How does a knife work?
Cut something up.
Reduces it to pieces.
But what this is saying is, the more I understand about how the knife cuts, suddenly I'm understanding
about cutting boards too.
I'm understanding about kitchen counters, and entire kitchens.
I'm understanding the house, the city that I live in, the whole world.
The more I cut somehow, the more and more and more I'm learning about everything.
