So let's go a little bit deeper now and introduce a new idea. In mathematics, we're willing to
consider most anything's space so long as we have a notion of distance. I mean, in fact,
we can go further than that, but not for these lectures. So someone had the bright idea at one
point. What if we considered functions as points and a space? So for example, now we could talk
about functions being close to each other or far from each other. So we could create this thing
called a function space and each point will be a function. I personally think of function spaces as
gigantic pots of spaghetti minus the sauce, of course. All these crazy mixed up long strands
twirled around and around and close to each other far apart in the pot, perhaps, and how do they
all look? Let me give an example of distance between functions. What you want to do is look at
how far apart are they from each other? So if you drew them on the blackboard,
you drew the two functions together, you could look at how close and how far apart are they are.
They might be the exact same in points, they might intersect in places, they might be very far apart
or never touch at all. And you could measure the distance between the points and say these functions
are close or these functions are far apart. You can look at a limit of how distant they are from
one another. Here's a, I hope, a simple example. If we consider the function sine of x, sine of x
measures something about angles and opposites and adjacent sides and so forth. And when we think of
it as a function, we generalize that and it draws a beautiful up and down curve. So let one function
be sine of x. Then consider the function sine of x plus one. That means I take whatever the sine of x
is and now I add one to that. These two functions will be exactly a distance of one apart because
of the way they're defined. If I consider the function sine x plus one tenth, now sine x plus
one tenth is a distance of one tenth from sine x. Sine x plus a thousandth is a distance one thousandth
from sine x. Now these functions when we keep adding smaller and smaller pieces to them, they all converge
to sine x. The visual image I'd like you to have is you have sine of x or any function, any drawing
you have stretched across a piece of paper and it starts a little bit higher and then it incrementally
moves down until it exactly matches it. That's the idea of the functions converging. The idea of
convergence is the important piece here. Now the fact that I've defined this in terms of sine x,
which is what I'd like to understand plus a little bit, doesn't help me understand sine x at all.
But Taylor's theorem says if we keep adding polynomial terms, it's not going to be like
that, just slow sliding down of the one function exactly onto the other. It's going to take a line
and then bend it more and more and more closely until it resembles sine of x. And this is what's
happening in general. So any function can be converged to an approximated closely by functions.
If you just take a little piece and add it to it, then a smaller piece and add to it,
and again the visual of it is it just slowly slides down onto the function itself. They get
closer and closer. The different way you could imagine the strands of spaghetti being closer
and closer is they're exactly the same for a while and then a little bit different, then exactly the
same for a bigger amount of time and then a little bit different until the time that they're exactly
the same grows larger and larger and larger until they are exactly the same.
