Mathematics is power, lecture four. Probability and statistics, the tools of prediction and perfection.
This lecture will take a look at probability and statistics. These are two ideas that are deeply intertwined.
And they involve mathematics, but most mathematicians would think of them as a little bit outside mainstream math.
They are on their own, fully developed fields that use math and logic, if you will, to think about the world and try to understand how things will come out.
Unlike most of mathematics, and the reason why mathematicians might think of them as being different, they allow notions of randomness to enter.
And random is a very interesting thing that's hard to understand and a little bit scary to humans, I think, for many humans.
We are uncomfortable with the thought that suddenly something random could occur.
If the random thing is a roof tile falls down and shatters at my feet, that's disturbing enough in itself.
But if random means everything turns yellow and floats away, which is in a sense not even all that random, that's not a likely event, but would be very disturbing.
But to combine things more to the sorts of things that are explored, probability theory and statistics were developed to help understand and predict what might happen and how it might happen,
given that the processes partook of a kind of essential randomness.
So the power of these is that they help us to understand and predict the future based on our present understanding of a system and a setup.
I'm going to talk first about probability theory because it historically preceded statistics and it is used to help do statistics.
Probability theory began and was developed in the mid-1600s, that's 350 years ago.
Some of the main people who first worked on it were Pierre Fermat, who was a lawyer in Paris, very famous for Fermat's last theorem.
Blaise Pascal, who's perhaps best known for Pascal's wager, so you can see he was already interested in gambling.
If I can digress for a second, Pascal's wager was, you might as well believe in God because either there is no God and it didn't hurt you to believe in God,
or there is a God and by believing in God, you're making the smart move.
So in fact, you could almost think of Pascal as engaging in an early form of game theory and we'll be talking about game theory in the next lecture.
One of the last main developers of probability theory in the 1600s was Huggins, who's known for his optics, telescopes and rings of Saturn.
The three of them originally began by analyzing gambling games.
Up till then, I think most gamblers who played a lot had developed a strong sense of what might be a better move than another,
or what might one want to do in one situation versus another, because with a vast enough set of experience, one begins to see what might be the right thing to do.
The early gamblers didn't realize that they were statisticians, and I'll talk more about that later in this lecture.
But when Fermat, Pascal and Huggins began to examine the games and try to calculate what the chances were given a particular setup at the moment.
There was one question in particular that interested them.
I imagine that at one point, police back then even raided a gambling game, or it grew late in the evening and people were tired,
or dinner was announced, at any rate something interrupted the game of chance.
And there was a certain pile of money that had to be divided.
Now given the setup, how would it be most fairly divided?
We'll talk more about fair division too later on.
But one way of thinking of it is, the person who had the strongest chance of winning deserved the most money.
So now you need to calculate not what would be the best thing to do in a particular circumstance,
but what was the chance of winning, assuming that it was a fair game and everything was random.
Thank you.
