These questions, which seem highly specific to people who want to make money gambling or playing
in casinos, move very quickly into risk assessment for insurance, especially two different kinds of
insurance. Maritime insurance that covered cargo and ships, and fire insurance covering homes and
factories. The idea of insurance is essentially a gambling game if you think about it, and we'll
talk a bit more about this too, but the company is gambling that if you pay them small sums of money
that they'll turn a profit, that the amount of money they have to pay back won't exceed the
small amounts they've gotten from lots of different people. From your side, you're gambling that in
fact something bad might happen, and so you're willing to advance a little bit of money to cover
that possibility. Now suppose just because I think it's probably closer to home, no pun intended
for all of us, you think about fire insurance, and you say to yourself, how much is my house worth?
And just for the sake of easy discussion, let's say today that a house is worth a hundred dollars.
Now that's not a very nice house, maybe a really large cardboard box somewhere, but let's pretend
just for the sake of easy discussion, the house is worth a hundred dollars. If you think that there's
a tiny chance of a fire, I mean how much would you pay to protect yourself against it? You certainly
wouldn't pay fifty dollars, because that seems like way too much. You'd think, well if my house
burnt down, fifty dollars is already halfway there. You might say, well a penny is certainly worth it,
a penny is almost nothing, I can pay a penny, but then the insurance company doesn't want to play
that kind of game, because they think, how many people would we have to get pennies from to make
sure that we could not only cover any and all fires, but also pay ourselves a nice wage and turn a
profit for our shareholders. At any rate, trying to calculate and figure out the probabilities
of things like fires or deaths or storm sinking ships or pirates capturing ships,
cargoes going bad and bad weather, all these kinds of things led people to develop the
theory of what is probable, how does randomness play into it, how do we compute the odds of things.
So what is probability and how does it pretty much guarantee that if you gamble in a casino,
no matter if you have some days where you're very lucky and walk away with nice profit,
over the long run, you'll almost surely lose a lot of money. Probability can be thought of in
terms of numbers. It's the number of outcomes of interest over the total number of possible outcomes.
So for example, if we were going to roll a die, there are six possible outcomes, one, two,
three, four, five or six. Now suppose you were interested in getting an even number,
now there are three even numbers, two, four and six, and so if you were to roll a die and you were
interested in the probability of getting an even number, it would be three divided by six equals
a half. That's the same as flipping a coin. You have a head and a tail. There are two possibilities.
If you're interested in getting a head, that's a one half probability. Your possibility is one out
of two times. Now this is very basic and it's been developed a lot more and for many more kinds of
sophisticated games, but the thing of most interest to me as a mathematician that will guarantee that
in a long haul in a casino you will go broke is what's called the law of large numbers. This is a
theorem in probability that is proved mathematically and the interesting thing to me as a mathematician
is that because it's trying to describe the world, it's odd to say that a mathematical proof about
a random process has a kind of certainty about it. So it's a balance of order and chaos in a very
interesting way. The law of large numbers says if you do enough independent trials of something,
you will result in the average outcome. So for example, if you were to flip a coin three times,
you might get heads, heads, heads. That wouldn't be too surprising. You might even assume that next
time you're due for a tail, which is a fallacy of reasoning. If the coin is fair and the trials
are independent and the outcome is random, it wouldn't matter if you'd gotten a thousand heads in a row.
You would still have a 50-50 chance, a one-half probability of getting ahead the next time.
You'd be very surprised and begin to wonder if it was a fair coin after a certain number of heads
in a row, but each trial being independent means you can flip a coin and you will have the same
probability of one-half each time for getting ahead.
