Another example is hitting over 400 in baseball. Now 400 in baseball was last
achieved by Ted Williams who hit 406. That means in every 10 times to the plate
he got to hit four of those. People have flirted with that number since then and
it seems to be as much as anything given that the league average is way below
that, a combination of someone who has extraordinary skill and then a year-long
supply of luck. Here's a different streak that's captured people's
imagination. Joe DiMaggio hit safely in 56 straight games. The closest anyone has
ever come since then is about 44 done by Pete Rose. Mine is all the issues
involving extraordinary skill and eye-hand coordination and luck and
experience. We could ask the question, will anyone ever hit safely in 57
straight games based on a fairly simple-minded, what engineers would call
back-of-the-envelope calculation? Will someone ever hit safely in 57 straight
games again? So let's take a look at that. Let's suppose that during a streak a
batter hit 500. That means one of every two times he stepped to the plate he got
a hit. Now people might have days or weeks like that. It'd be shocking for
someone to have a stretch that lasted almost half the season hitting that
well, but let's just pretend for the sake of argument because it makes it a
little easier that that was true. Suppose the batter is up four times per game.
That means there's 16 possible outcomes for all four at bats. Could be hits at
all four, hits in the first two and outs in the next two, all outs and anything in
between. The only one that we care about for the moment is all four outs. The batter
stepped up, out, up, out, up, out and up, out. Now that means that's one
possibility out of all 16. So there's a one sixteenth probability that the batter
will not get a hit. That means conversely there's 15 sixteenths chance that the
batter will get a hit. Now probabilities over trials multiply. If you asked
what's the probability of getting two heads in a row, that's a half the first
flip and then a half the next flip. If you looked at all possibilities, there'd
be four and it turns out that you can get the answer by multiplying the half
times a half. Now applying this to the streak 15 sixteenths is pretty close to
one. That means in any given game a batter is pretty likely if they're
batting 500 to get a hit. But now we have a second game and a third game and a
fourth game and all the way up to 57 games. These probabilities multiply. So
it'll be 15 sixteenths to the 57th power. If you calculate that and I used a
computer, you get about 0.025 which is one fortieth. Now what does that one
fortieth mean? Here's how a probabilist or statistician would interpret it. If you
had 40 people who hit 500 for 57 straight games, you'd expect that maybe one of
them would have gotten a hit in every single game. So 40 people, all who hit
500, that's a hit every two times at bat, for 57 straight games, maybe one of them
would have been likely to get a hit in every game. That helps, I think, put
DiMaggio in perspective, but let's put it even more in perspective. During his
streak of 56 games, Joe DiMaggio hit 409. So the probability of him getting a hit
in 57 straight games turns out to be 0.006. That's six in 10,000. Three in
5,000. That says if 5,000 people hit 409 for 57 straight games, then we would
expect maybe three of them would get safely one hit in each game. That says
that DiMaggio's streak is astonishing and likely never to be repeated.
