So back to insurance companies and something a bit more practical.
How is it that insurance companies don't go broke? And it is the bridge to statistics,
which we'll talk about shortly. As an example, I think it's worth mentioning
that Bilsener in Germany has an insurance company that's been around continuously since 1642
and Lloyds of London, which is very famous for taking all kinds of crazy insurance bets,
has been around since 1688. So whatever they're doing, they're doing right. How do they do it?
They make all kinds of careful computations of probabilities. They collect enormous amounts
of data on things. They calculate very thoughtfully what the risks are, and then they make bets on
it that will or won't happen. If enough people distribute the risk by investing one thing or
another, then they're going to win money. For example, Betty Grable's legs. This is an example
from World War II. Betty Grable was a famous movie star and pin-up model back in the 1940s.
Her legs were her strongest asset, and Lloyds of London insured her legs for a million dollars
against something going wrong. I don't know what the exact language was of that, but I assume it
would be something horribly disfiguring or early death or losing a leg in an accident.
And they knew that for a woman of her age and health who was traveling around in fairly protected
circles that it was very unlikely that something bad would happen. Perhaps a more compelling
example of that kind of thing would be how does sports team ensure their stars against difficulty
and not playing in injuries? If a pitcher's arm blows out, their value to the team drops to nothing.
What would it be worth if they had a ten million dollar contract? How much would it be worth to
the owners to pay to insure against that happening and that the salary would be picked up? And think
about life insurance from the client point of view. It's a fascinating and kind of funny thing.
If you win, in other words, you collect your insurance, it means you've lost because you're
dead. On the other hand, if you lose because you don't collect your insurance money, you win because
you're alive. So I like taking out life insurance because it's the most paradoxical kind of bet
I can make. If I win, I lose and if I lose, I win. Let's move on to statistics. How is it that
pollsters and statisticians can predict voter preferences and consumer preferences? How is it
that by asking a few thousand people about a topic, good information is is gettable from them
about how tens of millions might think or respond to it? How is it that Hollywood takes test audiences,
gets their reactions and changes movies endings based on that? And you could argue that by doing
that they kill an artistic vision, but make themselves more money. And let's not forget,
Hollywood isn't the business of making money. Well, I have a couple examples that help me think
about how statistics works. It's the science in some sense of sampling and drawing conclusions
from those samples. And it's incredibly powerful. Here are some ones that I think of. I used to go
to Starbucks to get their maple oat nut scones. And this is not a paid endorsement because I don't
think they make their maple oat nut scones anymore. They were delicious. And I found that the Starbucks
near me, if I got in by 10 o'clock in the morning, I was almost guaranteed that I would get a maple
oat nut scone. If I got in after four or five, I was pretty much never going to get a maple oat nut
scone. And so without thinking about it, like gamblers of old, I was collecting data and intuitively
coming to sets of decision about times I should go to Starbucks to get my maple oat nut scone.
Now, that may or may not be interesting for me, but for the owners of Starbucks or a particular
Starbucks franchise, there's something very important. You don't want an unhappy customer.
You don't want a mathematician coming in demanding a maple oat nut scone and not getting one.
Nor at the end of the day, do you want to have 10 extra maple oat nut scones that you have to
get rid of or give to charity. It might be nice to give them to charity, but it's not as profitable
as it might be. So how does the owner start to collect data on it? The owner of a Starbucks will
take data every day. How many sell? When do they sell out? Is it different on holidays? Is it different
on weekends? Because every day, if I were the owner of a Starbucks, I would want to have exactly the
right number and want to have just a few left at the end of the day. But I would never want
customers to walk away unhappy either.
