A related example of collecting data from something in an intuitive fashion.
I'm cooking meat on the grill.
I flip it, I flip it again.
It's looking pretty done on the outside.
I jab the thermometer into a few spots.
I make a few random cuts and look at the meat inside, how red it is or not.
And based on that, I come to a decision about all of the meat.
My decision will probably be pretty good.
Here's another example from my days in the dorm back when I was a student.
This is before there were built-in dryness monitors and laundries.
And I would throw my wash in and I'd throw it in the dryer.
Dryers, I think, cost ten or a quarter for some set amount of minutes.
I didn't want to put in too much money at first because that was money that I couldn't use to buy more math books.
I didn't want to put in too little money because that was money then that was wasted
because I ended up with wet laundry or sitting in the laundry room.
So what do I do?
I'd put in a few coins, then I'd come back.
Is the load dry?
Now, things dry at different rates.
Pants dry slower than socks and so forth.
So how do I check the dryness?
I don't take out each piece of laundry and feel every square inch of it to see if it was wet or dry.
I would just stick my hand in, grab a few places, maybe a few likely wetter places like the waistband of pants.
And based on that, I would come to a conclusion.
Wet or dry?
A more compelling example for me these days is I have a long commute to where I work.
About 30 miles.
And I want to know how long it takes me.
I don't want to leave too early because then I get to my office and I miss time with my family.
And I don't want to leave too late because I don't want to be driving like a madman,
hoping to avoid state troopers and reach my office late for class.
So how do I determine how long it should be to get to work?
I can do some calculations, but traffic and weather might interfere with that.
What I do instead is I notice every day that I drive how long it takes me.
And after a year or two, I've driven many, many times to work.
I looked at the time, every time I made it.
Now, I didn't actually go ahead and average it out.
But I did think every time, oh, that took me about 35 minutes.
Oh, that was 40.
Today was an hour and a half, but that's because there was a lot of snow and so forth.
And at the end of that year, like old gamblers before probability theory,
I had fairly well devised a sense of how long it would take me under normal conditions to get to work
and how long it would take me to get to work under adverse conditions.
There are events that are impossible to plan for, like a truck turning over
and blocking off the whole highway and creating a 10-mile traffic jam.
But statistics tries not to worry about the extreme thing that happens.
Those are called outliers.
There might be datums, that's a singular of data, that are collected based on very unusual circumstances.
We try not to worry about those.
If they start happening too often, then it becomes a commonplace and it's no longer an outlier.
So for frequency analysis, collecting data and finding ways of describing typical,
these are the meat and bones of statistics.
This is how it's done.
Data is collected, hopefully as much as possible and then analyzed.
Trends are picked up and from that, probabilities are inferred.
They're guessed at.
Let me first talk about some of the kinds of things that are gathered and then what their meaning is.
