A human impact is the purpose of a man's life because someday you will die you will be dust your money will be frittered away and taken through taxes and all kinds of things your property will be divvied up everything you've cared for in your life will be taken away the only thing that
endures is the future generations who are fundamentally altered because of your existence on this planet that is the purpose of a man's life that is why so many men want to kill themselves now is because they find no purpose and no ability to create human impact.
My favorite thing to do is troll through your Twitter and find interesting tweets to do with your history as a psychotherapist is a couple's therapist working on attachment issues pull them out and then discuss them with you so that's what we're going to do today and.
Well actually before we get started for the people that haven't heard you before because the show's grown a lot since the last time you were on briefly what's your background.
Yeah so is a psychotherapist for years marriage and family therapist and what I found through my training and through training other health care professionals was that attachment was the vehicle underneath it was driving all of the diagnoses that we saw in the book.
But what they were teaching therapists was that they only needed to treat the diagnoses because nobody understands attachment theory is terribly misunderstood and it became my obsession and my specialty seven training and experience in this and everything working with people on this for 15 years now.
Through this process I retired my license as a psychotherapist so that I could coach internationally and help people everywhere with attachment issues and I am working hard to change this game that says attachment is just something women study when they want to cry more and I'm teaching especially now men that I have found in coaching men through fixing their attachment in a way that is practical and make sense to them so that you can overcome a lifetime of dating problems insecurities fears and everything else that comes broken attachment.
Beautiful okay my first favorite one that I picked up recently most couples therapy is useless not because the therapy is wrong but because most couples don't go to therapy together until one of them is absolutely not wanting to work on the relationship anymore they're using therapy as an excuse to air the frustration one last time.
So many times I've had couples come in and that's exactly what it is is one is all in for it is convinced I'm gonna fix their partner and tell them that they've been right all along and the other partner comes in dreading it because their partner is the one who set it up and they say what at what sort of buzz saw am I walking into and it is a miserable experience for all three people involved unless I can turn them around and convince the other partner that I'm there to help them.
In which case the first partner can is convinced that I have somehow spilled pulled a switcheroo and they are now going to get betrayed by their by their coach now who's working with them it's an ugly process it is really ugly the only time couples therapy really works is when they are coming in because they both want to make it work.
But they don't have the skills and they have no idea what to do if they both want to make it work it's an amazing experience if one of them doesn't want to work and doesn't have the guts to say it it's a horrible experience for both people.
Why is it so rare for couples to go to couples therapy before the stage that one of them is basically ready to call it quits and needs an arbiter between the two of them.
Because most people do not have the skills they need to speak to their partner proactively and productively about the problems so they just pretend there aren't problems or they throw anger and excuses at each other over and over again one will try the other withdraws then they switch and the other tries again and the other withdraws.
And they only vent to the people around them they don't actually go out and get proactive solutions from the people around them and their family systems usually broken so they've never seen a healthy relationship they think this is as good as it gets.
They only seek professional help when one of them panics because the other one has made a change and I will also say this women change for relationships typically men only will change for circumstances which is reality.
Women will usually be done with a relationship a year or more before they're actually ready to get divorced men have no idea that this is coming men get blindsided and they say wait I'm finally willing to give it a try let's try couples therapy and she's been done for a year so this is a very common problem right there.
Do you think that that explains part of the reason that most divorces are initiated by women.
Absolutely at one hundred percent because most women have spent five ten twenty years changing for the relationship hoping that her husband will secretly somehow change for the relationship to men only change when they observe a problem.
And then when they believe that there is a solvable problem there that they can actually work on it takes both of those things for a man to actually work on something most men will only change enough to try to stop the discomfort that they're experiencing and try to go backward.
Hmm yeah it's a I have a number of friends that have either been through couples counseling or going to couples counseling at the moment and I would say that the archetype is as you've described that it really is.
If this counseling was to make the relationship better it is a severe uphill battle which I imagine from a therapist's perspective makes couples counseling.
Not exactly fun.
So I went through school graduate program six years for master's degree and then additional three years of apprenticeship of hard apprenticeship under clinicians nine year process become a marriage and family therapist.
Nine years of training of them telling us you will want to you will get burned out on this job couples therapy is hard couples don't actually usually get better very few of them do it's hard work and you have to completely detach from their outcomes.
Because otherwise you will drive yourself crazy watching one couple after another tear themselves apart there's nothing you can do to help them.
This is the message they gave us and it was very true you come in you do the best that you can and you guide them forward and usually the biggest piece that I would do is this is get them to a point where they could say what got you together in the first place.
Where do you have any commonalities and where is there even a sliver of hope that both of you could work together on this if there's even a tiny shred of hope.
We can make this work I really briefly one time I had a couple come in to my coaching practice they both had very very bad attachment very bad attachment neither one of them do it.
One of them was having an affair the other one wanted the relationship to work one who's having an affair wasn't sure if they wanted to work or not I educated them on attachment first session educated fully on attachment.
Second session got them working on bonding together and doing what couples are supposed to do third session taught them communication skills and conflict resolution by the fourth session when they walked in.
Both of them were happier in their relationship than they had ever been even as newlyweds even as well dating the person who was cheating said absolutely not I'm going to do this marriage it's amazing.
They had healed their attachment together and they were now growing closer to their friends and their family at the same time it only took three sessions of doing the deep work because both of them were committed to it if a couple wants to make it work even extreme circumstances can work but you must both want to make it work.
How does a pair of people who have got ingrained responses habituated thought patterns.
Routines built into the communication style the way they relate to each other the way that they show up to each other how can it be the case that three sessions is all that it takes to D program something which at the very least we're taught should take 66 days to break and make a new habit.
It's absolutely true it's absolutely true it's curious because here's the piece is so many people are living with a decision they made when they were one year old that said I am scared I am hurt I am sad I feel vulnerable.
People will abandon me or people will betray me there is something wrong with me or with other people and I am not ever going to be able to be open again because I will never be this hurt this scared this vulnerable ever again for the rest of my life.
They don't even remember this decision but that foundational belief has been set into their brain as an absolute fact of the universe gravity pulls things down water is wet and love is impossible and I must live in fear for the rest of my life to stay safe.
That foundational belief once you hear it and say how I have been believing that but it's probably true and someone comes in an attachment expert comes in and says it is not true.
Here's an alternate model for living that is possible I want you to think about it over the next week and tell me if it's ruining your life or if this is something that we can fix and they'll think about it and it ruins it for them and then they start seeing the matrix and they say wow.
Maybe there is two different ways to live and maybe I've been living the wrong way maybe I'm willing to learn and then they learn it once you got it intellectually cool once you experience it.
That's where it begins to change because when you experience the difference your brain chemistry balances out right we've got I deal with the five big brain chemicals there's more than this but the five big ones we work we look at.
Fastopressin oxytocin gaba gamma amino bioric acid and serotonin those four are absolutely crucial to get through your good relationships if you don't have good relationships you've got a dopamine button that you can punch like a monkey this is where people have porn addiction and all kinds of addictions and phone addictions and gambling addictions.
It's because their brain chemistry is off from their wounded relationships I think never been fulfilled it is like a duck that is terrified of water so it lives its whole life on land.
It's like a duck who will never fly because it's terrified of the sky as well it's a duck who is continuously walking because it thinks water or flying is going to kill it that's what these people are like.
As they experience even a little bit the overwhelming brain chemistry that floods through them from good relationships is like a duck who finally learns to swim or finally flies and says this is not just not scary it is exhilarating it's everything I was built for your brain is built for these things and the addiction to the good takes over.
And it heals you much more rapidly than most people are expecting it is not about habits is about cultivating the right experiences so that your brain takes over for you.
The public school system treats boys like defective girls then raises girls to act more like boys check the CDC's medication rates for ADHD in boys and antidepressants in girls what's going on there.
The American school system is designed to churn people out in a factory settings or churn people out in a prison setting or a corporate setting in a cubicle.
And it is not designed for young boys who are not designed for corporations are not designed for cubicles prisons and factories is simply not going to work that way so it punishes people who stick out.
And it meditates them down we have the medical system here in America the medical model of mental health I work with the response model if something is off the person is not responding right or the situation is not right there's something happening where we need to change their response.
Not medicate them into oblivion because there's something wrong with their brain boys are not defective girls boys are boys and we need to create a system for them.
Why the female set point why presume that boys should act like defective girls.
It's the same reason that overseas when American companies ship their jobs overseas they usually pull in female workers into their sweatshops because they are quiet they are more compliant they just sit there they do what they're told and they will do the tiny tasks over and over and over and then go home without complaining.
They are most unlikely to complain or cause a fuss they'll simply do what they're told that is why that's the model that we want here in America for boys so you've got higher agreeableness a little bit higher on average conscientiousness.
I mean you know you look at the rates in schools at the moment and girls are out achieving boys when the title nine and some adjustments have been made to the way that the education system works and I think it is plain that the current version of schooling that you have.
Is more suited to a female at nature or you could in reverse say that female nature is more suited to the current iteration of schooling there is a conspiracy out there that says that school has been purposefully sort of reprogrammed to.
Make it more difficult for boys I would be much more tempted to presume that it's just a easier it's not a coordinated effort to keep boys down by the school system it's simply the way to have the most peaceful sort of classroom and each individual teacher is optimizing for the most peaceful classroom which is the one.
Where students aren't doing things with their hands where they're not running around outside where there's easily structured timetables homework is opposed to exams all of these sorts of things they are they're done out of convenience not out of malign coordination.
Absolutely there's enough idiocy in the world without bringing malice into it.
It's okay to be sad that doesn't mean you're depressed it's okay to be worried that doesn't mean you're anxious it's okay to experience trauma that doesn't mean you have PTSD not everything is a diagnosable issue.
So many people hide behind a diagnosis and say I never have to get better this is one of the biggest things with attachment issues to people taking attachment styles quiz and say oh I'm anxious attachment I will be that for the rest of my life.
Absolutely not that is the medical system that says you have a disease we must treat you for the rest of your life you will go through 10 years of therapy and take five medications.
As I was working as a psychologist as a psychotherapist I did in home treatment for people and some of my clients run 27 different medications at the same time and I would ask them what they were for and they would not know at least 12 to 15 of those medications would be psychological medications.
Some of them were four or five different antidepressants and then three different anxiety medications and then some for panic disorder and then some for who knows they just kept throwing them in they had no idea that's the american system right now and if you have a diagnosis.
It's not the end of your life and not everything is a diagnosis a diagnosis should just say here's where you're starting where are you going to go.
There's something very reassuring in a way I think about pathologizing your emotions about giving them a label it's not that the world is unfair that life is difficult that sometimes bad things happen people pass away you become destitute or broke or ill or sick or your family members die.
It's not that it's that you have X or Y or Z it is a forcing function a convenient way to reduce down the complexity of the world and I see it in myself I see it in my friends I see it in the people that talk about this stuff online.
It is a very seductive solution to try and have a label that you can place behind something it's not that your sleep pattern is very bad because of your poor habits around eating late at night which causes your digestive system to cause you to not eat well and.
You're drinking too much water and now you've got like shy bladder syndrome or you've got like a bladder problem that means you got the bathroom or whatever it is which is causing your sleep to be bad which means that downstream from that your anxiety is high the next day.
It's anxious I've got anxiety I've got an anxiety problem and yeah reducing down the complexity of the world into a pathology.
ADHD we saw it before it's like giving that diagnosis the number of ADHD diagnoses is gonna was it like 10 times 50 times or something it's overwhelming the amount in America they say one in seven little boys in America is now medicated for ADHD I mean that's those are.
Brutal medications do you know how many boys I've talked to and grown men who are in their 20s that say I've been medicated for ADHD since I was four years old.
I've been on and I've been on stimulants since I was four years old because my preschool teacher diagnosed me with ADHD and told my parents they would kick me out of school if I didn't get on meds a lot guys have never lived their real life.
What how would you describe I don't know whether you've ever been on ADHD medication but from what you know about the experience of it what can you tell me about what life would be like before and after for a young boy or girl and then also moving up into adulthood.
Most of what I encounter is people whose brain is so fried from years and years and years of being doped up and zombified and then still being screamed at any time they twitch wrong they move wrong they act wrong they don't do something right it's you have ADHD that's your ADHD get under control I don't want to tolerate you you have this problem.
People who have ADHD sometimes it's not ADHD sometimes it's an attachment issue other times people have ADHD have attachment issues from being yelled at for having actual ADHD it's amazing how those two go hand in hand.
And those medications zombify you and then you've been on them for 20 years and you've never experienced what it's like not to be run down and also not to be yelled at for having a diagnosis it's it's not just even the meds it's the whole experience of being told.
There is something wrong with you and you will never function right.
What was that psychological experiment where they.
Took children who had minus stutters and emphasize the stutter yeah so they encouraged one group and said hey encourage them in the stutter got better the other one they stressed them out to the max and it made it so bad some of them couldn't even talk.
It was 100% if you encourage the heel ADHD by the way some people call it type E personality entrepreneur some people who thrive in entrepreneurial settings have very ADHD style brains and behaviors and they can do amazing when you get in the right areas.
Boys with diagnosed at least with ADHD do amazingly well in non traditional schools when you get them in there their achievement goes through the roof.
But that's not what we're doing we're not focusing because we have a one size fits all education model not everybody's got access to a walled off school or some sort of outdoorsy type thing which means that if you are a child or a young boy or perhaps a girl who has ADHD.
You are a square peg being shoved into an incredibly round hole and there are very few.
Alternatives I think the Elon Musk who dropped out of Stanford after his first seminar I think he I think he lasted less than half a term or something and you know you're looking at a guy whatever you think of his philosophy and his politics and his businesses who is very capable at doing a lot of diverse things.
That screams just like a weaponized commercialized ADHD to me it is it is weaponized ADHD is right and that's why he can achieve the way he does most likely when you harness it right it's an incredible power when you live in a society where everything is one size fits all then you are a giant living in a city for.
Very short people and nothing is gonna fit right you're gonna bang your head everywhere you go let's also remember that saying you know having an ADHD problem every pathology that you want to talk about is a spectrum.
You know even the most focused person in the world is the first percentile on the spectrum of ADHD there's no point at which you hit a marker and it's like oh at this point your ADHD even you could say this about obesity right when you.
Name somebody as being obese it's actually a kind of arbitrary line that's like okay above BMI of this particular thing and BMI is just this decision tool that you decided to use but we're talking about spectrum here and ADHD is a function of a bunch of other.
Like phenomena and manifestations the way that people behave and show up in the world the same thing would be true for anxiety for depression for whatever it might be and.
Pathologizing it as well using it as a label using it as an identifier is like okay up to a point at what point do you say that you're that you are ADHD or that you're just somebody that happens to have a more wandering imagination and really how useful is it.
To be able to get yourself to that I mean Robert Ploman what is the third most cited psychologist of the 20th century the preeminent behavioral geneticist in the world.
He said that all of these diagnoses as far as he can see a basically pointless because everything's just a spectrum so it makes it easy when you want to diagnose somebody when you want to come up with a solution but.
It's not tremendously useful at them understanding themselves because everybody is on this spectrum everybody has different bits of all of these thrown in.
When I was a graduate school one thing they told us is when do you undiagnosed someone and everyone in the room looked around and said what do you mean everyone when they get a diagnosis they just have it and they said no you undiagnosed them when in the book it says when you can function well in your relationships and you can function well in school or work.
Those are the two requirements you must have functional impairment from the issue if you can get a person to where they are fully functional they are no longer impaired they no longer fit the diagnosis you remove the diagnosis at that point and say.
You no longer have this diagnosis the problem is we have removed that entire part from the book in our heads and no one undiagnosed is anymore a diagnosis is now a permanent thing for the rest of your life that is not even built into the book that is built in our culture.
So you just spend your time accumulating and never reading yourself of different pathologies how funny okay next one there's two together that I really enjoyed here.
Most men avoid therapy because most therapy approaches are not designed to help the male brain deal with pain or find solutions that makes men believe therapy is worthless and men skip things.
That feel worthless also male depression is usually based on feeling helpless powerless and unable to affect one's life or environment therapy models focus on milk helping men feel heard and loved instead of restoring their sense of personal power men need solutions not just feelings.
Absolutely and we are churning out here in the United States an overwhelming number of therapists who do not have the skills that they need or the experience that they need.
To provide lasting solutions that will undiagnosed you in the long term there are not it's not that every therapist is bad I was a therapist for years there's many of my colleagues were wonderful.
However the system we are doing here in America is to desperately churn out as many health care providers we can because we do not have enough of them.
And to focus their training in specifically on the diagnostic and statistics manual so that you can treat issues and then you're going to be coupled in with all kinds of medication.
And problems are not unfixable because you're just medicating and triaging so much of mental health in America is based on the medical model and endless triage endless triage management symptom management that's all it is for the rest of their life when you get a man in that system men would rather kill themselves than sit there and say I am disabled.
I must have a medical help a medical assistance for the rest of my life and all I can do is sit here and talk about my feelings endlessly for the next 10 years while paying $10,000 for the privilege that is not what men are looking for men are looking for solutions and they're looking for guidance and how to apply those solutions when you give them those things men will do just about anything for you.
Why is a problem why is it a problem for therapy models to focus on helping men feel heard and loved instead of restoring the sense of personal power why is that something which is uniquely male and why is that the approach that therapy models have when trying to fix men.
The brain scans show us that the male brain goes backwards to observe and then forwards to act upon it. It mostly goes like this back observe forward act when we see a problem we act upon that problem is how the male brain tends to work the female brain tends to observe in the back and then go back and forth across the hemispheres and make a bunch of connections and process it and then think about it and pull pieces out and make deeper connections that that is often why women communicate to process with each other to share with each other.
And they need to feel heard they are also fairly risk averse typically so woman doesn't typically want to be the one who makes the final decision but they value being heard so they can have input on a group decision that all of them their brains go back and forth and back and forth and make a decision together so that there is shared reliability and shared responsibility among the group men want to observe and act upon it and solve the problem.
When you have a therapy model that just makes men feel heard loved okay they kind of feel heard I feel heard and they kind of feel loved well I kind of feel loved now I feel like a useless piece of helpless garbage that other people are sitting here loving that means they just pity me and I am just an endless creature of pity who will never solve any problems it almost makes them worse is there a point where it helps men to feel heard and loved absolutely do men not need to feel heard loved they do but.
It just makes them feel like they are being pitted and that is something men would rather die than experience for the most part.
You said as well most therapy approaches are not designed to help the male brain.
Deal with pain or find solutions what's the deal with pain I can see the fine solutions that's the back and forth that I have the information it's time for me to enact something what about the deal with pain thing.
Most women when they experience pain what they will typically do is look for comfort with other people look to share that and be nurtured as the experience the pain women are very adaptable they are wonderfully adaptable so they endure through the pain by building connections and relying on those connections.
Men hate that when men experience pain if they then have to go and just be a burden to someone else they feel worthless they would rather march off into the wilderness and die most typically.
Men need to deal with pain by finding a way through it and finding a purpose through it so that they can push through that pain push through the pain receptors push through that and follow that mission if you do that.
Men can go through the pain and put it in its place because they no longer feel helpless against the pain there is a reason for enduring the pain that's what men need.
Can you tell that story about the blitz in World War two again.
Yes so there's research that shows through the blitz in World War two psychiatric men psychiatric hospitalized men who were comatose they sit there they were just miserable wretched miserable but when things started happening around them and society needed them.
When the bomb start going off and everything happened they were needed all of a sudden they had a reason to get up and go do something and that impelled them to pull out of the pain out of their struggle out of everything and go do what they were supposed to do.
It is the same thing as a depressed man who is finally called up to do something and goes and does it in his family in his life men who were who are low and low and low and then they find out that the woman in their life is carrying their child.
And all of a sudden it sparks a difference in him right he stops drinking he gets he cleans himself up same experience I will endure the pain for the sake of my family my country my people might whatever it may be here is my chance to rise up and make this change that is what men are built for.
Does the fact that a man with a strong enough why can bear any how which is a nice synopsis I guess of what you're sort of touching on that.
Does this explain why modern men are so insecure that there is a massive lack of purpose relationships around them we have more childless men than ever we have no.
Intergenerational pangenerational homesteads anymore there is a lack at least in the west of patriotism of nationalism.
What first off why are modern men so insecure and then secondly how does what we've just spoken about play into that.
So many of the men who come in my coaching program are lacking what I call human impact they have no ability to create human impact in their life.
That's what a legacy is is the lasting human impact that endures after your death it does not have to be biological children although that's one of the easiest ones to point out and create.
It can be adopted children can be mentored people that you help it can be people you rescue it can be an organization that you build a human impact is the purpose of a man's life because someday you will die you will be dust your money will be frittered away and taken through taxes and all kinds of things your property will be divvied up.
Your verse your everything you've cared for in your life will be taken away the only thing that endures is the future generations who are fundamentally altered because of your existence on this planet that is the purpose of a man's life.
That is why so many men want to kill themselves now is because they find no purpose and no ability to create human impact.
Why would it be adaptive for a man to have that or how do women and their life goals and purpose differ from that.
It's funny because many women and I've worked with tons of these women they have much the same purpose women are much more adaptable.
But they want to be useful to the people in their life and help enhance those people's lives so they can go out and live and thrive women are about helping other people thrive men are about changing the course of other people's life.
If you want to look at it that way women can find that purpose just about anywhere helping just about anybody as long as they have usefulness women can be very happy if they are loved.
And feel useful to the people that they love that's when most women are okay and they can endure they can crawl over broken glass but.
They aren't looking for the overall life changing creation that men are looking for they're looking for enduring and helping people endure and nurture them as they go.
Whereas men are capable mission powerful.
Absolutely that's what men are looking for interesting you've been helping some of your clients to detox from red pill fears what's happening there.
So many men who grow up by their insecure with insecure attachment they say something's wrong with me I don't know what women want from me I'm scared of women you know I'll try to please them like I please my mom and then they're not happy about that.
And then what am I supposed to do how do I ask for sex how do I communicate my needs what do I do like we're in a weird society women are kind of confusing dating was really hard it seems like women are really picky what do I do.
Then they encounter a woman who hurts their feelings usually a woman who's very chaotic may have a personality disorder borderline personality disorder stands out pretty hard among the women who really devastate these men.
And they have such a horrible breakup experience that they're agonized and then they find online somebody who's willing to say look women really are horrible red pill culture teaches women have borderline personality disorder all of them it's normal for women to feel that way they don't even feel anything like humans do.
They don't feel like men do they are incapable of loving you the way you want to be loved.
There's a book I believe that I'm pulling that quote from which is a big red pill Bible that they use women are not capable of the depth of loyalty and love that you are you have every reason to feel scared of women and you need to control them.
And that is just all it does is switch men from anxious attachment style where I think I am the problem to avoid an attachment style everyone else is the problem and I must manage them like livestock while getting sex from them and then dump them the moment they try to build any kind of intimacy or connection with me and make them live in fear.
All the time and that's what red pill does is swap from one horrible life system to a different life system that's just as horrible if not worse guys come into my coaching practice and say Adam.
I hate how I have hurt women for the last five years I am lonely I am miserable and I'm realizing this sucks what is the alternative is there even an alternative it seems like everyone that seems like red pill is right but I'm just as miserable as I was before what do I do and I pull the man and I guide them through it other they have slept with three hundred women.
Or have never slept with a woman before cuz red pill has made them so petrified of women that they are terrified they're gonna be eaten alive I guide them through that because there is a third option which is to actually be a human being who connects other human beings with trust with honesty and understanding what great red and green flags to look for in relationships and how to communicate with women as if they are human beings too and that's the magic.
What if you could go in and tinker with the current world of men's dating advice red pill manasferi stuff what would be the main lessons that you would try to dispense with.
Talk about commitment more and be very clear about what you want every woman who comes into my dating practice is scared to death to say I just want to find one man to marry and have children with and be with for the rest of my life.
But if I mention that to any man before eight year three he is going to get up and run screaming from me and the men who come into my coaching practice say I just want one woman to be with for the rest of my life and have children but if I mention that before year three she will think I'm a psycho who's trying to control her men.
It makes you so attractive when you are very clear what you want but you must understand that you also have to pass tests that prove that that is actually what you want.
You don't have to pass test proving that you are an eight foot tall millionaire who sweats diamonds and drives Lamborghinis you must prove that you are a man of substance who is out there to make change in the world any kind of change and who is reliable and consistent so that you could be dependent upon in a family situation that is really all it takes and most men cannot pass that test if you can learn to pass that test.
Women will very much desire you for a lifelong relationship how do women enact that test.
Women enact that test typically because they believe your words up front but over time they begin testing you they begin challenging you when you do something that is completely against what you have claimed you want in life.
When you say yeah I want to committed loving relationship and then you're secretly scrolling through porn when you say yeah I want to get married but maybe in like eight years when you say I'd love to have kids and you have never interacted with a child in your life and you have zero interest in children and keep pushing them away from me when they try to talk to you.
When you are just smoking pot in your underwear playing Xbox instead of building a business a side business or advancing in a career or doing anything they look at that and say where are you at like you're not actually doing anything what are you doing be the man she would want to be married to instead of promising her that you are going to change into the man she wants to be married to do that on the way to building your good life you will find a woman who wants the kind of man you're becoming.
Do you not think that current men's advice touches on that topic.
Current men's advice says either completely disregard women as you build your empire or be so fearful of women that you end up manipulating them and playing games with them because that's all that they're capable of doing with you and you must keep them at arms length to keep yourself safe.
That is by large the majority of men's advice that is out there on the internet right there and it's terrible well I'm looking at this very deeply at the moment and one of the trends.
I would love to try and tune down is this adversarial relationship between men and women and I understand I think that you know there's a little bit of credence to say that.
Men's and women's dating strategies mating strategies in some regard can be a little bit adversarial.
We are evolutionarily programmed for them to not always align perfectly but on average they have to align at least some of the time or else there wouldn't be a fucking civilization so that and it's not really so much about the adversarial nature because let's you know even if you're the biggest Dan Bilzerian Chad in the world you're only talking about you and ten birds right only you and ten goals that you can have let's say that it is exclusively.
Refined and constrained within dating and mating that's your adversarial relationship okay that means that there's.
3.5 billion minus ten women on the planet with whom you should be able to have a non adversarial relationship and yeah and this isn't just coming from the men's side this is absolutely are slash.
The pink pill are slash female dating strategy you know all of that stuff that's just as toxic that comes from the women's side all of that stuff says the other sex is the enemy.
They are someone that you should fundamentally mistrust fundamentally any game that they have is your loss and any game that you have is their loss.
The goal is to walk away from the table with as many points on your side as possible and as few points on their side as possible or just discount what what the situation is left with it's so.
Scarcity mindset it's so negative some not even like neutral some it's straight up negative some scenario and that adversarial relationship between.
Both mating and non mating men with women blows my mind.
Let me tell you exactly where that comes from it comes from something called avoidant attachment style avoid attachment says the belief from childhood that there's something fundamentally wrong with other people they are incapable of acting morally just or with any kind of faithfulness towards you when the stress is on.
That they will always default to selfishness so you must endlessly pump up their positive feelings to then get them to do what you want them to do in return but you must also keep them at arm's length so they can never get in deep enough to see your human weaknesses betray you turn on you rip you apart.
That is avoid an attachment style comes in two different flavors there's the nervous type where they just try to keep safe from other people and then there's the manipulative type of coercing controlling other human beings.
These two can lead into things like antisocial personality disorder narcissistic personality disorder that's the extremes what you're dealing with on both sides is avoidant men and avoidant women who want.
All of this they want the pleasure without any real responsibility in the relationship because they are fearful and it's not just the other side that they're fearful of they are equally as fearful of their own side.
It's just that they're trying to sleep with the other side so it makes them more vulnerable to the other side than to their own side that is what is happening there to avoid an attachment style setting the definition for dating throughout the entire world because then they go out.
And the secure people and the insecure anxious people try to earn their approval and live with them and connect with them they set the tone for the entire dating pool for them for the whole world that way.
How effective have you been at the programming red pill ideology from men who maybe don't have a lot of real world experience.
I have men come in who are so deeply terrified of women that it is like working with the worst trauma cases that I worked with back in the day and in a low income high risk clinic.
It is like the E.R. of trauma experience men come in so overwhelmingly petrified they can't even imagine opening up to a woman.
What I teach them is exactly how to do that in a few sessions and when they experience it it feels so good that they are a duck learning to swim and water for the first time.
And then they realize how good it actually feels and the experience they have scares the crap out of them so they leap backwards and pull back.
But then they ease back into it again as she reassures him as she doesn't pull out a knife and stab him in the heart like red pill has proven that it will happen.
No she actually embraces it and enjoys the intimacy with him and he enjoys it too it is just a matter of can he believe it or not is he willing to give it a shot if he's willing to give it a shot we can get him there through experience.
What would you say to the guys that follow the red pill ideology and would say that's blue pill white night thinking you don't understand how women actually work this is you don't you don't understand the dynamics between the sexes.
If you open up to a woman like that she's not going to accept you you're going to end up being hurt and she's going to sleep with the six foot four lumberjack that lives next door.
Yeah I would say that if she has severe personality disorders maybe she would the number of women who have severe personality disorders is excessively low.
If you look at the actual number of women who have overwhelming numbers of partners and just leap but you'll find it's it's brutally low it's a tiny sliver of the female population that do that and is down to very much personality disorders.
Or extreme avoid an attachment style most women are just looking for a loving relationship to be with you and feel safe with you and build a family with you.
And be the wind at your back as you achieve your goals for the rest of your life that is what the vast majority of women actually want.
And I say that as a man who has built my own business was four children of the woman I've been married with for 14 years now marriage and family therapist for years now a dating expert and dating coach.
I have seen this through thousands and thousands and thousands of relationships women just want that love with you it is nothing like what you have heard but.
Yes there are women out there who can't hurt you and you've probably been hurt and your experience right now is one of one or three of three because you attract those women because your own problems attract those women because you by your nature reject the good women.
Learn how to not reject the good women learn how to be a good man yourself in romance and in love and you will find the right woman and if you can't I will show you how to do that.
One of the interesting things that I've realized when doing a little bit more research about the current trend of dating and understanding what's going on in specifically the men's online space is that.
As both men and women have become increasingly anti social because they have better things to do with the time whether that's spending time on the internet or just.
Generally being distracted by porn video games or whatever else.
Your real world experiences with the opposite sex diminish you have fewer and fewer.
Of those experiences to disprove stories that you hear on the internet and by design the stories that catch the most attention on the internet are the most egregious transgressions of whatever sacred cow or norm it is that you think should be accepted.
If some woman while her husband goes out to get the milk fucks the mailman and and and his dog and he comes back to find the all three of them in bed together you go well yeah obviously that's gonna get a hundred thousand upvotes on reddit because it's fucking insane and you that's not me saying that this stuff doesn't happen the dog thing maybe not.
But the point being that there are vicious both men and women out there who are very malign and have and have a ton of malice in them and you know massive red flags.
But because a lot of the world has no ulterior real world experience to disprove this you end up with that model being used as all this is what all women are like.
And I had a I posted an episode a couple of days ago and I had a very very interesting comment I'm gonna read out here.
The problem for many of us is this anyone dysfunctional enough to put up with us is going to be too dysfunctional or untrustable for us to handle in return.
And there was a reply to that that said I actually had a rule like this while I was in university informed by the disaster that was my first uni relationship.
If she approaches me she's interested in someone much better than me and she that she invented wearing my skin I'm not going to be able to compete with that guy how would you.
I'm aware you don't know much about these two commenters but how would you analyze the two people that I've just mentioned.
Sounds like learned helplessness learned helplessness is this belief that you can never get better so where you're at is all you will ever be so you are a piece of steaming garbage then people are attracted to steaming garbage no fix yourself if you say I'm attracting disasters then stop being a disaster and stop attracting disasters people you can change please take the time to learn the skills to change please take the time to learn the mindsets of changing you are not a static creature you are dynamic creature you can and should be changing.
Husbands who complain about having zero sex have no idea how the female sex drive actually works and the complaining makes it much worse.
My favorite thing is when couples come in and they haven't had sex in a year and I ask why and she looks at him and says because he hasn't asked and he says well I kind of hinted and you just never seemed interested and she says well what is the last time you spent time with me well why would I spend time with you if you're not having sex with me.
And that right there is exactly the spiral women after one year their sex drive switches from bonding with you mode to long term stability and mate retention.
If you have given her the adequate emotional bonding and if she has decent enough secure enough attachment to receive that bonding her sex drive will go way up because her brain says keep this man around and have as many of his babies as I can we must have 15 babies in the next week.
That's what her brain will say and I've seen couples I've worked with couples in their sixties who come in and sorry for this mental image but they come in having very little sex and they leave after a few sessions having sex three or four or five times a week in their sixties.
Because they improve their actual emotional intimacy which leads to better non sexual physical intimacy which then leads overwhelmingly to sexual physical intimacy.
It should begin in your emotional bonding and connection it will drive her sex drive through the roof and she will not only be receptive to you she will be chasing you through the house.
Yeah you had another tweet that said at about six twelve months into a relationship the female sex drive switches from attraction and bonding to long term stability that means emotional intimacy trust and predictability many couples like these three things so has sex drive tanks neither person fully gets why.
So many women that I work with do not understand how their own sex drive works I have clients who come in and they say Adam I don't know why I don't have a high sex drive I just feel like my husband is mad at me for not having sex with but I just don't want to what's the problem I say well you don't want to because he's not doing what he's supposed to be doing as your husband they say thank you for saying that I say okay well what would it take well I don't know just like maybe more time together and so we run through a list of exactly like twelve to fifteen things.
What spending time together should look like and then we give him a measurable list of do this do this do this do this often this amount of time this level do this and they do it for a week or two and all of a sudden her sex drive goes through the roof and they're very happy.
Hmm so.
I remember reading in Jonathan Heights the happiness hypothesis about the passionate and companion it to styles of it's not quite attachment I think it's attraction perhaps mm-hmm.
Is there an equivalent for men.
For these emotional intimate bonding like this yeah so you said that with women around about six to twelve months the arousal response occurs due to different stimuli is there a problem for men.
There is.
Yes okay here's what it mostly is I'm trying to frame it people don't usually ask that so let's talk about this the mail sex drive typically works if we have resources then we want to go reproduce because we have enough resources to protect whatever would happen if we reproduced.
That's a cheap way of saying it but the mail brain has to say look if I'm gonna throw endless resources at something I need to make sure it's actually going to be sustainable.
And that everything is going to continue the way it needs to so if a woman is betraying him if a woman is completely anti maternal usually if a woman is actively hurting him and attacking him or if his stress level is overwhelmingly high from his environment.
That's where the man sex drive typically goes down it takes pretty significant factors of this is not sustainable for a man sex drive to tank that hard it's it's tough not impossible but tough I do know that bonding through oxytocin actually and she helps men achieve faster erection and more lasting erection so oxytocin is very important for men it's a bonding hormone you get through emotional intimacy but.
It is very important but men can still endure without it it takes a lot to turn off the mail sex drive we're a little bit more simple creatures I think we are comes to that what was what was it that you taught me about the role of vasopressin for men during sex.
So the research shows that when men have orgasms it's a little bit different than how women have orgasms women will have orgasms and they their orgasm happens largely.
It was an overwhelming supply of oxytocin but it causes massive constrictions through the use of uterus and same same hormone that causes.
Labor and birth we have a synthetic version that we use a potosin that actually induces labor it's synthetic oxytocin and women flood with that during sex and that's what leads to one orgasm which then leads to another and then leads to 10 and then leads to her having a toe tag because she's died but that's what it's supposed to be men have one orgasm if they get any and oxytocin may or may not.
The male brain as much as it does the female brain it seems to more be there to move the semen along and he may bond a bit with you through oxytocin but men have far more receptors for vasopressin vasopressin is the hormone responsible for bonding when you achieve a mission together you solve a problem together you accomplish a goal together.
You know men are goal oriented who could have predicted that if he accomplishes in sex with you and says we're gonna give you 10 orgasms most women respond by saying no let's not do that or why the arbitrary number he is actually setting a goal with you wants to achieve it and wants to high five with you and that is actually gonna bond him to you more than his own orgasm is gonna bond him to you if you go with him and accomplish a mission together.
That's gonna be what does it so a failure of cross-sex mind reading in that women wouldn't understand why they would create some arbitrary number of this is how many pumps you're gonna give me before we finish this is how long it's gonna last for this is how whatever else it is.
Saying that to a woman is unlikely to cause her to have any additional bonding with you but to a man placing some sort of challenge in front of him that he can get to achieve whilst also having sex sex but achieving this okay so.
This is a team together as a team you achieve that by the way that's the vassal press in peace you your brain says we did this as a team what else can we do as a team to and it makes his brain say I want to work with you to solve other problems as well because now I have proven that you are good trustworthy ally in my life that's the key right there what is the take away lesson for women in the bedroom with regards to vassal press in and maximizing that for men.
Stop not asking for orgasms stop just letting it not happen stop just laying there and closing your eyes and thinking of england actually engage in it all right I'm okay I'm okay ladies are the listening if you want to close your eyes and think of england that's actually certified by me as something totally okay.
If she can say hey look this is what does it for me help me achieve this and I will be your best friend and they do it and then tell him that that was amazing and how great it was and do it to but mean it don't fake it don't be don't be pretend do it and accomplish it together and then celebrate the wind together that's the other thing is most women are so embarrassed when they have an orgasm.
Do it embrace it and celebrate the wind together as a team and man you guys are both got a much better time I'll just tell you that.
What's in your time looking at the sex lives of men and women were the most common reasons for women struggling to achieve orgasm.
Usually because they have their own attachment issues so they're either avoidant where they fear oxytocin so you'll see them pull away during physical intimacy they will prefer to be facing away from you during sex so that there's not physical emotional intimacy.
They will pull away after sex get their clothes on really fast and try to pull away and they're not comfortable with that closeness that's one big one that I work on oxytocin aversion usually through avoidant attachment.
The other is anxious attachment so they're massively insecure they are doing the sexual act to try to please their partner.
That's not like their prostitute they're trying to make their partner feel good and feel joyous and loving so their partner won't abandon them they're trying to be useful to their partner sex then is a performance it's an act to make their partner feel good they're absolutely not focused on their own sex drive at all.
Working as a couples therapist for years I didn't see even one divorce case where at least one of the spouses didn't have attachment issues every time but most couples therapists aren't trained in touch meant and don't know to check for that.
Attachment is what makes you connect to another person so that you can say look I'm gonna tell you the truth let's deal with the truth we will get through it together and solve this problem if you don't have secure attachment it is very hard to cooperate to solve problems then you get people who are just defensive running away trying to escape managing their partner pushing buttons for years and years and years until they reach a point where they have pushed too hard and it's now broken.
I've seen especially since our first conversation a massive proliferation of discussions around attachment on the internet I've had researchers like Jessica bomb on the show she was fantastic but I do sometimes worry about.
People who talk about attachment getting out over their skis and not only using it for situations where it maybe doesn't apply but also using it erroneously.
Similar to how you tried to sanitize some of the men's advice earlier on what what are the what are the things that attachment doesn't explain doesn't do what.
Would you tell the world about attachment that it isn't and that people need to dispel in terms of attachment.
I get this all the time people especially political persuasion start asking me hey is the other side doing x because of attachment is it all just down to attachment and what I tell them is this attachment forms the foundation of your life and it can definitely color some choices.
But we will not know some of the intricacies until we fix attachment and then we need to look at what remains and then we'll be able to solve those problems together as actual human beings working together with respect for a human and the human dignity instead of screaming at each other assuming everyone is our enemy.
Attachment doesn't touch everything it touches a lot of things but we won't know what it doesn't touch until we have fixed the massive epidemic in our society that by the way is increasing the research that I've seen lately says up to sixty five percent of people now.
But likely have an attachment issue and don't know it so the research is dead is definitely proving it's going in the wrong direction we need to turn that around so we can figure out what is an is an attachment.
I also heard that theories around attachment being.
Exclusively or even majorly contributed to by childhood rearing.
Coming under more and more scrutiny now you know fifty percent of everything that you are psychologically is heritable on average so presumably there's a huge heritability component here.
Are there any.
Elements of discussing attachment with regards to childhood rearing what what's missed there do people get out of their skis too much with regards to that as well and how else is attachment contributed to.
The biggest piece that I see is I have people come to me and say Adam I think I have attachment issues and I don't know why my parents were actually pretty cool they were actually pretty loving I don't know what's wrong with me.
What I see is people whose brains learned through experience something called an attachment wound through some sort of painful experience your brain learned that it is not safe and it will do anything to avoid that it's like it's like experiencing a trauma.
So being in the NICU we call the NICU and the baby comes out and they get put in there too early they get put into an enclosed chamber and they're trying to keep warm but they don't get physical contact the brain separates out and doesn't get what it needs for those first few months.
A child who's hurt a child who's abandoned a child who's traumatized from birth up until about age 12 your brain is trying to learn through experience with your peers with your parents with with people in the world what is going to happen your brain continues to learn beyond that I much very much a follower of Carl Jung who said that your brain is growing through the course of your life you can change I have people come in.
The oldest client I ever had was 79 years old who came in and said I'd like to fix my attachment okay let's fix the attachment and we did that you can still continue to change it is challenging those beliefs yes they do come from childhood.
No they are not set in stone they continue to grow over time we are not just.
Creatures we are cognitive beings and we have to embrace both sides and we have to educate both sides if that makes sense.
There was a really good article from box that came out recently about attachment what it explains and what it doesn't and there was a section in it that I put my story today that said knowing how you relate to romantic partners can be both helpful and the hindrance focusing on attachment style as an immovable obstacle.
Can lead to a loop of repeated mistakes instead of a nuanced approach could offer insight into your trigger points and how to move beyond them this is a quote.
I think it has a beautiful capacity for growing self understanding and self empathy Karen says at the same time we've got to make sure that we check ourselves enough to go.
I'm not going to use self knowing as self justification to not grow and to not change that is a really really good insight yeah.
I love that doesn't that go right back to the discussion we had about getting diagnosis and saying I have this for the rest of my life that is the worst mistake people make when they say Adam I took an attachment styles quiz and I am simply anxious avoidance I will just be that and I say no.
I have I built my attachment bootcamp course take that it will fix your attachment go from insecure to secure change what you're doing come to my coaching join my attachment circle community let me talk with you work with me come to my live events anything learn that you can change.
Do not settle where you are and have helplessness where you say well I'm just going to be miserable for the rest of my life and it's on my partner to make me feel better because I have a diagnosis of an attachment issue no fix it.
Then attract different people and be more fully who you are supposed to be in your relationships that's the answer yeah self knowing is not self justification is something that I'm going to carry with me I think that's a lovely little summary there.
Okay next one most people in therapy are there because the people in their life who actually needed therapy refuse to get it how do you know this you the person only comes in and you only speak to them presumably the abusive uncle or shit father or bad baseball coach isn't there.
How do you know the number of times interestingly in my practice through therapy and now as a coach is people come in and I assess where they're at and I say okay.
This sounds like an environmental issue a lot of my training was not just a medical response it was an environmental focus it was where is your environment reshaping you that was what my current my previous license was all about where how is your environment causing this issue.
So we would look at that and say tell me about the people in your life tell me how you're interacting with them tell me their responses and then I would say bring that person into therapy with me now it's bring that person in the coaching with me and let me talk to them.
And we talk and I interview them and I look at them and I see how they act and by and large it is that person who actually really needs the help the one who refused to come in because the one who actually came in was the one trying to work and make it better.
By and large that is the case and especially when I work with young people whose parents are the ones who are the driving force and teaching them the bad messages.
That's it most men don't know how female communication works they provide solutions which is what they would want when a woman wants validation.
When this is pointed out most men assume it's untrue because they'd hate to receive only validation instead of a solution.
And isn't that true have you ever had that experience where a woman says talk to me and you say what am I supposed to talk to you about have you ever had that experience Chris yeah of course especially with younger partners you know in your early 20s I think when everybody is poor at communicating.
That's it's very common.
Why do women do this women do this because to them communication is trust it illustrates that you trust them it illustrates your willingness to spend time with them it illustrates you want them to understand you so that they can be more helpful to you in the future.
It illustrates to them that you are emotionally invested when you listen to them when you share with them that's what that tells them when you let them share with you it tells them very much the same that you are curious about helping them.
You're curious about being with them you are interested in them you're invested in them you are willing to spend your time on them and you like your time with them when men stop and try to throw out solutions they are cutting to the end of the conversation and saying I don't have time for you.
That's what the woman is actually hearing not here's a wonderful solution that I wish someone had given me they hear I don't have time for you take your solution and get out of my face.
That is what men are accidentally saying when they number one shut them down solutions number two they refuse to open up about their day share about their thoughts share about their difficulties are experiencing when they refuse to share you are telling her I am not interested in you I could replace you with any woman out there.
That's so interesting a failure of cross-sex mind reading yet again yet again what are the differences in male and female communication then so why in your opinion.
Do so many couples struggle to communicate effectively why did we evolve communication in the different ways why did men develop one brain that is solution focused and women develop a brain that's relationship focused you go back to the hunter gather as you go back to 20,000 years ago before the neolithic revolution right before we realize if we eat seeds and poop them out that it grows more seeds where we poop them out so we should live there that we before we learned that.
Men had to go out and hunt and survive and fight women stayed at home and bonded and nurtured and cared and that's where our communication styles really started coming out the guy who is out in the field with the mammoth saying hey john I hope you're feeling okay I hope things are alright you know if it's not too much trouble maybe you can think about going over there because there might someday be like and by that time the mammoth has already run you down and killed you and you and John are now dead so those guys were like what.
Get out of here go over there go live over there with the women because I want to hear it that out there it's hey you go over there there's a mammoth stab it with spear all jump on its back that's the communication we evolved is find me a solution now I don't have much time and I gotta get it done quick women other way slower communication around the women the children teaching guiding listening nurturing sharing of resources sharing of time women developed sharing men developed solving if you look at the different communication styles even today we are still living.
Same patterns why then is it the case that men and women can't communicate and why they want to go for dinner.
They can if if the man explains what he is looking for so the more anxious a woman is the more she is afraid of disrupting the relationship a fully secure woman is not as likely to have that problem but any woman with any level of anxiety.
Is going to struggle because he says where do you want to eat and she doesn't think selfishly and say I want to eat over here she says what would he want to eat what's a good answer for us what's a good experience for us where do you want to eat last time what do you want to eat there again well and then anxious women their brain kicks in and says but if we pick wrong he could be mad he can have a horrible time it can even lead to us breaking up I don't want to do that and they cycle out like that and then they get stressed out and then.
The other half of women have a mental problem a mental load problem where they've been struggling with it and making decisions all day and they're exhausted say just you make the decision you're the man you tell me what we're supposed to do because they're resentful because they feel overburdened and stressed out.
And the guy said they're going just pick just eat where do you want to go that's why that fight is happening because he doesn't see that happening on the surface and she doesn't know how to convey that to him either that's why men and women will starve to death slowly arguing about what they wanted to eat for lunch last week.
One of my boys has got a solution that he uses when he wants to go somewhere his partner is a the woman is pretty sort of decision oriented in any case so it wouldn't be an issue to get her to contribute where she wanted to go so he has used neuro linguistic programming to trick her into going to the place that he wants to go to so what he says he proposes the place that he wants to go in the negative so he'll say listen.
With regards to dinner this evening would you be opposed to going to cheesecake factory and she said what do you like I mean who's opposed to going to cheesecake factory no one's opposed it's like well look I'm not opposed to going to cheesecake factory there's maybe somewhere else well no no no no no if you're not opposed my preference would be cheesecake factory and given that you're not opposed to it and this is my preference how about we go cheesecake factory.
Which actually thinks of like a really fantastic although slightly manipulative way to interesting it sounds like a couple that needs to work a little bit on balancing out but hey you know what if it's working for them so far they haven't killed each other and power to him as much cheesecake as you want okay next one that's right most women with attachment issues ramp the sex drive through the roof even more than usual at the start of a relationship and then no dive the moment it becomes long term and they hate themselves for both sides of it.
I made so many women angry with a comment along the lines of this one on instagram where I posted that if she is just you if all she thinks she has to offer the relationship is her body.
Then she really has nothing to offer in the relationship and so many women got angry at that because so many women that's all they feel they have to offer.
It's an endless act of please don't leave me I will do anything to make you like me and that's all they think they have and then they're just in perpetual survival mode.
So then after they've made you happy happy happy happy they just sitting collapse and then men complain women today don't have any cooking skills domestic skills if nothing else because those women are terrified and they're just an endless survival mode so they just try to make you happy and then collapse until the next time they have to make you happy that's unfortunately how it goes.
Why would the sex drive fall off a cliff after a while because it is built on emotional intimacy and women who have those attachment issues those insecurities are incapable of receiving that good love and reassurance even if he's giving it so even if he is trying to build an emotional connection with her she will actually push it away.
And do the one thing that would make her feel safe and secure because it's the one thing that makes you feel most unsafe and unsecure that right there is the problem those women actively reject the very thing that would enhance their relationships and their sex drive.
So a woman a man who gets into a relationship or a one night stand a casual sex with a woman who is very performative in the bedroom in the first instance that's got to be one of the amber flags at least for this kind of a personality I'm guessing.
Exactly if she will she goes to bed with you on the first date yes it's a gigantic red flag or amber flag in that case yes it is it's massive if she's able to build any kind of barrier and say you know what I'm looking for some level of commitment before I will do these steps with you and then she follows through on that and then continues looking for additional commitment that's where the healthy women really are to be honest with you.
Do you not think that there's a case where the predisposition that women have to make men wait to be more choosy with their partners can be heavily deprogrammed by a wildly sex positive culture that tells women that true freedom is having a job like your father and having sex like your brother.
It's even that though is based on fear because women don't really want that the research shows that only two percent of women prefer a hook up over a real relationship 98% of women prefer a real long term relationship over any kind of a hook up.
But they say that up to 80% of university women will have a hook up it's that they are settling for the little that they actually believe is possible and the little that makes them at least not feel as unsafe it's false intimacy.
And false connection for the sake of feeling like there's something in their world that makes them feel connected to a human being it is not that they crave it is that they think all they can get and everything else is too terrifying to reach for.
That's very sad why do you think that that's the case why are they thinking like that.
Because so many of them didn't receive the love they needed from their father growing up and it's back to daddy issues which so many people make fun of.
But so many of them did not bond fully and connectedly with a fully embracing and vibrant father who showed them what love and cooperation and intimacy and trust and conflict.
And conflict resolution and cooperation is supposed to look like and they are just petrified no one on this earth will ever really love them.
Okay next one some people actually believe you must have sex with someone before you marry them to make sure if it's good sex and if sexual behavior is innate and not cultivated through deep connection communication and sharing of needs these people want physical intimacy without emotional intimacy.
Yeah it's it's an excuse not to commit nobody who says have sex before marriage otherwise it's going to turn out bad.
No one like that ends up getting into a very happy marriage because they all they have done is emphasize the overwhelming pleasure and it's just one more reason not to have a loving intimate relationship.
Usually those women are like what if he has a three inch penis with a barb on the end of it and I don't find out to my wedding night that something outrageous like that that is just overwhelming.
That's one thing I hear all the time and all the women like yeah that could totally happen.
No no no no the extreme outlier so you have to bang your way through twenty dudes so you can find one who has a perfectly shaped penis yeah no I don't think that is how our human species evolved to function like that.
The other piece though is this is one more excuse to not get married people do everything but get married people have five children and three dogs and buy a house and move to another country and give their partner one of their kidneys.
But will not get married because the concept of becoming responsible to another human being and being legally vulnerable in any way shape or form terrifies them those are the people that say you must have sex before marriage because what if it's bad.
That's not to say to just jump on the back of the first point you made that that's not to say that anybody that has sex before they get married is inherently going to be a bad marriage partner it's the people that proselytize about it to others that it's something which you must do that that is another.
Quite dark amber flag and yeah I I mean the UK's on s data came back and for the first time ever fifty one point four percent of children are born outside of marriage so this is to either single mothers or outside of marriage or a civil partnership so this is to either single mothers or mothers that just cohabitating with no legal agreement or perhaps even not cohabitating separately
Habitating but with no legal agreement.
A lot of avoidance going on here massively massively very much fear very much terror this is why the divorce rate is declining but it's declining because fewer people are getting married it's it's why the sex rate is declining because people are so terrified of each other they don't have sex anymore.
People are gonna sit in our home and watch porn or binge netflix or suck down energy drinks they're gonna dope I mean binge over and over and over because their brains are so deficient on every other hormone that there's a neurotransmitter they're supposed to have because they're we're not meant to live in cold sterile little apartments and little tiny cubicles where we don't connect with other human beings we are meant to be in big messy dirty hard environments.
The challenges and make us bond with other human beings through trials and through nurturing and sadness and joy we are meant to live messy lives and our lives are not messy enough.
Michael Easter wrote a great book called the comfort crisis which is about this and talking about challenges of.
Excessive convenience and it's really really really not good and it's so difficult to push back against because convenience feels good and comfort feels good.
The warmth of the couch on a an evening time when it's cold outside and you've had a hard day at work compared with whatever the thing is the difficult conversation with your partner taking the dog out for another work going to the gym like you said you would spending time on Duolingo to learn Spanish because it's the.
New year's resolution that you made for yourself all of these things are difficult and the.
Problem is that the overton window of difficulty has been constrained so much that our lives are unbelievably comfortable and it means that we are ever less resilient when discomfort comes a knocking and.
It's going to happen you know the unchosen suffering is going to come and smash you in the face whether you're ready for it or not and the more fragile that you've made yourself by never exposing yourself to the outsides of this overton window of comfort.
The less capable you're going to be of dealing with it.
Absolutely you must experience these things and one more time as a child your brain decided that if you were ever vulnerable and exposed to other people you would die.
So you're dealing with an ongoing fear of death that tracks right in so not only are you too comfortable but the brain says what I rather sit here and jerk off to porn and drink this mountain do or what I rather have go go have a conversation that could kill me.
Nothing I'm gonna stay right here that's the difference that so many people are experiencing is that level of dichotomy and it's just it doesn't have to be that way and it cannot remain that way.
Tell you what's interesting I had a conversation with William Costello good friend one of the number one in cell researchers in the world and we were discussing this advent of.
AI generated images for only fans and chat GPT that would potentially be able to give you the virtual girlfriend experience completely customized to your quirks and fetishes and then we discussed about what happens if we roll this down the line and you get to VR and you have a virtual reality world and then it's kind of like her I think is the movie I can't remember there's a movie that's got maybe wacking finish and someone that's.
The way as a virtual girlfriend one of the things that William brought up which is an odd white pill was you could imagine a world in which VR technology is sufficiently widespread and sophisticated and avatars in a virtual reality world.
Able to model male or female preferences sufficiently accurately that you will be able to for the first time in human history have a sandbox to practice mating in to practice.
Discussing with somebody at a bar to practice practice getting intimate with somebody without being too pushy to practice fully getting intimate with someone so that and what it means is one of the concerns we have at the moment overcoming this approach anxiety.
The challenge of getting over the initial approach hump is very high but if you were you know a level eighty seven master dungeon master in like like girlfriend VR or whatever you would have it would be one of the first times that you can have a realistic crossover from what's happened in VR over into that and then imagine in this world you know in ten years time.
Instead of you making your coaching courses online you're able to get some VR programmer in you can give them here's your five most healthy women that you want to look for and here's the five most red flag women here's the avatars and then alright boys like you know every single night you're going to spend a bit of time in the VR world practicing and then you go out to the bar and you're just this super capable dude.
I think I thought that was really really exciting that's the best white pill I've heard about VR for guys and for women in basically forever.
Imagine if we sanitize to the birds it was a poor graphic but imagine if we made that into a high school course that each each person had to take of here's how you approach another human being in a loving healthy way that will actually lead to a committed relationship here's what it's gonna look like you have to go through a whole semester by the end of the semester you have to get this other person this other dating simulator.
To marry you if that was at the end of it imagine what we can accomplish in our society by that point because we all graduate with a degree in being able to get someone to marry us and that that in itself that would be fascinating.
That's benevolent VR that's where if we get it right if we manage to interject into the current sort of trajectory of what's going on that would be great okay so you put out a list of the dumbest mistakes that guys make.
On the first three days and I want to go through these the first one was their way to shy and stick to surface level talk.
So many guys are trying to give the woman a fun experience and that's not what women who are looking for commitment are looking for they're not they're tired of the fun.
They are tired of just having endless people dancing for them that's not really what they want they want substance but they're afraid to tell you they want substance give her your life mission.
Give her your purpose give show her who you are and where you are going and invite her along on that journey that is what attracts women.
But surely you also need to come across as being fun you can't just do the most boring thing in the world so how do you balance these two.
If you are talking about what is most deeply passionate to you how could it possibly not be fun yes if you're just rambling on for six hours about your stock portfolio or something like that is awful.
But if you're having an intimate conversation with another human being explaining that and then learning her mission learning her desires what she's passionate about it should be fun but not fun for the sake of fun is not masturbatory fun it is fun for a purpose that drives education about the other person.
What is the easiest way for a guy to broach going beyond surface level talk and into something a bit deeper.
Tell her stories that illuminate what your life goals are that illuminate what your values and principles are don't tell her life stories that try to make her impressed by who you are or make her feel sorry for you or make her want to jump on top of you tell her the life stories that illuminate who you really are as a man and where you are going and that that right there will educate her while also entertaining her what's the difference between the two or could you give us an example.
Yes so many men default back to trying to explain what they purchased recently or they default back to how amazing they are in some way they try to still tell stories that pitch them as i'm better than my friends or these are my exes this is why i left them cuz i was better than them or whatever it may be that you are trying to elicit a certain feeling in the other person that then makes them act a certain way.
Instead tell the stories that educate them while also entertaining them and say this is a glimpse into who i really am convenient and inconvenient here is who i am and here is what i'm trying to achieve those are the pieces so you may say here is let me tell you a story about my work lately let me tell you story about this place where i volunteer let me tell you a story about my family and you tell that story to show her who you are.
There will be a lot of women that listening so i would like to know if it whether you think that this is something that guys that you go on dates with do.
Regular whether you would like them to do it more the second one they go way too hard with red pill and pick up artist tactics.
So many guys are trying to rush through and establish physical contact and dominance as fast as possible and what they're trying to do is mimic being in love they're trying to do something called love bombing.
They're trying to make her feel wow he's really in love with me and then it releases the same oxytocin hormone in her that creates a rush and makes her feel overwhelmed it's love bombing and it is just fake and it is not what she's actually looking for insecure women will fall for it.
Secure women will shove you back and through the door because they know what you're trying to do and it's really uncomfortable for them the only thing you're going to do is farm insecure women.
Which is why red pill and p u a guy say hit on a hundred women a night and one of them will sleep with you you are trying to find someone who's so insecure she lets you jump through her boundaries and make her feel validated.
One of the problems that.
A bunch of friends had about 10 or 15 years ago when the game came out first with Neil Strauss was.
They became very disenchanted with who they were personally because they created a delta between the person that their.
Evening partner was going to go home with and the person that they really were and that made them feel bad about themselves they thought so this is how performative I have to be in order to get a goal to go home with me which then makes them both.
Resent themselves but even more so resent women because they feel unlovable as who they are despite the fact that they've never shown who they are to the person that they're talking to because that person is inherently broken and unlovable but.
That positing an ideal version of you or a p u a ideal version of you and feeling the gap between where you are and who that person is get made more of the guys that did pick up black pill than the guys that didn't go home with girls.
These are the guys who come into my coaching practice with millions of dollars in the bank and they sleep with five different girls every week and they say Adam I have never been more miserable than I am right now.
These are the guys who come in because they think everything is about being fake that's just like I goes back to red pill it teaches you to be avoidant on purpose.
To never find real love because real love is impossible when you learn that that is not true when you learn that you must be who you are so that you can attract someone who is attracted to you long term that's the only way to build puff and once you do that.
Then you start filtering for the right people next one they play games like don't text her for three days bro.
Game playing is just a way of saying I don't trust you enough to connect with you so I'm going to push your buttons I'm gonna manage you like a video game and I'm gonna play until I get a win condition or until I get game over and then I'm out of here and that's what games are if you're playing games with her and trying to read your mind and trying to figure it out you've already lost.
We've got the other side of this as well which is the way to nice and overly romantic.
Way too nice and overly romantic either comes across as love bombing like you're being fake you're trying to make her feel amazing to forget that she doesn't actually love you yet so she'll sleep with you or it comes across as being eager to please mom.
Because you're trying to please women the way you please your mother growing up and you don't know what women actually want from you.
Both are a fairly big turn off for secure women the only people who respond to that are avoidant women who are looking for anxious men to snap up and have sex with for a period of time and then dump you and then just reconfirm the red pill beliefs or.
Women who are really anxious and are ultimately craving that approval from you and you don't really want to connect with either woman you want a woman who is secure and stable who is going to give you a life partnership.
Mark Manson's models says that the number one turn off for women is neediness what's your thoughts on that.
Neediness is very different from having needs neediness is childhood neediness is saying I can't find solutions I'm going to lay here crying until someone else solves my problem for me it is not like most men say being completely immovable stone that never has a weakness because women don't want that either they want to see that you have vulnerabilities and challenges that they can help you with.
But they also want to see you rising to the occasion and solving those problems because they want and respect a man who views solutions and approaches them and applies them.
They assume she doesn't want to hear from them again because she wasn't explicitly throwing herself at him.
So many guys who don't who navigate from red pill into regular dating and say she didn't try to sleep with me what's wrong with me and they build validation based on if she's trying to have sex with them.
And women do this too if you don't understand what real interest from a securely attached person looks like someone who's not rushing into the relationship for validation if you don't know what that looks like you think they are uninterested or bored or boring.
Then you must recalibrate what actual romantic interest looks like before you can really pursue a healthy relationship.
They try to rush rush to sex.
Rushing to sex is just gonna muddy the waters number one it's gonna flood you with feelings and her with feelings that are not actually what's happening it's gonna convince you that you love each other even when you don't even know each other yet.
And it's going to turn off any women that you actually want to build a long term relationship with.
I wonder I really do would be very interested to get some more data around.
Attachment styles and psychological stability correlated with whether women have sex either on the first date or how many dates it would be and this would need to be revealed rather than stated preferences because there's a pretty big observer effect here to.
Perhaps give a different answer to the one that actually happens.
I would be very interested I'm pretty fascinated by the ability of modern culture especially a very sex positive modern culture to perhaps.
Reprogram or deprogram some felt innate.
Predispositions that women do have when it comes to how long they feel like they should wait you know because if you're around unless you come from a particularly traditional very strong.
Values household if you are a girl that is around a bunch of other girls and all of those girls have a lot of casual sex regardless of your own personality disposition and your own values it can be very difficult to not have that.
Impact the way that you see relationships.
Well especially if you look at it and she says I have very little to offer here is a really awesome man all the other women on earth are going to give him sex instantly why on earth would he stay with me if I don't I'm gonna have to let him do whatever he wants so that I can try to keep him to be competitive in the marketplace of pulling in a good man.
That's a lot of women women set the price of sex for each other and a lot of women are racing toward the bottom.
They share the wrong type of stories this is men.
Goes right back to what we talked about is share the stories about your family share the stories that illuminate your good friendships share the stories about your accomplishments without being a pompous asshole about it share the stories that show her what you're building not just what you've accomplished in the past but what you're building for the future.
Share the stories about your business that tells you you have a business share the stories about your best friends it tells you have best friends to share your stories about your best friends and how they are more people.
It tells her you spend time around moral people.
Tell her stories about your mother or your sister or your family.
It tells her that you value those people and you will continue to be around them and it
tells her what you do when you're in relationships.
Tell her those stories rather than stories that make her think that you are a complete
stud in the bedroom and you have a million dollars in the bank.
That's not what a stable woman's looking for.
Final one, they don't mention commitment at all.
Women are petrified to mention commitment.
Men are petrified to mention commitment.
Because people want it, everyone's afraid to talk about it because they think they will
be the psycho in the room.
What I tell people is through my three-date method, you should be dating through the first
three dates so that you can talk about becoming an exclusive couple by the third date.
This is the system that actually works for people who are moving through with good secure
attachment.
Three dates is all you really need to build an at least exclusive relationship.
I'm not talking get married yet, but to know that the other person is the right person
for you, three dates and then you begin really testing for deeper commitment.
Do you think that it's more difficult in the modern world for men or women to talk about
commitment early on?
I think that both are equally terrified of it and I think that women are utterly afraid
of it because they think they are never allowed to speak about it.
I have women who come into my live events on TikTok, for example, and they say, Adam,
it's been eight years.
Do you think he's ever going to think about marrying me?
I say, have you ever asked him, well, anytime I've kind of brought up the idea, he's broken
up with me for about six weeks and then gets back together with me and has slept with three
other women.
So I've learned never to even mention commitment.
Okay.
Most women will wait around for eight years on the idea of maybe getting married someday.
So I would say that society definitely is harder on women who want commitment, but if
women were more open about what they wanted, they would filter out the men who don't want
it and they would attract the men who absolutely do want it.
Adam Lane Smith, ladies and gentlemen, may I absolutely love you.
I love your work.
Twitter's fantastic.
I'm really, really enjoying seeing your flouration, all the different courses and books that you're
releasing.
If people are interested in what we've gone through today and they want to go deeper,
where should they go?
So I have my website, adamlainsmith.com.
I've got my attachment bootcamp course on there that guides you through the 10 steps
of fixing your attachment and building amazing relationships.
I've got my personal coaching on there that I can work with you.
And I am on Twitter at The Brometheus.
I'm on YouTube at Adam Lane Smith.
I'm also on Instagram at Attachment Adam and I'm on TikTok at Attachment Bro.
You can find me anywhere on the internet and now on Facebook, interestingly, of all places
I blew up.
In about one month, I went from 300 followers to almost 10,000 followers based on just a
couple of things I posted on there.
So people are hungry for this good information.
I'm happy to help.
Dude, I appreciate you.
Thank you for today.
Thank you, man.
What's happening, people?
Thank you very much for tuning in.
If you enjoyed that episode, then press here for a selection of the best clips from the
podcast over the last few weeks.
And don't forget to subscribe.
Peace.
