Just how triggering are our phones when it comes to dopamine?
Okay, great question. We often hear that social media getting dopamine hit after dopamine hit.
When we first get on social media for the first time or after a long period of time,
the amount of dopamine that's released we think is quite substantial. It's novel. Remember,
dopamine is about novelty, surprise, and the sense that we are on some exciting track.
That's what dopamine is really about. It puts us into states of readiness, anticipation, looking,
seeking, et cetera, almost always for things outside the confines of our skin. Just to contrast it,
maybe for a bit more of a future discussion, serotonin does the opposite. When there's a lot
of serotonin in our brain and body, typically it makes us feel satisfied, sated, and more quiescent,
comfortable with what we have in our own immediate sphere and within us. The comfort of a good meal,
the food you have, dopamine is about go, go, go. If you look at somebody who's high on cocaine or
methamphetamine, it's all about pursuit because that's a very dopaminergic drug. You look at somebody
who's taken a drug, and I'm not suggesting people do this, but it really ramps up serotonin. Let's
say a selective serotonin reuptake inhibitor, prozaxol, et cetera. The side effects of those drugs,
if the dosages are too high, lack of appetite, lack of libido, kind of meh about life,
then so they'll adjust the dose down. That's because those are serotonergic drugs.
So in general, when we are in pursuit of things, dopamine is quite high.
Now you have to remind me your question because I've set up the dopamine serotonin
parallel cell phones. Yes, forgive me. So the thing about cell phones is when you first get on
there and you have no Wi-Fi on the flight or something and you land, it can actually be quite
stimulating. You get a lot of dopamine. Oh, there's this. Oh, there's that. But very quickly,
when you're scrolling on social media, you're no longer getting the novelty, but you're continuing
to do it and you almost don't know why you're doing it. At that point, it shifts over to something
that's a bit more like an obsessive compulsive behavior, where we can define an obsessive
compulsive behavior where the obsession leads to a compulsion. So the obsession is a thought,
the compulsion is a behavior, but the acting out of the compulsion merely serves to increase
the obsession. This is very different than being obsessed with food or obsessed with cleanliness.
There's no payoff. Right, exactly. There's no anxiety relief by carrying out the compulsion.
With OCD behaviors, like scrolling social media, the dopamine quickly wanes and then you find that
you're just sort of, and we've all been there, you're scrolling and like, why am I doing this?
This isn't that interesting. This isn't that interesting. Now, the algorithms for social
media are very clever. And I don't want to demonize it. I provide a lot of, a lot of my life
has spent on social media now, but the algorithms that they've incorporated function on the most
powerful way to keep people doing a behavior or an animal for that matter is intermittent random
reward, a random intermittent reward that you don't know when you're going to hit the jackpot.
So you're scrolling, you're scrolling, and then you see something. Typically, it's very high,
what in nerd speak, we'd say signal to noise. So if you're reading some interesting things,
this came out in the news, this came out, and then it's all of a sudden a riot or a person that
is jumping, is based jumping off a building or for people that are scrolling, looking at bodies
or something like that, live bodies that hopefully people aren't looking at dead bodies. But look,
if something's very tragic, then that has this gravitational pull. And then what happens is you
start getting the system working for that next dopamine hit that you don't know when it's going
to come. It's just like gambling. So I look at social media as initially being very dopaminergic,
driving rewards, surprise and excitement, but very quickly transitioning to something more like OCD
and the kinds of behaviors where it looks, if we were to look at ourselves through the lens of an
experiment like we would an animal experiment, we think that animal is sick. If you saw an animal
digging in the corner, looking, looking, looking, looking for a bone, the dog is looking, looking,
looking, looking, looking, looking, looking, looking, you'd think that's really sad. That's us.
What's happening, people? If you enjoyed that, then press here for the full unedited episode.
And don't forget to subscribe. Peace.
