You just came back from your first holiday in quite a while.
Well, my first holiday of, let's say, three weeks or more in quite a while.
How was that?
Astounding.
Really very good to see what's going on in the rest of the world at this particular moment.
We had previously gone to India in the year to visit family.
This was to go back to Turkey and to go to Portugal, but also to the Azores Islands.
I can't tell you how meaningful it was for me to be back traveling.
Why?
Well, I mean, partially it's reacquaint.
When you have children and children change your game for about two decades,
you have to realize that that's a transient period.
It felt like it was going to go on forever.
This was sort of trying to figure out what is it like to go from traveling in your 20s and 30s with that kids
to traveling with your kids at the last moment that you still have them at home.
Now you're going to have the rest of your life without them again,
but you can't go back to backpacking and doing certain other things that were easy for you.
You have to figure out how to rejoin your previous life that has been in progress without you actually.
Ending for a long time.
Exactly.
That's sabbatical from life almost.
Another thing is that you forget about parts of yourself.
I forgot that I spoke Turkish not well, but I spoke rudimentary Tarzan Turkish 30 years ago.
To be back in Istanbul and suddenly have words and phrases and things come back
and be talking to cab drivers and just people in the street seeing the change.
Obviously, there's been an enormous amount of change in Turkey.
Portugal is fascinating seeing certain things at the end of their life cycle.
We were at a synagogue in Bursa where the home of the Ottoman Empire,
where they were down to their last 50 people, which is a common enough thing
when we visit diaspora Jewish communities at the tail end with the embers still glowing hot
but no chance for a rebirth.
Then in the Azores, I was not prepared for the level of beauty that we encountered.
There is a level of beauty that I've only experienced two, maybe three times in my life
that sort of leaves you physically sick, like ill.
It's so beautiful that your body is the weak link.
You might think that sugar is tasty, but if you were to eat a bag of sugar,
you'd probably be sick to your stomach.
I would say this was so much beauty that it was at an almost pathological level
and more than I think my family could really take in.
We're just so moving.
I've heard you say before about how a lot of the time you don't realize
the last time you're going to do a thing with a person.
A lot of friends, especially ones that are fathers, have told me the same thing.
The last time that you'll bounce your daughter on your knee.
You don't know when it's going to happen, but it's going to happen.
There's also a really strange realization when you get deeper into adulthood
and work out that probably by the age of 18 or 20,
you've spent 97 or 98% of the time you're going to spend with your parents.
All that you wanted for the last four years was to be away from them
and now all that you want is to have a little bit more time and it's all gone
and you squandered it while it was there.
I'm on the ethnic program.
We don't believe in this stuff.
My children don't become adults at the age of 18.
I don't care about the laws of the United States or the state of California.
I think we do family wrong in the States.
You send them off to college and then you tell them,
go follow your dream and they bounce into some locality that you aren't in
and you don't get the benefit of these very strong families
because the market has been so strong in the US for so long.
And the market more or less took over all sorts of duties
that were assigned to families historically.
And so the reason that people always say,
oh, your families are weak was because our markets were strong, right?
And so insurance and opportunity,
all of these things that could be handed over to the market were.
And as a result, when we find out that the markets are not safe,
we realize that we've abandoned the structures that we needed to retreat to
that our families are quite small, below replacement rate very often.
And we don't live in the same place.
And so, you know, I married a woman from India
and I basically carry a lot of Eastern European norms.
And so my feeling is that my children are my children forever.
And I'm not letting go of them.
And this idea that it's your life and you can do what you want
is only true up to a point.
You also have a continuity issue.
And this is normal, by the way.
And it may sound weird in an American context,
but I think that the world recognizes that we're links in a chain
and there's a certain amount that you get to do that's just yours
because it's your life, but never go full Billy Joel.
Yeah.
Pan-generational housing is something being in Austin,
people getting ranches, starting even commune,
you know, 10 family mini villages with a bunch of other people.
Yeah.
It's something that I'm seeing occur more and more.
And, you know, in an atomized, like mass solipsism,
mass individualism society, this doesn't sound like a bad redress.
We got to the end of it.
We got to the end of that dream.
And it didn't work.
You've been around a lot of very powerful, very rich people
throughout your career.
No, no, that's not true.
Only relatively recently, only in the last decade and a half.
That's quite a while in many people's lives.
What do you think that most normal people would be surprised to know
about the powerful and the rich individuals, world views,
the way that they hold themselves, what is and isn't true?
They feel powerless.
That's one of the craziest things is that very often you're at a table
of people of immeasurable wealth and they're talking about the rich
or the hyper-connected.
They don't see themselves in these terms.
Why?
I think there's different kinds of rich, to be honest.
I think that if, for example, you got rich from, let's say, arms manufacturing,
you've been entwined with government your whole life or agriculture,
something that's highly regulated that extraction oil and gas.
Those people, I think, have always been close to power.
A lot of the dream of tech, for example, was we don't need the government.
We'll just build stuff in our garages and if it's cool, it'll take care of itself.
And therefore, we're minimally dependent on the traditional ecosystems.
So a lot of tech money felt disenfranchised.
They didn't know how to play the game.
That was both to its credit and a huge danger.
But I think one of the things that I find very interesting is that when people are
not rate-limited by money, they're rate-limited by all sorts of other things.
They may not want their number to go down.
So they go from 6 billion to 4 billion would be a huge blow,
even though it doesn't seem to impact normal things.
Another thing is that most of them have given up on the retail notion of reality.
Whatever mainstream media, if you have a worldview that allows you to listen
to national public radio that then reads the Wall Street Journal
and The Times and The New Yorker, whatever that point of view is,
most of the very powerful rich people I know have checked out at a level that is astounding.
They don't believe that they can afford to depend on normal institutions.
How does that show up in their lives?
Weird ways.
They don't have a regular doctor.
They have concierge medicine.
Their fire policy comes with a private fire department that will fight for their home
but won't necessarily fight for homes next door unless it's just-
I didn't know that that was a thing, okay?
You know, it's not until you travel with some of these people
that you realize that there's a secret corridor in the airport
or a way of getting onto the plane.
There's a lot of infrastructure built for a very small number of people.
For the most part, they can't figure out what to do with the money.
It's my belief.
If you believe that the world is headed towards an apocalypse,
you're very unlikely to want to contribute money
because that's the only fungible thing you have in an emergency.
I think that a lot of the sort of apocalyptic thinking of very powerful people
is very destructive because they're trying to figure out
how to survive a mild apocalypse,
like a six months of your-
You know, if I have six months of canned goods
and I've got four X Navy SEALs on my property in a remote location in Montana,
can I weather the storm with a few diesel generators?
So if it's a very mild apocalypse, maybe they've got six months' plan.
But I think that there's a lot of thinking
that you should husband your resources because you don't know what's coming
given that things are going to have to collapse.
And I think it's very sad because those are the people who could shore up the system.
It's interesting to think about helplessness at the top end of the wealth distribution
given that a lot of people feel like they are restricted by their material possessions.
But it seems like despite there being a lot of abundance,
at least monetarily, the scarcity mentality scales all the way up.
It really does.
And particularly if you've been deprived early in your life,
there's something that happens where you're nervous till your dying day
that you're going to die under an overpass, right?
I'm not kidding.
One thing that I highly recommend, people never take me seriously,
is a video game called a tower defense game of plants versus zombies.
And plants versus zombies ends in a situation where you win
all the things you can inside of the game,
but somehow you still have the ability to continue to earn
even though there's nothing left to purchase.
And the reason that I find this fascinating is you get to watch your own psychology,
which is now that you've given yourself the ability to earn,
you can't bring yourself to stop earning even though earning has lost meaning.
And so if you can't get to that in real life,
you can at least get to that inside of plants versus zombies.
And I highly recommend it because you have to give yourself some idea of
we have to cross finish lines as they come.
If you decide, okay, when I get to $10 million,
that's when I can afford to become a philanthropist.
Then you're going to get there and you're going to realize,
no, the goals are going to move.
So think about how a waitress sees this.
Waitresses do philanthropy almost from the beginning.
They'll overtip somebody who gives them good service and they can't afford it.
And it's sort of a poverty trap when you're at the very low end of the earning spectrum.
But I think there's something to take from that,
which is practice a little bit of philanthropy and a little bit of kicking your shoes up
and not always deferring taking profit in some sense on your success.
So make sure that all throughout your life,
you're treating yourself to some luxury even when you can least afford it
and you're just exhibiting a little bit of goodness
even though you feel like you desperately need to build yourself up
because otherwise you'll always push it out.
There's a Morgan Housell quote where he says,
the best way to win the game is to stop moving the goalposts.
And he's wrote this great book called The Psychology of Money.
And it's true that most people treat their goals.
Their relationship to their goals is like the horizon that for every step toward it they get,
it then moves one step further away.
It's probably more like the horizon on a spring or on a rubber band.
Then it gets a little bit closer and then it bonk, it snaps away from you.
And I've been around a lot of people that have got chunks of wealth
and it's a rare thing to see someone who doesn't still have that scarcity mentality
despite the fact that they've acquired it.
You need to keep the scarcity mentality.
It's not a mistake.
The problem is that you also need an abundance mentality
and then you need to selectively access them in different circumstance.
Talk to me about the tension between those two.
Well, it's just this regulated expression idea that we keep trying to find settings where we don't,
just let me set the air conditioner at 68 and then I'll be happy forever.
In reality, more or less you need contradictory facilities
and you need to know when to pull one in and let the other out.
And this is the heart thing.
Anybody with multiple children knows that with one kid you're saying,
you cannot afford to take these risks.
If you jump off something like that and you don't look below, think what you could do.
The other kid needs this.
Nothing ventured, nothing gained.
Come on.
I've heard your brother say that him and his wife's advice to the children was
as long as you don't do anything to your eyes,
you can take the risks that you want.
Yes and no.
I mean, there's teeth, there's throats.
Anything somebody who does combat sports knows has to be regularly.
He's going to try and attack.
Small joints, whatever it is.
There are plenty of ways to get yourself into real trouble.
The key thing that you're trying to use childhoods for is to go through the mistakes
that are not permanently disfiguring.
It's one of the importance of having fathers around.
The importance of rough and tumble play is facilitated almost exclusively by fathers.
And you learn the limits of your strength.
You learn the limits of your body.
You learn how high of a tree you can jump off
and how high of a tree you can't jump off.
You also learn to lose.
I mean, I really hate some of this winter talk where basically people have no plan to lose.
And then when they actually experience loss,
they tend to throw everything away to say,
I didn't lose, you know, that's very interesting.
In other news, this episode is brought to you by Shopify.
Shopify is the e-commerce platform revolutionizing millions of businesses worldwide.
Whether you're a garage entrepreneur or IPO ready,
Shopify is the only tool you need to start, run and grow your business without any expertise.
Shopify puts you in control of every sales channel.
So whether you're selling satin sheets from Shopify's in-person POS
or offering organic olive oil on Shopify's e-commerce platform,
they have got everything covered for you.
Shopify powers 10% of all e-commerce across the United States.
Massive brands like Gymshark still use Shopify.
That's how powerful it is.
So if you want to start selling something, anything online, Shopify is where to start.
You can begin a $1 per month trial period right now by going to the link in the show notes below
or heading to shopify.com slash modern wisdom.
That's shopify.com slash modern wisdom to take your business to the next level today.
You met Jeffrey Epstein once.
Talk to me about what that's like coming face to face with somebody of that caliber.
Whatever that means.
Well, one thing is that there is a physiological reaction that corresponds to this phrase that,
you know, the hair on the back of my neck stood on end.
Like that's a real physiological feeling.
I don't know whether the hair actually does that, but it's exactly what it feels like.
You're meeting somebody who is unholy.
And, you know, one of the most interesting things is that he was beckoning into a world
that didn't seem to exist, but for him as the doormat.
I think that's one of the things that freaked out a lot of these rich people is that he felt rich in a movie
sense, which is not something that you find among actually rich people.
What do you mean?
Well, a lot of very wealthy people don't own an island.
Islands are really tough to maintain.
I'm obsessed with islands.
And, you know, in general, I have to be obsessed with islands that have airports run by other people
because, you know, they have populations on them.
But every rich person starts to wonder, can I afford an island or how many jets?
And if you look at Jeffrey Epstein's wealth, it was beaten, it was like gold beaten into gold foil
so that it could cover a vast area and leave the impression of a solid gold life.
But it was really probably a mid nine figure fortune that had been used to buy islands and planes,
which is not what any nine figure person is going to do.
So you had a felt sense and embodied sense of discomfort?
Oh, hell yeah.
And where did that come from?
The fact that he had a lipstick camera pointed at me from an art object that he laid a table
that was preposterously long and thin with a tablecloth made of an American flag
to make it look like a coffin so that I would spill my coffee on the flag of my own country.
I mean, the fact that he looked like a mutant Ralph Lauren with this kind of labricious quality
and he's talking all of the science and market stuff and nothing adds up
and there's an heiress bouncing on his knee to get his boobs to jiggle to see whether it can distract.
I mean, it's like one of these crazy scenes where nothing about it was normal.
There was no trace of a normal world.
That sounds like a script from a movie.
Yeah, I mean, I think part of it, John Travolta is like putting a gun to your head
and forcing you to drink and break a code in a minute.
Yeah, like that part of it.
And then there was some sort of like, you know, remember that story,
the most dangerous game where a man invites you to his island so he can hunt you.
You know, this was scary and it was meant to be scary.
Sounds menacing.
Well, I think his product was silence.
People think that his product was sex or finance, but it was silence.
I'm pretty sure.
What's that mean?
If you're scary enough, look, rich people can get sex,
but they can't necessarily get people to shut up afterwards.
So my take on it and my take on it instantly was this is not an actual human.
This is a construct of someone's.
Someone has created a fake human being called Jeffrey Epstein,
who's a mysterious currency trading financier with crazy rules
so that no one would ever invest with him.
And I think that was to keep people from seeking his investment services.
I mean, you know, he's labeled disgraced financier,
but nobody has a record of trading with him.
He was sitting there.
He comes into the meeting and he says, you know,
well, Eric, I was just doing some currency trading.
And I thought about that scene that you sometimes see in as a meme
with Steve Buscemi with a skateboard over his shoulder.
Hello, fellow financier.
Hello, fellow financial traders.
Exactly.
So I'm thinking you don't really look like a rich guy who trades in markets.
The thing that's interesting that I'm finding myself intrigued by here is
it takes a moderate amount of cognitive horsepower
to be able to piece together this theater that you sat down at.
Deployed in a nefarious, malicious, manipulative way.
But it's smart.
What do you mean it's smart?
Say more.
It's not something that could be done by a simple mind.
You think he did it?
Oh, he has a team of manipulators?
No, when I say I think he was a construct, I literally mean that.
I think he was constructed, like fitted with a story.
Oh, so you think he was a plant?
No, I think he was a construct.
What's that?
Okay, you're going to have to dig in.
I think Jeffrey Epstein, a super genius financier, was not a thing that existed.
Where did the money come from?
You're going to mumble, okay, so that's what you mumble.
But then there's this missing fortune of Robert Maxwell
and this fortune of Jeffrey Epstein that we can't explain.
Are those the same fortune?
The conservation of money principle, that if you have a fortune that's missing
and you have a fortune that can't be explained in there connected by Guillain Maxwell?
I don't know.
Why is it that no hedge funds, what is it?
They file form, I forget it, it's 13F.
There's certain forms that you have to file.
Nobody's ever asked for these things.
Who's his prime broker?
Has somebody gone over the prime brokerage?
What are his trades?
He would have to move the market if he was doing a yard of euros or Swiss francs
or who knows what, like a billion, that would move the market.
So there's no way you can fake retroactively a hedge fund of immeasurable size that trades currencies.
I don't think he was a currency trader.
He told me he was a currency trader.
So when you say a construct, who constructs?
Who's the builder?
I don't know.
I would imagine some version of the intelligence community.
You know, sometimes somebody's cover gets blown.
We have a very famous unfortunate story of Ellie Cohn with the Mossad,
where Ellie Cohn was an Egyptian Jew who was fitted with a backstory that he was an Argentinian playboy
who'd made a fortune in Argentina, but was Arabic in origin,
and then he moves to Damascus and he takes out an apartment where he holds orgies
and becomes the best friend of Hafiz al-Assad, right?
And so that's an example of a story we know.
We know how the intelligence communities of the world create people who don't really exist.
I know that this is just a one-time thing here that you got to see,
but the construction of the coffin-looking American flag, the spilling of the coffee,
this weird power play thing that's going on,
that seems, now that you say that it wasn't him even pulling his own strings, perhaps,
it makes a lot more sense, but even that,
that degree of sophistication, I learned this from Daniel Schmacktenberger.
We sat down and he's spent some time with particularly powerful people,
and he told me this really harrowing story of somebody who has both the desire and the means
to treat themselves like an apex predator against their own kind,
and they said so.
They broke the fourth wall about this and said,
apex predators don't care about the prey, but they saw their own kind as prey.
I asked Daniel, how does it feel to sit opposite somebody who isn't rate limited by the resources,
who can not only dream to have this,
plus have the motivation or lack of virtue or integrity to go ahead and consider doing it,
and then has the capacity, the assets to be able to enact it.
It's reminding me, it's giving me this same something.
It feels like it's up on the top of my head.
It's giving me some sort of a sense like that.
This was intended to be terrifying.
It wasn't an accident.
It was intended to be as fascinating as it could possibly be, which it was,
and terrifying at the same time, and it achieved both objectives.
I mean, I was given an opportunity to meet him again.
I didn't know what to do.
I mean, the other thing that I just found really weird is that he knew about my research,
and it turned out that he was connected to my graduate department at Harvard.
So he had a connection to the Harvard Math Department unbeknownst to me.
I don't know when that began.
I know two of the professors he was connected through.
This is some unholy story.
It has nothing to do with Jeffrey Epstein.
It has to do with whatever this thing was.
We tripped over a thing.
We tripped over a structure.
We named the structure Jeffrey Epstein.
It must be very unfortunate in some regards for whoever it was, if that's true,
that was in charge of this construction, that it became that people got t-shirts
with his name printed on them.
This was already going wrong in the early 2000s.
You see, my sense of this is that this was a pre-internet plan
that lived into the internet age and couldn't survive contact with the internet age.
What did the internet bring in that didn't allow it to survive?
Eyeballs, discussion.
Level of surveillance.
There's a claim that nobody cares about Jeffrey Epstein
because it's this many years later and we've all moved on.
That's completely untrue.
We know that it's true because if you start talking about Jeffrey Epstein,
the engagement goes up.
You have these fictions that are put out by mainstream media
or traditional news desks, which is nobody cares about that story.
You can see from social media that that's not true from the internet.
The internet is constantly providing an ability to check
whether or not these claims from inside the structure are true.
Jeffrey Epstein is an example of what I called an anti-interesting phenomenon.
What's that?
Well, an anti-interesting thing is something that would normally be fascinating.
Imagine, for example, you had a story where you could get a Pulitzer Prize for breaking it.
Everybody cares.
You'd sell papers like hotcakes, blah, blah, blah, and nobody wants to report on it.
And it's like right there.
You could just ask the dumbest questions and it would, like,
New York Times says, disgraced financier.
Well, tell me, did you find his prime broker?
Did you find the forms?
Did you go to his offices in Valard House?
No, nobody does, ever.
The story is anti-interesting and it's very different than being uninteresting.
Which would suggest more collusion, more coordination?
Hello?
I mean, see, this is one of the most uncomfortable things.
I think there was a time when mostly when people said collusion or coordination,
their presumption was, well, that's kind of, that's pretty far out there.
We now know, like post Elon Musk's $44 billion adventure at Twitter,
that there are these coordinating groups, coordinating social media with the intelligence
community or with the Department of Homeland Security or with the State Department.
We now know that we're living in an orchestrated, curated, choreographed world.
And we can't know it officially, but we all know it if we want it out.
Which is hysterical.
Now we have to talk about, well, are you a conspiracy theorist?
Like, I read, I read the Slack messages, I read the emails.
What are you even talking about now?
Sanbankman Freed currently being recharged with witness tampering as well.
That to me, fresh charges, releasing, even though he's totally couldn't get in touch with the press,
I think hundreds of phone calls to the press, leaked his ex-girlfriend, allegedly,
leaked his ex-girlfriend's diary entries, so on and so forth.
And, you know, this is a guy that some of my friends were flown to go and see on his island, his portion of an island.
Yeah, his portion, it's very different.
Yeah, okay.
For very different reasons as well.
There seems to be, and you hear about it, they believe they're above the law.
There was this really cool documentary on Netflix called The Murder Dark Murders,
and it was this small town, big family, lots of money, and the kids ran rampant, right?
Classic like Silver Spoon aristocracy bullshit.
But when it gets scaled up this much more, Sanbankman Freed, the biggest alleged financial crime since Bernie Madoff,
allegedly tampering with witnesses, allegedly leaking his ex-girlfriend's diary entries.
And?
Did the rules not apply to everybody?
Certainly they don't.
Why?
We stopped prosecuting all sorts of types of people.
You know, look, we stopped holding hearings.
I grew up in a world where we had the church committee, the pike committee looking at our own intelligence services.
We had Watergate hearings, we had tobacco hearings, we had Iran-Contra hearings.
Do you know how many hearings we need right now?
Where are these things?
It's ridiculous.
We've got weird stuff about UFOs with people making the craziest allegations.
Look, this is just not normal.
We're in totally weird uncharted territory.
What do you make of the recent UAPs, I think, is the new term?
Eric, you need to get up with the times here.
They're not UFOs anymore.
That's the old.
I wasn't even in this game when it was UFOs.
Okay, okay.
So what do you make of the recent UAP stories and attention and response and subsequent response?
I'd like to ask you first.
So I had a look at the first whistleblower from about two months ago quite closely with Andy Stumpf,
who used to have pretty high-level security clearance.
And he explained to me about how unimpressive that particular type of security clearance is, how very common.
Which one?
This is David.
Yes, David.
No, not David Fraver.
No, no, no.
David Fraver was the tic-tac.
Correct.
This is Dave Gurush.
Yes.
Okay.
Very common level of security clearance, that using that as some sort of, oh, this is a legitimate credential.
It doesn't really wash too much.
That it was second, it was third-hand information mostly, second-hand information kind of.
I heard from a person who saw or who heard.
Right.
It just seemed to me to be rather, on the face of it, unimpressive.
That release.
I see.
What did you think?
Well, like I've been telling everybody.
These are highly conserved stories.
This is not the only person I've heard this story from.
I've heard this from multiple people.
There are various versions of this secret world which play out as space opera.
Then MJ-12 became the real government that only, even the president couldn't understand.
It's like, okay.
So that's the weird part about it until you start realizing how sober many of the people are who believe this and who claim to have had direct contact with it.
And then you don't know what to do.
I mean, in other words, whatever this is, there is a thing.
It's not necessarily little green men.
It could be, for example, that they mock up a floating spaceship in a hangar and then they drag people past it and say, whatever you do, do not look to your left or right or you'll be shot.
And then, of course, people look and then like mission accomplished.
Now people will say, oh my God, you have no idea what we, the US has incredible technology.
And then maybe the idea is you've got a cover story.
Maybe you've got your adversary investing in things that don't make any sense.
I don't know.
But there's not nothing here.
This is not about mylar balloons and seagulls anymore.
I'm trying to come up with a word for it, but it's like a, it's like recursive false flags in a way where the goal is not to give or hide truth,
but to fire hose with information so much that the truth can no longer be discerned.
It's a haystack of bullshit to make sure that any needle is very difficult to find.
It is.
Yes.
Bullshit haystacking.
Right.
Yeah.
Okay.
So they haystack the crap out of this thing.
I have no question that there was something that was used to develop US aircraft like the B2 bomber and the SR-71 Blackbird.
So if you see something crazy in the sky, better that you think it's a UFO from outer space than some advanced thing from Lockheed.
I have no question that we use this to deal with things like the Chinese balloon shootdown where we shot down several things in a week and we couldn't recover debris from any of them.
I mean, come on guys.
You know, maybe the idea is that this is a head fake to our adversaries to develop the wrong things and to use their treasure on things that won't work.
Maybe there's a secret program where some of this stuff is actually real and true and we're not allowed to know it because it would be too mind blowing.
Maybe there's a cult inside of our government that has replaced angels with saucer shaped aircraft.
Whatever this thing is, it's being used for many different purposes.
There's something here.
We just don't know what, you know, this is the problem.
The princess can't feel a pee because that would be impossible.
The princess feels a disturbance and you can't say what the disturbance is.
Maybe it's a golf ball.
Maybe it's a cantaloupe.
Maybe it's a banana.
But whatever it is, there's something wrong with the mattress.
Yeah, it seems to me this firehosing, the goal of uncertainty.
Right.
How do things muddle out?
Who wins in a muddle is a great question.
We're not taught to ask.
Sorry to jump in on that.
No, tell me more.
Always look for who is trying to muddle to win.
Very often you're in a dispute with entrenched status quo.
And somebody will say, well, I guess we'll have to agree to disagree on this one.
I'm like, oh, well, who wins if we agree to disagree?
Oh, it's you.
Right?
Yeah.
This is like an old principle of mine, which is that you can always tell who's guilty by who first declares a time of healing.
Why?
Why is that a razor to use?
Oh, because if you do something wrong and the public is clamoring for your blood, you say, there's been too much blame and finger pointing on all sides.
At me.
I think what we need is to come together and declare a time of healing.
For me.
Right.
So I believe that in general, whoever declares a time of healing is suspect number one.
That's a very nice razor to use.
I wonder about this.
Oh, how would you say?
Epidemic of uncertainty.
Brilliant.
Speaking my language.
And I wonder...
How, first off, how as an individual, you are supposed to put up any kind of effective defense to just take some sovereignty being, you know, an agentic individual.
Right.
And secondly, I wonder what the end goal is.
I understand why uncertainty would be useful for manipulation, because if people can't discern truth from untruth, it can be easy to poke them and prod them and float them in particular directions.
But it also seems like, I don't know, kind of also useless as well, that some people, non-insignificant, large cohort of people will just reject it entirely.
Which actually...
What are they doing?
It actually makes it more chaotic and more unruly.
So it makes me think, well, maybe if this is the case, if the firehosing is happening.
Right.
It's epidemic of uncertainty.
Maybe the outcomes were predicted but haven't manifest in the way that was intended.
Maybe there's more of a rebellious streak in...
Say more about that.
I'm trying to understand it.
That if people who...
If you make the public very uncertain about most things by overloading them with information, or by even the...
It doesn't even need to be coordination.
It could be a byproduct of having 24-7 access to the entire world's population through Twitter and Instagram stories and blah, blah, blah.
Right.
There is so much I can no longer discern, even due to a multiplicity of opinions that's not coordinated to be a multiplicity that go in opposite directions.
Right.
If it was coordinated, the outcomes that are occurring at the moment, a lot of the time don't seem to be happening with people.
Just, oh, roll over.
Tell me exactly what to do.
There is a massive, non-insignificant cohort of people that say, I'm checking out and I now no longer trust anybody at all.
Right.
Or anything.
Yes.
And that doesn't seem to be...
If the goal was ease of control, that doesn't seem to be effective for the person that wanted that or the group that wanted that to be the audience.
What's the outcome?
First of all, I'm really glad to get a question about this as a sea change, which is that our lives have become wall-to-wall uncertainty.
We can't discern if the Japanese attacked Pearl Harbor today, we would spend 10 years discussing whether it was a false flag, whether it was actually the Japanese, whether there was any attack, whether it was a soundstage,
whether it was a sigh-up, whether it was a...
Right now, the main institutions of our society have abdicated their role for public-spirited adjudication of what is true based on expertise.
And so what you're seeing is people coming to hate experts and coming to hate institutions because they're realizing that these institutions lie to them at a level that they've never considered unless they were Alex Jones fans to begin with.
And so what you're having is you're having a large number of people waking up to the idea that, yeah, there really are organizations and working groups that determine what you hear from a multiplicity of venues.
It's the same message relentlessly.
Do you think people are overly pattern-matching that now?
Say more about what you mean.
That they're seeing conspiracy weather isn't because the lack of faith in institutions.
Same person is saying that they see a conspiracy and they see no conspiracy.
They have part of their head that remembers that conspiracy theorists are crazy people and they've got part of their brain that remembers that normies who don't believe in conspiracies are crazy people.
And they can't integrate those things, right?
They cannot figure out how are these things being coordinated?
Am I a crazy person for seeing these patterns?
Am I a crazy person for ignoring them?
For believing them?
For when they're unearthed?
What you're seeing is a complete destruction of bedrock reality that if you weren't actually physically there, how do we know that these people actually met in a warehouse?
Is this really a table or is it just CGI?
Was it green and we could superimpose wood onto it?
Nobody knows what's true.
And, you know, if you ask me, well, Eric, how are you dealing with this?
I would say I'm failing.
I'm just flat out failing, as are all of you.
I'm just more honest about it.
Some of you have an idea that you've got one lens, which is fix the money, fix the world.
Bitcoin, that's the answer.
Yeah, Bitcoin, rock on.
But no, that's not the answer.
Or somebody else says, you know, I really think that we just need to be open and tolerant and realize it's a big world and we just have to give people their due.
Well, that doesn't work either.
You can't just let everything run riot or we have to go back to our institutions.
With these people at the helm, are you kidding?
We have to abandon our institution.
Wait, what are you saying?
We're going to abandon our institutions?
Do you know what that looks like?
Nobody has an answer.
Well, get back to talking to Eric in one minute.
But first, I need to tell you about Gymshark.
Gymshark make the best training kit on the planet.
This T-shirt that I've been falling in love with and traveling in for a very long time is phenomenal.
And these shorts, the studio shorts that they make are the best men's training shorts on the planet.
They have lasted me over a year now.
They come in amazing colors.
The length is perfect.
They're sweat wicking.
They're lightweight.
They wash and dry perfectly.
You don't need that many pairs of shorts as a guy, but the ones that you do have need to be very good.
So if you need new gym kit, this is where to go.
I highly, highly recommend that you go and check out everything that I use and recommend from Gymshark.
They've updated my product page with everything that I use and recommend for men and women.
And you can get 10% off everything site-wide with no minimum order.
And they have 30-day free returns worldwide.
You're sounding an awful lot parallel.
The conversation is moving in a similar direction to one I had with Sam Harris recently.
I would think it's very different, but I'm happy to hear more.
He identified on an episode that I did with him not long ago.
The fact that we have lost trust in our institutions and yet abandoning them is also,
wholesale is also not an option.
Sam also tried to say, I can see the problems on the,
I say I can see the problems on the right and I can see the problems on the left.
And there is a group of people who have allowed their irritation with the left
to color their thinking to the point that they don't know what to do.
I think Sam is discounting the idea that once people wake up to the,
to the concept that they were living in an orchestrated Truman show,
that they did not understand.
They're not going to have the idea of like, oh, sure.
The vaccines were a little bit more dangerous.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
I don't know.
The idea of like, oh, sure.
The vaccines were a little bit more dangerous than claimed and maybe a little bit less effective
and maybe we knew a little bit more about the lab lead.
It's no way.
You spat directly in my face and told me not only that it was raining,
but that I was a crazy person for thinking that you spat directly in my face and you piled
up how many Nobel laureates to defend the idea that any inquiry into the origin of this
virus was racism?
It's like, you're dead to me.
And I think that that's what people are not understanding in the Democratic Party.
Increasingly, the basic attitude is whoever this class of people is that crawled into
our elite institutions is just dead.
Like, there's nothing Anthony Fauci could say at this moment that I want to hear.
It's not that I don't think that he doesn't know virology or epidemiology.
I know I can't trust him because of the way in which he looked into my eyes.
And then, you know, when Stephen Colbert is dancing with syringes singing the vaccine
song and Ariana Grande, you know, is in a super highly produced number from like hair
spray but converted to vaccines with a giant picture of Anthony Fauci and everybody celebrating
like it's a May Day celebration, I get it.
I live in a completely fake world and I wrote an article about this in 2011 on K-Fabe,
which is the system of lies that undergirds professional wrestling.
So now you've woken up to the idea that you've spent your life watching something like Major
League Baseball or Premier League Soccer or whatever it is, and it's all fake.
And now you don't know who you are, you don't know what your country is, you don't know
what a ballot box is, you have no idea what news is or media, you don't know what a university
is actually teaching, you've got people running around who are calling themselves scholars
who publish in scholarly journals and sit in scholarly seats and you can tell what
they're saying is completely wrong and it's directly in their area of expertise.
So the thing about pattern matching that I said was, there are still many people who
are scholars, who are in positions of authority inside of high-faluting institutions that presumably
do want to do good and do want to deploy their skills in a way that does this, is it
a case that every single institution is completely wrong or is this reflexive skepticism being
tuned up too highly to the point where there is skepticism about things that don't deserve
it and how do we determine between the two?
Okay, so we have to talk about the institutions that are fighting back.
The future which has become X is not on the same standard that the Facebooks are or Google
is, Elon is doing something different.
We can talk about what?
The University of Chicago is still fighting, my daughter just graduated from the University
of Chicago.
Congratulations.
I never mentioned where she was while she was there.
It needs support.
We have to support the schools that fought back, for example.
I believe Ohio State fought back and there's a school in Oklahoma that fought back and
leading that charge is the University of Chicago.
We have organizations like FIRE that promote free speech.
We have professors who are taking on some risk like Jonathan Haidt, but we're not seeing
the Noam Chomsky effect where you do amazing research and they have to put up with every
crazy idea that comes through your mind.
That's important.
Look up a person named Serge Lang in mathematics and something called the file to understand
how dangerous it is to screw with real scholars.
What happens?
Give us the 30,000 foot view.
People tried to put Sam Huntington into the National Academy of Sciences who was an architect
of the Vietnam War and Serge Lang just said, I look through his papers, I find the following
mathematical statements.
This is not science.
Why is this person in the academy?
Then they fight back.
I fought back with Serge Lang when he was at Harvard where we tried to engage Sam Huntington
on that topic.
You can't have these dangerous people running around.
That's why all of us are discredited.
You haven't noticed this, but like Jordan Peterson is discredited, Sam Harris is discredited,
Joe Rogan is discredited, Brett Weinstein is discredited, Ben Shapiro is discredited,
Barry Weiss is discredited.
Everybody is discredited.
Tim Pool referred to it as the IDW's walking corpse phase at the moment.
Well, my point is this personal destruction is the coin of the realm.
Some of the personal destruction that you see that looks organic is orchestrated as
well.
We're just in this thing where, in my opinion, what you're looking at is something called
de-confliction, but people don't know what that is.
De-confliction is supposed to stop what are called blue-on-blue incidences.
Blue-on-blue incidences, you have two branches of government that don't know that they're
operating covertly.
Maybe you have an investigative team and an undercover team, and the investigative team
is about to blow the cover thinking that they've got a target, but it's actually an
undercover agent.
What they're supposed to do is they're supposed to check in with these centralized systems
and say, do you have any assets in this arena we're about to move?
Yes, we do.
Oh, okay.
They find out, and this is supposed to stop blue-on-blue.
The interesting thing is, even though there are three systems called safety net, RIS safe,
and case explorer, you can't use them unless you are an official part of the government.
I called up one of them, had a half an hour conversation before I started asking about
Jeffrey Epstein, and then they immediately said this call will be terminated in five seconds.
Maybe it was case explorer for South Florida, something like that.
What happens when you have a civilian that's not signed up for nondisclosure under no rules?
You're an American citizen with full right to free speech, and you stumble on something
that you're not supposed to know about.
That is a deconfliction problem that nobody has ever solved.
The first thing I'd like to throw out is if we have three separate systems to keep the
intelligence community and local police departments from tripping over each other, what do you
think we do when ordinary citizens get wind of something amiss that's some super-secret
operation?
My claim is, we discredit them.
We pre-bunk them in the language of the GEC, I believe.
We're all familiar with debunking misinformation and disinformation.
You've got some disinformation that's spread it around, and we debunk it by giving you
the truth.
What happens when somebody is spreading the truth in a way that is unhelpful to a statecraft
level narrative?
Well, we didn't know what the words were, but we just found out, and it's you pre-bunk
the malinformation.
Now, if you didn't grow up knowing what malinformation is, here's a quick refresher.
Malinformation is actual information, but it's harmful.
Right.
The equivalent of politically incorrect incarnation.
Well, or you're trying to make sure that there's support for the war in Ukraine, and
somebody actually realizes that things are much more desperate than they thought.
Well, that would be deleterious to our efforts if the objective is to get Putin to capitulate.
Now you have to pre-bunk the malinformation, which means destroy the reputation of the
person spreading the information that's countering the official disinformation and misinformation.
I can't work out why anybody's confused and why they're having trouble existing in the
state and school kids.
The point is, I've got all of these friends who are pre-bunked malinformers.
That's what a club.
What a club to be in.
That's what I do.
I'm a pre-bunked malinformant.
There's never been a sexier title, actually.
I spread malinformation, and I need to be pre-bunked.
So of course, I'm going to be a grifter.
I'm going to be, I don't know, a charlatan.
I'm going to, well, he's over.
Can we stop trying to make Eric Weinstein a thing?
Blah, blah, blah.
There's giant farms of people in bots that are dedicated to spreading bad feelings about
anybody who's going to contradict narrative.
Well, don't forget as well that the coordination doesn't necessarily need to be there because
the incentives align online for...
There's an emergent part.
There's a non-emergent part.
I will not agree with anyone who tells me it's all one or all the other, but part of
this is actually coordinated.
Yeah.
So, close that loop on the agentic, sovereign individual existing in the world.
Holy fuck.
I'm getting bookockied with this total awfulness of information here.
Bookocky just means splattered in Japanese.
That's why it's not a terrible term to use.
Absolutely not.
Thank you.
It's actually been appropriated by the adult industry in a way that I think the Japanese
should reclaim.
And Melissa Chen has probably done more to popularize this in intellectual circles than
anyone else.
So, shout out to Miss Melissa Chen.
Melissa Chen and Bookocky in the same sense and something that we weren't expecting today.
I think there was a period of her life where she would use it in every public appearance.
Just sneak it in.
Right.
Okay.
The Bookocky of the gaps.
So, anyway, you have a situation where nobody knows what's going on.
And I don't think Sam is comfortable, by the way, being here.
Like, you're in open water.
And you have all of these instructions about what to do when you're swimming in your land,
which is, you know, try to align yourself with the shore.
Don't fight the current.
And like, that's not where you are.
You're just in open water.
And you're treading water and you don't know whether there are oceanic white tips around
and you don't know whether you can keep this up for much longer.
But there is no land.
There's a big difference with Sam.
Go a little deeper.
Make that a little planer for me.
You cannot trust Harvard or nature.
You cannot trust the Office of Management and Budget or the Lancet or the Lancet or
the Bureau of Labor Statistics.
You cannot trust any newspaper that I'm aware.
You cannot trust the CDC or the NIH or the WHO.
Now, people will hear that and they'll say, oh my God, Eric, you're spreading distrust
and fear.
It's like, I'm a pastor.
Shoot the messenger all you want.
All of those institutions are out of control and we all know it.
And say-
And it's highly out of control?
No.
Mostly out of control.
I did this on trigonometry.
We have this anti-institutional point.
How is it that the airlines can't keep my seat clean and can't make sure that I'm able
to recline it properly or that the Wi-Fi doesn't go out and then their planes never crash?
So the institutions are functioning and not functioning.
They're lying and telling the truth.
They're getting it done and failing outright over and over again.
And it's even worse because if the planes crashed all the time and you'd say, okay,
well, these people are incompetent.
But it's like the selective incompetence and madness.
And what I think is, is that Sam wanted to treat this as, look, it's pretty annoying
what's going on on the left and it's pretty annoying what's going on with the institutions.
But let's not lose sight of the fact, January 6th.
People don't feel that way.
People feel like, wait a minute, I don't know which end is up.
I don't know who's telling me the truth anymore.
I can spot these lies that are so transparent.
And this is the theory of lies as a checksum.
So when you get a binary for a computer program that you want to install on your computer,
you want to know, well, is this what came from Microsoft or did somebody adulterate
it?
And when I click on this thing, it's going to install ransomware on my machine.
So there's something called a checksum, which is generated by how the program was compiled
and it would be almost impossible to come up with a second program that would generate
the same checksum.
Verification.
Yeah.
If the checksum is off, I don't install the thing and the checksums are all off.
And that's why people are going crazy.
And that's why, to your earlier point, isn't it interesting that we're not talking about
the level of uncertainty, right?
This is not sustainable.
So Sam is 100% correct on a lot of things that people are making fun of him for.
And I assume that I will be keel hauled all over Twitter for saying this.
You cannot have a world without institutions.
We're not built for it.
We're just, there's no part of you that is prepared to generate all your own electricity
and, you know, kill all your own game and get your own clean water.
You need an army.
You need a police department.
You can only play frontier, you know, Wild West so long before you realize that modern
life can't be supported this way.
And we can't go with the institutions we have.
So we need institutions.
We can't go with these institutions, not because the institutions are wrong, but because the
inhabitants are wrong to a person they've been selected for by this ability to lie because
growth evaporated.
That's one of my main rifts.
We don't have to go into it, but basically that in the absence of real growth, everything
turns pathological.
And so it's just heartbreaking to see some of these people saying, look, we've always
known that the institutions were wrong.
We finally have the ability to prove that let's tear them all down.
So that's a very popular perspective at the moment.
Other people want to claim, let's cling to the institutions because we know we need them
and we'll look past the fact that they're obviously lying about almost everything of
importance.
That's not really tenable.
We can't vote these people out because like Diane Feinstein could beat me easily in a run
for Senate.
I don't know why because the machine is stronger than actually the vision we had for democracy.
So we've got Mitch McConnell having a temporary ischemic attack on camera.
We've got somebody post-stroke in Pennsylvania having defeated Mehmet Oz.
We've got Diane Feinstein.
We've got Nancy Pelosi trading up a storm.
We can't get rid of any of these people.
Joe Biden is way too old for this job and has been in government since he was 29 in 1972
when he won his Senate seat.
This is a joke.
It's beyond preposterous.
And by the way, it comes out of not loving your children.
How's that?
People who love their children don't drill holes in their children's life raft.
And the modern world at post-World War II was a life raft to get us to the next stage.
And the number of older people I see liquidating everything so that they can live out their
final days in the same style to which they've become accustomed is impossible in a world
where people love their children.
Yeah, I don't think they care.
You familiar with Toby Ord's analogy of the precipice?
No, Toby.
Really cool.
So his book, The Precipice, that everybody should go and read, it's my best primer on
existential risk.
Toby Ord's from the Future of Humanity Institute at Oxford with Nick Bostrom and he's a colleague
of William McCaskill, long-termism, EA, et cetera.
He uses this example of, you can imagine, on a journey, a particular individual getting
to a beautiful, lush, abundant meadow would have to take a treacherous mountain path.
And along this mountain path, there is a particularly thin, small, steep, sharp, uncertain, unstable
part of it.
That's the precipice.
And he talks about, I like to think about it like an hourglass, you have width with
room and then you have a choke point.
And at that choke point, things can get dicey.
And it's Toby's contention that if we make it through this precipice, you broaden out
and you have the meadow, you are a multi-planetary species, you have redundancy, genetically
redundancy, civilizationally, you have overcome some of the limitations of the castoffs from
your energy production and consumption.
You don't have value lock-in in a bad way that means that it's despots all the way down
or it's tyrants all the way down.
I assume that I hear you.
Yep.
Where do you think we are?
It feels very precipice.
Yeah, doesn't it?
Yeah.
What's more, as one of the only people who are really seriously hitting this multi-planetary
note, there is no interest in this.
From who?
I'm interested.
Are you?
Fuck yeah.
Don't I count, Eric?
All right.
Am I not legitimate in the future of this civilization's direction?
What are your best stories for how we become interplanetary?
I say it because you brought it up.
Stories or strategies?
Stories about how we get to be interplanetary.
I'm not sure what you mean by story.
Tell me a story by which we have 10 planets that humans have settled.
If you want to do 10, we're going to have to go to planets that are outside of the solar
system.
Right.
There's this one which is really troubling.
Mars is really screwing up this whole story because Elon has gotten everybody focused
on Mars and it's a marginal planet that would be very difficult to get to using chemical
rockets and it's not a stepping stone because once you master Mars, if, if, if, which we're
not going to do, it doesn't really get you anywhere.
It's just Mars.
So Avi Loeb, new book that recently came out, Interstellar, spoke to him last week about
it.
He asked him about this.
I said, um, do, will we ever visit other galaxies?
And he made this cop out answer of saying, well, Andromeda is going to crash into the
Milky Way.
I was like, that doesn't count.
Avi, we can't blend two together and say that we've been there.
Right.
Um, and he's talking about, uh, interstellar travel, right?
From here to Proxima Santori, pick, pick your other star, right?
They are trying at some point in the not too distant future to do the light sail laser
pointed added thing.
Maybe we can, and this was me asking him, uh, my conception was generation ships, you
know, you and the next 500 generations of your progeny, you condemn them to be locked
in this tin box and it's group sex and, and plants and CO2 for the next however long until
you get to Proxima Santori, hope that it's not totally wrecked.
This point was light sail, uh, desktop DNA sequencer, artificial womb, send it out.
You guys are being ridiculous.
It's, it's a thought.
This is my story.
I know.
This is my story.
Okay.
This is my story and I'm allowed to tell my story, but it's exactly why I wanted it.
If I could, it just to riff, okay.
It's an innervating story.
What's that?
We're not energized by this story, except for the, except for the group sex and the
plants, right?
Yep.
So the issue is, if we could sprinkle some Bukaki in there, everybody would get on board
a Melissa champ.
Moving, moving, moving at light speed, um, what we're doing is that we're telling people
we've crawled inside our modern theories and our modern theories make our imaginations
our enemy.
We're not excited about the, we don't really believe that we're going to open a wormhole
we don't really believe in multi-generation ships.
We don't believe that we're going to reboot from tardigrades.
We don't believe that we're going to scan all of our synapses and reconstruct the brain,
uh, from the beginning.
Einstein is the problem.
Now I know Avi decently well and Avi for the Galileo project that he's heading up, doesn't
want people to consider new physics.
So whenever I speak at all as somebody affiliated with the Galileo project with wearing that
hat, I don't think about new physics at all.
I accept the constraints of the physics we know.
Yes.
Yes.
Yes.
When I take that hat off, it's all about new physics.
It's not about new technology using the old physics and the way you can measure whether
people are serious about interplanetary is how much they're focused on new physics.
Anybody who isn't focused on new physics is not serious about interplanetary.
Is this because with the current conception of physics that we have, it's going to be
essentially impossible for us to go into planetary?
Yeah.
And the word essentially is doing some work there.
And so what you get is you get these innervating workarounds like, oh, if we use time dilation
if we went really fast, then it wouldn't be that fast.
Can you just explain the word innovating, please?
Do you mean as an innovation, or is this ER?
No.
Innervating.
What's that?
Means to lessen in potency, to sort of discourage and as long as I have to do things that don't
involve me cruising to new planets and taking in the, oh, it'd be your great, great, great,
great, great, great, great, to the 12,000 power grandchild who actually sees a new planet,
that's not going to work.
Or you're going to open a wormhole, or you're going to have an Alcubierre drive,
all of these sorts of things discourage us. And we know that we're telling lies about it.
And so we don't work on it. You want to know how to work on this?
We're abandoning the one field that has the chance of making us interplanetary.
And I don't know what to do about it because nobody sees this as the emergency I do.
We'll get back to talking to Eric in one minute, but first I need to tell you about cozy earth.
Look, we spend one third of our lives asleep. You do not want to spend 33% of your existence
inside of sheets that do not make you feel amazing. Cozy Earth has the best quality
bedding. It's not just about what you sleep on, it is what you sleep under. And the quality of
your sheets make a massive difference to the quality of your sleep. Sleep is the ultimate
game changer and improving your sheets will improve your sleep quality. Cozy Earth is a
premium bedding and loungewear company where they make the best quality bedwear. The products are
made from super soft viscose from highly sustainable bamboo, the temperature regulating, so you'll
sleep cool all year round. Best of all, they've got a 10 year warranty on all of their products.
That's how confident they are that they'll last. You can get an exclusive 35% discount
site-wide on everything from Cozy Earth by going to cozyearth.com slash modernwisdom and using the
code modernwisdom35 at checkout. Cozyearth.com slash modernwisdom and modernwisdom at checkout.
Okay, so let me see if I can get the topology of what you've said right.
The fact that Mars is within reach broadly and chemical rockets.
Correct. Of current technology, of current physics. And we do it. Hooray.
Super hard. We did it. Interplanetary. Right.
But your point is that, well, it seems like that is insufficient and also kind of like a
false duck type scenario where we did it, but we didn't actually do the thing we needed to do.
So we may have even been better off had the nearest closest planet been two light years away.
Assume Mars didn't exist. Correct. And assume that Elon was still the visionary
that we want him to be. And he didn't have a chemical rocket company. I'd like to think
that he would be focused on physics. I would like to think that any of these people would be
focused on physics. Take anybody with 11 figures. What is your allocation to building a life raft
to get humans out of here? You don't, you haven't even thought about it.
Immediately you're going to think technology. Well, what kind of a whole would I need? It's
like, no, you need a blackboard. You need blackboards and physicists who are not afraid
to do physics. Right now we are destroying the fundamental physics community at a rate that
you could not believe. What's happening? Give me the gossip from inside.
For 39 years, we've been dominated by one community's madness. And that community is
called quantum gravity, string theory or M theory. It changed what we were researching.
It's cardinal sin is not about string theory. It's not about quantum gravity. It changed the
questions that defined what it meant to be a fundamental physicist. So if I say to you,
how many generations of matter are there? I don't know. You don't know that it's three
because we don't talk about that all the time anymore. Or if I say, do you know why is matter
chiral? You wouldn't know about that. Or if I said, what's the nature of the quartic potential
for the Higgs field? Or why is there a Yukawa coupling in one case and a minimal coupling somewhere
else? All of the real physics questions that would cause progress got subtly replaced between
1984 and like 1987. And then we had questions like, how do we quantize gravity? And that became this,
oh, that is the ultimate question. Well, it's not. That's just wrong. This comes out of Bryce
DeWitt. This comes out of a guy who in 1952 went with his wife to the Tata Institute of Fundamental
Research in Bombay, then wrote an essay for something called the Gravity Research Foundation
that was about anti-gravity. And he was supposed to write an essay and then he said, well, to get
anti-gravity, what you'd really need to do is to do quantum gravity. And for 70 years, we've been
trying to do quantum gravity and it's an abject failure. And the physicists at the helm changed
the questions. The official questions should sound something like this. Why are there three
generations of matter? Why is it flavor chiral? What is the nature and the origin of the Higgs
mechanism? Why are we in one comma three dimensions? And what is with SU3 cross SU2 cross U1, which is
a bunch of symmetries? And why does it seem to represent on a 16 dimensional space with the
observed quantum numbers? That may not mean a lot to you. But I guarantee you, if there are
physicists in the audience, they're getting pissed off right now because they allowed their
subject to be dragged away from our real questions for reasons that are unclear and put in the service
of these questions that can't be answered. And we can't even question them 39 years into this
complete train wreck that is the community that could build the life raft. What is so seductive
about quantum everything? Quantum gravity? Yeah. It allows for toy problems so that you can not do
your work on the world that we have. And you can say, well, world that we have is too complicated.
So I created this fake world over here that's not in four dimensions. It's in two dimensions. It's
not in Lorentzian signature. It's in Euclidean signature. It's not the full gauge group. It's
just SU2. And I've changed all the parameters. And then I say, and I've made some minor incremental
progress in that fake world. And then everybody claps. And meanwhile, 10 years later, you don't
even remember what the particles are that are present in the universe. You don't even remember
the standard model of particle theory. And this is a very real effect. Today's physicists, a lot
of the young ones are completely ignorant about the physical world. They could not find the men's
or women's room at CERN if their life depended on it. Yeah, so it seems like a hijacking of attention
and focus from difficult problems to from useful difficult problems to useless or less useful
easier problems. But if you try to talk about the real problems, you can't get engagement. And
they will say it as, well, maybe people just aren't interested in your ideas. I was like,
yeah, but you're not listening to it. So far as I can tell, everybody who comes from outside with
an interesting new idea isn't being listened to. It's not personal. And we also have a responsibility.
This is like, this is a really crazy part. We doomed humanity.
Like Francis Crick, who was a co-discoverer of the three dimensional structure of DNA,
was a physicist. Edward Teller was a physicist. Stanislav Ulam was a geometer.
We doomed humanity on Earth. And then we're treating science as if, oh, it's a series of puzzles.
Well, what do you want to work on today? Well, I don't want to be arrogant. I'll just work on
this tiny little problem. And I'm just thinking like, do you not feel any basic responsibility
after Hiroshima and Nagasaki and COVID? All right. Just how crazy are you?
Is that, you know, we've spoken about the interplanetary
challenge. Right. And the fact that physics needs to make some progress in order to facilitate that
if we're going to do it. Yeah. Is, in your opinion, forgetting the fact that chemical
rockets, limitations, all that sort of stuff, is going into planetary as useful. Is it the
highest priority? The highest priority. You cannot stabilize this place.
Just imagine every communalist dream came true. We turned away from fossil fuels towards a,
the greenest new deal you could possibly imagine. All billionaires realized the errors of their ways
and contributed their money to bring up the poorest of the poor. AI was as beneficial as
it could be and only helped humanity to live its dream. Just go full wild, polyana optimism.
You still can't stabilize it. Why?
Too many people. Not for long. Say more.
Not for long. Population rates, birth rates at the moment.
We're talking at totally different scales. I'm telling you that with
CRISPR-Cas9, with the Teller ULAM design. IVG.
IVG. You know IVG? IVF, but being able to use from any other, yep.
I was trying to think in a different context.
You are going to have
people, what happens when you distribute the coronavirus because everybody's had it? You've
had it? I got an antibody test and I had it, but never felt it. You have this platform,
this viral platform that's spread all over the world and you have the ability to edit it.
Are you telling me that people aren't going to figure out how to come up with fun viruses and
gain a function projects and people are going to be able to do these,
polymerase chain reaction I think was taught in my daughter's high school?
Are you familiar with Nick Bostrom's balls from the urn analogy?
Yeah, vaguely.
Yeah. For the people that don't know, you can imagine that you have an urn and each time that
you make technological progress, you pick a ball out and you don't know what color. Some are white,
perfectly good. Some are gray, a bit of good, a bit of bad and some are all the way down to
black and black is permanent, unrecoverable collapse. And the unrecoverable bit is important.
And each time we just keep picking out balls.
So my take on it is there's already too much leverage, too much leverage, too little wisdom,
too many people.
What was it that you once said, we are gods, but for the wisdom we're just shitty gods?
I don't know if I said the second part, but I guess when I heard the story about this kid who
scavenged the americium from all of these smoke detectors in Brooklyn and built a self-sustaining
nuclear reactor from these tiny little radioactive strips, you don't know what people's creativity is.
You know, I found it fascinating when I was growing up that I was the only kid who knew
that gunpowder or black powder was 75% potassium nitrate, 10% sulfur, and 15% carbon.
Like you could just make it, you know? And that's the recipe. And that just blew my mind
the rate limiting step was that people didn't know that potassium nitrate was saltpeter or
where to get it, like meat tenderizer. But mostly we're saved from this stuff because nobody's so
sociopathic and competent that they go for these high leverage attacks. That's going to end.
You know, that was like what happened on 9-11. I always wanted to know why were little kids
allowed to go into the cockpit of a plane? You used to be able to meet the pilot. I remember
doing it. Yeah. So that's where we are now is that we've got all this high leverage stuff
and you're going to see nuclear proliferation. Eventually you're going to get some
desperate backed into a corner who says, well, this is my only move. Well, I mean,
for the nuclear concernists out there, at least what I know, wouldn't that be all of us? Everybody
is concerned, but for the people that are nuclear war is a genuine X risk, permanent
unrecoverable collapse. You can set them all off unless there's like 10 to 100 times more than we
think that we have, which they're very well could be. It seems difficult for it to be permanent
unrecoverable collapse for me as a true, true, true, true X risk. May I say something? Yeah.
This is ridiculous. It's bad enough that it would completely transform life as we know it.
You would agree with that. Absolutely. Absolutely. It's time to get serious about
things we can actually do. And the most interesting thing is that nobody's interested
in interplanetary physics. I've never seen anything like it.
Interplanetary physics would be physics in service of us becoming interplanetary,
or is there something specific about the way that planets figure together?
No, no, no. It's about... Let me give you an analogy that's more than an analogy.
Assume that somebody hands you a physical paper map, an enormous one. And you're trying to navigate
it on this table that we have here. You're starting to do motions like this,
where you're moving the paper across the table to get from Los Angeles to Fresno,
California, if it's at the right scale. And it might take you a long time to do that.
Okay, but now you have somebody trained on an iPad. What are they going to do?
Well, they might do that, but that's not the key thing they're going to do.
They're going to do what is called multi-touch gestures. And the one that you're thinking of
should be pinch to zoom. So the most natural way to do this is to treat it not as if it's
a paper map, but a stack of paper maps. And you want to go to the one with a different scale.
If you were doing this on an iPad that was mirroring this, the key point is that the paper map
doesn't have an extra dimension to play with. But the pinch to zoom dimension is a scale dimension.
So imagine what you did instead was you looked at your house, you pinched to zoom out,
you then do this motion or whatever it is to get to your friend's house. And then when you land
there, you expand it again. Imagine that you only know about paper maps, but your adversary has an
iPad. That's what I'm worried about. We're not looking for pinch to zoom.
What would that be in this?
Well, I claim that there are going to be 10 extra coordinates. And four of them
are pinched to zoom. And six of them are what I would call
shear to tilt. So imagine that you have a copy of a picture of the Leaning Tower of Pisa on your
iPad. You should be able to do something in paint, which changes the angle. So if you go
into MS Paint, there's this little thing that allows you to change by a particular angle.
But you could do that as a gesture. So my claim is if you have four dimensions of time
and x, y, and z of space, you have pinched to zoom on all four of those. And then for any two
dimensions like x and z, you have shear to tilt. So the first are the four rulers. And the next
are the six protractors. And that's something called a symmetric two tensor or a metric,
which Einstein knew all about, but he only chose one through his equations. And he let
all the other ones lie fallow. And my claim is I don't think that's where we are. I think that
interplanetary physics is going to involve moving from what we called spacetime to something called
the observers, which contains pinched to zoom and shear to tilt. And you want to get off this
planet, you're not going to get there using general relativity, and you're not going to get
there using the standard model, it's time to take your pacifier out of your mouth and go back to
doing real physics. I think if we were serious about this, we would be struggling with the physics
of the world in which we live, not toy models, we'd be taking massive risks and listening to people
from various perspectives who haven't failed or have not been invited to fully explain their ideas.
And we'd be looking for things that would be new, new variables, new ways of working with the world
that allowed us to do things that were previously considered inconceivable. So if you look at 1911,
which is when I think Rutherford first starts talking about the neutron as a hypothesis,
it's 41 years later, we have the hydrogen bomb. We can do incredible things that are not possible
yet, because we don't know the framework. And my claim is, if you imagine somebody used to
paper maps being put on an iPad, and not knowing about multi-touch gestures, that is pretty much
an exact analogy of what happens when you do too much general relativity,
is that you start to think in general relativistic terms as if that's the last word.
Einstein would never have put up with that.
That's a question you've mentioned, Einstein, a couple of times today.
The most famous physicist of all time. How different do you think the landscape of physics
would be had Einstein lived for another decade? Just how good was he?
He was that good. The rare situation in which the man and the myth are roughly at the right level,
the same level. I don't think you could solve the puzzle of theoretical physics
and a final theory before the mid-1970s. We just didn't know enough.
In particular, quarks in 1968, you needed confirmation, because they're not obvious
in the world. They're stuck inside of protons and neutrons. And if you thought that protons
and neutrons were fundamental, you wouldn't be in contention. I would say that the first time
you could really guess the answer would be around 1975. I don't think Einstein was in the position
to guess the answer. I think he was very caught up in a Romanian framework, which is that you
deal only with length, angle, and the curvature of the space in which you live. There's a more
modern viewpoint on this that he could have understood. I don't know to what extent he
showed any recognition of it, but a lot of his thinking was really well suited for the world
in which he lived, where he could do these thought experiments in his mind about falling
elevators or train cars or whatever. You know, Dirac was every bit Einstein's equal.
We don't know how to interact with Dirac, because Dirac was so strange. Einstein kept
throwing off wisdom at an incredible rate. If you read ideas and opinions or out of my later
years, you have an idea of just what a sage this person was, even when he's screwing things up and
making mistakes. It's all sage-like. Dirac was the singular human being, and occasionally he says
something about life. I think when he was given a Nobel Prize, I think shared with Schrodinger,
he's given two speeches. He uses his lunchtime speech to talk about the bond market and the
importance of using the toolkit of physics within any sphere that is numbers-based.
We don't really know much about Dirac's views on humanity. We know about his beautiful aesthetic
of the quantum. He gave the quantum poetry. I think that right now, it's up to us. They're
not here right now. It's time to make guesses. I'm very partial to an example which happened
on the Wheel of Fortune program. Fold this into the cutting edge of physics.
Sure. I'm waiting. Okay. There's a guy named Ken Wilson who's discouraged all modern physicists
from making guesses about the ultimate theory because he taught us that you can only observe
the world at the energy scale that you're at. You and I are in a classical world. We don't see
the quantum. On Wheel of Fortune, there was a puzzle. It said, okay, Fraser expression,
there's one apostrophe in the first word with three letters, and it's a long answer,
and person guesses R, and there are no Rs. Then I think that goes to the next woman.
I think she guesses N. Oh, yes, there's one N, and she says, okay, I'd like to solve.
The host looks at her incredulously like, well, I guess you could try to solve. She says,
I will always remember this. I've got a good feeling about this, and it was right.
You'd never guess that there was enough information for a solve.
Whatever we have is what we've got. It's time to solve the puzzle.
What would that look like?
Ask somebody else. I try to solve this. I've got a theory, but Peter Wojt has a theory.
I'd like to hear what the string theory think their theory is. I'd like to understand where
asymptotic safety is. Everybody who's got a theory, whether it's David Deutch or Julian Barbour
or Garrett Lisey, needs to come to a conference. Somebody needs to hold a conference and say,
who can solve this puzzle? Let's put the sword in the stone, and let's let everybody try to
pull it out, because now is the time. The idea that we're not doing this and that we're letting
this community that has run itself into the ground continue to adjudicate what is physics,
it's like, you boys haven't really done anything in N years. You're not the arbiters of what is
science and what isn't. You've allowed this madness to creep into your university departments.
You're signing loyalty oaths. I have physics professors telling me that their boss is some
dean who writes to them about what they posted on social media. It's like, no, you're the boss.
You, the professors are the soul of the university. Stop sucking your thumb. Stand up for what it is
that you're supposed to be standing up for, which is excellence and research. Kick the people out
who don't belong there, and invite the people in who do, and let's get on with it. It's just,
I couldn't be more angry about anything else in the world. How can you take the lifeboat community,
the only community that can get us a way out of here and run it into the ground?
I like the term the lifeboat community.
It's time to save everybody, and we've got huge responsibilities. We carry a lot of responsibility
for getting everybody into this mess, and now we've got to offer everybody a way out.
Yeah, it seems, I don't know. I don't know the inner workings or the machinations of the physics
world, but the first time I ever spoke to Sabine Hossenfelder, she explained to me that physics is
as much about politics as it is about physics. In bad eras, that becomes more true. Sabine's
entire career has taken place inside of the stagnation, and she's like one of these
truth-telling people. I think she's basically truthful. I disagree with a lot of stuff that
I don't like that she, I think she does, which is a disservice to the community,
but she is truthful that this community is off the rails.
Moving from physics to something that you mentioned there, poetry, your cover photo on
Twitter was the first thing that we actually ever connected about long, long, long time ago,
and I'd just been to the Sagrada Familia. So I went for the first time to a wedding,
a friend's wedding that he was holding on the outskirts, and it was very enjoyable.
I had known about this building, I had read about it, I had seen all of the videos,
and it's your cover photo. First off, why? And then secondly, what does it mean to you?
What does this Sagrada Familia mean to you? I'm dying to hear, obviously we know it's important
in my life. I don't know whether it had an importance in yours.
Beyond beauty, no. It has no greater meaning to me than that. But one of the lessons that I did
learn was, there's that quote about humanity will flourish when men plant trees under which
they will never sit, something along those lines. And that's the first time that I've ever seen
a purely joyful expression, architecturally, artistically, that was created with the intense
intent purpose that that would be the end goal, that this is a, where are we at now,
in construction, 70 years, nearly 100 now? How many? I don't know. But it's a lot.
Still going. Yeah. So it's not done. And I think it's-
And we can't even figure out what his vision is. So we've allowed other people
to put their vision- Step in and- Yeah. Because there's only one of him,
Gaudi. Okay. The ceiling of that thing, to me, is transcendence.
You can't even believe it's real. There are things in this world
that remind you of the transcendent in all of us, that it's possible.
I can think of particular pieces of music or poems or pieces of architecture. I was just
inside the blue mosque in Istanbul, which is a few feet from Hagia Sophia. And the
interior of these two structures just are mind-blowing. And La Sagrada Familia,
I mean, these are religions that I'm not a part of.
If you're talking about the sacred family and you have a skylights to heaven,
how better to honor the creator, whether the creator exists or not,
than with genius and elegance and grace and humility and arrogance and everything that
went into that ceiling. That ceiling is like nothing else I've ever seen.
And you can touch- Sam Harris is famous for saying that you can either learn how to meditate
or I can give you a few micrograms of the substance and you're gonna have a profound
experience. Well, okay, just getting back from Sao Miguel and the Azores,
you could take LSD or DMT or you could go to Sao Miguel. I mean, it's just crazy
that there is that much beauty on earth. And I guess that space is something that I wanted
people to understand. When I named the show the portal and people did not understand,
it wasn't intended to be a show. It's intended to be a search for the actual portal out of here.
It's an attempt to find pinch to zoom. I believe that we are not doomed here,
but that we have developed this very weird focus on psychology. To challenge Einstein
is almost seen as arrogance. And yet, if Einstein is to survive as a legacy,
it's only going to be because somebody basically undermined general relativity status as a
fundamental theory because we're not going to make it. And I'm trying to remind people
in a world that now, like you can look up on Twitter, say lone genius theory,
people don't believe in the lone genius theory.
Well, then what was Gaudi? What was Dirac? What was Einstein? What was Yang?
What was Emmy Nerder? Somebody tell me why I have all of these lone geniuses in my life.
And aren't we supposed to be doing that and thinking that that's admirable?
I think we're supposed to be building the theory that can realize that the ceiling
of La Crada Familia is a portal. We're supposed to inspire ourselves with beauty and luxury.
We're not supposed to consume it to pig out for status reasons. We're supposed to get ourselves
into a state where we can dream at an interplanetary level. A lot of the things that we've spoken about
today are to do with cerebral horsepower, cognition, the difficult things that need
to be done in the head. And yet you're talking here about the transcendent. You're talking about
something which is embodied, which is spiritual by whichever definition of the word you want to use.
Do you find in yourself as somebody who does rely on cerebral horsepower for a lot of the
things that you try to do and presumably takes pride in your ability to have workout problems,
have thoughts? Do you feel attention in yourself between the transcendent, the relinquishing,
the embodied, and the cerebral, the cognitive, the purposeful on that side?
You know, I have a dumb expression which I don't use in public and I'm sure I'll be castigated for it.
Yeah, brilliant. But it's head, heart, and loins.
If it doesn't speak to your head, heart, and your loins, leave it for someone else.
What's that mean? How do you enact that?
You have to try to realize that these things have to be balanced and tempered.
You don't want to live by your heart. Just every time, you know, you see a daffodil blowing its
seeds into the wind, you'll be transported and you'll stop paying your electric bills.
And you don't want to be led around by your loins. That's not going to end well.
And you don't want to be led around by your head, too, because then you'll get yourself
into one of these cul-de-sacs and you won't even realize that you can't think your way out of it.
You were given all of these facilities and motivations.
How do you pull yourself from head to heart?
Well, you brought this guitar.
A Gitalely.
A Gitalely.
It's just on your right. Grab it. Show it to everybody.
So I don't, I do not play the Gitalely.
I don't think anybody actually technically does play the Gitalely.
It's like a guitar that's too small for your fingers.
Yes. You've got your pixel in it.
So you take some piece of music that actually means something to you, right?
And one thing that I remember hearing when I was growing up was this.
So it's the Asturias of Isaac Albanese. It was originally written for piano.
And you see sort of these things on Ud where you have a tremolo.
You've got two, two fingers playing the open B string,
and then you've got this melody which is played with the thumb.
So the combination of these things produces this different effect.
I can't really get my fingers in there.
And then I started thinking about, okay, well, that's a great effect.
What if we tried to write and to create using the same idea?
And I started,
so.
So that's not the same song, but it's using some of the same techniques about
just getting these things to ring out and to get the melody going on the bass line.
And then you have to forget this. Now, you know, if I was able to play this properly,
and I'm sorry if I'm embarrassing myself, you're trying to do this thing where you're
recognizing that the transcendent lives in particular structures,
that they elicit this feeling, and that we have this opportunity to go back and forth
between the analytic description. If I'm thinking about this, I can't really feel it.
And if I'm feeling it, I can't really figure out how to use it or think about it or compose with it.
And so, you know, to me, what we're trying to do is we're trying to
camp and de-camp. Well, that spoke to my head and my loins, but it didn't speak to my heart.
Or that spoke to two out of three. We need ultimately to be fully embodied. And that's a
challenge. And we have to, we either accept the challenge or we don't accept the challenge.
And we have to go back and forth between these lenses. You can't necessarily
be in the same, you know, if you see your child and you're a physician or surgeon,
you could see your child as a bunch of tissue hooked up to itself, you know? And that's important
if you're hiking and you're in a bad spot, you actually have to do an operation on your child.
But it's a terrible way to put your child to sleep when you're reading a bedtime story.
Is there a, is there a challenge that people are facing at the moment with
an over-reliance on a brain-based economy, an unlimited amount of information at your
fingertips with Wikipedia and chat UPT for them to struggle to find something transcendent when
it can be broken down into its component parts and explained by somebody who understands the child
as a connection of ligaments, organs and blood vessels as opposed to as the beautiful progeny
of the person looking at them? Well, keep in mind that there are people who can weave poetry
through their description of something very technical. Herman Vile, for example, wrote in a
very Olympian fashion about abstract algebra. He talked about the homosexuality of certain
symbols as filiating with themselves, you know? Completely crazy.
Ultrogyn arithmetic.
And, you know, there are people who just write beautifully. I think that Jim Watson,
who may be a son of a bitch on many fronts, is one of the great writers in the English language
if you read the double helix. It's an incredible narrative from one of the most memorable first
sentences to the conclusion. We need the Carl Sagan's to animate our head and our hearts
at the same time. Do you think there is an over-reliance on head at the moment?
I'm worried that our head, heart and loins are all disengaged.
So what do you use if you're not using any of those?
I use them all.
No, but what are the people using who are not using those?
They're not watching what's happening to them. They're being denatured by their phones.
Your phone is not a phone. It is a very, it's an environment.
You know, you pick it up and suddenly you're some place that you don't realize
isn't relative to your physical surroundings. You get very angry that you get a text message
while you're driving and you try responding to it. Well, you're going 45 miles an hour in a
several hundred pound or a thousand pound vehicle. You've lost track of where you are.
Our phone is, you know, and I talk to people about the crisis in pornography.
The only fans movement, the pornographic stuff that you're seeing, people are not getting easily
excited and aroused inside of any kind of context. Like the erotic is taking it on the chin, I think.
I think that's really important to remember that eroticism, for example,
is at least a combination of the loins in the head and it bests the heart as well.
What you're starting to see is people can't actually derive excitement from normal stimuli
that has to do with falling in love or having children or, you know.
So you're talking about an ever-escalating stimulus that people require to get the same
arousal response. And they can't. Yeah, Mary Harrington calls this one of her three
laws of porno dynamics. It's the law of fap entropy that whatever you start out wanking to
will get progressively more extreme over time. Well, what's the cure for that? Something high end.
You could just try to do it all on loins. Show me something where my psychogenic arousal gets
greater and greater because I've never seen that and holy cow is that far out. Or you could say,
you know, it's more like a cob-douglas utility function. You're going to have to bring this
down to my level. Multiple inputs. In other words, if I could offer you only food or only water,
that would not work. You'd rather, if you have a lot of food, have a little water to complement it
because that water becomes that much more valuable. Or if you have a ton of liquids and you have no
nourishment, you probably want really value a little bit of food. Well, in my opinion,
part of what we need is we need more things that reward us when we're integrating rather
than when we're extra-mising. Get back to that discussion about technology, not only fracturing
our attention, but also fracturing our experience. There seems to be a wistfulness, not just in the
dating realm, but in the experiential realm for a bygone time where we felt connected to the things
that we do. And it's interesting for someone of my age, I'm 35, so I'm like slap bang in the middle
of the millennials. So I remember a time before ubiquity of iPhones, before internet,
but there was like there's a whimsy of childhood in any case, and me being able to
tear those two apart is kind of difficult. But I definitely think that when I read history,
when I read Ryan Holiday, for instance, and I think about Zeno Obsidian walking around the
Stoa Poclei, where I've been, and I'm there, and I think about the degree of connection to the
experience. What is technology and what are our smartphones doing to our ability to connect?
So they're changing our, our wetwear. We're not,
if you can have 12 life-changing experiences in the space of a minute and none of them are yours,
what do you think that's going to do to your mind?
You know, at some point I was in an oculus situation. I was deep underwater in a blue whale
swam past me. Well, none of that actually happened, but it felt like it did. Or you know,
that you can do this nuclear explosion on Henderson Island in oculus. That's just a more immersive
phone. And look, you have to be, you know, that's one of the things about La Sagrada Familia.
You go in there and it's real. You see the Grand Canyon and it is actually grand.
You know, there's certain things that don't easily live up to their billing. I think I went to
Pamukkalei in Turkey years ago, which Pamukk means cotton and Kalei, I guess, castles. It was a cotton
castles of mineral deposits and they formed these pools. And there weren't enough pools and there
were way too many people. So it was like one of those moments where the tourists have totally
destroyed the natural attraction. Okay, but I went into the blue mosque and it was every bit as
mind-blowing as it was the last time I was there 30 years ago.
It's the same way that I feel every single time I step into the Vatican, every single time.
Every single time. And I've been there three times now.
I've been there three times.
And it's just holy cow. Well, I shouldn't have said that. Anyway, very good. I didn't mean to.
Yeah, you have to, there have to be things that you actually viscerally relate to that stop you,
like the Bach cello sweets. How many times have I heard the Bach or whole lot of love
could do it either way? Or you shook me all night long, you know? That's holy. You shook me all night
long is a transcendent song.
It's less transcendent if you see it as part of a 60-second TikTok montage.
No, because the schmah is transcended and that'll fit right in there.
Can't hit that.
That's prayer.
You know, if that doesn't move you, you need to check into some place.
Those four notes recur in all of these songs that matter. It's basically Mary had a little
lamb with pho thrown in as well. You know, and I bring up this example. My wife was watching
a film. I didn't want to watch it, but some chick flick. And it all hovers around this one scene
where this guy drags this girl into a music store because he can't afford a piano.
He goes, I don't know you, but I want you. Going up to that fourth.
All the more for that. And I was transfixed. I could not continue to do my calculations.
Like, what the hell is this movie? So those four notes is a great place to ground yourself.
And there's a reason that they work. The second note brings up in your mind the
thing called the fifth, the dominant chord. The first note is spread between the tonic and the
subdominant. The third note belongs to the tonic only and the fourth note only belongs to the
subdominant. And so this idea that Western harmony revolves around these ideas of the
tonic, the subdominant, the dominant are carried by these notes. So even if you're not playing it
on a chordal instrument, that this pattern of four notes that keeps recurring grabs us because we
know what the chords are behind it. And it's basically Mary had a little lamb or proud Mary,
you know, but that's a great place to start for transcendence. Just check on something really
simple, whether you're feeling it. All and dread to emotions that I miss in my life.
Same one. So when I look up at the night sky, I get it in equal dosages. Oh, good.
You know, when it's good, I've been out to Joshua Tree, taking an edible,
didn't need the edible at all. That was unnecessary amplification. You know, we're having this
discussion in the middle of the Perseids meteor shower. No. I highly recommend get yourself
to a place where there's no light pollution and lay on your back right before dawn, you'll have a
blast. Oh, and but the awe and the dread is very much there. Yes. And I don't know, it makes you
feel insignificant in a way I think that keeps your ego small and helps to recenter your.
Do you want your ego small? Have you been told that was a good thing?
I've been told that it's a good thing. I would say for me,
remembering finitude and not insignificance, but the
temporary nature of our time here, the vastness of what is going to go on, the things that have
come before the things that will come after the scale. Yeah. I think that it grounds me. I struggle
to get into my head to describe the thing that is almost exclusively in heart and lines. And
it makes me feel good when I do that. And yet I find myself, I've got emails to do.
I heard this term the other day, John Lovell, Warrior Poet Society said the tyranny of the urgent.
And fuck, I love that. The tyranny of the urgent.
You're familiar with this concept of bathos? No.
The alternation between the transcendent and the mundane and the pressing. We will conquer
the cosmos, but I have to pick up my dry clean. Yeah, I think that there is that tyranny,
but I also want to just talk about arrogance and humility. I meet too many people who have
one without the other. And I see all these discussions online about so and so has this
beautiful epistemic humility or somebody else's, you know, preposterously arrogant or whatever.
And I sort of sit and wonder at this discussion. You want both.
What is humility without arrogance?
Well,
you know who I think actually had this in kind of pretty decent balance that was on display
for the world to see was Khabib Nurmagomedov.
What an unbelievably good example. Right. So tell me how it lands for you.
Khabib is very, very high on a list of people that I would love to speak to.
And you hear that Khabib? Listen, Khabib, if anybody in Dagestan has got Khabib's email address,
please tell him to get in touch. Okay. This is fascinating to me.
So the more, I'll do a timeline of it. So Conor McGregor, very seductive,
very obviously seductive, working class, the Irish hate to be told that they're a part of the UK.
They're not, they're near, you know, close enough. It's like an adopted son type thing.
Okay. And I'm thinking God disguised like a savant of war and artistry as he's coming up.
And then he beats Chad Mander's and it's a war as a fight. And then he's crying.
And then he does the other side of it. And he's doing with Ida Potal. He's balancing
in the middle of maybe Vegas or California somewhere on a walking rail, on a side rail.
And he's, I think Nate Diaz accused him of playing touch butt with that dork in the park.
And he's doing handstands and he's got this sort of fluidity to him.
And then there's this amazing interview that was clipped and put in perfectly of
a journalist reciting back to Conor what he said before the Aldo fight. And he said,
at the press conference, I saw his right hand shaking. That was a subtle tell for me.
He's going to overload with that right hand. And when he thinks I will be that I will not,
I will create gaps within that octagon. He will fall into those gaps. And that is when I will
strike. And then there's a clip of him backstage before he's about to fight.
And he's bouncing backwards and forwards in that sort of long karate stance that he does.
And he steps back and he throws that left hook practicing and they placed it in time
with the fight. Amazing. And it's the same move. And this guy says, you said these things,
recites that thing post fight. How'd you do that? How'd you do that? And Conor talks about if you
have the bravery enough to speak it and the courage enough to be able to pursue it then.
And I'm just fucking enthralled by this guy. I got put onto a reality TV show in my 20s
that we had no internet, no contact with friends or family or any sort of news.
And it turned out that while I was there, I think it was Rafael Dasaos,
it was injured. So I was terrified I was going to miss McGregor's fight,
because that's how inspiring it was to me. And then there's this talk of this guy,
this other fighter, unbeaten, undefeated. And it's the Bane Batman type scenario,
at least that's the model that I had in my mind. And I'm like, you know, you've got the almost the
Rocky versus who was the Russian guy that he's training for in the fight? No.
Who's the Russian guy that Conor fights? The Rocky fights, sorry.
Yes, I'm Dragov. So it's almost that, right? You've got this training in the mountains and
chopping wood. And then there's the Dolly, Conor throws the Dolly, and you start to see,
that was the first time I really took notice of Khabib. And you remember that video?
Send me location. Send me location. Just tell me where.
Send me location. And there's a number of tribute videos called the location,
it's about with a K, about Khabib. I'm like, fucking hell. This guy is something else.
This guy is real. Correct. Conor McGregor was spread between real and fake.
Right. The showmanship was a part of, it was backed up, particularly by his striking,
by his ability to sense his opponent, sort of almost using your antenna.
But I really believe that in part, trying to get into your opponent's head with somebody,
I really wonder whether Westerners have any idea of what happens in places like Central
and Eastern Europe, when you start talking about somebody's mother.
I had this really bad cultural reaction, which is that there are people who are bought into the
whole trash talking thing. And if it had been like, I don't know, Conor McGregor versus,
and I don't know how to pronounce it, Child Sonan or something like that.
Yes, Child Sonan, yeah. It's a fag game. Yeah, they're both accepting the game.
And with Khabib, I just had this other thought of like,
have you never met anyone from Dagestan before? Yeah. Like anyone from Dagestan. It's not just
Khabib. It's so bad. Have you ever done improv? No. Well, inadvertently.
In improv classes, there's something called punking the game. Okay. And let's say that we're in a
circle and we're supposed to whoosh, we pass energy around whoosh, and you can go boing,
and it goes back the other way, and you can like send it across and stuff. There's only one rule.
One rule is don't punk the game. Punking the game is like not playing by the rules.
Game rejection. Yes. And what you see is Conor playing a game of tennis,
and he keeps on serving this ball across. And I saw it 100% from Khabib's perspective.
Not only does the ball not come back across the net, he doesn't even have the racket in his hand.
You know, he's there. He's got to be there. There's obligations to be done.
And it was that series of press conferences that really made me fall in love with Khabib,
and then how it gets me emotional thinking about, thinking about his tribute to his father.
I'm telling you, I can't see it from Conor's perspective.
Of why you would behave in that way?
Two seconds facing this guy is not a question of fear. It's a question of respect.
Maybe I just don't get it. But I spend enough time, I have spent enough time
in, I don't know, the north of India or the center of Turkey or places in Egypt,
or Ukraine or Russia, wherever. You don't...
I can tell the internet's gonna completely tell me I don't get it. You don't do this stuff.
You just don't. It's like, I can't explain to people who are convinced that the internet is
the gift to prove that dunking and dragging is man's highest function. There's so much stuff you
don't do. And this whole move towards like anonymity and let's make fun of everybody and
everything because mockery is good. This way, this is the direction to madness.
I certainly think that, Peterson said this a while ago, one of the main problems with Twitter is
it's driven the proximate price of being a prick down to zero. Sure. And the combination of real
people and unnamed accounts and bot farms and the inability to work out whether it's been said in
earnest or said in a... Or whether it's been coordinated so that 100,000 people go off at
once on the exactly the same point. Getting back to the issue of arrogance and humility, what is
Khabib? Competent, unwavering, humble. He's both arrogant and humble.
And you have to look at the move that he does when you compliment him. What does he do?
Alhamdulillah, right? Or Mashallah or something with the name Allah in it. It's like, I give you
this praise. Oh, no, no, no. It's not for me. It's for the God, all for my father or for my father.
And so this issue about... This is a beautiful thing when you have Muslim friends is that they
learn to deflect all of this positivity out. If they're getting it, they deflect it
so that they don't keep it and they don't become insufferable. On the other hand,
if they're extraordinary at what they do, they know that they're extraordinary at what they do.
Khabib is under no illusions as to how good he is. He set the highest standards for himself.
Tomorrow night, I'm going to smash your boy.
He is simultaneously... You said competent. It just wasn't fair to him.
He's way beyond competent. I guess I just want people to realize that you need arrogance to stand
up against insuperable odds. And you need humility to stop your arrogance from driving you insane.
And to keep asking that people be constantly humble is an affront to what we are as humans.
I really don't grasp it. You need that deep humility, 100%. But so many people need arrogance
in order to take on the challenges that they could... If you took the world seriously,
you'd never take on those challenges if you were just humble.
Yes. One of my favorite clips of Khabib, post-fighting, post-career,
he's doing an interview and talking about the training camps, the gym that he looks after,
and some of the fighters that are there. And I think they train six days or six and a half days
a week. And he tells them they need to get up. Some of the guys complain and he says,
it's okay. You go home, your mom, she'll tuck you into bed at night, she will cook you dinner
and tomorrow, you'll be comfortable. But that's not why you're here.
Put that coffee down. Do you know coffee is for closers?
Ah, yes. Yes. Good reference. Your name's Lavie. You call yourself a salesman,
you son of a bitch? I just love... I really, really love this.
I had a conversation last week and I was told a quote,
self-love is holding yourself to a higher standard than anybody else.
You know, I'll be honest with you, I get tired of these things. I think that there's a lot of men
in particular looking for simple answers. And all of these things fall flat for me.
They're front-loaded because they simplify things. Imagine that that's all that self-love was.
Well, then I'd have a definition. But it's not going to work. And I think that this is one of
the things that I don't know how to fight exactly is that we're in a world that's convinced that
the truth must be simple. And all of these simple truths don't survive the collider that is
modern social media. So I don't disagree. The problem with a truth which is boundlessly complex
is that functionally, it's useless. And I'm so glad you made this point. That's the puzzle.
We're now in a world where to do the nuance is to get yourself tangled because the internet
is not friendly to nuance. On the other hand, to say something simply and crisply leads you into
disappointing everyone who's believed in you. And you know, we were talking before a little
bit about Christopher Hitchens. Yes. Tell me about your thoughts on Hitch. I asked Sam this
question. Sam spent a good bit of time with him. What would the modern culture be like if Hitch
was still alive? Hitch, I think, would have been forced to either self incinerate or
adapt. And I'm not sure what you would have done. What self incineration in this context?
One of the things that makes Christopher Hitchens a hero to so many people, almost oddly a secular
saint, if you will, is that he held the promise that one could simply stand in some place that was
reasonable and hold forth from that simple perspective like, yep, there is nothing to Islam.
It is nonsense. It might be something he would say, or you might say,
you know, free speech is absolute and you have every right to say anything you want. And I have
every right to say and the better ideas will prevail. Now you watch what's happened with Sam
and this question of Trump. Sam perceives Trump to be an asymmetric existential threat
and was willing to go and back the idea that the Hunter Biden laptop story
might not have benefited the election. And he's lost an enormous number of people who otherwise
agree with him. And now what's the reasoning? The reasoning and something I, oddly, I,
first time I met Sam, I went on his show to warn him that you can't just optimize for truth.
You have to optimize. I said, I have four variables I can't live without. Truth, meaning, fitness and
grace. So Trump is a fitness puzzle to Sam, which is if we allow Trump to destroy the country
in Sam's mind, then we've lost fitness. There's no, there's no point in being truthful.
And then there's a question about what is the meaning? Do you destroy the meaning of a democracy
when you hold back information? Maybe you do. Maybe it no longer feels like it's an actual
democracy. What is the graceful thing to do? What is the just and right thing to do?
I am convinced that some of Hitch's positions
were attractive because he was using his big brain to suggest that life could be lived simply.
If we were just strong enough of character, if we were clear enough of thought,
we could espouse something like free speech or reason, and it would be enough.
Without requiring that we hold it up to a higher power.
Or that you get caught in some very serious situation where you're in an edge case.
Free speech does not exist in an absolute forum under American law.
It just doesn't. We mentioned Miller versus California, which was a sort of a
follow-on decision to memoirs versus Massachusetts. You don't have a right
to broadcast pornography because pornography does not enjoy First Amendment protection.
Now, how do you discern that pornography doesn't? Well, the justices claim that it doesn't.
And there's a three-factor test for what is pornography, which was, I believe,
attenuated under something called memoirs versus Massachusetts, but that was not allowed to stand.
You're not allowed to necessarily endanger troop movements by blabbing information in a war.
You're not able to slander or libel. There are all sorts of adjustments to free speech.
And when you come at one of these perspectives from an absolutist frame of mind,
you have to hope that you're not going to meet the edge case. A good example for me was the Second
Amendment. I noticed that many Second Amendment types took an absolutist perspective, saying the
right to keep and bear arms will not be infringed and don't bother me about a well-regulated
militia. I said, okay, I'm not going to talk to you about a well-regulated militia. My question
is, should the Davy Crockett be sold at K-Mark? And they would often say, well, what's the Davy
Crockett? And I said, well, it's about 100-pound personal nuke. Well, first of all, I was very
flabbergasted that a lot of gun enthusiasts did not know that there was a personal nuke developed
by the United States. But then immediately, many of them saw where this was going, which is, okay,
if we're going to restrict personal nukes at K-Mark, then you've got your foot in the door,
the camel has its nose under the tent. It's a difference of degree, not a difference of kind
all the way down. Exactly. So I think that personal nukes have to be sold at K-Mark,
because the American population needs to keep parity with the American military.
And then I say, well, do you realize what you just said? Do you realize that you've
bounced out of your very simplified framework? They don't. And this is partially the problem,
which is that if you can't talk about taste and trade-offs and balance, because it's all squishy,
then you have all of these people running to these different ultra simplifications, none of which
work. There's a quote from one of my smartest friends, Gwinda. A dilemma of tweeting is that
you're aware of exceptions and conditions to your statements, but can't include them without
turning an elegant aphorism into a clunky mess. So you must choose between writing
tinniered garbage or getting torn apart by pedants and replies and quote tweets.
I've chosen to fail in a particular fashion. No, but this is really important.
I'm failing. How about you? Depends what your goals are.
Well, but my point to you is I don't think we're meant to succeed here.
What's that mean? What's the criteria?
Was that a herd? What's the criteria?
No, sorry, the person who just said that.
Gwinda, no, a guy.
A guy. What he said was that you're aware of the trade-off and there's no way out of the trade-off.
I believe that there are ways out, but they have their own problems. Once you start to understand
all of the different forces that are arrayed against you, you realize that if somebody
chooses to hyper-focus on various things, they can effectively destroy your credibility in general.
And you brought up Wikipedia and I wanted to talk about that.
An interesting thing that's happening with Wikipedia is the difference between individual
Wikipedia entries and Wikipedia entries on a subject or a plant or a geographic place.
So isn't it strange that if you were to look up, for example,
pneumatic drill on Wikipedia, there'd be a huge technically accurate article about
pneumatic drills.
Constitutes it. Who invented it?
Right. And then you look up Jordan Peterson and I guarantee you it's going to be a war zone.
And now you fuse these two things together, which is weaponized Wikipedia and factual Wikipedia.
And this is like some really dangerous new object.
And I always knew that Wikipedia, the genius thing that it was, had a finite shelf life
because it made the fatal flaw of using authoritative sources as bedrock truth.
What happens when trolls get access to bedrock sources?
What happens when the State Department or the Department of Homeland Security
or the intelligence community or people who hate you?
That was the headlines that happened after my episode on Joe's show,
where it was the weekend that somebody had nudged the definition of recession on Wikipedia to no
longer be two consecutive quarters of negative GDP growth. And this was a Monday and it happened
over the weekend. I mentioned it and all hell broke loose. It had already broken loose over
the weekend. And then obviously anything Joe touches gets amplified to high heavens.
And you're like, okay, so the definitions that we use, I think Shapiro calls it semantic overload,
that's the battleground, ultimately almost all.
Tell me the frame and I'll tell you the argument. Like somebody will say,
you know, is it worth stopping Donald Trump by suppressing stories? Yes or no? Go.
I was like, well, first of all, the question was designed to subsume that we have to stop
Donald Trump. I might agree that with that. I believe maybe we should stop Donald Trump.
But you did make that the argument and then you piled on a question on top of it and you subsumed
that within the frame. And so more or less, this is everything at the moment, which is if you can
define misgendering and dead naming, you've won the argument.
You suppose there's a world in which, yeah. So I'll give you an example for the fledgling
podcasters out there. When you first start doing a podcast, you're nervous that the guest
doesn't like you. You're nervous that the guest isn't interested in you, that your question sucks,
that your question doesn't make sense, and you're terrified of silence among millions of other things.
Did any of those happen in this episode? Oh, you've been very welcoming. How could I know?
After you serenaded me with you, Gitta Laylee, it was a perfect aphrodisiac. So what you do,
and what I noticed with a lot of young new podcasters, is they do multiple choice offering.
So I'll ask you a question. Eric, Trump 2024, what do you think is going to happen?
Is it going to be that, and as soon as you say is it, and you then create either a binary or
a trinary of options, you have now, not only, you've restricted for the entire universe of
different things that you could have come up with, I don't know whatever you're going to say.
I've given you two choices. So it makes it difficult for you to take a third because you
need to say no and why, no and why, and then take the third. So you often offer up this
very narrow, very unidimensional landscape. Exactly. And it ruins the conversation.
It's funny. Lex makes assumptions in so many of his frames that I unweave, but I think he gets like
some of the best out of me as a guest. And there's something about unweaving
Lex's questions, which I hate doing to him because I want to just answer his questions.
But on the other hand, there's something about the process of unweaving the assumptions that
actually benefits some of our interaction. So I think that there's a lot of this
just grooming us, grooving us to only think about certain possibilities. And
what I don't know is how do you get nuanced thought to propagate at the speed of the meme?
You need to make it sexy. Well, to an extent, I do this with acronyms and the acronyms have taken off,
but then there's a different population that gets very angry, which is why are you allowed to create,
we're allowed to create these memes with a distracted boyfriend, but you're not allowed
to create an acronym to make a concept sticky. So what we're in is some sort of warfare for
mind share. And I'll be honest, I'm not seeing high-level interactions the way I was five years
ago between people. What's happened? I think that they've done a pretty good job of disconnecting
us. You remember the old data and society report where you looked at chains of association,
and the whole game was to tie everyone back to my loyianopolis or something.
So I go to Interject, I go to Qatar to do this debate about masculinity about six months ago,
and they put up on one of the segments. I was pro-traditional masculinity, and there was a gentleman
on the other side, and they said, here is a montage of some unspeakable people that represent
masculinity. And there was Joe Rogan and John Peterson and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah,
but the first person was Milo Yianopolis. I said, look, if you have brought me to the Middle East
to defend Milo Yianopolis, did you have brought the wrong person? I'm like, we need to shift that,
get that to one side. Milo can go over there. Do you see his debate with destiny that he did
a couple of weeks ago, maybe three months ago now? Milo looked like an old touring singer
in a rock band, still doing the shows, but can't hit the high notes anymore. And the whimsy
and that sort of playful jester-joker kind of game, gamesmanship, had been abandoned in place of
bottom of the barrel, backbiting and genuine emotional sniping. And then destiny said,
after he's been pushed and pushed and pushed for 90 minutes, he says to destiny,
back in the olden times, they would have left your kind on the side of a hill to die.
And destiny said, well, I think that the gays would have been left there first. Milo said,
well, I don't think that you can tell whether a baby's going to like dick when it comes out or not.
Destiny said, well, you'd know all about young boys liking dick, wouldn't you?
Wow. And it broke Milo, it broke his brain. Sorry, what was that? And no one had any sympathy,
because for 90 minutes, he'd called destiny's wife a public fleshlight. He'd said everything
under the sun. Why are we dealing with these people? Because it is entertainment, it is mental
masturbation, it, a story about people will always be more seductive to a broader group
than a story about ideas. Got it. I think. Am I wrong? I don't know. I just,
despairing. So much stuff, so much beauty in this world. And I just, I wonder at what point does
middle school lunch table, when you compare it to amino acids, you compare it to,
you go scuba diving? I have done. I suck. What's the most beautiful place you've gone scuba dive?
Ghillie T, off the coast of Bali. Okay. I remember scuba diving off
Manjungan Island in Bali. Amazing. But the Red Sea totally blew my mind.
I can't tell you how little I care about Miloianopolis and how much I care about scuba diving in
the Red Sea. I don't know. Maybe I'm just wrong. There's something wrong. It's just to get back to
it. We all used to talk to each other. And then this thing started dividing us.
You know, you started seeing all these messages. Oh, your boy said this. Your boy said that. Time
to come collect your boy. Who talks like this? The internet. And then we stopped seeing each other
in our feeds. And I said, well, this is Vijaya Gade under Jack Dorsey. Jack had gotten some system
whereby he took his hands off it because he knew that terrible things had to be done, I think.
And he just had this idea, well, if I have to intercede at Twitter, then something has gone
wrong with the system. And you had this person who was just very happy bringing health to the
internet, but it disconnected all of us. It was very clear that our engagement just
dropped. And then if you complained about it, it was because you actually sucked and nobody
cared about your tweets. You had no idea where you were. And so all of this kind of good feeling
evaporated in part because people didn't know how to fight as a team. And this is just,
I would love to get back to the masculinity riff a little bit.
I don't think men know how to fight as groups. And it's a key part about masculinity. And it
really makes me upset to see all of these people in individual masculine space. If you're ever
faced with three attackers, two of whom have knives and one of whom has a gun, here's your best
move. It's like, you know, you don't know. You've never faced this.
You've never faced this.
Is the best move to have a group of five friends with you?
Well, first of all, yes. And having people's back.
So this is something that I've spent an awful lot of time over the last couple of years thinking
about. The definition of addiction is that you can find fulfillment alone.
It's something that I heard a few weeks ago.
The atomization of everybody, the generalized risk aversion syndrome that we are seeing,
something called extended adolescence or slow life strategy from Gene Twengey.
Talking about young people are getting their driver's license.
Don't know it, but let get immediately from the title.
People getting their driver's licenses later. They're partying less. They're drinking less.
They're leaving home later. They're getting occupations, starting jobs later.
Could this have been contributed to through COVID? Yeah, probably.
But it was catalyzed. It was already a trend that was happening.
It's affecting men particularly because male friendship groups are
more fragile in some regards than women's. In 1990, the number of men who said they had zero
close friends was around about 3%. In 2020, that number was 15%.
That's insane.
The most common answer to the question, how many friends could you call on in an emergency,
is zero. The most common. It's not the average, but it's the most common.
More people have zero friends to call on than have any other number.
The challenge of modern masculinity relates to that addiction quote,
the belief that you can find fulfillment alone. You see this in the sigma male meme,
sigma male grind set. I don't know this.
So you have alpha, beta, the sort of red pill, the blue pill, the purple pill,
halfway between the two. I don't know this either.
Okay. So the sigma male steps outside of the existing dominance hierarchy.
He doesn't try to lead. He doesn't try to do anything. He is a lone ranger,
Lauren to himself. Over the top of a lot of this meta meme, which is being created,
is a guy called Chris Bumstead, who is a three-time, four-time classic physique champion,
Mr. Olympia. Classic physique is they have weight limits, which means that they have
a much more Arnold-esque. It's all about shape and sculpture, massive, but not a mass monster.
Phil Heath was sat in that seat not long ago, mass monster. I sit down with Chris,
this guy who is the face of the sigma male meme, perhaps the one of the driving forces
behind young male belief at the moment. And I asked him, how much of what you've done and
achieved in business, in personal life, and in your sport, could you have done on your own?
Zero. I could have done none of it. I couldn't have gotten through the difficult times
emotionally without my fiance. I couldn't have built my personal brand without my best friend
and videographer Calvin. I couldn't have run my business without Vaughn and my other business
partners that are here. I couldn't have done any of this stuff. And this is the guy that
he's in the ice tub as there's dubstep music over the top of him saying,
you don't need anybody else and so on and so forth. The belief that you can find fulfillment alone
is a lie. It is a lie that people who have been hurt and scorned and rejected by the world
retreat into. There is a safety blanket of cynicism that people can use. It's sour grapes at an
existential level. The belief that the upside of never trying is never having to feel the pain of
failure. And the generalized risk aversion, the extended adolescence, the slow life strategy
permits that to seep ever more into people's lives. In a world where we have hyper convenience,
why should I feel discomfort? So what's going on with the modern masculinity movement?
It's fractured. So there is the manosphere, which is the broad term that describes people
talking to men. I've never identified with it. I'm not a part of it. In as much as I speak to men
about things that I struggled with and they listen, perhaps someone could put me in it,
but I don't think that they help. I think fundamentally at the moment the masculinity
movement sees women as adversaries and competitors rather than compatriots.
I think that they treat women largely like an enemy to be avoided or a resource to be used
and discarded. I think that largely much of men's advice benefits some men at the expense of most
others that if being a high value man means sleeping with as many women as possible,
but a low value woman is a woman that slept with many men, what you are doing is creating a wake
after you that other men have to pick up the pieces of if your goal is to be this high value,
many high body count male. Let me give you this. So this is actually going into a paper,
my first academic paper that I've ever been a part of. So this is the male sedation hypothesis.
Okay. There's an effect called young male syndrome. You heard of this?
Nope. If you have a large number of dispossessed sexless men throughout all of history,
bad things happen. Yeah. Testosterone drops when you get in a relationship and drops again
once you have kids. This means in large part that women domesticate men in some regard.
They have to. You don't want to take risk taking behavior when you've got a newborn at home. Don't
jump off that fucking cliff. Okay. Like let's be, go home, go home. So when you have
large numbers of dispossessed young men who aren't having sex,
what's the reason for integrating into society? They take a brilliant study is done of men crossing
the road and the difference between when they cross and the distance from the nearest car
with or without the presence of women. You put a woman there, the distance
closes massively. No women there. They're not bothered. Risk taking behavior is a show. Look
at my excess fitness. Yeah. Look at all of these risks that I can take. Look at the plumage on the
back of my tail, right? So throughout all of history, it seems like they set cars on fire and
push over granny and cause havoc. In Portugal, 1700s, the first son, there was a disparity in
the sex ratio. I'm not sure why the first son was allowed to marry. Every subsequent son was put
on a ship, go explore the new world. Don't burn our home was what they were saying. There is a
question. We have very high rates of sexlessness and we have very low rates of integration amongst
young men at the moment. Why are we not seeing them going around and setting a setting cars on
fire? Jordan Peterson was featured as the incel god. He inspired a movie by Olivia Wilde
starring Harry Styles a little while ago. I brought it up to Jordan.
The incel god? He was the king of the incels. Yes, this incel. I am so pissed to hear this.
Jordan laughed it off in classic him fashion. Yeah, but as a guy who opened for Jordan Peterson
on Harmonica, I've been to some of his shows. Jordan Peterson recognized this demographic
early and he had the courage to speak directly to it. If you want to see me break out in tears,
have me tell you the stories about the people who went up to Jordan Peterson and said,
I was smoking weed, masturbating in my parents' basement. Six months later, I've got a job,
I've got prospects, I've got a fiance, et cetera, et cetera. To turn him into the incel king or
whatever, no, Jordan Peterson tried to become the one person answer to the world uncle shortage.
I just have no patience for dismissing that much good. If some of his message seemed off to you,
it's because you didn't need it. You didn't understand what clean your room was about.
You laughed it off because you weren't screwed. He gave people a path just the way Sam gave people
a path from that abusive religious household where they didn't know to escape. To an extent,
all of these people spoke to people at different stages of their lives. A lot of this female
behavior which is, oh, I'm on only fans, I'm going to get my this, I'm going to get my that.
Well, good luck to you. I hope it works out. The gold digging or the misogyny, it's of a piece.
People are listening to each other's strategic conversation and saying, why would I want that
for my life? I'll round out the sedation hypothesis. You have this large cohort, dispossessed young
men, high tea, high risk taking, they cause problems. There is a question to be asked,
although many of the almost all mass shooters, including the ones that hit all of the headlines,
were sexless young men. Given that we have the highest rates of sexlessness amongst young men
that we've seen in a very long time, there is a question, why have we not seen an in kind
increase in antisocial behavior? It's my belief that young men specifically are being sedated
out of their status seeking and risk taking and reproductive behavior through a combination of
social media, porn and video games. I was waiting for it. So there is an idea from Diana. Sorry,
social media, porn and video games does not include weed.
I think ubiquitous weed.
The motivation killer?
We don't have a ton of culture around open weed. We have a lot of culture around open alcohol,
about open coffee. We used to have culture around open nicotine. We don't have a lot of
culture around open weed. We have culture around closed weed,
served dishes weed. Yeah, yeah, yeah. But I do think that in part,
the video game thing is an absolute as if drug. What's that?
You meet people who come from the gaming community or social media and they have an idea
that life permits you to do certain things that are absolutely not tolerated in civil society.
Like a lot of the people, an interesting feature of social media is the difference between critics
and trolls who call you names and people who actually try to find a way to ruin your life offline.
Like there's a huge connection between the gaming community and certain sort of bulletin boards
and this freak game about how can we destroy people offline?
Yeah, yeah. And once you meet these people and you read their messages to each other,
they're talking about, oh, yeah, I've got a cool exploit where I'm going to invite somebody to
someone's house because I think that person might be dangerous. You realize it's a video game.
Yeah, so I had this idea specifically about Jordan, but it would apply to yourself. It would
apply to Joe. After a while, there is a particular threshold of exposure and notoriety that people
cross. And when they do, they are no longer treated like a human. It's easy online to dehumanize
because you don't see any there, there, you don't see that. But there's something specific about
crossing a particular threshold where you're no longer a person, you're a representation of ideas,
you're a conglomeration of viewpoints. And I think that really allows people to dehumanize
the other side. Really, there is no one reading these tweets. Well, you think Jordan Peterson's
reading these tweets about the incel God thing? Yeah. Is he? I don't know. I think he is. I think
Jordan spends, I would love Jordan spend less time on Twitter. Okay. I think that would be,
I think that that would be good. But even if they're not, there is a person there that is the
representation of the person. And I don't know, like saying something to somebody online that you
wouldn't say to their face, to me seems like a coward's way of communicating. Or you view it as an
adaptive landscape, which is new exploits have been created. I mean, if I explained to you a
mosquito life cycle, okay, you're going to find somebody with excess blood, and you're going to
steal some for yourself. That's my video guy who's been eaten alive since we've been in LA.
Is that right? Yeah. Okay. But you see the same cookie cutter sharks do the same thing for large
marine wildlife. They'll just take a plug of flesh out. It's like, can't afford to go after
cookie cutter sharks. When you have those kinds of strategies, am I going to sit around in the
ocean and say, no, that's not a legitimate strategy. You're a parasite. It's like, yeah.
Like that's my whole game where I'm a predator. I just murder things for a living.
It's really what predation is about. And in a certain sense, what you've done is you've changed
the adaptive landscape. And these are the new exploits. Yes. So to get back to the video games,
porn and social media, Diana Fleischman has this idea she calls uncanny volvers.
Tell me more. She says that porn has been able to hijack the mate seeking behavior specifically of
men by giving them a very titrated dose of what it is that they would usually get. Which means that
part of that motivation to go out and do the risk taking behavior has been tuned down.
But what do you get from video games? You get camaraderie. You get progressive overload in
terms of your achievements. You get a sense of belonging. You get a dopamine when you achieve
something. You may even get some serotonin because you feel like you're lumped together with your
group of friends. Okay. And then once you get on social media, with social media, we've gamified
the status hierarchy. It's there. There's a number right in front of you. And there are
levels that you can get to. There's your silver plaque on YouTube. There's your gold plaque.
There's your blue tick. Look who followed me today. Elon Musk followed me today.
Whatever. I got a retweet from Paul Graham. It has been able to, and I don't necessarily think
that this was by design. It could be by side effect. It has been able to specifically for men,
maybe also for women, give a titrated dose of most of the key drivers that got people out of the
house to go and do things. Scott Galloway trended earlier on for saying that unless you're asleep
as a young person, you shouldn't be in the house. And his point is life is for living.
There is lots for you to learn outside. Fuck off. Go out. Come on. And he got tons and tons of
pushback. And maybe he's wrong. But when I get advice, sometimes on Q&As, people will say,
young guys and girls will message and say, I'm 13. And I love your podcast. Like, what the
fuck? Fantastic. You are in a growth period that is unbelievable. And the people that you're
getting exposed to, I wish that I'd had access to at 13. What should I do if I want to improve
myself? What books should I read? What practices should I do? I don't mean to be patronizing,
but just go outside and live life. There is so much low hanging fruit from knowing what it's
like to have an argument with your friend and having to cycle home with a flat tire.
Just things. There is so many life experiences that I think you will gain massive amounts,
huge, huge amounts of benefit from over and above a 2D lesson. So me and my friend George
have this conception of a 2D lessons and 3D lessons. So a 2D lesson would be reading about
Warren Buffett's wealth through an autobiography or watching it. A 3D lesson would be hanging out
with Warren Buffett at his house for an afternoon. And no matter how immersive we try and make learning,
3D lessons are always going to win because you can't forget them. They're so visceral.
And in a world where most of our time and increasing proportion of our time is spent online,
the in-person 3D lessons become more and more and more powerful. So this is my conception of the
male sedation hypothesis. How do you judge our sperm counts and testosterone over time?
Yeah. So there's some evidence. Andrew Heumann shared some evidence that although
sperm counts are decreasing, penis length is increasing, which...
But that's not... If I recall correctly, and I hesitate to get into...
Get into your penis literature, Eric. Come on.
Well, there is some trade-off in various reproductive systems between
things that we would classically associate with masculinity. So for example, dung beetles have
weaponry on their head called antlers, giant hook, and their copulatory apparatus and their antler
is in inverse proportion. It's the gorilla and chimp thing again, right?
That one of them has lots of testicles and very little penis length and the other one has the
reverse. So you have a lot of these conserved systems where somehow reproduction says you
can have this many total resources, but you have to figure out how to budget between various things
that appear to be strongly masculine. So I think that declining testosterone is a big concern.
I would say that it certainly contributes to a generalized change in male behavior,
risk-taking. It is... Talk about, oh, and women that take birth control can impact the local
ecology of male testosterone by basically making it feel like they're around infertile women when
they're not, they're just artificially suppressed women. That impacts a man's testosterone level.
Men that are around weapons, if mean you walked past a table of guns, the testosterone would go up.
If we walked past, there's a chainsaw over there, so perhaps it's already high, I'm not sure.
Do I see how many volleys we can get?
Do football freestyle. The issues of sperm count, the issue of testosterone production,
I think contributes to this in a large way. What it is that's causing this, is it phthalates in
the water? Is it women peeing out their birth control and we've got estrogens in the water supply?
Is it the foods that we're eating? Is it seed oils? Is it the lack of time outside? Is it grounding?
Is it... There are a whole host of things that are contributing to this, but I started working
with a blood testing company, MaricHealth, about six months ago, and I had my bloodstone for the
first time. My testosterone was about 500, and I'm 35, and I was like, it should be higher than
that, so what should I do? They gave me some lifestyle interventions and some boron that
frees up free tea from sex hormone binding, globulin and blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
No pharmaceutical interventions, but they gave me a ton of lifestyle ones. I had my bloodstone
a couple of weeks ago and it was 900. Over the last six months, there's been some minor but
noticeable changes to my demeanor, one of them being I'm more aggressive. Like my frustrations
come to the fore more. Love it. And so, I mean, I'm dying to ask, are you, first of all, are you
married? No, in a relationship. In a relationship. Do you find that women, heterosexual women,
respond to classical masculinity? I have to be very carefully as I ask, because they certainly
respond more than they're supposed to, according to modern rules of femininity. But my guess is
that it's greatly decreased from the market for masculinity in the 60s, let's say. So look,
again, inter and intersexual dynamics, something I've spent an awful lot of time
learning about. I'm writing a book at the moment with David Busse, evolutionary psychologist,
on this. In the early 2010s, after the success of 50 Shades of Grey, there was a proliferation
of dark romance novels. And they, there was a pushback from the feminism movement,
saying that the portrayals of men as dominant, masculine, bearded, big chested, in a loincloth
or a plaid shirt, wielding an axe, wasn't what women wanted. They wanted a softer, more like the
brawny guy or the Marlboro man. Correct. They wanted a softer version of this. So they started
putting more agreeable, more feminized men on the front cover of books. They didn't sell.
Right. But I wouldn't guess that either of those would be where modern women's heads would be at
now. In the space of 10 years. So I think that there's, there's, there's massively a difference
between stated and revealed preferences. Sure. Right. And also to, you know, to caveat that,
the thing that you may sexually fantasize about is not necessarily what you want to get into a
relationship with. Guys will say. Say more. That what you optimize for in a one night stand and
what you optimize for in a marriage partner aren't always necessarily the same thing.
I would think they would be wildly disparate. Correct. Which means that the front cover of
the romance novel is not necessarily the partner that you want long term. They're the one that
you want to fantasize about. Most of these stories are driven by sex rather than driven by love.
So I have this hypothesis and I wonder if you, you have names for all sorts of things that
before you give me, I just need to bunch this up. Your acronym, your ponchant for acronym acronyms.
Yeah. And a friend, Mary says meme first, explain later. And I think that
some of my favorite episodes, they rely on aphorisms. They rely on creating memes. Sure.
Small, quippy razors and so on and so forth. First off, because it makes it easy to remember.
But secondly, because that's what gets the hooks into you. This is how you make things.
So if you are somebody that's listening that has an idea that really loves that idea,
give it a name. Give it a name and give it a cool name. Yeah. I came up with fame
seesaw the other day, which is that on your way up, people want to support you because you remind
them of their dreams. When you're at the top, they tear you down because you remind them of
what they gave up on. Yeah. Fame seesaw. Beautiful. And even if it's fucking wrong,
you can't forget it. So it's good. Very nice. You were saying that when women, when heterosexual
women realize that they have several possible life cycles and they don't have a clear sense of which
one they will actually live. Am I going to get married and raise children and be at home with
the children? Am I going to get married and have one child, maybe two, and be a career person?
Am I never going to couple, but have children? Am I going to have no children whatsoever?
Am I going to do that in a coupled situation? Yeah. Yeah.
Their decision trees blow out as to what it is that they're actually looking for.
And one of my strong senses is that women encountered something they weren't expecting,
which is that they might even be smarter than the guy at work who they're competing with,
but he's happy to come in all of Saturday, all of Sunday, and work hours that are completely
psychotic. And so then the idea, well, we need work-life balance. We don't want people coming
in on Friday and Saturday because that's sort of an unfair advantage that somebody who wants a
healthy life is different from somebody who wants an extreme life. And so now you have this problem,
which is I'm attracted to the sort of man I wouldn't want to compete with at work.
If I'm going to be in the office, I want to know that I'm not going to have to deal with the guy
who's willing to give up every weekend and work hours that I'm unwilling to work because that's
not how I'm set at the factory versus I want that guy as the go-getter while I'm pregnant and
incapacitated and raising children to make sure that not only he can shepherd our family through
anything because he's highly capable, but can also get me back into the workforce when I'm done raising
children. And this is somewhat what I believe is responsible for the sort of incoherent messages
that men and women are sending to each other is that when we don't know what life cycle we are
going to be inhabiting, our eroticism and our romance and our desire is unstable.
One of the most uncomfortable correlations that I've found over the last few years is that as
gender inequality, pay inequality between the gender's increases, relationship satisfaction
for both men and women increases as well. Sorry, decreases. The more egalitarian,
the more equal the pay, the less satisfied both sexes are with relationships. Men who are in
relationships where the woman is the primary breadwinner are 50% more likely to use a rectile
dysfunction medication, where a woman is contributing more than 70% of the household
income, the marriage is twice as likely to end in divorce. Women for a man, sorry, for a
woman to move herself the same distance on a 10-point scale in terms of attractiveness
that a man can by increasing his income by $100,000, she would need a 10,000 times increase
in income. In short, women are interested socioeconomically in the status of their partner
in a way that men aren't. Now, the problem that you have is that women now have access
to education and employment in a way that they never have done before, so they're no longer
financially dependent on men. Sure, but you're seeing something which is particularly heartbreaking
in my group of females, which would be women in their mid to late 50s. I have to be honest,
I've seen some of the women I was most impressed by never coupling. When you talk to them,
there's some very uncomfortable things that get said, one of which was I was looking for a man
I could look up to and the pool was just so small. You're thinking, well, okay, it's illegal to say
I'm looking for a man that I could look up to because that's not in accordance with modern
feminism and egalitarianism. On the other hand, this idea that when you're one of the world's
leading chemists or something, there's just not that many men that are going to be in that position.
I got another meme for you. I got in a lot of trouble for this. It's called the tall girl
problem. If you stand atop your own status hierarchy, it's very difficult to find somebody
else across and above from yours. If you're a six foot one girl without heels, you're looking
at professional athletes and two women for every one man completing a four year US college degree
by 2030. Between the ages of 21 and 29, women earn 1,111 pounds more on average than their male
counterparts. But women still have this vestigial attraction to the man who is across and above
from them. That's hypergamy. This means that as you rise up through your own dominance hierarchy,
it amounts to a opportunity of diminishing returns. Then why are we not allowed to build
better men? This is this thing that just floors me. I'm now, through being a father, looking at
the subset of young men who are absolutely looking to crush it. The advice they're being given is
so horrific. What like? Well, that doesn't seem mentally healthy. I think it's much better for
you to enjoy this time with everyone else. It's just like watering down raw ambition.
Is it ludicrous who said, get out of the way? Get out of the way of these people.
These people want to invest and blow your socks off and just do amazing things. There's some
administrator or nanny or nurse ratchet who's like, well, that would be arrogant. We can't have that.
You're saying, I don't think you understand it, but ambition is a necessary input for certain
humans. If you sit there and say, why do you have a right to innovate when nobody else has
innovated? Don't you realize that your go-getter personality during the COVID situation was based
on your privilege? In fact, a lot of other people are suffering from mental health. You're just
thinking, why am I taking the most promising people and tying them to the most damaged people?
Why not instead take the most promising people and have them get a PhD by the age of 2021
and study what to do for their fellow souls who are struggling?
Do you remember when Elon took over Twitter and he started to rip out the tech team?
He said, I want to make Twitter a place where the people who want to work the hardest on the
biggest problems can come and work. People said, they looked at that and said, this is going back
to an archaic form of Silicon Valley where people are forced to sleep under desks and it's a blah,
those people do not have theory of mind to understand what it's like to be someone as driven
as it takes to look at that from Elon, not as modern-day slavery.
No, he was saying, it can be modern-day slavery or it could be the person saying,
for God's sakes, I'm burning to solve this problem. Let me go. Let me sleep under my desk.
Unhook the leash and let me go at this. There is a cohort of people out there for whom
that's their calling. They didn't want to work at Twitter if they got
frappuccinos and mindful Monday afternoons off and to be able to play ping-pong for half the
whatever it was that was going on. They want to go and they want to feel like they're contributing
to an astronomically-sized goal, an unreasonable goal, and they want to feel the rush of going
toward it. I think you're right. I think that there is a dampening of ambition. Since being in
America, since moving to America 18 months ago, the fuel that I've had from the enthusiasm from
the people I've been around has fueled me and powered me in a way that I wasn't, it was alien.
I was 33 years old and I'd never felt it before. There's so much to do and it requires ambitious
people. Those people have to be both arrogant and humble. It's a complicated thing. It involves
mentorship. I want to say also something about elitism. Elitism is incredibly unfair.
I've hung out with Stanley Jordan and I am never going to play any instrument the way
Stanley Jordan plays the guitar. He's an elite object. I am not going to be that guy. You have
to learn how to let elite people do elite things where you can't compete with them.
I don't know what to do about this. The idea that we're turning against the concept of elite,
because we've got this pretend elite that sits in these chairs that screws everything up,
and you've got all of these ambitious people who are being destroyed by enforced helplessness.
How do we fire the administrators necessary to return universities to being universities?
How do we explain that some people are built to fly wingsuits? It's a super dangerous activity,
but somebody needs that rush or they're not alive. People need danger. They need risk.
They need to be able to create. They don't need you in their way all the time. I have this very
strong sense that school has become the most dangerous place that we're pushing so many
people through school. School is basically destroying vitality. By the time you get
through this education that is so laden with administrators and people telling you things
that are wrong, I don't know how to say this, but when a friend of mine gets a call as a
chaired professor in a technical discipline from a dean who says, we have a little bit of a problem
with some of your current tweets. What did I say? It's not what you said, but it's that you liked
somebody else's tweets and you're thinking, I don't care who you are. You'd never talk to a
professor like that. You cannot have these people. We need the University of Chicago
to spread its middle finger across the country and get rid of these people.
You can't talk to them. They're a plague from hell on thought.
You can't tax all thought by making it nice. Something I really don't know how to communicate,
but I saw you got Sam Harris a certain amount of trouble, so maybe I'll buy a little bit of
trouble for myself. You can't have terrible ideas circulating everywhere,
leading to pogroms and riots and killings. I was just in Istanbul, maybe my favorite
city on earth, and I was reminded of the Turkish Kristallnacht that happened in the Beolu
Karakoy area of Istanbul where there was a rumor about the desecration, I think,
of the birthplace of Adatrk. People died as a result, and ethnic minorities could not be
protected. You cannot allow free speech to circulate every dumb idea infinitely until
people are killed in pogroms or holocausts or whatever. You've got two options. You either
constrain speech by rules or by culture. This is the reason that I was so against
Myloyanopoulos. You want a culture in which everyone is allowed to burn the flag and it
doesn't even occur to you that that's something you would want to do. That's culture. You've
got to load the inhibiting factor on culture. People say, well, that's what cancellation is
about. It's like, well, but if you misuse the concept of shunning, let's call it by something
older than cancellation. If you shun people for good questions, if you shun people for
speaking truthfully and decently as if they had done something horrible, then you lose the ability
to control bad behavior through social norms. One of the things that I've now come to understand is
we are either going to restore a culture which shuns only when shunning is really the correct
course of action, or we are going to have rules that prohibit what you can and cannot say. I am
absolute in that we should not have rules. We've got to put this on culture and we've got to get
a culture in which, in general, you are very careful about the negative things that you say.
One of the things that Milo did that I really disliked was he said, well,
the purpose of free speech is to protect outrageous speech. The answer is not really.
Yes, if I'm forced to stand up for your right to say horrible things, I can do that if the
culture generally retards horrible things. If the culture now starts to encourage it,
we can't have terrible ideas being the precursor of communal violence, let's say.
We really shouldn't be having rules determine what we can and can't say. It should be that
when somebody starts to say something that is the beginning of an incitement to madness,
that the cultural prohibition against that is very strong. In my recent travels,
I've been shocked. I've been in Bombay, I've been in Istanbul, I've been in Lisbon, Porto,
in the islands of the Azores. None of these cities has fallen as far as San Francisco.
Bombay is madness, but we don't have a homelessness problem in San Francisco. We have a zombie
apocalypse problem. We have a dysfunctional government problem. When you can't say we
cannot have this in Union Square, we just can't. We cannot have a zombie apocalypse in Union Square.
When that becomes controversial in and of itself, you've lost the plot. And partially,
what's happened is that we've given up on high trust societies where we more or less share
each other's values. That's the concept of the loyal opposition. We both know what the goal is.
You have an idea of how to get there. I have a different idea. I agree that we're going to have
a contest and one of us will win and one of us will begrudgingly go along with the other person's
idea. When your idea about what a just society is, well, let's vindictively punish successful
people. Let's pretend that male and female have no difference or all the difference according to
some set of rules on alternate Tuesdays. Let's decide that we can redefine what a recession is
or the consumer price index. Let's decide that we don't need masks. Yes, we do. No, we don't. Yes,
we do because of the science, science, science. Can somebody get rid of these people? We need
to be in a society that makes some semblance of sense. We cannot go in these opposite directions.
As far as I'm concerned, when you say, we don't want no more police, you and I cannot be the
loyal opposition to each other. You're not the kind of a person I even understand. Somehow,
that idea got into your head and it made sense to you. It's now carrying the day.
I have always supported some amount of reasonable gun control. I changed on a dime with that
abolish the police. We don't want no more police to fund the police.
Are you telling me that people are not going to be allowed to own a weapon and you're going to get
rid of the thing that was supposed to centralize the violence on behalf of the state and make it
follow rules? There's no coming back from that. I think that one of the things that we just have
to learn is that many of the voices that we've been listening to because they got jobs in our
organs, whether it was the New Yorker or the Washington Post or a professorship at Duke,
we have to stop listening to these people wholesale. We have to stop being tolerant
of the intolerant. If you come from a position that is sufficiently extreme and your whole point
is to try to use and weaponize democracy, to weaponize free speech, to weaponize good faith,
to weaponize what it means to hold a debate, you need to not really have a voice at the table
because we don't have a solution. If you say that I am entitled to sit at this table as a
member of the suicide bombing community strapped with a vest filled with high explosives,
the presence of C4 in your vest invalidates you being at that table that's trying to come up
with a solution. If you say fundamentally, I don't believe that we should be having children
because humans are evil and we need to bring this all to a close, it's very important that you not
be on the city council because that city is a generational endowment and you hand it to the
next generation and eventually you don't live there anymore. We are somehow seating people who
are so nihilistic and so freakishly divorced from anything that we should be able to assume as a
default. Certain positions that probably had 10 adherents appear to have millions of adherents
and if we don't get rid of these self-extinguishing theories, we are going to self-extinguish,
so I believe that civil society has an obligation to stop listening to positions that are avowedly
self-extinguishing. Eric Weinstein, ladies and gentlemen, Eric, I really appreciate you.
What's next? What can people expect from you? Have you got anything interesting coming up?
More than anything, remember that the whole point is when you see a person with a shirt that says
there is no planet B, look at the night sky and remember that the only way to get to planet B
is to change what we understand about physics and so look for me on that front.
Thank you. Cheers, mate.
Thanks. Be well.
Thank you very much for tuning in. If you enjoyed that episode with Eric,
you will love this one with Jordan Peterson. Go on. Press it.
