What's do most people get wrong when they think about happiness they think that they can be happy and
Happiness is not a destination. It's a direction
One of the most important things that we've lost
Sido particularly in the current generation of young adults is thinking that if you're unhappy for any particular reason
Something's wrong. Something's abnormal and that's completely incorrect
We have negative emotions for a reason that they make us feel unhappy the negative emotions are signal
That something's aversive outside of us and that's not gonna change
We need sadness and anger and fear and disgust furthermore
We actually need negative experiences so that we can learn and grow
Happiness is a direction and therefore we shouldn't be trying to attain happiness
We should be trying to attain happy urness, which is obviously a neologism, but that gets the point across that's that's mistake number one
What is an analogy that people can use to understand how happiness isn't a destination?
We we think of happiness as a thing we think of happiness as a feeling a state an affect that we arrive at
What's a what's another way that you can explain this
Disquieting of what happiness is
Happiness as we talk about it is really a state compared to something else and it's a long kind of a number line
We we're getting happier means happier than what is what it comes down to and it's just it's a it's kind of a
It's a status in which we have these macro nutrients more or less in equilibrium
You'll never be perfectly healthy, but you can be healthier
You you're never going to eat a perfectly nutritious diet, but it can be more
Nutritious than yesterday. What's more nutritious than yesterday? Well, you have a good for example macro nutrient balance to your diet
I'm a healthy nutrition nerd as are you and and we know that you you got to get your macros right
You have to have you be paying attention to your protein carbohydrates and fat and have them more or less in balance and proportion and relative abundance
The same thing is true for your happiness. So I start happiness discussions by saying there's three macro nutrients for happiness
Just like there's three macro nutrients for food that you have to get right
They are enjoyment
Satisfaction and meaning those are the three things to pursue and everybody can get better at those three things
That's an analogy that people can actually particularly people that would be wanting to improve themselves
That's why they're listening to modern wisdom that they would actually help them understand the whole process
What is the truth behind people who try to be happy and make themselves less happy?
What they're trying to do is to feel good all the time, you know back in the 60s
Uh, you don't remember this. I barely remember this the hippies used to say if it feels good do it
I remember my dad hearing that and saying that's the end of america
He was kind of right
The problem is that that people still think that feeling good is
Is is the happiness state and they're trying to feel good all the time as opposed to having a a tangible set of goals
Like I am going to enjoy my life in a better way
That's more stable and it's not just looking for pleasure
I am going to try to achieve things in my life with goals and direction that gives me adequate access to satisfaction
And I am going to do what it takes to find the meaning of my life
Even if it hurts those are strategies that actually lead us to live a much better life with actually a lot more happiness
Right. So what is the relationship between feelings and happiness then because presumably this uh
conglomeration of different contributing macronutrients
Arrives us at a state of some kind. There is an outcome of some kind if that isn't happiness
What is it?
So feelings are evidence of happiness like the smell of your dinner is evidence of dinner
What happens is if you're you're you're achieving these states adequate states of enjoyment satisfaction and meaning
You will get a better mood balance such that you're enjoying more joy and interest and you know a positive surprise
And you're you're suffering less from avoidable levels of disgust and sadness and anger and fear
And that mood balance will be evidence that you're actually on the right track with the macronutrients that you're getting
In the same way by the way, chris that you'll have a lot more energy if your macronutrients in your diet are are actually on point
right, so in this way
Is it advisable for people to sort of turn the bar stool upside down and think
Rather i'm not happy. That is a problem to
My current state is not one i would describe as happiness
That's an indicator that one of the three macronutrients is missing from my life diet
That's right and and every single person i've ever met in my whole life and i perhaps besides the dalai lama
Has has issues in their macronutrient profile that can lead to progress. This is really good news by the way
You know one of the most deleterious things that we say to young adults today and our kids is you're perfect just the way you are
What could be more depressing than that?
It's like i feel i feel
Garbage and you're telling me i'm perfect just the way i am that means i can't make progress
The truth is everybody can make progress because i've never met a single human being
That is perfect in enjoyment and satisfaction and meaning and i have a whole set of protocols
That will help people understand where they can make progress and where they need to make progress
What is the
current state of modern
Happiness what does the research tell us because we're hearing stories
Feelings of listlessness and hopelessness and disconnection and all the rest of it
What is the weather report for 2024 happiness?
so
Well like the owl was saying that in the in the advertisements your results may vary
Because you can be doing a lot right when society isn't unfortunately society
As we understand it particularly in the oecd countries in the western industrialized countries
Happiness is going in the wrong direction and we actually understand why but here the basic data
Most of the western countries the industrialized nations have been ticking about a half point down
Every year in the percentage of the population that says i am very happy about my life
so typically you know going back to about
1980s 1990 in the united states for example
About 35 percent of the population said i'm very happy about my life
About 15 percent said i'm not happy about my life and the other half was i'm somewhat happy
That's kind of the general proportions and there's better ways to measure it with greater granularity but that gives me an idea
What's happening you've been finding that that's ticking down so such that for the first time now
Not happy is higher than very happy and that's consistently happening now over the past few years
So that's been just this gradual decline now. Some people are getting a lot happier
But society in general is seeing this and this is largely being
Pulled down by certain demographics. You find young adults are less way way less happy than they used to be especially young women
Especially young women with very progressive political views. They're
I mean really really declining and there's one little subgroup, which is men my age
That and and this has to obviously this has to do with macroeconomic factors, etc, etc
so
This is these are interesting questions from a kind of a policy perspective a sociological perspective
But more importantly from a psychological and personal
Strategy perspective such that we can live better lives
What do you lay the decline of happiness at the feet of psychologically?
There's kind of climate factors and weather factors and I don't mean that literally that's a metaphor too
It's kind of like you and me dating is a metaphor
So the climate is the climate of faith family friendship and work in this country
Those are the habits of the happiest people. There's tons of literature out there that give you 10 000 happiness habits
Okay, but they're all trivial compared to the big four, which is your faith or life philosophy
Though the y of your existence
Metaphysically that will make you small and the universe large. You must transcend yourself
You'll be stuck in the tedious psychodrama of of christness. I mean, it's like it's
It's great for a minute but 24 hours a day you're going to lose your mind
You need to zoom out is the bottom line and I've got a bunch of ways that you can do it
I've got to have a folder full of ways that you can actually achieve this which
Up to and including the faith of your youth
But not not exclusively second is family life
Family life is critically important and is woefully neglected and it's societally increasingly neglected as well
Which which is accounts for a lot of this decline
Friendship friendship is actually getting harder and harder to come by we find that more people say nobody knows me well
And last but not least we have more of a dysfunctional relationship with work than we've had in the past
It's less like a vocation. It's less like a mission. Those are the climate factors
I know you're going to want to talk more about specifics in each one of those silos
Then there's the storms the storms have been have created down drafts of happiness from which we have not recovered in
2008 to 2010 it was screens smartphones social media
Especially among young adults. This is we understand the brain science on how this is incredibly deleterious to happiness
Second starting in about 2014 across most OECD countries
But really in the united states and the uk was the was the culture war was the incredibly polarizing ideological conflicts where
Malignantly narcissistic political and media leaders were conscripting child soldiers into their culture war by saying if somebody
Disagrees with you politically. They're denying your right to exist
And you must hate them unbelievably terrible for happiness
And last but not least was the loneliness that came from the coronavirus epidemic
For young adults that were coming of age
Synaptically in the plasticity of their brains
They literally didn't learn how to make friends and and have proper in-person love relationships
Which is probably the worst thing that's happened to happiness in the last hundred years
Why hasn't happiness been so robust that it's bounced back? What has locked in these losses in the market?
Well, if you if I could do one thing for somebody to make them happier one thing
It's eye contact and touch
That's the one thing. Why because you know, the neurophysiology is straightforward. You've talked about this on your show
The the the neuro peptide of connection is oxytocin
It's intensely pleasurable and and again, we don't want to be reductive about the brain chemistry
But this is a really important thing for us to understand. We're a kin based species
We know hours and hours know us and we get pleasure from being close to our kin such that we are averse to
Walking the frozen tundra and dying alone
Okay, that that natural impulse is actually guided in no small part by this neuro peptide that functions as a hormone in the human brain called
Octitocin
We don't get it when we don't have eye contact and touch
How do you not get eye contact and touch by conducting your friendships through an iphone?
with social media
By going to school on zoom by never going into an office man
I mean, it's it's it's crazy
Look, if I were in austin we'd be doing this in person because it would be it would be better
And it would be better because we'd have more eye contact and because we'd be getting more oxytocin over the course of this conversation
Young people who've never gotten that have wired their brains differently
And the result is it's not clear that they're ever going to be able to recover from what we've done
Not I mean, I don't I don't mean to be you know catastrophic about it, but
I'm not entirely convinced that this that we're not losing a generation to oxytocin deficit and lowliness
this
is bad news
predictably for
the
lone ranger sigma male
Guys out there who don't need friends and i'm going to make it on my own and it's too hard to get out there
And I'm just going to retreat myself to my little digital cabin in the woods and not spend any time together
It's one of the reasons why I'm such a
a critic of cynicism on the internet that
Things won't get better and people who say that it can are the problem
It is so
I mean look if you have managed to convince yourself that things aren't going to get better and
You are robust in your thinking and it's not going to change. All right, whatever like I don't want you to
Leave society but so be it but it's fucking evil for you to convince other people
Of the same like you for you to somehow convince other people that no it's not there's no
Point in trying to get into a relationship. There's no point in trying to have friends
There's no point in trying to contribute to society. All right
Well, I mean like all of those things will very reliably make you miserable and you're basically saying
My philosophy is the one to follow despite the fact that we know the direction. It's going to take you in
Yeah, yeah, you know, let me let me let me make sure that I'm not I'm not actually guilty of that
By saying that I'm worried about losing a generation
You can rewire your brain the question is whether or not that you have this is that the society is
Is giving us adequate opportunities to do so and if it isn't take those opportunities yourself
nobody is permanently lost if they actually will will
Will do what actually needs to be done and adopt the attitudes that show that for example
You're better off when you're around people you need real friends
You'll be a lot happier
All the young men listening to modern wisdom if you fall in love and get married and have children
You'll be happier. You'll be a lot happier. It's not true what the red pill community is telling you that you'll be
Subjugated and miserable your whole life. I got the data trust me on this. This is the whole point
I'm worried about losing a generation precisely because the messages are coming out that these things are stupid and don't make sense
That's the wrong set of of messages
I want to be transgressive and counter cultural against the
The technology that's saying that you don't need to be in person and against the culture
That's saying that not being around people is better than being with people
Bravo. Okay, faith
family
Friendships contributing in terms of work
right
faith i'm a
non
Religious person non-believing person right many people listening will be if they don't have a direct
route to access faith
What are some of the highest return strategies they can do?
So remember the point isn't faith per se as transcendence
You need to do something that will make you small and the universe big
That's what that that's what the science really says
And you know in mother nature doesn't want you to do that mother nature is like it's all about you
You are the star of your psychodrama and why because you know that that's you know evolutionarily
It sort of makes sense that you'd be focusing on yourself all the time
But also it's worth pointing out that mother nature doesn't care if you're happy
mother nature
Only cares that you survive and pass on your genes and so therefore happiness. That's that's your problem in your business
That's the key thing for us to keep in mind. I think that's just to interject there. I think that that
Realization that humans are not designed to achieve happiness that that's a state which might be
It's it's neither necessary nor sufficient for you to do what mother nature wanted you to do
It was just it was like a byproduct of it. So
Realizing, you know, it's not like you're swimming upstream
But that most of the set points and motivations
that
Your system will try and push you toward
Are not going to be conducive to happiness
So when the question of why why is it so hard to be happy or why is happiness a big dearth in the modern world?
It's like well, it's been in a big dearth for a very long time
There is no reason for your system to try and encourage you to be happy in the first place
Yeah, that's right and and and to speak in terms that you've often used in your show
That is to be managed by your limbic system
As opposed to actually drawing the experiences of your life into your prefrontal cortex
The c-suite of your brain where you're making decisions that the divine path actually comes from being fully human
The animal path comes from not being fully human
That that leaving these sensations in the emotional centers of the limbic system of your brain would say
Do this because you feel that that's no way to live. That's a really important thing to keep in in mind
Mother nature says you're the star of your psychodrama
You want to be happy? You have to leave that behind and the way to do that is to achieve transcendence from yourself
Here's a really good way to do that. You and I are one of your neighbor out there in austin texas is ryan holiday
Our mutual friend ryan hall of it. He's great. He's the world's leading expert on the modern understanding of the stoic philosophers
He reads senica for fun and epictetus and marcus aurelius and he's talking about wall cicero said
It's just amazing how he does that. Why because he actually wants to achieve transcendence
By doing the hard things that come from the denial of the visceral pleasures that are embedded in the
In the impulses of the limbic system. That's really what stoicism is all about. That's the divine path of transcendence using pure philosophy
Many philosophies will do that. I don't recommend niché
That's what a lot of sort of the modern crowd is is talking about which leads to some of the problems that we were just discussing a minute ago
There are better paths
Some people will actually get this by getting out of their head in a meditative experience using nature
So one of the things that I recommend to a lot of young people today
A lot of young guys coming out of college will call me. Ah, I feel lost
I thought I was going to be
So clear about my life when I got out of college and so what do I do professor?
And one of the things that I often recommend is i'm not going to you know
Tell them to go find some specific faith or sit in the mouth of the cave and talk to the guru or learn how to meditate immediately
What I say is get up an hour and a half before dawn
That's called the brahma muhurta in samskrita. That's that means in samskrita the creator's time
That is a very special time for for the development of your own brain because what you find is if you get up
systematically before sunrise
You're going to be more focused
You'll learn more quickly and your attention will be better throughout the course of the day
There's a lot of research that shows this get out of the house when it's nice and dark and cool
And walk for an hour be ambulatory for an hour
And and such that you're doing it as the sun is coming up by the end of your walk
And you can hear the crunch of the gravel on the trail beneath your feet. You don't have your device
You're not I mean I I strongly recommend listening to modern wisdom not then
That's not when you're listening to your podcast. You're listening to your heartbeat. You're listening to the birds
You're listening to the the sound of the trail in your feet, etc.
This is a very good way to do it. There's a lot of science to back it up
This is not just romanticism another way to do this is to
Is to actually
Stand in awe of great genius. I recommend learning about the fugues of yohan sebastian bach
And listening with utter seriousness
For example to his cantatas. He's got hundreds of them. They fell off his pen
Learn about that. It's just gonna it's gonna blow your mind. You'll be small. Trust me
You could start of a postant of meditation practice. Why not or
I go to mass every day
You can practice your faith and and by the way chris. I understand that you don't have a faith or you know a sense of this
You might after 40 and being open to the impulse to actually find the divine in your life
That's a critically important way to actually practice this as well. Just the openness
I went to my first american
Bible church
service on
Easter Sunday this year and
Boy was that that was an experience. There was a rock band. There was an led wall. There was pyrotechnics
I pulled up behind a
uh
Like super fast american muscle car that had god now as the number plate
So I found that it was very enjoyable and I can totally see why people do it
So I'm absolutely open to I'm open to the potential of that. All right. That's faith family
yeah, so
This should be pretty obvious not everybody by the way has access to
Functional family relationships. I get it and some people actually have to kind of assemble a family
But I'll tell you it's a kind of a funny thing. I mean, I didn't quite understand this until
Later in life and part of the reason is because I had at best kind of a cordial relationship with my parents
It was there's nothing wrong. They were there were good parents, but you know, I was doing my thing
I was living in europe through my 20s. I was I was a professional musician when you were, you know, throwing people out of bars
I was playing in a symphony orchestra
Which is a different lifestyle, but you know it bears certain similarities as well
You know you're out late at night and you're far away from home and you're living your dream and the whole thing
And I can't remember thinking
In my 20s, I should get to know my parents. My mother was an artist. My father was a mathematician
They were very interesting and intellectual and cultured people
And then they died
They just
died young
Now my father was pretty close to my age now and uh, and it was too late and I thought
You know, what does that mean? Does that set me back? And it turns out that I could fix that because now I have adult children
I'm a grandfather at this point
And I talk to all of my kids every single day
I see my grandson
I'm moving
Because my kids are moving and my grandchildren are going to living in a different place
And I'm not going to commute to them is what it comes down to
You must have family relationships or manufacture family relationships in your life and you must not have schism for
Stupidities like differences of political opinion
The narcissists and politics will tell you to stop talking to people in your family because they I don't know voted for
Trump or didn't vote for Trump or whatever the thing is
It's so idiotic that you would sacrifice your own happiness for somebody else's political cult
It's completely nutty is the way that that works out
You need to have it keep it or make it and make it a part of your life that you exercise every day
all right friends
Friendship is should be the easiest because we're all surrounded by people all day long
And it turns out it's the hardest for a lot of people. I'm kind of a striver whisperer in my practice
I specialize in people that really want to make a lot with their lives that are serious about the
Entrepreneurial venture of their own life. They're the startup entrepreneur of me Inc.
I really admire that and it's something that I teach
The problem with that is it's very easy to no longer have real friends
They have deal friends, but not real friends and and real and deal are different deal deal friends. They're useful
They're very useful, right and it's good to have people who are useful to you and it's good to be useful to others
Don't get me wrong
But you need useless friends too people who just love you
You need useless friends. I don't mean worthless friends. I have those too
You need people who who are not useful to you and you're not useful to them
They just love you chris and and we have fewer and fewer of that. That's the reason that
60 percent of 60 year old men today say their best friend is their wives
And 30 percent of their wives say their best friend is their husband
That's a a sad story of unrequited love for men my age. It's really important to keep this in mind
It's also because women seem to be able to hold on to
uh, that allo parenting
Adjacents group of close friends better than men do. I mean, this is one of the reasons why during
divorces men have a worse time of it
For many reasons, but one of them being that they often subjugate their friend group for their wife's friend group
And when the wife goes away the friend group goes away
Yeah, yeah, so for in traditionally organized families in in past times in particular when dad left and and made a living
Outside the home at work. He would be cheating his family by hanging out with his friends
And so he didn't and the result is that he lost his friendship chops over the years and got lonelier and lonelier and lonelier
Now you think it'd be much better now
It's much worse because everybody's doing that now everybody's men are doing that women are doing that
And you find that women and men under 30 are now the loneliest cohort in our society
And the more successful they are in their lives the lonelier they tend to be in their lives
They're more likely to say that nobody knows me well
The reason is real and deal and you got to do the work
I mean for a lot of people they haven't had close friendships since college or from high school
And when they're you know, 28 years old and now 35 years old they're 45 years old and everybody's incredibly useful to them
Now to be sure the the most successful marriages are the ones that are based on on on deep friendship
We call it companion at love which sounds, you know, distinctly not hot
I get it, but it's important because that's the the closest friendship you're going to have but it's not enough
You find that the happiest people they have they're very close friends with their spouse
But they have one really close friend at least besides that introverts usually have one really close friend besides a spouse
Extroverts have more like five
They don't have 20 because you don't have the time to maintain that but it's really important
How often do we need to see our friends? How do we determine whether somebody is real or deal?
What's the amount of time that we need to spend with them per week, etc, etc
Yeah, there's lots of rules for that and again, this falls into the your results may vary category
But there's one thing that I do know when somebody says, oh, yeah, no, no, I mean that's like
I have some real friends. Let's say think about your most real friend who's not your spouse again
When's the last time you talked to him?
I don't know two months ago. Not a real friend. I'm sorry
I'm sorry. I mean, it's like if it's your real friend you keep up to date with your real friends
I have two guys that I talk to every week and they one lives in san francisco and one lives in atlanta
I live in boston
I see them in person. I saw one of them for breakfast yesterday in new york city
We take opportunities with one of them. We go on vacation together with our wives
That's the effort that you make because you you want to see the people you love
You want to see him in person you make the effort you want to talk to him
You miss him you actually miss him if if you don't miss the person
It doesn't kind of hurt your heart because you haven't talked to him in a while in a week
It's not a real friend. What's the difference between real and deal? How can someone tell a lot of the time we
Feel like real friends are also impressive if you're on the personal growth journey. It's difficult to
Distinguish real and deal from real ordeal. Yeah, the difference is that with a deal friend
There's something in front. There's this trend. There's a transaction that's happening. That's more important than the emotion transaction
Trump's emotion. There's nothing wrong with that with people in your life. By the way, it's not like you should
Fire all of your transactional friendships. No because you'll wind up without a career to be sure
It's very good to help each other
But if the emotion that you feel for the person is more important than the transaction you could undertake
Okay, that's good in which case you can actually have deals with your real friends
But that's the key component and if for all of them, it's like I care a lot more about how the person is useful to me
Than the person's life. That's when you know
Got you final one. What?
Yeah
Work is you know, people listening to us right now
They want an edge in their lives and I and I understand that in a way that they
Measure that edge frequently is is in their and their success. You know, I think I probably at first listened to you
Three years ago, maybe the first time I heard your show and I think you just passed
I don't know a hundred thousand
YouTube subscribers or something that was a long time ago because you have a lot more than that right now
And I remember you're like, I can't believe it man and your career was kind of blowing up
I remember thinking that because I was thinking yeah, this young guy is doing great. It's very inspirational
I love people who are in the hunt. I really really love people who are in the hunt
The problem is
That when it comes to work the hunt itself doesn't give you
Doesn't give you the satisfaction that you're going to desire mother nature lies to you in many ways
But and we've talked about it before but but here's one of the biggest lies that mother nature gives you
If you're successful and making
Progress and money and power and the admiration of other people then you'll be happy you get happiness for free
Success first happiness second. So you don't have to worry about happiness
You just have to be successful money power
admiration
Maybe a little pleasure thrown in there along the way
Those are the worldly idols by the way st. Thomas Aquinas
In paraphrasing Aristotle and the Summa Theologia written in 1265
Classified those as the world's idols he was an excellent social scientist
Because it turns out that those are the intermediate good. There's nothing wrong with those things by the way
I'm not condemning those things. They're just incomplete for your happiness if you you have those as the goals
You're in real trouble. Okay. So what are the right goals from work? It's twofold
number one earn your success
That means create value with your life and work in your life in the lives of other people and you have to be rewarded and
Acknowledged and recognized for the the real value that you're creating
10 years nonsense loyalties nonsense merit hard work and personal responsibility and you're rewarded and recognized for it
And you believe it that's earned success
That by the way, that's why I'm a complete advocate for the free enterprise system
Not because I you know, it's like rah rah rah capitalism adam smith
No
Because it makes people happy when they're succeeding in the in the in a system that rewards merit and personal responsibility
It's not perfect, but it's the only system we got that really does that that's number one two
Now i'm going to sound like a commie
service to others
Service to others you need to actually believe actually that's not communism. That's capitalism too. I take it back
Service to others is incredibly it's it's this will bring you joy to your work
You have to know that people need you the essence of human dignity
Is about being needed
Is like feeling it like an asset in society the essence of despair is feeling like a liability to be managed
By your family by the welfare system by anybody else
Which is why it's so terrible to be in poverty because of the way that we treat people in poverty
We don't look at them as assets to develop which they should be because human beings are human beings with equal dignity
We treat them like, you know
Liabilities to manage by the by whatever system that they're they're talking about to create value in the lives of other people to
To to to serve others means that they need you and that is the true secret to everything else
Now you get it like crazy because you know
You don't you don't have gunned anybody's head to listen to modern wisdom
They're coming to you voluntarily and that is this affirmation. They need me. They like it. It's in the comments. Thank you
My guess is you get
20 emails a day from people who say that that podcast really changed my thinking
They need you. Well, everybody needs that every single person needs that whether you're you know picking apples or
You know trying to you know running for congress you actually need that in your life
Those are the two service to others and and earning your success
I had an essay that I wrote
Probably about a year ago now
I want to read it to you about the tension between success and happiness
One of the most tensions one of the most common tensions
I talk about at the moment is between a desire for success and a desire to feel like we're enough
Success is a strange thing
Presumably we want success because we think a more successful life will bring us more happiness meaning and fulfillment
Here's the problem. We sacrifice the thing we want
Happiness for the thing which is supposed to get it success failure can make you miserable
But i'm not sure that success will make you happy one of the most common dynamics
I see amongst high performances is this parents want their child to do well
Parents encourage their child to do well by praising when they succeed and criticizing when they fail
The child learns that praise and admiration is contingent on succeeding this lesson
Metastasizes through early adulthood into I am only worthy of love acceptance and belonging if I succeed
Now powered by an internal feeling of insufficiency
This person is driven to achieve many things
They're prepared to outwork out hustle and out suffer everyone else because they're not just running toward a life that they want
They're running away from a life that they fear success and progress ameliorates the feelings of insufficiency
Therefore success and progress becomes prioritized above everything else
Now don't get me wrong many high performers genuinely love the work that they do and many are driven by a well balanced
simple desire to maximize their time on this planet
Rather than trying to fill a void inside of themselves
But if I was to place a bet I'd guess that the majority of high performers are driven by fears of insufficiency
Rather than a holistic desire to be better
I think people who are high achievers on average are more miserable than the average person
So what does it mean that the people we admire most are the ones with the least admirable internal states?
If the pursuit of success is in an effort to make us happy and in the pursuit of success
We make ourselves miserable. Why not just shortcut the entire process and just be happy?
Is that even possible now external accolades count for a lot?
And I don't think that recanting all worldly possessions and retreating to a cave in the woods is an optimal strategy
Some degree of external material success is important to make us feel validated and satiate our desire for status and respect
But external success will not fill an internal void and insufficiency adaptation is this if your drive
Comes from a fear of insufficiency and you continue to disprove those fears with success in the real world
And yet the feeling of insufficiency persists. What makes you think that the answer to this problem is more success
nice
Very astute you're a natural social scientist
I admire it and it's all true
Look everything is like there's a ton of science that backs all that up, but you don't need it
Everybody knows that that look if you go for the success to get the happiness
You're going to get the success because we'll be unto you if you have the wrong dreams
Your dreams are going to come true if you work hard on them, but you're not going to get to the happiness the right strategy
Is to shoot for greater happiness and then you'll have enough success
Now those words for a guy like you a stranger like you
They give you a little chill don't they?
Because enough success doesn't sound right. No, no, man. I'm not doing this for enough success
I know tons of guys back in high school who have enough success
I don't want that. I want to be
I want to be special chris. I want to be special
How many people with a success addiction, which is the fundamental brain delivered underlying dopamine?
Moderated or mediated addiction which lies behind workaholism by the way
How many of those people have chosen specialness over happiness?
That's what you're talking about any loser can cultivate all these relationships and all these friendships
But not every loser can work as hard as I do and become a navy seal
and do you know 50 pull-ups and and have you know 40 million
Instagram followers. I don't know
If that's specialness and and by the way mother nature is arriving you once again
Mother nature does not care if you're happy, but mother nature wants you to be special
So that you'll be able to survive more easily by having a higher rank in the kin group
And being able to pass on your genes because you'll be the alpha
But that's not what you want. That's actually not even what you want
You're gonna get enough food and you don't want 750 kids
You what you want is a really really good life and you're being driven by these ancient impulses
That's exactly what you're saying and you've walked into a dopaminergic
Moderated and I don't know why I actually had this thing come up on my screen right now. It's fine. It's fine
It's a why we we we walk into a a a success addiction that makes your brain look more or less like a methamphetamine addicts brain
How can people
Learn to unwind and detach themselves from their desire for success
You don't need to unwind your desire for success. You need to understand and manage your desire
That's what we need to do on all these things. You don't need to want different things
You need to manage your wants for these different things. Look, what does that? I don't drink?
I don't drink alcohol. I don't drink alcohol
And the reason I don't drink alcohol is because there's a lot of alcoholism in my family and I drank way too much when I was your age
I drank a lot when I was your age
And so
I stopped
And I stopped a long time ago. I stopped over 20 years ago. I still want alcohol
I'm not going to stop wanting alcohol. What I do is I manage my desire for alcohol through visa v my behavior
That's what we need to do. Look, of course, you're ambitious. Of course, you're driven for tremendous success
That's wonderful
But it can't manage you that that that drive that ambition that that that intense visceral sense that that you'll only
Be special if you have enough success you can't let it manage you is what it comes down to
Of course, you have these desires. By the way, chris, you're going to get married at some point
And and after you're married you're going to look at a woman and she's going to be incredibly beautiful
And you're going to have a sense of natural human desire for her and you're not going to act on it
That's the same thing is true when when you could work the 14th hour instead of spending the first hour with your kids
You're going to make the decision to sublimate that desire and manage it
Yeah, that's interesting. I remember david bus told me this story
That a reader sent in to him
Saying that his book had saved his marriage
Because this guy had been married for a while maybe between five and ten years something like that
and he'd found himself being attracted to other women and
He took that attraction as some sort of sense that his existing relationship was wrong if I was
Fully totally renaissance period besotted with my partner
I wouldn't have eyes for any other woman for the rest of time
And david explained that there is a very very well embedded reward system that men get when they look at
Even a pair of rocks that slightly resemble boobs like you are driven to just like sexualize and look at anything
whether it's like
geological or otherwise and
He said that it sort of liberated me from this sense that I can't
The desire itself is wrong and I must tell myself a story about it. It feels a little bit to me
like this
Line that we have drawn between when I get enough success
I will allow myself to be happy or I will I will have justified happiness happiness will come as a byproduct
Along for the ride with success
That's kind of the same look your desire to continue to chase this thing may not really
Cease all that much
But your choice about whether or not you do work the 14th hour today
Is one of those and it's not just about you know, it's kind of further upstream
I'm going to guess what you need to do is go further upstream than this and think about
How many hours a day do I want to work?
How much work do I need to put on my plate in order for me to need to work those number of hours
Because otherwise what you're going to end up doing is failing at things that you've intended to do
Like if you've put 14 hours of work on your plate, like you kind of need to do it until you no longer need to do it
And that is a more sort of life design
position
That's right. The unfortunate fact is that
You won't know how to do anything else once you become hopelessly addicted because these behavioral patterns feed on themselves
Notwithstanding the fact that you're getting unhappier and unhappier
Furthermore, there's one other thing that's keep that's worth pointing out if you were
An you know an untreated alcoholic
Nobody would say like dude last night you put away two bottles of vodka. That was impressive
I admire you for that. They'd be like get some help man. That was it's pathetic
But if you work 14 hour days, they're going to be like man, you're going to be the next Elon Musk
What do you admire about Elon Musk?
He works all the time
He and you know people will admire the fact that he says I haven't taken a day off since 2008 or something like that
We love workaholics in our culture. We love success addicts. We love people who are
Self-objectifiers, but let's just think about that a little bit. I mean, I bet when you were a kid
Did you have a good relationship with your dad?
Yeah, not bad
And I bet that he said that you shouldn't objectify women
You shouldn't look at them and say that they're nothing more than sex objects or that you should treat them like real people, right?
you know
Why because you you're a boy and you have an impulse to not do that for all the reasons that david buss has made very clear on your show
Okay, well, you shouldn't objectify yourself either chris and and a self-objectifier is somebody who looks in the mirror and says
That's a success machine
That's somebody and you know that these
Affirmations it'd be like looking in the mirror and saying that's somebody who can say stay stoned all day
It wouldn't do that. That'd be pathetic. It could be weird
And yet that's kind of the thing that we do with the self-objectification which is downstream from success addiction
Which actually is related to workaholism
Which all these weird patterns of behavior that we establish often before even before adolescence
All right, let's get into the macro nutrients the component parts of happiness
We've got three to go through one other. Yeah enjoyment satisfaction and meaning and they seem self-evident, but they're not
The that to be I'll give you an example enjoyment sounds like pleasure
But it's completely different for all the reasons that we've kind of discussed
pleasure is a limbic phenomenon
pleasure is uh is uh
And it's a set of signals in your limbic system saying that something is either really good for helping you survive to get calories
Are really good for getting mates and passing on your genes
That's really the and and we become ingenious at in the laboratory
Creating new ways to get those sensations. So, you know, everything from gambling to pornography to
methamphetamine to
Fentanyl to alcohol all these things do is they mimic different ways that in the place to seem before we had substances in these behaviors
That we would get pleasure from something that actually helps us survive and pass on our genes
Unfortunately, all those things that I just mentioned are addictive and bad for you because
You know, what you're doing is you're artificially stimulating something you don't need to do
And in a way that your your body and brain are not accustomed to and so they're incredibly unhealthy
A lot of guys, especially your age, don't realize how dangerous
Is for the brain for example, but what it is is just it fires up that impulse to pass on your genes
In an artificial way. Okay. So why do I bring that up? Because all those limbic searches for pleasure are different than enjoyment
Which is fundamentally an experience in the prefrontal cortex of your brain
And you don't have to not have pleasure by the way. I'm not I'm I'm catholic. I'm not I'm not a puritan
And what you need is the source of pleasure plus people plus memory
Thus delivering the experience into your prefrontal cortex, which is part of happiness. So I'll give you an example
I was doing work with a big beer company and we were talking about these ideas and I said look
Associate your product with enjoyment not pleasure
And I said, what do you mean? Well, don't run a commercial of a dude alone in his apartment pounding a 12 pack
Why because that's the pursuit of pleasure and everybody knows is addictive and dangerous and irresponsible and pathetic
Do the ad where the guy is having a beer with his brother or his friends
You've taken beer plus people plus memory and that equals enjoyment and that's part of happiness
If you're doing something as pleasurable and and it can be addictive and you're doing it alone. You're probably doing it wrong
That's where pornography comes in. That's where gambling by yourself comes in
That's where eating a whole cake by yourself comes in
That's where using what drinking alone comes in all of these particular behaviors
And that's an example of how the the neuroscience of this can be intensely practical in helping you to lead a better life and change your habits
What else is there to say about the
way to use
Pleasure people and memories is there something you should do to embed memories more effectively other types of pleasures that seem to be better for
Happiness or not other types of people. Is there a way that you can reinforce this?
Do I need an ebbing house forgetting curve flash card anky deck to be able to remember all of the shit that I did?
I mean, hey man, let's make it. Let's make some money. So
I mean, see you're such a natural entrepreneur. It's it's unbelievable. You go write your product. It's great. Um, yeah, the people shouldn't be addicts
You know, it's not going to be helpful to you if your community of people who help you enjoy things that are pleasurable are also drunks
So so it's obviously the case that you want people who are trying to enjoy each other's company as opposed to simply focusing on the
The source of the pleasure the the chemical or behavioral source of the pleasure. That's really important
Actually just to interject that I wonder whether I wonder whether there's an analogy to be drawn between
Um, let's say that you know a bunch of people in a crack den all of whom are just smoking crack
And the only reason that they're there is to like be around other people that also do crack
That's just the environment that they they exist in. I wonder whether
There is kind of an equivalent if you were to let's say be
A professional athlete of some kind training in a facility with a bunch of other individual athletes
But all of whom were only there because they also needed to use the facility individually that they were there for the
personal pursuit now, obviously the pursuit of
training versus the sort of direct pleasure that you get from taking drugs
but my point being that
there's
a lack of
Interaction between each of those individuals. They're very much siloed within their own experience of whatever the pleasure might be
You are at a gaming a games
Place where tons of people can play call of duty
But none of you are playing against each other and none of you are speaking to each other
Right like you're with people. It's doing it in community
But it's not
Integrating with the people. Yeah interaction is critically important. You're not with other people
You're not actually with other people if you're just
In a crowd. I mean you can feel unbelievably
Lonely walking down the street in New York City. You're technically all walking down the street in New York City
This is with little kids. You'll see this when you have children
Before they learn how to interact with each other they do they do something called parallel play
Where you'll bring two little kids two little two year olds together and they'll be playing with blocks
But not together parallel like they want to be looking at each other's way that that works
That doesn't stimulate oxytocin
And so if you want to get into the neurochemistry of what we're talking about here
You're not going to get the benefit of pleasure plus people plus memory unless you're doing something that really stimulates oxytocin
Which means intense interaction eye contact and ideally human touch as well
Right. Okay. So this is an argument to
You know
Give your friends a hug when they just win at a board game to like reach up a high five
I play a lot of werewolves. Have you played werewolves? No, I haven't okay. So werewolves is like a
It's a role-playing card game where everybody in a circle is given a particular character
Some are good guys some are bad guys and you don't know who's who and you have to bluff your way through
The game and oh, I thought about that. Yeah. Yeah, there's another game called mafia, which is basically the same but with different characters
and I have observed
People that have been married for 15 years
Where they completely straight face just lie to their partner about what their role is. No, of course not, honey
I love you. I would like so we've had to make a rule that like what happens during werewolves stays during werewolves
Because the potential blast radius of sort of the loss of the loss of certainty
Lots of trust. Yeah, exactly. There's a lot of uh, I play with a lot of like
World-class pro poker players too, which is just like a kind of to be honest an unfair fight
My point being that with that as soon as the game's finished
Everybody gets up everybody's sort of high five
There's been a ton of tension for a long time
Some people have been working together some people have been working against them
But they've been working together too and everybody's sort of high-fiving and all the rest of it and it's very enjoyable
Um, what is there to say just to round this out? What is there to say about memories?
Um, what can we do to maximize the yield of memories when it comes to enjoyment?
The key thing is actually to do something that's not part of your ordinary routine
The more that you'll actually
Disequilibrate your experience around for example a particular occasion or in a particular place
That will add to the memory such that it will be easier to recall to put together and to recall
And you'll be able to do it to to to to recreate that enjoyment again and again and again
What you'll want is to do something where the experience doesn't stop at the end of the action
That's what you really want. What do you mean when you say disequilibriate?
Disequilibrate what your ordinary routine is so so you'll notice that
The things that you do every single day you don't remember them the things you don't do every single day
You remember them and that's how you the recall so you can have the duration of the experience be richer and longer
To do is to you know when you're going to hang out with your friends go someplace with your friends right as opposed to
Is this a degree of novelty?
Yeah, and that's one of the reasons that I recommend that couples for example leave the house
That they do things together outside of the house. So they're not you know, they don't get into too much of a domestic routine, which is a very
Un a sort of uninteresting way to run your marriage is to do the same thing over and over and over and over again
You're just not going to get the benefits of enjoyment in the same way
I had uh, Susanna Hallinan on the show forever ever ever ago. Now remember she had this really great book
Uh talking about how to make time move more slowly
Yeah, it was so fascinating and it seems to me
At least my current sort of conception of it, which may need to be updated now is novelty and intensity
Those seem to be two of the things that increase the frequency of memory blocks sort of being dropped in that you know
Someone that's listening has driven to work a thousand times. That's a thousand journeys, but it was always the same route
so you have condensed a thousand
15 minute half hour blocks down into essentially one memory apart from that one time that there was a car crash
next to me and it was different because novelty and intensity and um,
yeah, I think just trying to
Keep that in mind to you know
Turn left instead of turning right when you go to the shops to go to a different restaurant to travel to a different hotel to do the whatever
Um, I think important
It is important and and there's a lot of ways that you can do that my wife and I have tried to do that
We've moved 20 times
In the 35 years that we've been together, uh, I mean we I mean it sounds like we're in the witness protection program
I realized but it's part of it is just because when we decide that we want to do a new thing
We do a new thing we've moved three times in the past five years because you know, where do we want to live not here?
I try that
And and this this it's not a search for novel it can become a pathology to be sure
You know, you actually can't stop any place
But the whole idea that you can live in a new way
Try a new thing and not letting it turn into kind of a groove
One of the reasons that the perception of time speeding up happens as people get older is because their openness to experience starts to decline
particularly after 55 your openness to experience increases
Um through your teenage years into your early 20s and it stays relatively constant until your mid 50s
And then it really takes a big dip as a as a matter of this
The way that we typically measured it and what we see your love of new things starts to decline you you got to fight against that
If you want if you don't want time to go
Terrifyingly fast and and and suddenly life is over one of the best ways to do it as you
Correctly point out is to inject more more
You know newness of the ways that you do things in your life and to do that with your partner as well
All right satisfaction. Yeah
Satisfaction is a weird one. So satisfaction is you know, we talk about it all the time, you know
But we don't really define it satisfaction is the joy that you get after struggle
And this is the weird human mystery only humans want pain
We only humans want to sacrifice and struggle because then the rewards are sweeter
The more you struggle before the more and and everybody kind of knows that's true
And yet we don't follow through on that very often. We're always looking for the easy way out
That's the reason that there's this kind of this
Call of the wild that people have when they listen to people like david goggins
Or jack-o-willingke because they're whole or rich role, you know, these are all mutual friends of ours, obviously
And it's like the the the thing that's kind of calling from nature to people when they hear this and they find it so attractive
It's like, yeah, yeah, man. I need more pain
I need more pain in my life because then my life will be sweeter and yet they're going through life trying to find the
Easiest way out. This is a real mystery
Actually, it's not, you know the divine path requires struggle
And the animal path wants convenience and ease and a complete lack of pain
It wants sort of an analgesic existence
So one of the things that we do is we try to teach our kids this, you know, when your kids are little you say
Don't eat before dinner
All parents say this and the and the kid is always like why and you make up a bogus
Excuse like it's bad for you. You know, you're not going to get your proper nutrients. It's all nonsense
You don't want your kid to eat before dinner because you want your kid to be suffering a little bit of hunger before dinner
So they'll enjoy their dinner and be happier. That's what you actually want
But you can't quite articulate it and you don't want to tell the kid
It's because I want you to suffer you want the kid to suffer
And so that's an important thing to keep in mind and that's a real conundrum
And the the more that we can understand that the more that we can expose ourselves to
Suffering for the right reasons
You really should get up before you're ready and while it's still dark. It's best for you to do that
You should work out in the morning. It's a good thing to do
I mean, I get it not everybody can do that
You should do these things that actually hurt and your day will be better and your life will be happier
That's the first mystery is you know trying to sort that the second mystery however is bigger
In satisfaction, which is that mother nature tells us that if we get that thing like that millions
YouTube subscriber, you're gonna love that forever. How long did you enjoy that like half an hour five minutes?
Yeah, that's pretty good. All right five minutes, right?
And but but your brain told you the whole way that when you got that it was going to be awesome
You know, so so Mick Jagger saying I can't get no satisfaction. That's wrong
You wouldn't try and try and try and try if you couldn't get no satisfaction
You can't keep no satisfaction
That's the real problem and you try and you try and you try and that's what
The reason for that is what neuroscientists call homeostasis
Which of course you know about and homeostasis is the tendency of any physiological system to go back to its baseline
So you're ready for the next set of circumstances. It's true for your emotions. It's awesome. It's awesome
Forget it. I got to go back so that I'm not distracted from then so I can stay in the hunt
Is what it comes down to otherwise I'd start to death after I got food
You know be like I was good enough and then you die and you don't want that
So that's the key thing and we the mystery is that really smart sophisticated people never figure that out
And they conclude that they just didn't have enough and this gets back to your success problem
This gets back to the success conundrum. It's like, yeah, I got that thing, but I'm still not satisfied
So I guess I needed five million. I guess I needed 50 million
The first thing that a billionaire concludes is that he needed another billion
Have you seen have you seen that study where when pretty much anybody is asked
What level of wealth would you be satisfied with?
It doesn't matter what level of wealth you're at. It tends to be almost
Exactly three times your current income. It's like at about three times where I'm at now
That's that's my sort of settling point, but it scales all the way up to a billion
Yeah, yeah, there are different studies that one of the studies. I mean some studies say is 40 percent
Some studies say is 300 percent the bottom line is more
Because that's what your brain is telling you that the secret to satisfaction that endures is more
More what more money more power more pleasure more honor more instagram followers more sexual partners more more
And and the problem with that is that it doesn't recognize that there's
A divine version of that that actually works. There's a what I did it again. I keep getting these weird effects on my camera
That there is a way to hack this
This this neuro physiological matrix this evolutionary matrix
And the way to think about this so that you're not subject to this you can be free forever, by the way
Is by remembering the satisfaction that endures is actually a function of all the things you have
Divided by the things that you want
haves divided by wants is the right
Mental model for you to pursue and that means of course you have a have more strategy
Of course you do you also need a want less strategy
You need to manage your wants just as much as you need to manage your haves
I realize that's very Buddhist, but it's actually in every spiritual and philosophical tradition
And so the way that I do that the couple of ways to do that one one way to think about that is to think about the metaphor
The metaphor of success for entrepreneurs is kind of like you're an artist and and you're putting
Brushstrokes on a canvas of your life
The right metaphor is is at some point in your life at least is actually the sculptor
Where you're chipping away the jade or the marble to find the true work of art within and that means getting rid of the detritus
The part of the block of marble that's not the horse or the rider
So that you can find the horse and rider inside and one way to do that that I often do
Is like I used to have a bucket list everybody who listens to this podcast those little bucket lists
I have a reverse bucket list now
Where I take my worldly cravings and desires and ambitions, which I still have I'm turning 60 in two weeks
And I still have the these dumb
You know at this craven trivial desires. I'm a weak weak man
But I'm I actually will write them down on my birthday and I will cross them out
Not because I'm not going to get them
But because I want the management of those cravings and desires to be in my prefrontal cortex and not in my limbic system
Can you give us some examples of of what you cross out? Yeah, so one of the things will be for example these worldly
Metrics of success in my particular industry that are trivial
So for you, it would be a certain number of of youtube subscribers for me
It would be a certain number of
sales of my latest book or
Or prestige inside the university or whatever it happens to be
Now and I realize I know
You know, I I authentically know as do you that these things are trivial
And yet we we look at them as a marker of our own specialness and our own
Sense of accomplishment when I write them down
I acknowledge that I have the desire when I cross it out
I say I I have the desire, but I will not be attached to this goal
That you're you're you're physically negating the attachment from the goal
That I mean, of course the attachment on understanding, you know
Ducca is that concept to the first noble truth of Buddhism that life is suffering because of ducca because of this
Sticky craving for the inadequate things, but it is not saying I'm not going to do that
I'm not going to get that it's saying that I'm not going to be attached to that and it's incredible
This year on my birthday by the way
I got a big one coming man with a zero
My attachment that's bothering me right now. I'm going to admit it. I have too many political opinions
I really do
They're they're weighing me down. They're they're making it harder to have friends
Then they should be so I'm going to write down my 10 strongest political opinions and I'm going to cross them out
Not that I'm saying that I don't believe these things, but I'm not going to be attached to my rightness
That humility is going to set me free and that's a kind of a metaphor
Tick not ha on the great vietnamese buddhist monk
He wrote that our greatest attachments are to our opinions
And that's you know triply true for me right now
So man, I I need freedom and and I'm going to get it by by talking about
the wants that's just a house
that
Practice the exercise of writing down the things that you want and then crossing them out
Sounds great symbolically. Lovely the writing the physical writing of something lovely
Presumably that's not just a master key that downstream from that and yes, I'm still going to have it
But where are you going in your mind?
Is there a practice which is more repeatable and robust that when your desire to correct somebody about their view on abortion?
arises that
What where are you going to there to permanently be crossing it out?
You know what it does is it makes you remember the attachment in the moment of behavior
That's what that thing does. That's what the important thing is because when it's in your prefrontal cortex
then it's not
Then it's a behavior that is that is manageable in in the executive centers of your brain
And so what will you do instead?
When somebody sits down next to me and says something that I really just I don't believe about abortion
And I think that I think now I have my opportunity
Because my prefrontal cortex is managing and I say
Tell me why you think that
Would you please tell me why you think that?
And and you listen to learn it's an extraordinary thing
And by the way, you get smarter and you're wrong less often and you get less embarrassed and you lose fewer friends
And and when you do that the other person that you're talking to
I just gave a long lecture on the on the on the neuroscience of the absorption of messages and political communications
that I just get a lecture today
And one of the things that you find is the more that you do that the more people think that you're that that you're a
Very smart person who makes very good points and that your point of view is actually quite persuasive
To shocker how that happens
Can you you mentioned earlier on something I've heard you talk about before to do with the common idols?
That uh, people kind of get waylaid by can you just go through this?
Yeah, that was we mentioned that just a minute ago. That was the Aquinas four idols money power pleasure fame
money power pleasure fame now Aquinas asserted this is 1265 you didn't have data
But man he was the best and Aquinas said
That everybody falls prey to one of these things more than anything else that this is an exhaustive list
Of the things we care about the most now money is pretty obvious money or wealth it or you know
financial resources
Anything that actually allows you to buy stuff and shows that you're a very important person, you know that these markers these
um medium of exchange and store of value
The second is pleasure we've talked about and or power power is is the ability to control the behavior of others
And the last is actually a really kind of a you know a lot of people listening to us are like I don't care about fame
You know, I don't want to be instagram famous, but that's not it
It's really the prestige and the admiration of the right people
I mean if you can be completely screwed up if you were on the disney channel as a kid
And what you want is the admiration of strangers and they're literally people's brains who are wired like that because they got famous before they were
While their brain was still in formation and they'll be like somebody who got addicted to methamphetamine as a 14 year old
They'll they'll never be normal is what we actually know
But but most aren't like that, but they still want to be considered somebody for the people whose whose opinions actually matter
Those are the four idols and I play a game with my students
What's my idol because once you know your idol
You can actually control your behavior and manage yourself in a much more effective way
You have to know your weakness is the way that this works out and a lot of people
It actually don't so do you want to play the game chris hit me you want to play?
What's my idol? Okay. I'm right the way to play
What's my idol is not for me to say what which of the four really controls you
Is to say which of the four do you not care about and start eliminating them?
Because then we're going to wind up on the one that's really harder for you. So money
power
pleasure
honor
You got to give away one. Which one are you going to give away power?
how come
I
Don't notice in myself a desire to really accumulate power of any kind
Okay, so I'm going to make a prediction about you
You hate it when people have power over you. Oh, yeah
That's it
People who hate having people having power over them are averse to having power over other people as well
You're a non hierarchical person. You're a non hierarchical guy, right?
Yeah, the the org structure of the business would suggest that as well. Yeah
Yeah, that's it's and that's almost always the case. Okay. Good. So now we've got money
pleasure
And fame or honor or prestige average
You got to give another one away and it's harder now. What are you going to give away next?
Uh money
Money how come
One of the of all of the different mental pathologies that I have
materialism
a desire for sort of
Flashness in terms of possessions is just not something that I have. I have a degree of scarcity mindset
which
A abundance kind of ameliorates, but for me, it's just it's it's not something that I really think about very much
Did you grow up with nice things?
We were like lower working class. I think okay lower middle class kind of like lower working class
Oh lower working class. Okay. Like my wife grew up in Barcelona. So it was you know
Sometimes you paid the light bill and sometimes you didn't pay the light bill. Okay. You didn't grow up with nice things
This might be the case now when it comes to this
There's a very interesting set of sociological theories that you can never be actually comfortable more than one and a half classes
Above that in which you were a child
So if you were if you were kind of lower working class that means that
The tastes above upper middle class are going to be like that stuff is boring, man
That's that it's like you want me to collect art. Why would I spend my time collecting art?
I want to talk about stuff and ideas and things that actually excite me
And so that might be part of it
But also you've had a pretty a pretty I mean at age 36
You've had economic success beyond your wildest dreams, right?
And you probably figured out that there's not that much stuff that you can buy. That's really that fun
all right
As soon as you as soon as you can fly business class and not have to think about the cost of a coffee
Most stuff downstream from that. I mean, you know, there'll be some things once I get a family
There'll be I think that you kind of transcend your own desires in that way
And it's more to do with providing for the kids and so on and so forth
But yeah, you know
I'm very very glad of that and I think
Lots of people
Don't realize that they're kind of blessed by having no or a limited materialism set point
That like if you look at how much money you need in order to be happy with the worldly possessions that you have
With the degree of keeping up with the Joneses that you're motivated by
With the shows of affection and love and and gifting that you need to do to other people or that you need from other people in order to feel loved
If you don't have that
That's basically like you needing you being a much more efficient system financially
Like there is somebody else out there who needs 10 times your salary
To get the same level of satisfaction out of life. So I
Reframed that probably about
Five years ago and just it's one of the things that I'm I genuinely feel blessed about whether that's from genes or or environment
I'm like, I don't need it and it's by the way, it's great
But it's not a super virtue because we haven't gotten your idol yet
We're getting that don't worry don't worry and we are getting back down to us soon
And what you find is that there are certain there are certain guys who are way
I mean, they they they they objectify themselves
With their relationship to money in the same way that women often do for the same reasons evolutionarily and and they're in their physical appearance
Why because this is going to predict your you know, sort of as a as a
Predictor of your success in mating markets despite the fact that you're not even in mating markets
So a lot of that's primordial and has to do with you know, what the idol is for all kinds of reasons that we could talk about
Okay
Now it's getting uncomfortable because there's two left and you've already through process of elimination told me that these are the
Things that you care about. Okay. So number one
um, you know, let's let's put these in order because you got to get rid of one of these pleasure
An honor you got to get one you got to get rid of one
Pleasure can go
You like pleasure, don't you but
But now I know what you're really like
I found out what you really want Chris
It's not a surprise to anybody my desire for prestige to be recognized and validated by the world
I yeah, I know I know because you're doing this you're doing you're doing something you're performing in public
And most people who are you know, straw you're in a strong extrovert clearly you have openness to experience
You have an agreeable nature. You're probably not highly neurotic
You've got all the things that actually go into somebody surprised if you if you if you do a big five on me
Uh, I come in
Uh, neuroticism is uh moderate
Uh
Get most of my energy from being on my own. I'm an only child
Uh, I choose to work on my own. So, you know that
Turn it on turn it off thing. Um, it's definitely there. But yeah, I I'm glad that I've managed a lot as a an extroverted
Loan neuroticism person, but uh, I fear that the source code may be slightly different
It might be it might be and you know, you don't know until you know
And and you know, there are people who present in a particular way and have a
Habitat that's quite different because they've been able to they're so good at getting along in society
But what we do know now is what your weakness is going to be
So five years from now, I predict you're going to be married and the argument you're going to be having with your wife
Is because you're going to be doing something that's going to bring you new heights of success
And your wife is and and then you're going to have this argument with your wife who's going to say
I don't want you to I want you to be around more chris
And you're going to say yeah, but you love all the great things that this lifestyle brings
And then you're mad at me for doing the things that it takes and she said I'll take you
I mean, I'm going to accept those things that don't have you but I'd prefer to have you
That's what I predict is the argument that you're going to actually have with your wife because
You love success
You love success. It feels good. That's the thing that actually and what do I mean by it feels good
That means it gives there's a lot of dopamine that comes from success
Which gives you anticipation of reward and when you get the success
It taps the ventral tegmental area of the chris brain, which gives you this little burst of joy
That's what's happening when this one these weird things these markers of success actually happen and those things happen to be
That centering around the admiration of other people
That you got to keep your eye on because all the mistakes you make in your life that you look back on with regret
Are going to be because you follow that particular idol
Meaning final holsman of the apocalypse
Yeah, so
This is the most important meaning
I can go because I'm very disciplined. I can go a long time without
Enjoyment and I can go a long time without satisfaction
But I can't go 10 minutes without meaning and be a happy person
And this is the biggest problem that we have among young adults today
I have all kinds of tests that I give people to see whether or not they have a proper sense of meaning in their life
And I'm not judgmental about what that meaning is going to be
But I do know I can tell people
When they have a crisis of meaning and this is the biggest predictor of unhappiness for people in their 20s today
Now most people in their 20s are actually not in the in the active pursuit of meaning
Whereas in about 1960 most people were in an active pursuit of meaning
That's a big generate a set of generational differences that we have and it's a big one of the big
The biggest explanations for the things that we talked about earlier
Which is the degradation of of general societal happiness and particularly among the young
So meaning is actually kind of a combination of three things. It's coherence
Why things happen the way they do you have to have a
A theory of the case about why things happen. It doesn't mean it has to be right or it has to be mine
But you have to like this is why things happen yours tends to be very scientific about why things happen
Second you have to have a sense of purpose purpose and meaning are not synonymous purpose is a subset of meaning
That is direction and goals purpose is i'm going in a particular direction towards specific things
That's what it comes down to
And significance is the belief that your life matters
So it's it's coherence
Purpose and significance
Now there's a test that I give my students and by the way that I give my children
My kids are younger than you my kids are in the all three of my kids are in the 20s
And all three of my kids had to answer these questions
I made them write a business plan when they were when they were coming out of high school
You know, which is like a business plan for the enterprise of their lives for the next five years
I'm a b-school professor. I can do this
And uh, and I'm the venture capitalist. So, you know, I deserve a business plan
And and the point was what are you going to do to find the answers to two questions the two meaning questions?
Why are you alive?
And for what are you willing to give your life joyfully at this hour?
You need answers to those questions. You need to be alive for a reason
And you need to be willing to stop being alive for a reason
those are the meaning questions so
What are your answers? Why do you believe you're alive?
Why are you on earth?
A sperm and an egg is not the right answer and a stork isn't either
I think
The thing that I often come back to when I ask myself this question is
Uh to understand myself and the world around me. I get so much
Joy, I'm at my best when
I'm learning about things and engaging with ideas downstream from that
I can teach you to other people and do all of the rest of the stuff, but um
Maybe I'm revealing my sort of only child bona fides here, but so much of it is just
me understanding myself and the world around me like that's
It's been the single lineage trajectory throughout
All of the good things that I've done
Yeah, no, and and you just told me what you want to do with this life that you have
What you enjoy the most where you find the greatest productivity, but this is a little bit different
Why do you think that you were placed on this earth?
What is the purpose for which you were placed on this earth?
Now if if you're a radical materialist, you might say it's just all random, man
I wasn't I wasn't nobody down. Yeah. Yeah for sure. But my guess is you don't believe that
Why why did the universe create Chris Williamson?
I think to find and talk about good ideas that seems to be the thing that comes to me
You want to serve others? You just told me why why do you want to talk about things?
Otherwise, you wouldn't bother we wouldn't be having we're having a conversation in public
Why because we want people to listen to it and it might just be completely venal on your on my part because by the way
My idols map exactly onto yours. I'm the 60 year old version of you. Sorry
I know I know it's like maybe you'll you'll still have hair
If you're lucky, but but okay
If it's purely venal, that's just not good and that's a that's that's a bad answer to the question
but if it really is I want to serve the world by
uncovering its mysteries
And in so doing people will be able to lead better informed better lives
In other words, you were created to serve
In a certain way solid
now it gets harder
For what would you give your life joyfully at this at this hour?
Mom dad and
Like perhaps a golden retriever that's younger than five years old
Would you really give your life for your mom and dad? Yeah
You would die for them despite the fact that they're significantly older. Yeah. I mean, they would they would be I would be in a lot of trouble
But it's something that I would be prepared to do
There would absolutely as with almost anything I've ever had to do with them. There would be a very long portrayal
Negotiation, which would all of us would be dead before that was finished. So it might be a moot question
It's a hard one and it's a especially hard question for young adults who don't have children yet
It's a really hard one, right?
Where are we getting that deepest sense of meaning from what is that that we've transcended ourselves with?
You're like, you know, you know from the utilitarian perspective when you think
Ah, how much longer if mom and dad got left and what do they really want to do?
Ah, you know, what do you look at what you can give the world you haven't even passed on the genes yet?
Like even from their perspective, they would probably say even fuck you like just don't let especially because I'm an only child
Like don't let the bloodline end here. Like god dammit. Like at least, you know, like
Come into a cup before you do this so that we can you know, you're some some lady in a turkey base to somewhere
I can actually keep this guy. I don't know. But yeah, it's uh, it's difficult one. It's difficult one, man
Like to think about for sure. It wouldn't be like it wouldn't be my uh, country of birth
and it wouldn't be my uh
country of birth
And it wouldn't be my uh new country of adoption. It wouldn't be the faith that I don't have
uh, it wouldn't be the
sports team that I
barely keep up to date with
What's your sports team by the way texas rangers?
Really? Oh, yeah, I'm a bar. I'm a barsa man
the um
Well, we both we've both swapped sports. I've followed an mlb team and you've followed a like Spanish football team
I I married a catalan. There's no other way. There's no other way to
Keep family harmony. Well, do you have a best friend?
Yeah, would you would you would you die for him?
I definitely consider it. I bet you would
He's younger than me
The utilitarian and you again. Yeah, I fucking just can't get out can't get out the front of my brain
But this is the point this is that this is the introspection that's required to actually find a full sense of meaning
This is worth going away for five days on a silent retreat and thinking about these questions
And it's funny because you know, my adult kids have come to very different revelations about this because I push them push them push them push them
I have a I have a son who's a sniper. I have a son who's a marine sniper
Um, and he just got out of the Marine Corps now. He's he's he's in the reserves
But he was active duty for four years as a marine sniper. This is a this is a scary job, man
For me as his father and he went in as a knucklehead, you know, and he came out at 23 married
He's now five months out. His wife is pregnant
Um, and here's his answers
I mean because he found his answers by by actually putting his life in danger and doing all these really like wicked things
um
My I was created because god made me to serve other people. You know, he believes that these are not the right answers
These are his answers. Um, I would joyfully die for my faith and for my family and for my fellow marines
And for the united states of america and our allies chris. So this is
This is
Solid stuff and and he's i'm telling you he he actually has called me I screamed his call because he called while we were talking
Sorry sniper. Don't don't shoot me through the window. There's carlos. He's the best and he's six foot five and he's you know covered in tats
and um, he's
He's happy because he has these answers to these questions
But he did the work is really what it comes down to and this is what I recommend to a lot of people who feel
That little bit of hollowness that slight bit of deadness within
Where things that i'm doing every day, you know, it's like, I don't know I don't want to stand in this line
What's the meaning of me actually drive sitting in traffic and doing this when you have the answers to those questions?
There's a why for even the most trivial things that you're doing in your life
And that's a really really beautiful thing if I can do one thing for people
It's actually to encourage them to look for the answers to those questions. How can we improve our coherence?
So our coherence is the why things happen the way that they do
And uh that theory of the case is really tricky, but it gets back to the sense of transcendence
If you pursue a strategy of transcendence coherence comes in its wake
Even if you can't quite articulate why things happen the way they do
You have a sense of why things happen the way that they do
If you study dystoic philosophers with the utmost seriousness
The understanding of why things happen the way they do even if they're random and even if they're unfair becomes acceptable to you
And that acceptance of that is a sense of coherence on its face
Maybe you're a complete radically physicalist atheist who denies the utter existence of free will if you study the science
With enough seriousness of that you can you can make your peace with a coherence that actually comes from the randomness of the universe
my father was a
phd biostatistician he was the smartest guy ever met
and um
He said when he was dying of cancer when he was more he was just a little bit older than me
and I said it's just
Sucks it's not fair and he said
Somebody's gonna be on the left side of the distribution
Hahaha
Spoken spoken like a man that looked at a lot of graphs throughout his career. It's coherence, baby
But you can get coherence in a lot of different ways. You just have to do the work
To figure out what you believe
purpose
Purpose to to to create the goals and the directionality of your life
Now this is not a sense of attachment a lot of people will say well
I'm gonna make my bucket list
And I'm gonna earn this and I'm gonna do that and I'm gonna meet this person and I'm gonna you know shake hands with the president
I don't know whatever the dumb thing is that people are really into that's not it the buddhist talk about intentionality without attachment
Now there's a there's a the way to think about purpose. There's a do you speak Spanish right chris? No
Okay, there's a word in Spanish. It's a very evocative word is rumbo
Which in in English is it's not common. It's called rum line rhum rum line. It's a navigational term
That's the straight line
That goes from where you are to where you want to wind up
To do navigation properly you need a rum line rumbo is actually used in Spanish in the vernacular to say
This is your directionality. This is to figure out your purpose in life
What you need to figure out is where you think it would be good to end up to have a straight line to get there
And then have a complete utter lack of attachment on whether or not you're sitting on that rum line
That turns out to be the way to understand purpose. That's intention without attachment
Of course, I'm going to lay out the things that I want to do
Of course, I'm going to and I am completely
Flexible if life takes me in another direction for something that actually meets my moral
Metaphysical my love goals in a better way. That's the way to actually be thinking about purpose
if
Suffering and difficulty are so important to meaning
How do you advise new parents who are
Successful because of the challenges in their past
But now have more resources
To make life easier for their kids than their parents did when they were growing up
That by using the things that they've worked for they may rob their children of the very challenges that would make them happy
Yeah, guilty by the way guilty guilty is charged
You know, I'd say it's a the greatest
Privilege is feeling like you've had a lot of success and you earned it
That's an incredible privilege
The greatest I mean the the the worst thing you can do for your children is making them wonder whether or not they earned their success
Like did I did it was a me or is it my dad?
You know, was somebody kicking down the door for me. Am I a baby nebo? I mean what what what right?
That's a real problem and a lot of that has to do with the fact that that we're
We're simply trying to make it so that the difficulties are cleared away exactly as you say
This leads to a lot of problems that we see today
Safetyism, you know, the fact that we're we're completely
Freaked out about a lot of difficulties that don't exist and we're and we're inured to the problems that really do exist
So we don't let our kids walk to the store, but we give them, you know
As you know unlimited access to smartphones and social media
at age 13 and like predators and creeps and god forbid politicians and you know
Dictators on tiktok. Yeah, our are climbing out of the screen and into their brains and you know and and and
Destroying their sense of self-worth and and creating social comparison and all these deleterious things
What we need to do is to set our kids up to do really hard things
And and and it's telling them that it's okay if they fail
Not because what we tell them when we're when we're protecting them from everything is that it's not okay to fail
And we create a pathological fear of failure, which is a death fear. We're giving our kids a death fear
Death all death is
Is the death of who you are to you? There's an essence to you
So a client would say that your soul is your christness
That a dog's soul is this dogginess
Each one of us has an essence to us
No, we define that essence on the basis of who we see ourselves
And if you are never allowed to fail you become the person who doesn't fail and failure becomes a death fear for you
Why would you install a death fear on your kids?
Well, because you want to keep them safe and that's a terrible thing to do
So the way to get beyond that even if you're blessed with tremendous financial resources
So they don't have to worry about making rent
When they're kids they don't have to worry about getting their caloric needs is you have to say
I expect you to be doing difficult things
And I don't expect you to succeed all the time if you're not failing enough. You're not doing it, right?
That's and and and okay now you're gonna say how do I do that? Okay. Here's how you do it
Do it yourself. It does not matter what you tell your kids all that matters is what they see
If you want your kids to grow up in the catholic faith
Make sure that they see you on your knees on sunday. That's all that matters
If you want your kids to do hard things do hard things if you want your kids to deal with failure fail
And and have them see you'll see how you fail and that's why
these lessons in modern wisdom are important for 60 year olds and 20 year olds and
kids
Talk to me about the difference between
happiness and unhappiness
Is unhappiness simply the absence of happiness? Are they different networks the ways to avoid them separately?
Happiness is not the opposite opposite of unhappiness on the contrary
So the the experience of happiness has a lot to do with
But positive emotion and the experience of unhappiness has a lot to do with negative emotion
We go through life with different kinds of positive and negative moods
And they're largely produced in different with different structures of the limbic system of the brain
Because we're reacting to different outside circumstances some of which are opportunities and some of which are threats
So it makes perfect sense that that unhappiness is not the absence of happiness. These are different sensations
Largely unhappiness is experienced on the right side of the brain
And unhappiness on the left side of the brain and we know this because of the musculature of the face when people are experiencing
A lot of negative emotion the left side of the face is more active
And you can tell you know when somebody's about to cry the left side of their face is more active
It twitches a little bit you get when you're when you're married you'll see this
And you're like, uh-oh
You get like a five second warning. It's just amazing
If you you know, it's like it's what it's like if your husband is studies neuroscience
So it's important that we understand that because then we can manage both our happiness and our unhappiness and we can see
Which is a greater?
Which is a greater challenge?
Happiness or unhappiness in our lives for me happiness is not the greater challenge for me unhappiness is a greater challenge
I have very high negative affect
I'm a normal i'm a naturally negative affect person because I fall in this personality characteristic called the mad scientist
Which is unusually high positive mood and unusually high negative mood
That's important thing for us to understand that that that that you know
Which is your challenge?
And so I'm spending a lot of my effort managing my unhappiness as opposed to trying to boost my happiness
And there are lots of there are terrible ways to do that like drinking alcohol looking at pornography gambling
Workaholism the best way to do that by the way is vigorous physical exercise seven days a week
And so that's what I do to start my day the first hour of the morning
Not because I'm some sort of you know, look
vanity doesn't favor me
The reason that I do that is because
Um, I I want to feel less unhappy
So there are different pathways for making people more happy versus making people less unhappy
And all of the stuff that we've gone through so far although fantastic and maybe great for refining your happiness level
you can still be
Pressing the accelerator harder whilst you've still got the brake pushed down if you don't look at these things which cause unhappiness
So what are the other biggest strategies beyond?
High intensity training that you do seven days a week. What are the
highest return
Uh tactics that you use
Clear away the barriers to your happiness
Because one of the sources of unhappiness is not having access to the sources of happiness in your life
That's a source of aggravation and frustration
So clear away the barriers by by by getting rid of your prejudices against trying to develop your faith or spiritual life
Clear away the barriers to the prejudices that you have and and the the difficulties that you have toward family life
friendship
The the behavior and attitudes that you have toward work, etc. That's really important
third and probably for many people the most important is taking seriously the
mood disorders that are so common in our society today
understanding the essence of what what chronic and and and generalized anxiety is all about in people's lives what
What clinical depression actually means and how to treat it because the greatest source of unhappiness and misery for a lot of people
It's just
Straight on common mood disorders
And they can't actually even get to the better things in their lives because of these barriers that are actually coming in the
In terms of these sources of unhappiness
That's the big ones that i'm talking about
general
High levels of negative affect that do not go into mood disorder. I strongly recommend physical diet and exercise
You know the the kinds of self care that that have a lot of discomfort attached to them
Always be thinking about the hygiene of removing barriers to your happiness and taking care of your mental health
Those are the best ways to think about it
Why do you think it is in the modern world that
Anxiety appears to be the most prevalent
emotional state that people are in why has that one emotion
grabbed a hold of
the 21st century so much
Anxiety is unfocused fear fear is a natural physiological phenomenon that
that comes from
A stimulus that that that then lights up the amygdala in the brain passing a
A signal through the hypothalamus into the pituitary glands thus
Leading to the adrenal glands putting out epinephrine and later on cortisol stress hormones in response to some sort of a threat
That should be intense and episodic the problem in modern life
Is that that we don't have these intense episodic episodes of fear on the contrary
We have we have minor threats that are very diffuse but chronic
And that is that leads to an unfocused fear aka anxiety
Which is a very slight drip of cortisol going into your brain again and again and again and again
And how do you get it by opening up twitter?
How do you get it by by being on a you know an overly long zoom call when you need to pee?
How do you get it by actually being in a you know a work relationship?
That's ridiculously tense that you're not doing anything about modern life is all about not having your life threatened
But feeling constantly under a little bit of threat which gives you unfocused fear
That leads to a stress response that comes from your adrenal glands and that gives you a tremendous amount of agony
That's just spread out and constant
I
One of the things that you've mentioned that you you said that you have a
Disposition toward negative emotional states
How much have you found in your practice and also with yourself that people can?
Rewrite their childhood and their past history
Because I think a lot of people feel
Trapped by their past and that they're stuck in their patterns and that you know this all sounds well and good Arthur
But really what you're talking about is sort of putting a little bit of icing and some sprinkles on the top of a dog
cake
You can rewrite your past you can't actually make a different past
What you can do is is understand your memories in different ways
And it starts with an understanding of how memory actually works in the brain memories are not extant
They're reassembled from all different kinds of parts. That's the reason that memory is so unreliable
You can remember with incredible vividness what happened on 9 11. I was in new york on 9 11
I saw the first plane hit the first tower
I mean it was I remember it vividly
But but the data show that what I remember vividly is probably not completely accurate because I'm
Reassembling that memory so frequently from different literally
I mean the different parts of the memory are stored in different locations in the brain
And those will get corrupted just like files will get corrupted in a computer from time to time
And one of the ways that will get corrupted is because of the biases that I have in my ordinary life
This is the reason that you and your sister I realize you don't have a sister
But if you had a sister you and your sister could be looking back to a Thanksgiving 15 years ago
Which I realized you didn't have and have because you're british
But and and one of you could say oh that Thanksgiving with uncle mark and aunt betty
It was so great and your sister was like wasn't that the wasn't that the one where uncle mark
Got you know blind drunk and and then beat up the neighbor and passed out in the front yard
That was terrible that year
You're both right, but you're assembling the memories from different places with biases and emphases
Placed in different parts of the memory with different corruptions that have happened across the decades
That's a really important thing because you can reassemble your memories in different ways
By by helping people to emphasize the parts of the experiences in your past that were positive and not just negative
Some people are retrospectively
unbelievably negative
And and that has everything to do with the way that they've stored and are reassembling their memories
And and you don't have to do that
You can actually choose to look back on the parts of your childhood that actually were sweet
And the more that you do that the better you'll get at doing that and the more that you'll naturally
Reassemble those memories in ways that favor you more and you're not wrong
You're just looking at different parts of the experience and repairing the you know the memory the memory assembly process
Yeah, I love that. What about the role of envy another emotion that's very prevalent in the modern world?
What what is that to say about envy?
It's evolved and the reason is because we live in a hierarchical kin based species
We actually were tropical. We're a tropical species
Evolved to live in kin groups that are hierarchical now some of that we can get beyond like, you know
We invented coats so we don't have to live in really hot places anymore
But some of it we haven't gotten beyond we're still kin based and we are still
Very hierarchical and the way that you you tend to see your likelihood of survival and gene propagation
Is rising in the hierarchy and the way that you know that you're rising in the hierarchy is paying attention to people who have more than you
And wanting what people have who have more than you a k a n b now
That's a big I mean, that's a that's a survival tendency in in the Pleistocene
But it's a it's maladapted to the to the modern world and it's exacerbated by the technological
Innovations that we've had such that we're aware of the hierarchy of the entire human race all the time
on social media
The biggest problem that we have is you don't feel envious of you know, the loser
You know down the street from you who has a slightly different
You know rv up on blocks in his yard compared to yours
you envy
The Kardashians, which is completely absurd you have you you envy somebody who's got
You know all the wealth in the world you envy a billionaire despite the fact that you've never met one in person
So that's the biggest problem that we've taken an evolutionary tendency and we've blown it up with tech
With our technological means and turned it into an actual form of mental illness
That means that we have to take it on on his face and use our prefrontal cortex to combat these limbic tendencies that are ruining your lives
That's a lot of what I talk about
You mean making sure that you're you're you're consciously not comparing yourself to people outside your group
To you know to if you need to get rid of the apps and stop paying attention to these rich people
Only because you enjoy watching the lifestyles of these rich and famous folks
That's an unhealthy thing for you to do
A lot of the things that I often talk about to get rid of this as well is to
Is is to to separate your envy from from benign
From the malicious malicious envy is that you feel envious of people who have something that you don't feel that they've earned
Ignore that and pay attention to where you have benign envy where you think that they've done something that's really virtuous
And turn your envy into admiration
And then you've actually made it into something that's really beneficial that will benefit you and won't make the world worse
Yeah, it's so interesting to think about how
that
very adaptive
Impulse that we had I need to track my place within the hierarchy, but you know
That was 150 people if that it was probably actually 70 people
Probably 30 70 and yeah, just speaking of what we were talking about earlier on when we were discussing the
Slot that your intimate partner takes up. I had robin dunbar. He's been on the show twice now. Maybe three times. He's so
Fantastic the first time I ever recorded with him. It was I think 8 p.m. On a Friday
Evening in the uk 2 p.m. Here in austin and he just had a big glass of wine that he slowly worked his way through as he was just
unloading
evolutionary psychology social psychology insights, but
One of the you know, you've got this sort of small group within maybe a slightly larger tribe
And you can track your place within that hierarchy relatively easily
But if envy is the only one of the seven deadly sins that doesn't feel good, which is kind of an interesting insight
Not even fun. Not even fun. Not even fun to do it. Um
You have essentially an unlimited way that an envious mind can find to
Subjugate you below someone else. Well, yeah, sure
I've got more money than them
But they seem to be a little bit better educated than me or their wife slightly hotter or they drive a faster car
Or you know, they seem to be a bit more muscular or or whatever like, you know
There's a million different ways that you can do this with now
essentially an unlimited global
Marketplace hierarchy within which you can compare yourself
Yeah, this is one of the reasons that men have now become orthorexic
You know that men men are now weirdly
um
Comparing their biceps men my age are paying attention to you know, the you know, they're
Physical prowess by looking at, you know, these youtube channels in ways that we wouldn't have any concept of it
They were to live happily
But instead they're like, I don't know man. I think I need to go on trt
Why because I don't know. I mean, I'm looking at all these other guys. They look great
You wouldn't even have a you wouldn't be conscious of this. You'd be, you know
Happily living your life in your own silo
But this exposure that we have to this massive comparison group is
unbelievably unhealthy because you're always doing this hierarchically
evolved
Thing this tendency this habit that we actually have and you have to combat it on purpose
There's no way that you're just going to make it go away by by changing your environment
This brings up one key point by the way because of all these things that we're talking about
It's very efficient inefficient to try to improve your life by changing the whole outside world
It's very inefficient to curate the entire outside world
It's efficient to work on it yourself
By moving your experiences from your limbic system into your prefrontal cortex aka to be metacognitive. That's why that's what I talk about all the time
We've gone through a lot of the big
Sexy things I think from your recent thesis
Is there anything
from your book or from your work and from this kind of domain of work in general
that
people you wish people paid more attention to
Is there something that is seemingly unpopular and sexy but
Has more bang for its buck that you wish you could bestow more people to remember it when you when they read stuff that you've put out
Yeah, I mean
There's a concept that people don't
Pay attention to very much because our world is largely been organized over the past 30 years
by
by
technicians engineers and bureaucrats
We've actually we've handed the keys in our culture over to people that say that if we can solve a series of complicated problems
We'll live in peace and happiness forever
That's a completely misguided understanding of the human experience. There's two kinds of problems in life
There's complicated problems that engineers solve
these are problems that are
ferociously hard to solve but once you solve them you can replicate them with effortless ease
That's like making a toaster or a jet engine. Those are complicated problems
All the problems that we really care about in life are complex problems
Which is to say that they're very easy to understand the solution and completely impossible to solve because they're dynamic in nature
Your toaster is complicated. Your cat is complicated is complex
It's you know what it wants. It's warmth and scratches and a litter box and food
But you never know what it's going to do
That's why it's interesting
Your your marriage is complex, right? It's very complex
You know what it means to be happy in your marriage
But you can't get there with any amount of stuff and any amount of money and any amount of technology
A war is complex
I win they lose that's the solution. How do you get there? I don't know a football game. Look, you like sports
I like sports. I love barca. I love watching soccer. I love watching spanish premier league soccer
You know the best days barca wins, but I don't know that's why I watch
Because it's a complex thing the biggest mistake that we make
Is thinking and a lot of what we've talked about in this episode comes down to this is thinking that my complex human problems
Are going to be solved by external complicated solutions
And that's what the world keeps trying to tell me
The world says if you take this and you try that and you buy this and you adopt that
Then you're finally going to be happy and it's not true
It isn't true. Here's the thing about life
Life comes down to the complex problems of the heart
Which are all about love and you can't solve that with a product you can only
You can only live that in real time
You want a better life live it in real time be fully alive right now suffer with it experience it
That's what you have to do. That's what we had to do two million years ago. And that's what we still have to do today
Hell yeah, Arthur Brooks ladies and gentlemen Arthur is been really great
I I adore this sort of blend that you have of eastern and western of sort of neuroscience with the mindful with
It's it's really really great. I'm very very glad that we stopped circling each other and finally managed to sit down
I look forward to speaking to you again soon as well
Where should people go? They want to keep up to date with all of the things that you're doing
Where do you want to send them?
arthurbrooks.com that gives you you know links that write a column every week in the atlantic on the science of happiness every
Thursday morning and it has the books and has you know the videos and the workshops a lot of free stuff and
Surveys and and and clips to my favorite podcast like modern wisdom
Well, that is the way that I wanted to hear you finish out dude. I really appreciate you. It's been really really great to catch up
Thanks. Thanks for what you're doing. You've made my life better and you're making millions of people live more mindfully and better in their lives
With more love. Thank you for doing it. I appreciate you. Thank you, man
If you enjoyed that episode, you will love a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last couple of months
And it's available right here
go on
Give me a watch
