Talking about the individual one of the things that I see holding people back is comfort
So it's easy to get life to a stage where it's not that bad
But it's not that good either at least when you have a full-on breakdown
There's only one way to go right you're only going to go up from there
But I think it's possible to wallow for years in a just about passable life
Right sedated by comfort and I see this temptation in myself as well to give up the good for the great
What would you say to people who are trying to escape this curse of mediocrity?
Well, if you're satisfied with it in some fundamental sense
I mean, there's there's something to be said
I suppose for walling off of private space for yourself if you can maintain it and
Detaching yourself to some degree from the troubles of the world and
Maintaining your own little private garden the problem with that is the snakes tend to seep in from the outside, right?
It's it's pretty difficult to wall yourself off in any real sense from the concerns of the world
So it isn't clear to me that that's a viable solution
It also means that you might justify to yourself lack of civic engagement, you know, I shouldn't go to church
I shouldn't take part in the political process because it's all so corrupt. I should hide myself from all the annoying
Noise that's generated constantly on the media front and I have some sympathy for that viewpoint, but I
Don't believe it's really possible because you can't have
You can't have a walled garden independent of
Independently of the health of the broader society. It's just not possible. Maybe you can have it for a very short period of time
but so
But if you're if you're comfortable with what you have and it's Jen it's genuine comfort and I think okay, but generally
It's not I think for the most part. It's it's people that have become sedated, you know
They've forgotten their dreams, but they've forgotten that they've forgotten them pink Floyd's comfortably numb is about this, right?
They've become comfortably numb. I think most people said I have this friend and this this story really hit me
So during the pandemic
Running a podcast
I was able to have the thing that I feel I'm good at my artistic
Pursuit and outlet that was available for me to continue. It was actually increased because I didn't have other stuff to do
now have a friend that's a barber and
He got a job at a supermarket barbers shut down for a long period of time
He got to job at a supermarket stacking shelves overnight and I asked him I was like man
How are you? How are you finding the new job? This is a big a big change. He's like, do you know what it is?
I
Actually don't mind the work and mind the people that I work with mm-hmm
But man, I miss being good at something right, right, right. Well, dude that hit me. Yeah, so hard, right
I missed being good at something. Yeah. Yeah, well people need the opportunity to be good at something
It so then you might ask yourself. Well, what's the best antidote to the discomfort of life?
and you might say well, it's comfort and I
Suppose that's what you act out when you swaddle a baby
but a better antidote is something like adventure to excellence and
That's far better antidote to suffering than the mere absence of suffering
So
Not to say that the mere absence of suffering. That's not nothing, you know, stepping out of that
Sedation from comforts difficult that especially if you've become routine eyes to it. Yeah, well, that's the difficult
Difficulty of maturity. You know the Freudians said very wisely that the good mother necessarily fails
What's that mean?
I mean, she stops providing the comfort that insulates people against the need for adventure. I heard you say recently that
A mother's ability to let her child go out into the world knowing that they're still vulnerable and that it's now
Down to them and the world still look after them. That's one of the bravest things that it's the female crucifixion
So and that's exemplified best in well the best
Portrayal of that I've seen is Michelangelo's pieta. You know, it's it's a statue of Mary
And she has Christ's body on her as an adult on her lap and he's broken and destroyed and you know, she's displaying that
That's
That's the bravery of a mother to allow that to happen, but not only that to to facilitate it
Facilitate it. So what about we go kid? Where you go? Where you go? Well, why it's dangerous out there. It's like, yeah, no kidding
It's more dangerous here if you stay with me by a lot
So you might lose your body out there in the world, but if you stay here you lose your soul
How do you see that as an individual let's say that there isn't the mother there that's pushing you along
Well, you know, one of the things young Carl Jung
Was very interested in the edible complex and that's basically that overprotective maternal and
he
He criticized Freud or presuming that it was
Really something the mother did
He says it's more relational than that first of all it would be something the father would allow to happen assuming there was a father around
So let's not forget about the paternal contribution to allowing that to occur
Because in some sense, it's the father's role to
Serve as the antithesis of that maternal over protection
So a woman is extremely bonded with her infant say between zero and nine months and the infant is utterly helpless
And so complete compassion and the provision of comfort is the only job that matters
And that's really the case and then the woman has to switch gears to some degree
The mother has to switch gears as the child starts to become more
More mobile fundamentally and more independent. She has to let go of the infant, which is a real grieving process and
She has to start to facilitate this movement towards independence
But that's a hard shift and so partly the role of the father in that is to be an advocate for the child's independence and to
Comfort the mother to let her know that that degree of security provision is no longer necessary, but also to
Act as an advocate for the child's outgoing
Outgoing desire and so so it's the edible situation is not only the mother
It's also say the weak father, but then it's also the child so you can imagine because you don't
believe that these
negotiated agreements were
We're relational so, you know, you're six
You're in grade one
Maybe you're feeling a little ill
Maybe you're not
Maybe you're playing with being a little ill and maybe you're playing with exaggerating how ill you are and your mom comes downstairs and says
You know, you've got a test today at school. Maybe you haven't quite prepared for it. Maybe, you know, you should have and
She says but you know, you you seem to have a tummy ache
Maybe you're too sick to go to school and the kid thinks
Maybe I could just stay home and
You know, mom could tuck me in and I wouldn't have to take that test and I wouldn't have to confront the world and he says, yeah
Yeah, mom my stomach really hurts and
and away we go and
The child has made a choice and you think well, that's and that's a catastrophic choice
And you think well children shouldn't be held accountable for choices. They make at that age. It's like
That child soon gonna be an adult that's going to make very similar decisions
The the choice has consequences and to be held accountable for that is to recognize purely that the choice has consequences
And that it is a choice now, you know, you could say well
95% of the blame is to be put on the mother and maybe that's an overestimate. I think it probably is but
the child could say mom you don't have to worry about me. I'm gonna get up and go do this and
That's choice and
That's the right choice
so these are always chicken and egg problems obviously but
That that fleshes out the complexity of the situation, you know, if you're if you're being enticed down a pathological road
You can accept or reject the invitation now
Some people are better at enticing and some people enforce it more harshly and you know, there's all sorts of individual variability in situations like this, but
Just because you're offered debate doesn't necessarily mean that you have to take it
So and I'm not a determinist. I do believe that people have free will whatever that means
That's a murky subject and it gets complicated the more you look at it
But whatever it's still a good shorthand way of describing the fact that we seem to be
Cursed with responsibility for our own destiny at least to some degree
What's happening people if you enjoyed that then press here for the full
Unedited episode and don't forget to subscribe
peace
