You say that you're useless to the world if you're not competing and you need enemies to drive you. Why?
I think most people who say they don't have enemies
They probably don't want to tell others they have the enemy or they don't want to disclose it
They're great poker players. I don't know a single person that doesn't have an enemy
Everybody does
We're we're very good at concealing our
Our insecurities our emotions our fears our wildest desires our
Enemies or comments that rub us the wrong way that wire us
We are very good actors
Incredible actors right now if you have a long time of talking to somebody and you kind of watch them closely
And the more they talk and then eventually you're gonna find some leaks. You're like, oh, I just found one right there
Boom, I found one contradiction right there. Boom. I found one and they're okay interesting. We all have a little bit of that
But I do think that when you study the people that do something very big. I'm not talking about small
I'm talking really really big. We're talking about some interesting people today
You and I have somebody we both respect a lot Robert Green his books
I'm sure you love his books. I love his books 33 strategies of war. I couldn't put it down for two years straight. I
listen to that book every day
in my car
Straight every day. It was on repeat for two years straight. Why though?
because I innocently got into sales and
I had a good time in sales and business after I got out of the military and
I wanted to be a bodybuilder and then I realized I'm six four
It's not gonna work for bodybuilding to win Mistro Olympia because everybody's five eight five nine five ten
Maybe five a lemon Ronnie Coleman, but the six four days are behind us even Luc Ferigno didn't win at that height
Arnold did and then when I got into sales and
Everybody was a fan then I started competing still a little bit of fan
But when I started the insurance company and then I started growing market share really
Then a lot of those people that were fans then started
Undermining and I said got it. This is how it works. You can't be this naive. You can't be this innocent
Competitions out there if you want to kind of go out there and take market share from others
You want to get bigger?
You can't expect for people to sit there and like everything you're doing. That's what I realized
You got to choose your enemies wisely people want you to do well. They just don't want you to do better than that. Yes
Yes
Yeah, it's interesting. There's this story of Churchill and
He's showing a young MP around the House of Lords in the UK
This is before World War two you can imagine that they're wandering through these dusty hallways over there's the
Toilets and over there's where we have a cigar and blah blah blah
Anyway, they go into the chamber they go into the House of Lords, right?
The difference actually the distance between the two front benches is the same distance as a longsword held out at arm's length
From both sides. She's a kind of a funny vestige of evidently what they were worried about in the Middle Ages
And they've just continued to update but they've never changed the distance of the front benches
Anyway, but this young guy who's probably full of testosterone and you know, he's finally he's here with Winston Churchill
He go in and this young MP starts just
Sticulating at the other side he keeps referring to them as the enemy
Churchill turns to me says that's the opposition dear boy. The enemy's behind you
And I love that story and the reason that I love that story is that it often reminds us that
symbolically we believe
That the biggest obstacle we have to overcome is out there and many times the call is coming from inside of our own house
I think that the worst enemy that many people have is the voice that's inside of their own head
Now this voice has probably maybe come from the outside world, but we've now internalized it
You know, we have become our own worst enemy in some regards. Yeah, and by the way, that's one of the enemies
That's one of the enemies and there isn't one is the famous
Matthew McConaughey speech that he's given. Hey one guy asked me who's the greatest actor in the world and he says hey
You know, I'll tell you and then you're like I want to meet the 35 year old version of me
And hey when I get to 35, you know, I want to make it 45
It's always looking forward to what that next better version of you is going to be but
At the end of the day, even Alexander one of his famous quotes is quotes is I have met the enemy it is I right and
Although that is one element of an enemy. That's great. We need that
Michael had it Brady had it Kobe had it, but
There's a there's a crazy
Psychologically you can call it, you know psycho competitor that
They're constantly in the search of recruiting their next enemy
It's it's like, you know, life is boring if I don't have my next target, you know
I'm almost you know bad for myself if I don't have the next target the next enemy
And if I choose it the right way, then I'm able to bring out a side of me. I've never seen before
What's the function of an enemy? What is the function of an enemy? What is the function of?
Fallen in love. Why do you need to fall in love? Why do you need to have a wife?
It's pleasurable. It's fulfilling. But what does it do to you though when you're in love?
You know, you know how they say when when a person is in love and they go and test their brains
And it's like somebody that's on drugs. You've seen this before you probably read this before, right? Okay
so
But what's the risk of love?
Heartbreak
Losing years of maybe you love the wrong person. Maybe they don't love you in return as much as you love them
Maybe you're gonna give more than they're gonna give you maybe a betrayal
Maybe it's an act. Maybe it's just good for the season
Maybe they're gonna change your minds if they really find out what you're out
There's a lot of risk to love, but why do we love? You know, it's a very unique relationship that risk is exhilarating
It's exciting, you know
Maintaining it. It's a lot of work. It's not easy. It's why nowadays most people don't want to get married nowadays
There's a movement of I don't want to get involved to getting married. I don't want to have kids. It's too risky
I want to live for myself. I don't want to have the
Responsibilities I don't want to be heartbroken. Okay, great. I think you know one time a friend of mine and I
Arash we're in Italy and I rented this place in
Tuscan, Italy, this is like 10 years ago and we're staying there and Arash and I when we're together
We like to debate and we debate about anything. It doesn't matter what the topic is anything, okay?
He's like the Middle Eastern Bradley Cooper too good looking of a guy one of those guys kind of like you're a good-looking guy
He's a good-looking guy
So we have a three-hour drive to Cinque Terre, okay?
It's a beautiful place you go to and it's a long drive to go to it. You know what we're debating about love
Here's what the question was
Can you love somebody you know define love for me says love is a feeling it's emotion
It's this it's a great. I said say you're in jail
Your wife is somewhere else
How does she know you love her? How do you show her love is love a verb is love a feeling is love a noun?
What happened this conversation right and
Then
You realize the risk of loving is worth it. I can't imagine live in life without having that love
It introduces you to a person you've not met before man a great enemy does that as well a
Formidable enemy is gonna introduce you to a person you've not seen before by the way could be ugly could be scary could be oh
My god, who is this person? Why are you acting like this? Why are you thinking like this?
So most of us when we come almost like that the movie venom
It's one of my son's favorite movie, right? The venom comes inside
There's a there's an ugly side to it if you lose control of it, right?
And you become reckless then you hurt people around you then you're actually not good for yourself. You're destroying your own life
That's why the key word is what?
Choose your enemies
Wisely, it's not it's not have an enemy. It's choose your enemies wisely
If I choose the right enemy and then I have this relationship with this enemy
Sometime it's a one-month enemy. It could be a one-week enemy could be a one-day enemy could be a lifelong enemy because it's yourself
because that's a permanent enemy and
Just like a love affair
There is an affair with this enemy. It's actually a beautiful thing. I
Love the idea of it bringing out a side of you that you didn't know
Bringing out a person inside of you that you want to wear existed. So I think there's a
There's definitely a function to get that into you come on crack it in there's definitely a function to
To people looking to be well balanced. Oh
Yeah
Delicious good wow fantastic. That's what I want to hear six months of taste testing
So I'm glad that it takes time to fly to Liverpool to do that
There is definitely a
culture on the internet of
people wanting to
ameliorate all of their difficult and
Uncomfortable emotions to transmute them into something closer to equanimity, right?
balance peace sanity and I've said this a lot and I think that I'm quite averse to
Conflict by nature. That's the way that I tend to operate. I often just bow out opt for peace
and
then
Two things changed
First off, I realized that I am leaving an awful lot of motivation on the table
Okay by not utilizing a very specific very potent kind of fuel
Because I was aware that over a long enough time span. I think it can be toxic
I think that if you're fueled by hate and distaste and fear and scarcity for long enough
It becomes something that damages you more than it helps you win
But it's unbelievably potent especially in times of war
The second thing that happened was I became a little bit more of a target for people's ire and distaste and that meant that the
underdog
Loving support that everybody has for the person that's on the come up
Dissolved a little bit and started to evaporate because people don't mind you doing well
They just don't want you to do better than them. You know when you're on the way up
Everyone roots for you because you remind them of their dreams and when you're at the top
Everyone tries to tear you down because you remind them of what they gave up on
So those two things changed now had a great conversation with Alex Homozy that really drove this home to me
Said use what you have and a lot of people have more pain than they do pleasure
Don't use it for too long 10 15 20 years like that's how you end up having a breakdown or some sort of dependency or addiction or vice
But it's potent so use it and I think that
The inside of enemies can bring out a side of you that you are not aware you want to where even existed is
Kind of like alchemy
Right. It's turning something that is both toxic and useless into something which is golden and your choice
Yes, and by the way your eyes. Okay. I'm looking at your eyes right now
Your eyes don't tell me a guy that is just doing this
To just have fun. Okay
Your eyes have a lot of fire in them. Okay, a lot of fire in them
You your eyes tell a story of maybe you have a crazy side a side inside of you
Okay, a side that maybe you keep inside. Okay, we're very few people maybe see
But that's why you're doing as well as you're doing. I walk into this place. I do a lot of podcasts
I walk into this place you chose a walk in. I'm like Sam. Where are we? He says honestly, I don't know
But I think we're at the right place
We walk in and I see why you do what you do and the amount of time and resources and your team putting into
Hands selecting a different set. We don't do that. So what does that tell me? You're maniacal your detail oriented
You got it. You're moving up right now on the podcast across the board competing with everybody
You have a vision. Maybe some of it. We know probably all of it. We don't know
Okay, some of it's kept even the smiles telling the story right now. You're a perfect example of this, right?
If you and I sit down we get the benefit I don't know if you read Elon Musk's recent book or not Walter
I think so not yet
No, I've heard from every single person that's even glanced at the blurb that you need to read it
You need to read it. You're gonna flip out. You're gonna love it. You'll appreciate it for a guy. That's wired like you
We get to judge Elon from the outside. Okay, why would somebody?
You sell a company for 180 million dollars. You take a hundred million dollars. You put it in a
Solar, whatever you take 70 and Tesla you put 10 in, you know, another company vice versa, whatever the structure
No, you put 100 million in SpaceX 70 million in in Tesla and 10 million you put it in solar
Then you're a billionaire
Then you want to do what you want to go to the next thing then boring company then you got Twitter
What for and you read a story in the book about his father on how his father was are you kidding me?
Oh, I mean if you some of the biggest people that we read about we watch movies about it's one of their two parents
That did something to them. I'm Tom Brady a
month ago we haven't met the event and
The the formula I see with a lot of people that do something biggest three things one at one point in their lives
They experience unconditional love because you need it. It's fuel. You have to have it even if it's just from one person
Okay, unconditional love means what you screwed up you went to jail. You got a DUI you got kicked out of school
You got expelled
Everybody ousted you and said you're a nobody you're not gonna mount to anything you're a loser. You're this but that mother
They're always said honey. I love you
You can do anything to lose this one person's love
One person. It's all you need. You don't need 50 of them. Just one unconditional love number two is
you need somebody who
brought
Unbelievable pain in your life that you loved
This is a person you and I loved that they destroyed our heart
We couldn't do anything to gain love from this person nothing
Perform talent. We love them go above and beyond give them money buy him gifts
Give them incredible experiences become buff have a six-pack drive a Ferrari have a Lambo own a penthouse
Have a yacht be best friends with the best athletes with billionaires no matter what you do
This person brought you so much pain. You can never win this person over
It is a battle your entire life try to win this person over you're never going to do it
It's not going to happen. Well, you need that person as well
You know what the last one is obviously choosing your enemies wisely you take a person that has those three combination by the way
very rarely
Will they ever tell you the entire reason very rarely will they?
Fully disclose everything some of them will take it to their grave with them
We will never know about it, but for someone to have the kind of a fire that goes
Yours beyond 99% of people would have stopped. What's the reason for it?
What else do you need? How many more accolades? How many more tens of millions of dollars?
How many more cars? How many more houses? How many more top charts on podcasts number one this? What's the reason for it?
You know, it's a
Again, we're not talking about everybody most people will listen to this whole concept of choose your enemies wisely and they'll say
That's hate. What a miserable life. What are this? What are that?
No, most people chose the wrong enemies the enemies they've chosen is about being entitled is about being victims about feeling sorry for themselves
And it's destroyed them the stolen stolen years away from their lives. So yeah, the way you're describing what you're saying
You know, you'll typically see a pattern with those three things of people
Who do something big they experience those three and unfortunately the reason why I like Musk's book is when you read it
You see the pattern with all three unconditional love mom and Kimball his brother
unconditional pain father
choosing his enemies wisely
industry
Conditional, you know guys who are like this is the way we do with NASA, you know governmental agencies
Censorship, you know establishment. He's just recruiting new enemies for himself every day
It's like bored. He needs more enemies and more enemies, but guess who's talking about him around the world
Everybody is in a hundred years from now
Our kids our grandkids will look back and say and who was this Elon Musk guy
Unfortunately, we're not gonna be around to talk about who it was how we viewed him
But they're gonna be watching plenty of documentaries and movies about a guy like that because he chose his enemies wisely
Feels to me. I've got in my mind the image of Pac-Man, you know, when he is able to eat the ghost
Yeah, and the ghosts
since were previously a threat to him now become fuel and
that to me is I
learned the three most common traits of elite performers and it was
Acrippling sense of insufficiency a superiority complex and maniacal focus
Yeah, and I think that those three things map on to what you were just talking about there
Have you read this book? I've read the first half just so you know that part from your podcast is in the book. You're in the book
Did you know this or no? No, you're in your podcast is in the book. Those three things you just talked about. Okay. It's in the book
Hell, yeah. Yeah, so those three things, right? I'm scared that I'm not enough
I believe that I can do more. Yep. I have the impulse control to be able to keep me focused and keep me moving forward
What would you say to the people that say
What you're describing sounds an awful lot like a competitor. Okay. Yeah, what's the difference between a competitor and an enemy?
Yeah, it's not a competitor because to me
So so in the last 20 some years
I have worked my tail off to figure out a way of writing a business plan that I can teach others how to write a business plan
So when you go buy books on business plans
It's all boring
Technical it's for a fortune 500 company or somebody that wants to go raise capital and it's so
Complex and dense you will not think about a business planning book
That you're gonna walk away and here's how I can write a business plan
That's simple that I can look at it over and over and over again. Great. I'm good to go, right?
There isn't something like that out there. This is supposed to be a business planning book that turned into an
enemy's book so when I'm talking to the
CEO the the publisher of a portfolio, okay
Adrienne and we're going back and forth we had five hour zooms five one hour zooms
Just on the title and in many cases we would sit there for 15 minutes. No one's talking
We wanted what who won what he wanted what?
So they wanted to figure out a title that was a straight-up title like you know
Well, how to think and grow rich, you know, how to just stay very much of a business
Exactly something like that and then eventually I'm selling Adrienne. I'm simple. That's not what it is
This is much deeper than that. It has to do with enemies and eventually on the fifth time of choosing the title
Guess who finally says the title the book has to be choose your enemies wisely Adrienne does from portfolio
And I said that's the one it was a battle of attrition
It was a battle of attrition a few hundred of them, right?
But but it's an interesting concept when you're saying
Competition to me the 12 building blocks that I talked about in this book, you know
We have different categories because one side of the building block has to do with emotion
The other side of the building block has to do with logic and you read this when you were going through the book
So on the emotion side, you know, it's gonna move us. So for example, I mean, what skill says do I need to learn?
Well, I need to learn how to do podcasts how to ask questions
How to do research you told a Churchill story at the beginning with the sword the size and hey, your enemies are not ahead of you
They're behind you. Okay, you have to go find that story. That's content, right? Okay, so that means you're constantly reading
Why is this guy so good at what he does with content? Okay? He's very detailed. Look at the lighting
Look how he doesn't look at his sets. He's intentional. He's not winging it
Everything you're doing for the most part 95% of it can be replicated by somebody else
But the 5% is your wit is your interest is the curiosity. I did a person has it or they don't have it, right?
Okay, so yes, I can pick up those skills, but do I have your willpower? That's emotional. Yes, I can go study the competition
Let me see the top podcast is out there what they're doing. What is the category for politics for business for sports for comedy?
Yes, but enemies bigger study competition all you want
But enemies a complete different criteria that you're talking about you can have all the money in the world
Fantastic, that's finances. That's money. You can go raise money. There's plenty of companies that raise money
Quibi a few years ago raised two point thirty billion dollars from who all the big money guys
Everybody gave Quibi money. What happened to them Katzenberg make Whitman. Everybody behind it went out of business in
1962
1962 was a super-saving center
Which is the year where Target came out Walmart came out and Costco came out all the same year
1962 okay in
1962 when these companies came out
Kmart goes and raises a ton of money five years later Kmart has 250 locations
Walmart has nine locations five years later
Kmart on a leader's bulletin within five years guess who's winning Kmart's dominating all logical all numbers
Spreadsheet etc. Etc. You couldn't tell me the founder of Kmart
Who he is if I ask who's the founder came you're not gonna say mr. Kmart, right?
That doesn't make any sense. What happened to Kmart a few years ago Kmart goes out of business. They're no longer round
You know how many employees Walmart has around the world 2.3 2.5 million employees
Do you know Walton Sam Walton when the best books you can ever read is made in America?
It's 200 pages. He walks to you through how he built
Walmart
Do you know what his poorest kid is worth today poorest kid is worth 50 billion dollars today?
He's got four of them. Can you imagine these guys at Thanksgiving? They're like hey Johnny
I noticed man. You're only at 50 billion. Do I need to you know go for me?
You know raise some money for you now. It's gonna be all right. You're gonna make it through
What's the moral of the story the moral the story is
One is logic the other one is emotion emotion brings out a different set if it can be controlled madness
Controlled emotion
It's gonna go into a different gear that a normal person's not gonna have we'll get back to talking to Patrick in one minute
But first I need to tell you about element
Elements contains a science-backed electrolyte ratio of sodium potassium and magnesium with no junk no coloring
No artificial ingredients or any other BS
It is a healthy alternative to sugary electrolyte drinks and it's how I've started my morning every single day for over three years now
You don't need coffee first thing in the morning
You're a denicine system that caffeine acts on isn't even active for the first 90 minutes of the day
But your adrenal system is and salt acts on your adrenal system best of all
They have a no BS no questions ask refund policy where you can buy it and try it
Completely risk-free and if you do not like it for any reason
They will give you your money back and you don't even need to return the box right now
You can get a free sample pack of all eight flavors with your first box by going to the link in the description below
Or heading to drink
lmnt.com
Modern wisdom that's drink
lmnt.com
slash modern wisdom
Let's start competition. You're saying competitors, right? Okay. No problem
um
In high school
You can see somebody who was the best basketball player super competitive at that level say they're tall
They're six six. They can jump 40 inches. They have a quick first, you know step
They're very athletic in every way. They're the best athlete in the county even in the state for that position. No problem
They go to college
They can compete
But maybe they're coming off the bench average in 7.2 points a game three rebounds to assist no problem
They may not make it to the NBA
But let's just say he makes it to the NBA plays a year two years
Then he goes to Puerto Rico
Then he goes to spain then he plays in turkey then he plays in china 10 years later never comes back to the NBA
He's out now. He's an assistant coach in Puerto Rico or somewhere else
Then there's a guy that comes to the NBA. He competes. He's talented. He shows into work
He's a very good worker stable guy doesn't do the drugs doesn't do the alcohol
He hooks up with a lot of girls, but he doesn't get in the way
He doesn't respect, you know, he respects his teammates wives. He doesn't do anything
He plays for 15 years makes 200 million dollars good for him
Then you have the cycle competitor
who
Counts
The 55 kids ahead of him that were chosen as the best high school basketball player
And he's ranked number 56 and one by one by one
He targets every one of them until he takes him out his name is Kobe Bryant
Then you have michael jordan in 1984
Where the number one draft pick is a kimalajuan fair good a lot good selection for the rockets number two is sambui
I think portland picks him up or seattle picks him up. Number three is michael jordan. You pick me number three
Yes, what happens to michael?
these guys
michael was never the highest paid guy in the NBA the only time michael was the highest paid guy in the NBA was
The last year made 33 30 million dollars
Scotty pippin made more money in the NBA than michael jordan ever made
michael jordan today's worth 30 billion dollars scottie pippin is not what's the difference
It's a very different mindset scottie's a competitor, but he's not at michael's level by the way
It's very easy to criticize a guy like you who wants to compete
And maybe internally you don't want to compete you want to dominate
Maybe internally you want to show everybody. No, I'm going to be number one. Let's just say with him because professionally want to do this
totally cool
But there's a lot of other competitors out there that have good podcasts and they're doing a good job
It's just a different mindset when you have that enemy. By the way
Very rarely will those guys ever truly again reveal their top driver and the top enemy why?
Because it's it's it's an element of insecurity. Yeah, it's a signal level of status
It is it's it's and it's also I don't want to give the other person credit power
I don't want to give that other person more power than the person thinks they have you don't have power
Or because somebody may be like, oh, I'm your enemy. I control you exactly
Well, when it's a part of the come-up story. Yeah, it's romantic
Right. It's it's uh, it's grassroots. It's what's keeping you
Going look at look at how I was mistreated by my first high school coach. They didn't see the I'm going to prove it to them
That's
a beautiful origin story
age 20
age 45
That just sounds like someone who can't get the chip off his shoulder. Yeah
So yeah, I think it's it's interesting how the tools that got you here aren't the ones that will get you there
And how the strategy this is again one of the reasons why continuing to rely on
Resentment and bitterness and the chip on your shoulder and enemies for too long becomes a very toxic fuel
And it's also importantly optics are very very important
It's a signal of low status
Okay, you brought I don't disagree when you brought up a story of Churchill, right? Okay
The world is weeks away from all speaking german
Okay, if we lose the war the guy wins no problem
chamberlain
Cannot hold it together and the story about
How the only way Churchill said he was going to come back is for chamberlain to come and beg him
The only way
Does it sound like something Churchill would do by the way? Absolutely. Yeah, Churchill sat there and said, okay
He has to come and ask me because chamberlain sent other people he said no no no no no
Only one person
Has to come look at me face to face
And say you can do a job. I can't do come back and help us think about
Think about that now
Visualize that scene we can see it in a movie or we can read in a book and by the way
Say 50% of it is true. The other 50% is true, right?
The other 50% is a lie and it's like build up mythical over generations, right?
I believe that Churchill would want to hear it from
A chamberlain. Have you heard of Churchill's ministry of ungentlemanly warfare? No, so this is a phenomenal book that everybody can go and read
uh
Before the second world war
It was considered ungentlemanly to use guerrilla style tactics and in fact one of the
British politicians said something to the effect of if this is what it takes to win the war
I am prepared to lose they were
The brits saw
anything shy of gentlemanly conduct in war as a loss even if it resulted in a win
And Churchill came in and changed that he was the one that changed that culture
So he puts together this crack squad of eccentric weirdos
One guy invents the limpid mine, right?
Which you can descend to depths and then it'll attach using magnets and it'll blow things up another group
Develop what is the uh predecessor to the sas another group are working on disguises and and guerrilla tactics to disrupt
Infrastructure as the german advance is trying to move forward. Uh, so yeah, Churchill was prepared to play dirty
But you know, you look at the tactics that were used
They only came about because of one man who legitimated it and and he said we will do whatever it takes to win
Now, here's the thing when you hear a story like that
Um, somebody may say well, you know, what a what a what a cold-blooded bastard?
Oh my god, no wonder people hate him
No wonder he is who he is
Where many president moved the bust of Churchill in the white house of wins that take this out
So I don't represent what he represents. Everybody acts all hard, right?
We can hate a Churchill during peacetime
but during wartime
You you beg for a Churchill to rise up
wartime leaders like Churchill you only appreciate during
wartime
There's a really interesting insight from evolutionary psychology here. There's two types of leadership
One is from dominance and the other is from prestige, right? One is uh more authoritarian
It's tyrannical. It's very aggressive. The other is uh more altruistic. It's uh the
The rise to power is denoted
It's spread through the group everybody chooses together that this is someone who we all believe has the skills and
The dominance is not the same and there are specific times when you want dominance and when you want prestige
And in times of conflict you want
Dominance sure sure you could say it in business. It's startup versus when it's more established, right?
But here's also the thing like the part where you got to give a lot of credit to steve jobs
steve jobs had a startup mentality
and then he took that to the company and then he hires
You know his uh scully that comes in from pepsi and he says you want to sell sugar
Can you know water for the rest of your life or you want to change the world?
He brings him in then he ends up being the reason to fire jobs
Jobs leaves goes builds Pixar
Sells it to disney most of his wealth is tied to disney not at apple then he comes back
And he realizes that style of leading is not going to work to take the company to the next level when he comes back to apple
The first phone call he says he says the idea of thinking microsoft is the enemy is behind us
We can't think like that anymore
This is what steve job says and he goes to microsoft and he gets 300 million dollars from microsoft
To invest into apple and these guys hated each other microsoft came out in 76 apple came out in 77 a year apart
And everybody was always comparing the two together bill gates ended up being much richer than
steve jobs, but steve jobs was admired way more than
Bill gates. So what does this mean?
The individual has to
Evolve like you have to also
Recreate yourself as you're going through this the same enemy that drives you when you're 22 years old
Should not be driving you at 32 years old or else you haven't matured
You should also out matured that enemy
And then 32 something else should be driving you then 42 then 58 and 63 then 75
But you are going to have those love affair with those enemies
That's a love affair
You had an affair with this enemy over an eight year span over a 13 year span over a six year span over a six month span
But you know, there is truth in the idea of you still being driven by that enemy
18 years after you beat that enemy 13 years after you beat that enemy
Someone who I think is particularly good at creating enemies from modern pop culture and our industry is bench of hero
Okay, what do you think about what he's doing at daily wire from an enemy perspective and and generally
You talked about recently with his feud with Tucker Carlson or period everything overall
um
I think Tucker's a true believer. I think Tucker is not somebody that
If he's doing it intentionally to get under your skin
Let's say that's 20 percent. Let's say it's 10 percent because he's witty and he's smart and he's sharp
Tucker or ben i'm sorry ben ben Shapiro. So you're talking about right? Yeah
Let's say ben is doing that 10 or 20 percent intentionally to get under your skin. Okay
But this guy at a young age wanted to be supreme court. Just you know, he's been wanting to be that for a long time
This is not a regular guy. I think at 12 or 13 years old. He performed in front of a couple thousand people
His level of intelligence of how early on he got a degree went to college 15 16 years old that all the stuff that he did
so
He's 100 true believer
Does he have an element that he can
Talk to somebody and say I can murder you in a debate right now if you really want to go there. Yes
He has that element as well. Yeah, does he have a side of him that's a maybe a bully type a little bit? Sure
Well, don't forget during school. He was very heavily bullied himself very heavily bullied
But that's what happens typically to people like him, but that may be
the number one driver
That he's continuing because he wants for the rest of his life for those bullies to talk about that ben Shapiro used to be a
Classmate
What makes him go out to pace that he goes you think it's just all these other guys that we see there's no way
You think he would ever tell us you think his own family knows that highly doubted
It's to himself many of these people that he has in his life
Anybody that goes at that pace like tucker Carlson today. I don't know if you saw the approval
He got I think they got 150 million dollars today from some organization who did took his organization
Yeah, so finally today the ward is out that he raised money. It's it's a hundred
It's a big amount of money that he finally raised today
Who's his enemy? He's got a very easy enemy. He's got fox news former employer as an enemy
He's got a lot of political people as an enemy people with silo some as an enemy
You know how many enemies tucker got you think tucker needs another 300 million dollars that he has in a bank account
I highly doubt so
He's doing it for a complete different reason because he wants to give the middle finger to five 10 15 different people in his life
You just sense it with tucker and by the way, you know, it's wild right now
Ben Shapiro went after tucker this week. What happened because of uh, uh, israel tucker's position where he says we should focus on
a hundred thousand
Uh, uh, people in america that are dying from fentanyl not focused on what's going on in israel and gaza and ben Shapiro says
You know, we can chew gum and walk at the same time specifically from the moral standpoint
We can handle two different moral issues, but you know, they're going back and forth whether it's a seasonal thing or not
That's a complete different, you know competition that we're talking about. I suppose
Uh, how would you say enemies of convenience are sometimes good for optics?
You know, what have we just seen dylan danis logan paul ksi tommy fury jake paul tommy fury
logan paul
jake paul and
Who's the jiu-jitsu guy stocked in slaps
Diaz, thank you. Nate Diaz love that guy
Enemies of convenience. Yeah, you know like nothing gets people's tongues wagging more than you creating a little bit of a feud
on the internet
dc, uh
They announced yesterday speaking of feuds and speaking of disney
That the daily wire are going to do that own version of snow white with brett cooper starring in snow white. I saw that
I saw that I mean that to me is you know, largely a
declarative statement of culture war on what's happening with
Children with children's movies, you know, it's synthesizing down all of the little tangential issues that have been included
Is there anything to do with the push toward the sort of books that are in school? Is it us?
You know denying this uh rachel's ziggler ziggler throwing snow white under the bus like she doesn't have a prince charming
She has a stalker. We don't need that. What do you think about that?
I think that it is a very dangerous lesson to teach young girls that
Boys that show interest in them are dangerous and to be avoided
I think it makes for a generation of fragile
narcissistic fearful young girls
That I wouldn't want as a daughter and that I don't want as a mother. You know what a perfect example that is
The movement of feminism is the ultimate example of not choosing your enemies wisely
You chose men as being the enemy
40 years later 50 years later you're 65 years old
Single not married no kids
You're living in an apartment or a condo with a dog
Or a cat that that's all you ever talk about and you're lonely and you're sitting there saying
I was wrong
Men are not the enemy, but guess what?
That movement stole 50 years of your life. You know how painful that is
What what she's doing right now with the messaging she's given and then getting out there and saying well
I don't want to be able to have to do this. No, you know
That's not necessarily going to be that way nowadays, you know, women don't need that anymore
It's a completely different era right now. We're talking about and to do this at a hundred your anniversary of disney
Yeah
Really
With what waltz and many of us I remember living in iran watching disney cartoons translated in farce
Literally in farce
It's it's very weird when you watch it in farce because the language is a rough language, you know, you watch pinocchio
In farce it's not as appealing right, but we grew up with this stuff
You know, we grew up with watching these cartoons to see that taking place
Is uh, if you ask me, it's absolutely pathetic, but you're seeing how many back-to-back-to-back flops disney has right now
Yeah, and it's not a good look. Um, by the way, the buyers who want to buy disney. They're loving this
Apple's one of the most qualified buyers. They they hope disney makes five more flops
apples sitting there saying make five more flops. Iger, please by the way
Have you read the ride of a lifetime by bob Iger? Okay another interesting guy what he did with a 38 career at abc
Obviously he's been there a lot longer, but when you read the book the first 38 run
To be one of the best power brokers
Then to finish your career up the way you're doing right now
very
Very bad way of finishing it. He's not an idiot, right? You don't have the excuse of not knowing
He is for what a point you just made he is 100 not an idiot
This guy was about to run for president bob Iger was gonna he was one of the guys that everybody was trying to get to
Run for president him and oprah. They were supposed to be this literally. This was the conversation
so he also ended up choosing the wrong enemies and
The wrong allies
Not realizing your best allies are parents. You're losing parents who have been watching this for years
You're losing the people that this is a legacy product
It's another example of a complete screw-up that's going to come out of discount for somebody else like apple
I mean look at to go back to ben and what jeremy are doing over the daily wire
Hershey's do a campaign that they don't like within five days. They've released their own chocolate bar
That shaving company does something they don't like within
24 hours, maybe they filmed a video with a mclaren for jeremy's razors
They don't like the way that's fantastic commercial by the way. Well done. Jeremy's got jeremy's got skills
I listened to him and shepiro talking about the fact that originally jeremy was the talent
And ben was the money man and the the the uh data guy behind the scenes
Do you know zack levi? I think it's him exactly by the actor who played the uh, what is the movie?
the the
the
Super hero for kid movies. What is the guy's name? Ben 10? What is it? Ben 10? No?
It's a recent one. You're the one with like yeah four kids. Yeah, trust me. I've seen this movie a couple times
He played kurt warner a recent movie that came out the american underdog. He played kurt warner
him
and
Jeremy used to have a production company apparently 10 15 years ago
And zack ended up being a big time actor in hollywood doing very good for himself
And by the way, jeremy is another great example of a guy that's got enemies. Just look at his eyes
When you talk when you hear jeremy speak
You see the fire built for enemies. He's got enemies and he wants to take those enemies out
But that's why I thought the daily y was an illustrative example because they are as far as I can see largely a company built on
Identifying enemies, you know, they're very much in opposition to ideas that they don't like to movements
They don't like to people that they don't like and uh
Yeah, man, I mean it's you have to be built for that
You really really do need to be built for it. And it certainly seems to me that what ben and what jeremy are doing over there is
Purpose built to be
The anti this the anti that and a lot of the time it's new movements that they don't just they don't agree with
The market's gonna prove if the concept is gonna work or not
And if it can't sustain because if it's a built to solve concept, they're gonna be they're gonna succeed
But can somebody else come and pick up that concept and continue with that with the same level of fire?
It's gonna take a couple decades to figure that part out. It's interesting to think, you know from from our side
When you see those rachel ziggler interviews and she's saying courting is stalking
Um a girl doesn't need to be saved by a prince. You know, she's busy thinking about how she can fulfill her own dreams
And becoming the woman that she always knew that she could run and so forth
You think a lot of people are
Is that really the you know the highest
Manifestation is that real self-actualization for young women nowadays?
That's the question they ask and you're totally right that look ultimately the market will choose
There's no question about it. The market will choose the market is brutal. You know, you know, it's a great thing about
It's always right. It's always right, you know, you can you can say well, let me tell you I'm the best bodybuilder in the world
Yeah, okay. Look at your calves. Yeah, good luck. You go put those a little skimpy, you know
Shorts on and see what your
You know legs look like now. You're not as good as you think you are you're full of it. Yeah market is brutal
podcast business concepts investments drinks
You know alcohol books you write when we first wrote
When I first wrote your next five moves and we launched at august of 2020
This is during the peak of kovat
My publisher simon and schuster asked and says so how do you think the book's gonna do?
How you gonna judge the book me and greg dinkin are talking I said
If the book is doing well three years from now, it was a good book
You can have a great marketing campaign the book does well the first 30 60 90 days
But is the book selling three years later if it is
That's a great book because the market will tell you that
Yeah, very interesting to think about how
optics
and
There are ways to game the system and I think people are very
They're hyper aware of this
They understand that there are
People who have managed to use
Tactics and hacks to get themselves into a position that they maybe didn't quite deserve that the legitimacy of the product the book or whatever it is
the person who
Maybe uh when megan markles autobiography comes out perhaps people would
Accuse her of doing something like this, right? It's not to do with the actual product. It's to do with the positioning
And sometimes that does work
but ultimately
Form is temporary and class is permanent
navals got this great quote where he says
Um
Karma is just people repeating their beliefs
Actions and behaviors until they finally get what they deserve
You just roll the dice you keep rolling the dice, right?
Every single time every single thing you do the way that you interact with the uber driver
The way that you pay or don't pay the bill or invoice that you've got every tiny little thing each time
Is an opportunity for your true nature to come up and people just keep on rolling the dice
Keep on rolling the dice and then every so often someone hits double one and you go. Oh, there we go
But it's temporary you can't do permanently megan merkel whether her motives are really because she loves
The prince and it's like harry. She's in love with them or she's using the power to bully and
Get what she wants out of it
The market is brutal. Look what happened to amber herd for how many years did everybody think?
You know johnny depp was a bad guy for how many years? Oh johnny depp was an abusive
You know relationship all this up and then they start showing the clips
The videos and johnny's comfortable. Would it be in public?
and all of a sudden
180
The world is like what an asshole
She is
Not him. I love johnny the next thing you know the love affair was like
How many more men are going through like johnny is and then how many women said she ruined it for women who were actually abused
So yeah for longest time. Oh my god crying is so such a so difficult time what he was so when he hit me
We fell for it
But we will only fall for it temporarily not permanently the market will reveal eventually
Hopefully yeah, I again man form is temporary classes permanent and people will ultimately get what they deserve
Uh when it comes to the courting is stalking
Culture that we have at the moment
You've got a daughter. You've got young sons
You also spend some time undervalutainment talking about
Intersexual dynamics and what's going on between the sexes
What do you make of the current dating scene for men and women and why do you think it's being demonized in some ways?
From what perspective from I think that there is an anti dating culture at the moment
I think that men and women are being encouraged to be treated as equals. Uh, sorry as adversaries not as equals, right, right?
Um, I think it's transactional today. I think it's easy today
I think the swipe right community is it's friday night 11 o'clock. Let me swipe right. I'm gonna use 20
Someone's gonna get back to me if they swipe right and they so and typically I would go after an eight and a half nine
But it's friday night. I'm gonna go do a six and a half seven. No one's gonna know
I'm gonna invite her back to my place. She knows if she's on tinder. I'm not on bumble. Whatever these dating apps are
And so it's transactional strategic
No one's gonna know and literally not a lot of people are gonna know you can really run through 20 40 50 100 nowadays and it's not a
Big deal. Okay
So what does that do? Whatever is too easy to come you devalue it. You don't value it that highly
You know my era you had to court
You had to prospect you had to have scripts. You had to build relationship. You had to follow up
We didn't have these types of things to do. We had my space the last time I was single. There was my space
Okay, I DM'd uh
My wife on my space my wife and I knew each other for five and a half years
Eventually we're in palm springs for the first time. She's single. I'm single ever for five and a half years
We're both single
And
You know we go on a date first date
PF Chang's December 29 of 2007
Used just when PF Chang used to be good when they had their uh, their their noodle soup
They don't have it anymore used to be they took that away phenomenal item on the menu. I'm convinced they they fell apart after that
So anyways, we go to well PF Chang's by the way, if you're watching bring it back
It was actually a very good item on the menu. So we go on a date. There's magic
She's smiling. I'm smiling. You know the smile. That's kind of like I'm happy to see you
And then it's midnight where the last people left at PF Chang's
You know waiter comes up to me and he says what's going on
I said, you know, my wife wants to follow divorce. She doesn't want to be with me anymore. So your wife why?
Yeah, I come from a different religious background and her family's convinced we got to split up and he has no clue
We're not married. We're just on our first date
He sits down for 15 minutes convincing her to stay with me if you love him stay with him
It was a beautiful, you know
Seeing that we have we go in the car she goes home the next day I take her we go do stairs in Santa Monica
We go to church. We go to earth cafe in Santa Monica
Then we go to boarders
I buy her book on our second date called 101 questions to ask before you get engaged on our second date by norman right
She's like, what's this? I said, I'm not looking for a girlfriend. I'm looking for a wife. I'm 28 at the time
Uh, I said, I know exactly what I want. I've already done this exercise with three other girls
If you want to go through it great
You need to answer the questions. Let's meet up when you're ready and let's go through it week later
Six hours at her place one by one by one each question we go through
I said, this is somebody I can date and by the way, it's ugly because you got to talk about everything in the book
so today
That's not it anymore today. It's too
Risky today. It's you don't have access to that anymore today percentages are coming out where
marriages from dating sites have the least chance of working out versus marriages where you meet somebody through a referral
Where you say pat I've known mary for seven years. I think you and her should talk not know what's going to happen
Let me set you guys up. Let's take our girls and do a double day. Cool. Hey, I kind of like her
This is good. Well, you're telling me seven years. I've only seen her be with one guy larry five years
He was an asshole then she's been with this other guy two years, but she's single now
Now I have some kind of a history I'm dealing with right
So it is a different climate now with kids. It's a different story on how you raise him
my
10-year-old son he's he's been
He's had a girlfriend since he was five years old literally at a birthday party at five years
So he's making out with this other girl at this they've embossed they've embusters. I'm like babe
What is going on his mom is asking me, you know, our kids are kissing. I said, well, I got a son
You got a daughter. You may want to stop your daughter, but I'm not gonna stop my son
So she's like well guys guys. No stop stop. They don't even know what's going on
So there's you need to have the conversation with kids early today
Uh, I remember having conversation with my boys when they were six and five in the shower and I said, okay
We need to have this conversation together. What's that? Okay, stand up. That's your dangling. That's his dangling
This is my dangling
Only you get to play with your dangling one day. You're gonna find a girl
That's gonna play with your dangling till then
God gave you that dangling for only you to play with your dangling now. You got to see how they're looking at me
By the way, they're looking at me like this and my wife leaves quickly. She's like, babe. This is unconscious, babe. You can leave
So we have that conversation
I think you need to have the conversation today because most parents are on middle eastern
They don't have those types of conversations
No one's talking about sex and condoms and all this kind of stuff
You need to start early but the dating scene today
Very very different than what it was when I was single
Uh, I if I wanted to go date today and find a wife my approach would be very different than what most people are doing today
Very different
We'll get back to talking to patrick in one minute
But first I need to tell you about Shopify
Shopify is the e-commerce platform revolutionizing businesses all over the world
Whether you're a garage entrepreneur or ip already Shopify is the only tool that you need to start run and grow your business online without the hassle
Shopify powers 10% of all e-commerce in the united states
And if they are good enough for huge brands like gymshark, they are good enough for you too
Shopify puts you in control of every sales channel
So whether you're selling satin sheets from Shopify's in-person POS system or offering organic olive oil on Shopify's all-in-one e-commerce platform
They've got you covered and once you've reached your audience
Shopify has the internet's best converting checkout to help you turn browsers into buyers
If you are someone who is looking to start a business online
Shopify is the only place to go. They are a one-stop shop to create your business
So if you're looking to take your business to the next level
You can sign up for a one dollar per month trial period right now by going to the link in the description below
Or heading to shopify.com
Slash modern wisdom in all lowercase that's shopify.com
Slash modern wisdom you say to be impressed by the right things
And you just suggested at that as well. What are the right things?
What should people be impressed by in what area in relationship? No in life in life
What is it that people are miscellaniously being impressed by that they shouldn't be so your guy chase right wherever chase is
Okay, right there and then uh, you're uh, where's uh, dean? Where's dina dina's in the back?
Okay, you're telling me about dean and what dean does he's been with you two years three years?
What you said 2,500 episodes and how many uh, uh 700 episodes two and a half thousand videos
Two and a half thousand videos 700 episodes. Yeah, okay. What does that say about you a lot?
Okay, if somebody works with you for six years, what are they gonna learn about you your temper your expectation?
Hey boys, are we ready?
This is all standard and expectation the expectation that you have that is a reflection of he likes working with you
Why does he like working with you? I don't know but you do something right for him to want to work with you
And then you told me what you're doing with them structure. That's private stuff that you told me
So you watch people you watch
Values principles you watch how they treat people you watch how people treat them you watch how people respond to them you watch
How they are with powerful people you watch how they are with regular average day-to-day people you
You look for that today
It's not the cars the the lambos the ferrari's the houses all that stuff. By the way, i'm a capitalist and I love all that stuff
but
I like that stuff because
Different reasons. I enjoy the game. I'm a kid
I'm turning 45 tomorrow. I'm 44 today for the last day tomorrow. I'll be 45
But there's an element of childlike stuff that brings out
The 14 year old kid when I look at a baseball card. I'm a kid when I look at a baseball card
The average person's like who cares about baseball cards. That's a different element, but
The relationships the way they treat people values and principles what they value
you look for those types of things and
Eventually enough will be revealed the more you pay attention
That's one of the byproducts
I think that is dangerous sometimes of people who play the game that they get captured by the game and they forget that it is a game
And they see the game as reality
They don't realize that there is something which is supposed to be deeper which is hidden below the surface
So I did rogan's show last year
And I listened back to the episode he said something on it that I really wanted to dig into
And he listened back I listened back and and pulled this this really really powerful insight for me
It was one of the most powerful things I learned last year
and he said
Just because something is hard to obtain does not mean that it is valuable
Just because something is hard to obtain doesn't mean it's valuable. Correct. Yeah, just because it's difficult to get
Doesn't mean that it's valuable
Look at the car. He's arriving. Look at the watch. He's wearing. Look at the girl
He's with these things were hard to obtain so you presumed that they were valuable
But you didn't realize that what's genuinely valuable are friendships and relationships
And a comfort and a confidence in yourself and peace of mind and sanity
And being able to positively impact the people around you. So it got me thinking
I've been really sort of reflecting on this over the last year
And I did some research into the history of the pineapple
so
1492 christopher columbus lands on the island of guadalupe
And for the first time ever a westerner sees a pineapple and you look at it
It's kind of a royal fruit that's got this stupid crown on its head and he writes in his journal
He describes the taste of a pineapple if you've never had a pineapple before you blow your head off
You know if you haven't got processed I remember the first time I had a pineapple. Yes, it's insane
Of course, anyway, they take a shipload literally back to
the prince of spain
Prince aragon the second
Take this entire shipload back one of them makes it that isn't rotten and the prince is allowed to eat it
And again almost gets this sort of mythical quality to it the pineapple
Very quickly the british quite rightly so they
They start to see it as this symbol of opulence, right? They see it as this symbol of wealth
So they would parade pineapples around at dinner
On a platter and they would use them over and over and over again
You could rent a pineapple, right for the evening. This is the sort of house in which you might be able to see a pineapple, right?
Castles had pineapple statues on the top of them there would be
Fountains with pineapples at the front of someone's estate
All of this occurred because of the scarcity of a pineapple. It was 8 000 pounds to get one pineapple. Wow, right?
That was the equivalent back then
8 000 pounds. It was a symbol of of privilege and opulence and wealth and
What it meant was that people really
looked up to this one object then the french a couple of hundred years later. They invent greenhouses
And that allows us to grow tropical fruits at higher climates higher
latitudes
Price drops and guess what?
No one starts parading the pineapple around anymore
The scarcity of it was largely determining the value of it
And that story and what I called rogan's value difficulty conflation just because something is hard to obtain does not mean that it is valuable
Now I would argue that a pineapple is valuable no matter how hard or difficult
It's like a dialed fruit no matter how good or how difficult it is to get a hold of
But I really love that insight because I think that it shows how
non valuable
But difficult to obtain things get slipped into our desires
I see that particular expensive possession that intrinsically I don't actually care about maybe I've never been a watch guy
Maybe I've never been a shoes guy. Maybe I've never been a car guy
But I want it I want it because it's hard to get okay
Well, what if there is a quicker route to what fulfillment?
What if there is a more direct path because there are some people out there for whom
Keeping up with the jonesism materialism is an inbuilt part of their life
But I can say as someone that doesn't have that bone in my body particularly that for me material possessions
They don't make a massive difference to my quality of life. I like nice things. I like to fly business
I like you know, I like a nice house and blah blah blah
But there's people who are tuned into that, right? Maybe it's the upbringing the genetic predisposition whatever whatever whatever
But I think that people should be very cautious. Why is it that I'm chasing this thing?
Am I chasing this thing because it's something which is valuable or am I chasing it simply because it's something that's difficult to get
Yeah, that's a by the way a very good story
And a great quote. I remember in iran
Pineapple is on on us. That's how we say we say on on us
And anybody in iran who had pineapple you were rich two things pineapple and banana in iran
Only rich people have pineapple and two good fruits. Yeah, two good fruits. And then I go to germany
And bananas are everywhere
But the first time I had pineapple. I had it in the states. I couldn't believe we were having pineapple
I thought we were rich when we had pineapple. I said mom, are we finally rich here?
We made we retired on a pineapple. Yeah, it was on on us and I remember I was in
Ninth grade first time ever we went and ate at sizzlers. I thought we had made it. I'm like guys you will not believe what restaurant
I don't know if you know sizzlers, but sizzlers in us is not a fancy restaurant
I thought we made it because we ate at
sizzlers. Yeah, you know what say
I used to think
And you know this whole concept of people who are too much about
Fancy things it's kind of like well look at this guy all he cares about his money all he cares about his fancy things
All he cares about is these cars and life with the rich and famous and all this other stuff
Eventually I realized not everybody is driven by the same thing all I care about that's something that drives you
Okay, my oldest son could care less. You know what he wants for a car his favorite car a jeep
That's his dream car. My daughter says I want a white Ferrari
Okay, and I said, who do you think's gonna buy that for you? Well daddy, you're gonna buy
I'm not buying you white for are you gonna buy yourself a white Ferrari?
Dylan wants a completely different car my oldest son. You know what you know what is
Absolutely a great day for him outside
in the dirt
playing with lizards
catching animals
Playing with dogs and cats
That's an incredible day. By the way, he's been like done since eight months nine months
My youngest son 10 years old first time I take him to my barber to get a haircut
And one of the girls at this place they give
Massages at the end when you get the haircut my oldest son says don't touch my back
Don't don't touch me. He would go like this. He's like no no dad. I don't tell her not to touch me, right?
But my 10 year old son it was five at the time
She's like, can you also massage me over here?
Oh, he likes to find the things in life to find her things in life, right?
My oldest son loves dogs. He loves animals my youngest son
Don't get on my bed get off my bed
My oldest son wants a dog right next to him the youngest son doesn't want any of the dogs next to him and his dad loves dogs
I love animals, right?
so I'm not I'm not you know
I think
Joe specializes in doing the heart if there's anybody that specializes in doing the heart is joe. You kid me like joe is a
enamored by doing the heart
But also joe's learned to be so self-aware of himself to know what he likes
I said joe, what do you think about sports? Is uh, I know nothing about sports. I don't watch sports
The only thing I watch is ufc
Joe now that you're getting all these eyeballs. What's your vision? What if we can do this pat?
The only thing I want to do is I just want to podcast. Yeah, I want to go hunt. I want to be my family
I want to do ufc. This is all I want to do the level of clarity. He has of where he's at
Props to him now Dana white
slightly different
Dana's not worth a few hundred say he's worth a half a billion dollars today
Why is he still driving?
Why is he still pushing? Why is he still competing? Why is he still wanting to be number one?
Who's his enemy?
He drives around in nice cars likes to go to the casino likes to be around with people having fun late night
Two different dynamics two different personalities. Look at the organization they built with you
I mean
Thinking of someone who chooses their enemies tactically Dana is not someone who's shy of a fight
He loves it, you know, if you were to think of a c-suite level fighter
Dana white is is pretty well and bring the crop. Yeah, you've you've spent a good bit of time sort of
Orbiting that that whole crew of people. What have you learned from your?
Insights about the UFC and sort of what that says about Dana. Oh
listen
what I'm about to say about Dana is
Some people are not gonna like it, but I'm gonna say it anyways
UFC is what UFC is because of Dana white you can sit there and talk about all these fighters and
Yeah, but you know if it wasn't for this guy if it wasn't for that guy if it wasn't for what this person did and that
Totally get it. Listen different players come and go right totally understand
Dana has made it about the sport. He never made it about the fight. He never made it about one fighter
He is very
Quick to call out anybody. It doesn't matter if it's the number one guy in the league
He'll call him out. John Jones. He'll call out Connor if he screws up, but he'll back him up
To the highest level. He'll say that was some stupid shit. He did
He'll sit there and straight up tell you what he likes what he doesn't like
But everybody learned during covet. He was the number one commissioner in all of sports
Every commissioner in america caved
mba caved
nfl caved mlb caved
Every commissioner caved except for one guy who had brass balls called dano white who said I don't give a shit
We're going to find a place to do the fight. So during covet. You know, it's the only sport the world watched
We watched ufc. No one's watching the freaking football game with no fans out there and card boards
What am I going to do with card boards? Oh, no, we're gonna watch
Hey, you can buy this seat for your face to be on the you know
Basketball game who gives a shit. It was the most boring finals lakers one ever
They shouldn't even deserve to have won that finals. There was no audience. Nobody boon against you
But everybody realized here's dano as a commissioner. Then it's everybody else. You're not at his level
He's a wartime leader as well as a peacetime leader. He's learned how to balance both
prestige moving together
He said something in an interview says listen, man, maybe it's just the fact that I'm getting old
And I'm getting soft, but I have a hard time seeing what's going on with some of these guys and
You know
In the way his personal life when he went through that crisis and the way he put it
He says you want me to be embarrassed? How much more embarrassed you want me to be?
You know how embarrassing it is to talk to my wife and my kids. You know how embarrassing that is
This is nothing compared to embarrassing the two have to face my kids
You respect that you love that there's a degree of clarity
especially to dano
that is
very rare
and
I think that one of the things that ufc has done is make boxing particularly
Feel so antiquated and pedestrian and the fact that ksi almost speed tommy fury. You know how bad that would have been for boxing
That's not good. That's not good, but he ksi does not represent ufc either
He doesn't but what would have happened if a youtuber would have beaten a professional boxer with the last name of fury
It's humiliating correct and many people would have said he could have won on the points
But what was it that you said you made some comparison about jockeys and horses to do with dano white?
Yes, I made the analysis with ilan musk where you either bet on the oh the same goes with dano white as well
Yeah, yeah, so you got the jockey and the horse. Okay
You got dano white is the jockey the horses ufc ilan musk is a jockey
Tesla is the horse. Okay, so if tomorrow ilan musk resigned from tesla to only do twitter
What happens to tesla?
It's going to be disturbing for a lot of investors because a lot of people bought tesla because it's ilan musk
A lot of people are selling tesla
Tesla and getting rid of their cars like aoc
It's ilan musk ever since yeah about twitter double-edged sword. Yeah, it's a double-edged sword
But you know to me in a perfect world is if you can have both I think ufc is a great product
Phenomenal product addicting product. Okay viral product
But dano white is an incredible jockey. Do you remember someone brought up?
I think it was israel adesanya had been using the n word
And it's at the press conference. I mean it must be fun for the press
You know to sit down and dano sits down. He goes. All right guys. What's going on the gate tonight was
We broke this he would have the fight of the night and then he just looks up and someone asks him a question
And he just says what he thinks you know, he doesn't say something that the media team has prepped him on
Although i'm sure he's got training and he understands the boundaries, but nothing feels
prescribed
manufactured
Conceited
Nothing
Contrived nothing feels like that. It just feels like this is what the guy thinks
Someone I saw this on the internet. Someone had talked about
Many organizations and youtubers at the moment are trying to speed run authenticity
Right. They're trying to growth hack relatability. How can I make myself seem more authentic and relatable than I actually am
And obviously it's kind of a self-defeating prophecy
Which is that the only way to be authentic is to be authentic
And there's a degree of trust, you know, I mean dana dude the start of this year was rough for him that
Him and his mrs. Got into a scuffle and it got videoed and it was maybe like new year's eve or something like oh
January 1st. Guess I was starting 2023 the worst way possible and
He comes out and you have faith that you go
Yeah, this guy
Meant what he said
There's I don't think that there's any demons looking in the closet because I may
Regret saying that at some point in future, but I don't think that I'm going to need to because I just have faith that
I'm not a dana white. I don't have stock in dana white. I just I'm a good judge of character and I see in him someone
That seems to tell the truth more often than not and seems to be very open and honest and own his mistakes
And people love that people really really like that
So, yeah, it makes him incredibly likable
Authenticity at the highest level that brand is a very
authentic brand
He said is uh, you know his enemies. He's had the people that have
challenged him and given him a hard time, but
Dana in a in a past life could have been a gangster
Maybe he was but he could have been a gangster. He could have ran a
Family that's how Dana's he could have been he Dana is almost not a
mob boss
You know of a Gambino family or Genovese or colombo
Dana's more the guy that ran the commission like a Luciano. That's Dana
And to be that guy
There is no book you can read to be that you can read 40 lots of power 100 times you can't be that guy
You either are that guy. You're not that guy big boss energy Dana is that guy Dana's that guy
One of your quotes is when you're winning you're not as good as you think you are
When you're losing you're not as bad as you think you are. What's that mean to you?
Both of them lie, you know, both of them is exaggerated, you know, both of them
are
When you when you're winning everybody's telling you how amazing you are. Oh my god, let me tell you do you
You know what you're the best
You're amazing
You know, you're just better than that guy and you're better than this guy
And it always takes me back to that quote of Marcus Aurelius who had a slave
That would sit behind them and always whisper to him. Hey, you're just a man
You're just a man. You're just a man. That's right 40 laws of power, right?
You're just a man. You're just a man. You're just a man
And then he would get up and he became the best emperor what 62 ad to 69 whatever the time is
And he becomes who he becomes
And we read about him now, you know, you pick up the book meditations. You're like, this is like mandatory reading for anybody
What is this all about? Right?
You know a simple book
Not that big you can read it in one hour. No, it's not it's not
And you're going through it saying what was this about then you google what did he mean by this?
Wow, I don't think about it that way. So and then when you're losing
Everybody tells you I told you shouldn't have done that. I knew you weren't gonna make it
Yeah, I told you it wasn't for you. You weren't that guy and you believe that as well
So both of them are are lying for me politically
Politically, I'm a capitalist hardcore capitalist. I fully am a capitalist to the core
I think the free market will create solutions to problems. I think the free market is going to filter out
all the fakers in
pharma in
finance in podcasting in sports in real estate and insurance
It takes two decades, but it'll filter people out. It's not it's got zero sympathy for you
It doesn't care to be friend. You can give capitalism as many compliments as you want. He doesn't feel it. He has no emotions
You can't flatter capitalism. All he's interested in is results. Are you good enough? Can you last can you recreate yourself? Great
But when it comes on to politics, I want to hear both sides
Okay, I'm a christian, but I held a podcast four weeks ago
I brought two muslims and I brought two christians and I had them go at it for two hours discussion
because my
Conversation was more about okay if we agree on seven different things we disagree on seven different things
But you agree on 23 different things. Can we figure out a way to make this work?
Why do you feel the way you do?
Why do you feel the way you do and they go back and forth and your sinners in okay?
Interesting to date israel palestine with what's going on with hamas
complicated lots of issues
You know on one end the question is where pro israel
Where folks are going back and forth
You know, I'm a pro-israel guy. I'm from iran when I lived in iran for 10 years
Iran was safer when reza pahlavi was there because they were strong and they had allies with everybody
And israel was safe the middle east was safe you could go
And say, you know what patrick next week, you know where i'm going. Where are you going?
I'm going to tehran iran
Because frank sinatra is performing there i'm gonna do a podcast with frank sinatra said you're doing a podcast with frank sinatra in tehran iran sick
You would have been able to say that in 76 in 75
So the middle east was fairly peaceful not perfect, but it was peaceful
But at the same time it you know, you got to ask the question
Had it israel with the best
Intelligence masad not know that for one year hamas was training for this
How did you not know that they went and built a city similar to the one that you haven't trained on how to break into homes and take hostages?
You didn't know that you really didn't know that
And intelligence gave you a report from here from egypt
But you didn't know that it's a fair question to ask but when you ask that question guess what people say
What kind of a question is that this is not the time to ask that question. Do you realize what they're doing to kids?
I don't support it
I'm not supporting any of that stuff. Then I got another question because palestinian said that's exactly right
This was intentional by israel. They know what I asked palestinians and they also don't ask this question
Here's a question
If you're so peaceful
Who knows more about palestinians?
us
Who live in america or uk or your neighbor if you live in a condo or if you live in a house
And you've been living in this house for five years or 10 years
You have a neighbor on this side. You have a neighbor on this side
You know when they do barbecues, you know, how much they drink
You know who in which in-laws comes in, you know the son when he sneaks in the girlfriend at one o'clock in the morning
You know the daughter when she sneaks out and changes her skirt and gets into a car with that bad boy and goes out and does
What she does and she comes back at four o'clock. You know your neighbors. You see all their mess. Okay
If if palestine
In gazes filled with so many peaceful people. Why is egypt not taking them?
As refugees to go to egypt egypt knows a lot about you. Why is it only 800 people?
Why are they not letting a million people come to you? So somebody may say
What a shameful question for you to ask. How dare you ask the question? I think both questions need to be asked
What you do with it is up to you. Okay, so for me this whole concept of when you're winning
Don't believe the hype when you're losing. Don't believe the hype
Whatever story even your own side is saying. Why don't you be skeptical a little bit and question it for yourself and see if you can
entertain both ideas
I want to find ways to entertain both ideas as much as possible because I find myself becoming sharper when I do
That and I eliminate blind spots anytime
100% one side have way too many blind spots. We'll get back to talking to patrick in one minute
But first I need to tell you about fountain life. Here's a crazy statistic
Nearly 70% of heart attacks occur without any
Prior symptoms simply put the human body is really good at hiding disease and this is where fountain life comes in
They provide top of the line health snapshots vetted therapeutics and a team of longevity physicians
So that you can live a longer healthier and more vital life in seemingly healthy adults fountain life's initial results have shown
2% have cancer 2 and a half percent have a potential ruptured aneurysm looming in their future and over
14% have a critical life saving finding right now
You can get the exact treatment that I got by going to the link in the description below or heading to fountain life
Dot com slash modern wisdom using the form on that page to get $500 off their apex membership
That's fountain life dot com
Slash modern wisdom. Do you think that we're obliged to have a take on everything because I haven't
Got involved in the israel palestine conflict and there's a lot of people that are very unhappy
The silence is violence crowd your silence is deafening. Why haven't you come out in support or against this group or that group?
Is it an obligation for us all to have a take on everything?
If if the background has to do anything with you, I think you are obligated to talk about it
Meaning if you're a jew, I think you have to if you're palestinian you have to
If you're a muslim, I think you have to because it's your community. It's your pride. It's your background
If you're a political show and you've spoken about ukraine and russia
And you've touched that topic. Why are you not touching this topic now?
I don't know if you have no no no no to all of the above then guess what that means then you're consistent
So no you don't have to if you've been consistent with all of it. You don't have to talk about it
That's not what the show is about you could simply say you want to hear that show go to ben Shapiro
Well, what people are saying they're not saying why haven't you commented specifically what your position is what they want
What they're saying is why haven't you said the thing that supports the stance that I want you to take for each of them
No, why haven't I come in and done edit at all?
I mean listen
There there's a lot of events in the world that if you and I have to comment on all of them
We don't have a life you would have to do 12 hour podcasts to cover everything on a daily basis. No
But this is a
Once in 50 years type of crisis that could lead to a world war three numbers came yesterday
Were ray dalio, I don't know if you've sat down with ray dalio. Okay, so you know who ray dalio is
He's a 20 billion dollar man built an incredible company
I had him on as well ray dalio yesterday said
The chance of world war three is officially at 50% and jayme diamond yesterday said
These are the most dangerous times we're living in decades
Okay, so one may say
Well, you get tens of millions of eyeballs
You're no longer somebody that gets
Back in the days your first show when you did were 220 people watching a mom and dad didn't watch it
Your siblings didn't watch your best friends didn't watch it. No now you're getting
Well, that's the interesting question, right?
Whether somebody with a sufficiently large platform is obligated to comment on things simply because they have a large platform
And you ask why whether I haven't why I haven't if I haven't
I found out about the incidents that were going on in the middle east on twitter
Two days after they happened and I wondered why hammers was trending and I thought what the fuck's hammers. Oh, fuck. That's Hamas
That was two days after everything had happened by this time
I'd already had texts from people saying dude like
Are you gonna get you're gonna do an episode on this and I was like
bro
The requisite amount of understanding for me to be able to add an educated opinion to this topic
Is not one that I have time to do. I mentioned to you earlier on we've been traveling. We were in la
We were there for two days all I did all I've done for the last week is travel
Sleep research and record and I've researched very specific guests. I haven't been researching stuff about the middle east, right?
So that's all I've had time to do
Is it not the precise problem that people who do not know what they're talking about have given
Cod psychology insights way outside of their domain of expertise and just added to the noise rather than adding to the signal
And yet there is a group of people on the internet that would say no
But this is so important to me that it's something that should move
Aside the other things that you're doing in life. And I think a final element of this is
people who are chronically online
Cannot understand what it's like to not be chronically online
I am chronically online for periods
And then I am chronically traveling around and researching and recording and going from hotel to hotel coming out to florida
This is one of those periods during which
There's a lot of reading that needs to be done
To make a comment to contribute to something that lots of people who are better educated than me can do
It's the same reason I didn't comment on covid
Covid was something that was happening. We did a a couple of
Episodes explaining how we felt people could better work from home some mental health tools that we thought that they could use
Some strategies that they could do to improve their time blocking and some stuff like that
Here's how we would design your homework station. I'm like
If you want me to comment and just throw horseshit at the wind
I can do it, but I don't think that it's going to benefit anything. So yeah, there's this
compulsion
this obligation I think that uh
certain groups on the internet feel
Anybody that comments on things should get themselves involved with and uh, it's just are you surprised?
No, no at all because what they want, but again, they don't want you to comment
They want you to support their side. No, that's a different story that that that's a different story. There's a difference between
commenting and supporting right
I'm not if I comment i'm giving you my thoughts
and i'm gonna share with you my
uh, uh
You know opinion
Thoughts on my life experience on what I think is going on and then from there
Agree or disagree for the people who are asking you to contribute
if your thoughts and your life experience led you to
Uh
Implicate one side rather than the other sound like you were being more generous to one side rather than the other
They would very quickly say I wanted you to comment, but I didn't want you to say that
They would very quickly have an issue. Is that your brand though? Is your brand?
Uh, uh of 700 episodes 2500 clips
You know is your brand given opinion on current events? Have you done that in the past?
Because here's what happens. So
In the market, you know how in hollywood. They say this guy's a triple threat. What's a triple threat act sing dance
Okay, in podcasting. There's also triple threats. Okay. What's a triple threat a great interviewer?
Which you are but that's one of three
two is
perspective and opinion
Which joe rogan is people want to hear what joe has to say about this
And in three is entertain
Can you entertain me while you're giving me your perspective or asking questions where i'm kind of like
Man, I was funny as hell. Yeah. So joe the reason why joe is number one is because
joe's
great host
We want to hear his perspective agree or disagree. He has the
He has the conviction and the confidence to give a side and be willing to change. Hey one minute. You're voting for bernie sanders
Four years later. You're saying to save america. You got to vote for trump and republican. What?
What are you talking about? Right?
So then three is he entertains you he makes you laugh
Your brand
You have to take the risk whether you want to go to two
I don't think you need to comment on absolutely everything if joe was to be asked
What do you think of aron roger's most recent achilles rupture?
As you said earlier on that's not a but there's a different story with that
You asked about consistency earlier on ukraine russia didn't comment on covet didn't comment on and that's your brand then
But but by the way, what you just said is
Your perspective absolutely, but it's a meta perspective on what's going on. You're not going to please everybody though
Look, i'm armenian and assyrian. Okay, so now i was born in iran. So here's where i'm screwed
i'm a half armenian half assyrian born in iran
And i'm an american, okay
So for the emulsmen of the apocalypse. Oh my god. So whenever something happens with armenian genocide
I have to within a second comment on it. Okay
And I do but now within a second because I don't have intel
So when you're talking about your days what it looks like research all that stuff
You're telling the truth
But i'm running nine companies and I got a wife and I got four kids and i'm
Transitioning with another company and i'm doing research on a podcast and i'm doing the interviews and i'm running a tech startup
And i'm running a consulting firm with clients that are traveling worldwide to come to us
And i'm doing our our best to kind of see what's going on with stories
Yeah, there's going to be days you just don't have time and the audience
Can't understand and cannot understand it right? That's a decision they got to make
Uh, so assyrians. Hey, did you see what happened at that theater?
What are you going to comment at this wedding that just took place and a hundred people were dead
And a place caught on fire and these people. Okay, great. Let me get some intel and then i'll comment on it
And then I did you know or iran or you know, but but the natural part where I would take it as a
compliment is the audience
is
leaning on
You to see how you would assess this issue and they trust the way you reason
And nowadays there's not enough people who are able to reason
To give a different perspective because they simply don't trust mainstream media
But then the next step is do you want to take the risk of going in that side?
If your brand is not on covet not on uh, ukraine not on this then you're staying consistent. I think largely the main
Lesson I learned I learned this from douglas murray is that there are a lot of people in the online space
Who do not have expertise within a particular domain and have it in another one
They have expertise within psychology or climate change or whatever it might be and then they start thinking to themselves. Well
Why
Why shouldn't my thoughts on the ukraine be important to people?
What everybody thinks that my insights about climate change are absolutely wonderful and they start to get out over the skis
Outside of their domain of competence. If you want to talk about my domains of competence
I'll comment on it
For me, there are people out there who are
Capable prepared to do the work have the time and have the expertise. I don't think that the internet needs more noise
I think it needs more signal and I would be contributing nothing short of noise if I did that
I'm also just not passionate about learning about this topic and I understand that in order for me to give the
For me to meet the bar of evidence and insight that I would want to to feel proud about my opinion
I need to be passionate about it. Right. I need to be compelled to learn about passion about life
Of course I am
Would you like to live 200 years old? Yes. Okay
So do many of your listeners because the feedback you give
Has to do with living a great life because people are watching the life you're living
The only thing I would encourage you to consider from the audience side
Is this is a different crisis
This crisis
If reasonable people like you can find a way to lower the overreaction that people are having
With everything that's out there. I would say you would actually contribute to lowering the
overreaction community
so
I'm I'm simply complimenting you to consider the fact that people are looking to see
How a reasonable person like you that can give a logical perspective because that's what's missing today
and
When a Ray Dalio
When a Jamie Dimon when many of these guys are saying 50 percent
And you with your millions of people who listen to you can and it's not a
Niche audience where it's in one country or two countries your audience is worldwide 100 plus countries. You got people listening to you
I think maybe from that level the
Feedback from the audience could be this is not a regular issue
We'd like to hear your thoughts and then whether you choose to do it or not. It's your prerogative and we move on
Yeah, you've got uh
You mentioned there about this sort of loss of faith in our institutions
Right the previous gatekeepers the people that we would have relied on to
Tell us what what in the world?
What do you think about this rising skepticism?
Uh, there is also a degree of conspiratorial thinking
heterodox cynicism around what we're being told
Is this leaving a vacuum where people's uncertainty is making their lives worse?
What is going to happen from a a sense making because how do people make sense of the world when we can't trust the
information
communicators
Well, that's the that's why they want to hear from you. So so what you're saying is is validating their point. So in america today
We are at the lowest levels. We've ever been for americans trusting mainstream media and trusting the government
Not one or the others the lowest in both. We don't trust the government. We don't trust mainstream media
The last time the the people trusted mainstream media and the government the highest was right before kennedy died after that
That was at 72 percent. It's gone from 72 65 60
Down to today 27 percent people simply don't trust
The mainstream media to get feedback on what's really taking place. There's a reason why rogan
Gets more eyeballs on his show than all these guys combined and people are watching to see what he has to say
There's a reason why shepiro gets the eyeballs. He gets there's a reason why you get the eyeballs
There's a reason why all these other guys get the eyeballs
Is because they want to hear a different perspective, you know, we're going back to
The the the story where you know in this quote's been criticized many times. It's not really true
You know amateurs build
You know professionals build the titanic amateurs build the arc, you know, this whole story that they go back and forth
professionals run mainstream media amateurs run podcasting
But the world is trusting amateurs running podcasting more than the people that build the titanic
because a lot of people think mainstream media is about to
Sink like the titanic dick now whether it did or not who knows but
People want to talk to somebody just a regular guy says, you know, what's your story? What do you think about this?
What are your thoughts on this? Do you really agree? Do I does anybody else feel I kind of feel that way as well?
I'm a little bit skeptical. I'm a little bit worried about this. What's going on?
Is it really as big as they make it out to be should I trust these guys?
So I'm not surprised this is taking place. By the way, you know, what's the
Only thing that's keeping mainstream media in business. It's only a couple things that keep in mainstream medium business
number one is
75 year olds
70 75 year olds are keeping mainstream media in business. Okay, so that's another 10 to 15 years
Before that generation is no longer here. That audience is gone. Number two is big pharma if
Two countries in the world that allow big pharma companies to advertise it's us and new zealand every other country in the world
You cannot advertise
The only two countries in the world where pharmaceutical companies like Pfizer
That can advertise is us and new zealand everywhere else. There is no commercials on tv
Do you realize what would happen if a president?
Did an executive order got congress everybody in it to say moving forward big pharma can no longer advertise on mainstream media
You know what happens the next day
Every one of them goes out of business
And all these talented guys at espn or at cnn or fox or abc that are getting the 5 10 15 20 million dollar contract
gone
80 percent of revenue is gone
And a lot of these guys now have to go and try to make it in the world that you're making it
And this is what you're doing is hard. There's not a teleprompter behind me
There's nobody whispering in your ears what to say follow up with this question. This is all you doing it, right to them
Hey, ask him this follow up with this. We just found data 63 percent. He's lying follow up with this
Did you watch any of the late night hosts when they tried to do a podcast between them? Yes
What did you think from a professional's perspective a amateur professional's perspective? There's a reason why they can't do anything without writers
You know, I mean don't get me wrong to me fallon is a very talented guy a very talented guy
And you're not going to get to that job without having talent these guys got a lot of talent
They're workers, but the moment writers are done. You mean to tell me for may 12th
You guys can't do an episode until what october which they just started with two weeks ago
You realize writers control this world now the writers are worried that chat gbt can write the
Jokes of what's going on and what if a i can pop out these, you know
Jokes and what could take place no this game is a very very hard game. This is not an easy game
Think about what spot if I did
What other president in the last 20 years has been as popular as obama
And let me get this straight obama and another guy named bruce springsteen start a podcast and spot if I drop some what?
Who else has been more popular in the last 20 years on television than kim kardash in with 300 million followers on instagram
Spotify signs a podcast with her then they drop her what?
Who else has been more on tv and every magazine newspaper than harry and megan
But spot if I drop their podcast and hasn't
Fully is like we're not renewing the contract and then they give rogan a few hundred wait what?
So let me get this straight just being famous doesn't help to have a podcast. No wow
I thought it was just about fame. No, this is hard. This is an art. This is very difficult to do
It's not easy to do so if mainstream media
Sinks like the titanic
90% of that talent is going to disappear and they're not going to know what to do 90% of them
It's not an easy game. There's does this mean or does this contribute to?
Complicity or
those
Commentators and all of the other people whose wages ultimately are paid for by
those adverts
Does this does this create a perverse incentive for them in what way that they may be
Prepared to compromise something they truly think to not jeopardize the people that ultimately pay their wages
That there is a risk to them saying something out of turn which may
I mean are you really asking that question or you know the answer to that question? You already know the answer
You're a smart guy. Yeah. No, of course they they they have to they don't have a choice to take that position, right?
I'll give you an idea. Chris Cuomo was on cnn for god knows how many years and he was a number one guy for two or three years
What does cnn do to chris?
fired
his brother andrew Cuomo governor
fired
And then he's got a hundred twenty five million dollar pending lawsuit against cnn
and now cnn folks can't talk to chris. I had him on the podcast and
For the longest time Cuomo was hated by a lot of people on the right
Absolutely hated because of the stuff you would say where is jesus?
Jesus going to come and save you with covet. What's jesus going to do for you and all this stuff you would say, right?
well
He came on a podcast
And i'm with one of my partners in dalas. He's a billionaire himself in the insurance, but he's the number one power player in insurance
We're at his uh, uh office corner office on the top one the sickest office you'll see in your life like 60 at floor
He's overlooking all of dalas
brine and he says
You know, it's kind of weird watching Cuomo on your podcast. I said why?
He says he sounded different
You know those moments where I kind of liked him when I was watching this and this is not a guy
I can say something like that with you know how many people said that
What happened to him? He's now a free agent. He's got a shirt. He sells that's called free agent. He's got a podcast that says, you know
You know
With something Cuomo project that he's got a podcast and how does he dress like you?
we're with him a couple weeks ago in uh, what do you call it in um
sag harbor in uh, up in uh
That entire area whatever that area is I forget the name
uh, sagaponic sag harbor all that stuff
And we'll go to his house. My kids are running on the back. He said pat somebody wants to talk to you
I said, who's that facetime? It was like this like, oh shit
What's up robert downey jr. How you doing?
So i'm having a conversation with him
But forget about talking to robert downey jr. I wanted to see my kids reaction, especially my two boys
Because my boys when he died
My kids were devastated
When he dies iron man dies in you know in the do you know what today is in the marvel cinematic universe?
Today is the canonical death day
Of tony stark when he clicks his fingers today is the day the date get out of here today is the date
I did not know that
What is the chance of me bringing up the sword and I don't even know that story
So I said dylan tico come here. So daddy will run around with the dogs. I said trust me
Come here
And chris turns the camera around he goes like this
My son goes
Oh my god
Zion man, I know you and then the other son tico his reaction dylan's reaction
You know, you love robert downey's one of those guys that you absolutely love when you go back to his journey
I was talking about the movie that my dad and I watched 30 years ago only you
And the only movie I've ever watched four hours two hours and two back to back in a row was judge
This by robert downey jr. What's the moral of the story the moment chris coma was free
And he didn't give a shit
He just kind of told you what he was kind of going through
Would you like it or not? You may not agree with everything, but he's finally free a lot of these guys working on mainstream media
They're not free. I mean now see took his transition
And guess what he's killing it. Okay
Love them or hate them when tucker puts on a show
Everybody's watching what this guy's got to say. So I found out from the guys that
Light and tech all of this stuff that we're doing here who understand very very very closely what's going on
Bennett was it anamorphic lenses? Is that what they shot took his first thing in his garage with?
Yeah, so anamorphic lenses a very particular type of lens very particular type of shooting very
Uh short wide so it has the
Image of maybe it was his garage or something like that or a living room with the background behind him make no mistake
that is
lit and shot
in
Cinema quality right with the facade of it being a sort of low budget thing, right?
So it's this beautiful on an iphone. Yeah, precisely. It's this beautiful blending of both and uh
That's exciting. I think it's exciting to see what these guys do and also, you know, I love this about
Given that we spend so much time talking and and people have this
Uh concern about whether or not someone's gaming the system. Are they trying to growth hack relatability? Right or authenticity?
Seeing I would be lying if I said that I didn't take an amount of pleasure to see late night hosts
that have got massive platforms struggle to hold a conversation together for an hour over zoom because
That is ultimately the battle place of ideas, right? It's not how well can you read a script from a teleprompter?
I mean, there is skill absolutely skill in being able to do that and I couldn't I couldn't do the writing
I couldn't do the performance. I couldn't do the bits and the blah blah the music
but
Largely you are a marionette, right? That's being ventriloquized by a handful of writers and and execs
Ultimately seeing what you can do
When the gloves are off is more interesting to me. This is very hard. This is this is very hard because
How long is your average podcast?
Hour and a half
Okay
So an hour and a half of keeping people's interests with no breaks and nobody talking to you and touching up the makeup to them
What are you talking about? That is absolutely insane to do something like that. No
This is very hard and the market is proven that this isn't for everybody
The market is proven. You cannot keep my attention for that long. This is very very difficult when when people start to say
and I remember I hired a
marketing expert
You know 13 years ago 14 years ago. He came in and said well studies. I've shown you're making one of the mistakes
You're making on youtube your videos are about 12 minutes long
And the only videos that do well is 12 minutes after 12 minutes that I said nah, man
I'm doing 42 minutes 28 minutes hour and 20 minutes. That's a mistake
Number one thing we have to do is no video can go past 13 minutes
Like dude, okay, maybe this guy's the expert. He sold this company for a couple million. You know what happened the day we fired him
60 days later our first video goes viral and gets 40 million views today
It's got a half a billion views. Okay for the life of an entrepreneur in 90 second takes off, right?
And we start making other clips and other videos and other stuff and ec joe takes it to a whole different level
Three hours and you got lex freedman takes it to a different level four hours three hours and 48 minutes
You know, yeah, what lex does he did seven hours with balaji
Glutton for punishment
Yeah, you um you tweeted something that I thought was quite interesting
You said why do so many people who come to the america from other countries with little to no money at all?
within 10 years outpace the average person who was born here
What is going on where americans who have all of the i'm an immigrant to this country, right?
Many people who are given from the very beginning all of the benefits of being from this country
Why is it that they are outpaced by people who weren't born here?
so
Six seven months ago
I'm sitting with my state planner and one of the fears I have for the last 10 years is
What i'm going to do with my kids with the wealth with money?
Am I raising them in a way that they're not going to turn out being the
You know the snobby arrogant kid that you know the spoon. Oh man, I cannot say I never liked those kids in school
Those are the kids I got into fights, but I never liked those kids
So I don't want to raise those types of kids and then you go and read these books about which families
Generationally created a wealth that state like Vanderbilt raised a bunch of snobs
So Vanderbilt's money only lasted one generation generation later. There's no money left
So when you read the story about that anderson cooper's a Vanderbilt
But his mother said even though we were Vanderbilt don't expect any kind of trust fund baby
You ain't got no money here. Nothing's coming over till you got to make your money
You know and but you look at the medici family and what they did five six seven generation
What did they do differently? You look at Rockefeller still has the money
You look at some of these other families that kept the money within the family
What did they do? What did they structure and there's a state plan and we can go do, you know
10 15 20 50 thousand dollars then there's hot guys. You can hire. That's a hundred thousand quarter million a million dollars
But those are state planners when you hire, you know what they do they interview your kids
so they go sit down with your kids and
After they talk to you and they'll say how do you want to set the stuff for the money with your kids?
Who gets money? What do they need to do? What's the criteria or your gift to get this?
What kind of cars do you now want them to buy to waste the money? Who do you want it to work for?
What happens with this business? Can they lose all the money? Are you given equally?
Here's what this family and they give you all these suggestions on how to properly set it up
Once you and your wife agree on what you want to do with that wealth
These guys have meetings with all your kids
without you there
And they'll record it so you can see how the meeting went went but they're setting it up with them
So they'll say okay kids. This is uh
On behalf of your parents, here's a few things you need to know
number one
Um, the good news is your parents are very prepared on what they've done with you
And here's what you can get your parents have worked very hard
And they have made a lot of money and if you do it, right? Some of that can be passed over to you
But if you don't you're not going to get it either. Let me go through some of these criteria
These three things you do you're not going to get anything these two things you do
If you do this, here's what's going to happen. This is what they want to see use the money with
And then they kind of break it down to them
now
You know how many families actually do that
Very few those conversations most people don't have most people are so much about go go go go go go go go
And then you die unexpectedly. Oh, we didn't set up the state planning let alone the detail the state planning. No
Okay, now your kids are spoiled right and doing what they're doing. I've had this conversation with a number of friends
Ben Francis who is the CEO of gymshark his net worth is triple drakes
Um, he's the start of a guy by the way. He's a serious. I had him on the podcast a couple years ago start serious dude
Yeah, uh, I was talking to him and I think that it's the same with you
One of the things that you value the most in your upbringing have been the hard times the spit and sawdust
Lessons and rules the hard school of hard knocks, right?
That's given you the work rate that has permitted you to be able to achieve the success that you have and
Reverse locally reverse entropy, right? So you've been able to wrangle your reality in a way that you want it to
Mm-hmm. And yet
You have worked so hard to be able to give your kids
Opportunities that you never had. Mm-hmm. And yet, you know that they need to go through the hardships
And that those are where the lessons are learned that are going to bear them. This to me seems like a very
Uh, interesting tension, right? I want to give my kids opportunities that I've worked so hard for if I don't
What the fuck was the point in you working so hard, right? And yet they need to go through the difficulty
They need to do how have you found this tension between the two?
Well, that's a great question
But I want to finalize by making a point when you ask the question about
Why is it that so many people come to america within 10 years to have more money than the people that were born in america?
because
unfortunately
The way we've ran america if the american-born kids
Are kids of these families?
They're the kids of the families that spoiled
them in america
There's no more earning things in america. It's just handed out to them. We're printing money left and right
We're giving away income to people left and right. We're making life easier
We're incentivizing the wrong things. Do you know in 1940 in america what percentage of kids were born to single mothers in 1940?
in america
What percentage of kids were born to a single mother who's not married with no father in the household?
4% is the number. Did you know the number or no? It's 4%. You know what that number is today?
Over 50
It's over 40 shy of 50 percent. You're right there at the number
You mean to tell me we went from 1944 percent to today. So what happened there?
first of all
policies by fdr
Social security and incentives of taking care of single mothers then linden johnson in 1965 took it to a whole different level
Mothers are sitting there saying the more kids I have the more entitled programs. I get great. Why would I get married?
If I get married, I lose those benefits
The incentive programs america set up
Totally screwed everything up. It incentivized the bad behaviors like telling a kid
Can you imagine if you're in estate planning you say for every kid you have not married? I'll pay you 700 dollars
Whose fault is that parents fault?
Bad policies have consequences. Yeah, you create a bad policies
What person in the right state of mind?
When they have their wealth america's a family. It's a corporation
What person in the right mind would incentivize what parents would incentivize kids to say i'm gonna have more kids
And i'm gonna give you money out of the living trust nobody in the right mind would do that
But america did so what happened to us now we got all this crime
Now we're paying the price for it because all these years there's no father in there to
Put him in their place to challenge him to straighten them up. That's not in place
You know, so that is a missing piece that these kids
Don't have in america
So to me if we looked at america as a family as a corporation estate planning matters
You know living trust matters the right policies matters
Listen, I even think to the point where you know how in america voting starts at 18 years old
I would much rather this was a very
Strange policy i'm gonna share with you when I posted this on on youtube a lot of people very upset with me
I would much rather
Have somebody who's 14 and a half years old
Who's had a job?
And paid a thousand dollars in taxes vote
Then a 28 year old kid who's never had a job
Never paid taxes. I don't want that guy to vote. Why?
Because he contributed to society the 14 and a half year old kid the 15 year old kid contributed to society
And realized how hard it is to pay the taxes into
Whatever they're spending money on you want to spend a hundred billion dollars to
Ukraine we could have built 20 walls
We could have built 20 walls with that money that was sent you're not saying ukraine. I'm saying this so you're safe
Don't worry. They're not they're not gonna come after you. They're gonna come after me
So all of these things that you look at we're going away from earning
When a immigrant comes here
All they're looking at saying wait a minute. I can go work this and do this and do this and do this and i'm gonna earn this
Yes, i'm going i'm going town all day. I'm good with this
Many americans don't have that mindset because bad policies have consequences that we're suffering
Uh, uh the negative impact of that but you ask the follow-up question
Right with kids and your question is how to balance it with
Challenge in them yet still having the opportunity. What was the question you were asking?
Yeah, the tension between you affording your kids the benefits that all of your hard workers
Allow them to do and some greetings. I'm very greedy and here's what i mean by i'm very greedy
I want my kids
As close to me for the rest of my life
We have a family that lives in our community
Uh message just bought a house right next to our house and he just moved into the community
He caused a lot of mayhem. It's all over the place cops are coming in every week
We have you know, what do you call it paparazzi craziness that's going on
But one of the families that lives in our community they they run a medical company with six seven thousand employees
So the the founders the mom and dad their house is here
Right next door to the house
They have two sons the other son lives here. Who's the chief marketing officer? They're all the son's house is here
Each son has four kids
Each son has four kids
Both sons are doctors both sons married someone who's a doctor and they each have four kids
They have a structure on what they do monday nights every tuesday night
They have dinner together and they talk about god everyone's there's a system to everything they do
He'll call me and say hey, we went fishing this morning. I got a bunch of fish. Can I drop it off to you?
I am enamored by how those parents created that kind of a structure where their kids are respectful
Their grandkids are respectful go on a halloween. We're walking in halloween doing trick or treating and
The
Son comes by 17 year old son comes by and he says yeah, he doesn't have his iphone with him
I said, how does he know it not have it not have his iphone with him? He says in our family standard
It's very easy. You want your phone you got to have straight a's he's got to be
I said, well, let me get to straight your 17 year old son doesn't have a phone because he doesn't have one
Because he has one because yeah, it's our standard
I said, what are you talking about? This is very simple. You just got to make sure you got straight a's
You'll get a phone you get the car you get this
Now somebody's going to listen to this and say what what a freaking extreme set of standards. That's tyranny. That's tyranny
That's exactly the type of kids that end up becoming da da da. No problem. It's called standards and expectations
And for a family who has the ability
To use money and waste it and do whatever they want to keep that kind of standards
I respect that even more and guess what the son loves his father
Loves his mother loves their grandparents respectful kids
So it's it's not easy to do
But if it matters to you eventually in my life when I say I'm greedy
I would love to create a proposition for my kids. We're 20 years from now. They want to run one of the companies
I want to be within the company
They want to work with one of the companies and I like them to live close to me. Will it happen
It's going to take us 30 years to find out because dude pan generational housing. I'm seeing it in austin, right?
Commune or ranch where someone's buying up a ton of land and then there's another one of those puppies down there
If you want to they're buying up a ton of land and we're going to not just have us
We're going to have somebody else come and live with us as well
We're going to have grandma and grandpa and they're going to be that this is the way that it was
This is the way that it was and here's another thing to consider, right?
Would you rather have drinking too? Going to do anything to me or no, what's you're going to survive?
You're going to be dialed in you're going to survive. I promise
Whatever whatever the internet throws at you. You'll survive. So
What is the uh
Yeah, so we've got that's citrus that one's orange one sunrise. Okay, yeah wild citrus so
One of the interesting questions that you have here would be
Would you rather have a parent who pities you more than they believe in you?
You didn't do well. It's okay. That teacher doesn't understand
Let me pat you on the back come here little timmy will take you for ice cream
Or would you rather have a parent who says
I believe in you more than more than I pity you
I mean look, I'll tell you my dad very annoying man. Okay
because
Never sympathized never felt sorry for anything
Never it was always stands on expectation, but he always loved me
So when I was six years old and my teacher asked me what do you want to be when you grow up?
I said I want to be a father. Why I said because I want to be like my dad
I had a very good dad. My dad's still with us. He was in a hospital this week, but he's out. He's doing good. He's at the house
Kids love him. Everybody loves him. My kids all have a relationship with him. He's 81 years old
It took a lot to please my dad my dad wasn't impressed by anything
He wouldn't be there and say, oh my gosh
And by the way, he's a middle eastern father, which means I've never played catch with the guy
We've never thrown the football. We never played anything. No sport. Why why he just he was a worker since eighth grade
He dropped out in iran and started working to take care of his mom and dad. Their family was very very close
You know, but again, remember how earlier on when we're talking about, you know, choosing your enemies wisely
We talked about how the the top performers have
a
Person that gave him unconditional love and one that brought a lot of pain and then they chose their enemies wisely
I think
The role of a person that is gentle
And another one that nothing's ever good enough is a great combination
I think if both parents are gentle, that's a problem and I also think if both
Parents are nothing's ever good enough is also a problem. Yeah, I think you need a little bit
There's a reason why the creator god
Created the dynamics that he created
You know, I have a one of our guys we're spending our photographers with us
And he's holding his daughter while we're doing a photo shoot this Saturday
And she keeps asking for mom
She keeps asking I said she's she daddy's girl. Oh, it's just now. It's all mommy
I said, when does she want you whenever she's scared? She comes to me
So the kid runs to daddy when she's scared but goes to mommy when she's hurt
That's your interesting dynamic. How it is she feels safer
By dad when there's a risk
But feel safer by mom when she's hurt because she's gonna be pampered and taking care of it. Yeah
I think that's very healthy combination. There was a quarterback bread far many years ago
I don't know if you know, bear bread far. He's a famous texture. That's an inside joke if you know who he is but
He has his quarterback
He has his coach so tough on him
So tough on him. Nothing was ever good with this quarterback kicking his ass
Talking shit to him in the sideline. How could you throw that interception? What the fuck was that all about?
What was that all about and he's afraid of the coach and he's always escaping the coach
But there was a guy that was I think his name was mariochi stave mariochi
And he would always put his arm around and listen. He believes in you. Why don't you prove him right?
Deep down inside. He believes in you go through the past that you know, he knows he can throw
Show him exactly what we got. Let's go win this game for him. Let's go
So that dynamic worked incredibly well for bread far as well as many other players out there
So I think
You know one without the other is a problem if you got both. It's a great combination
Yeah, there's a lot of problems with
fatherlessness in homes
Melissa carney just wrote a new book called the two parent advantage
Two parent privilege. Sorry and uh, dude, it's terrifying just the raw data the raw outcomes that you get
Your mom and dad stay together. Yes. Okay. Uh, we till today. Yep only child
So only child only child. Do you have the only child uh syndrome? Yes. What do you mean?
The guy that's the center of all of these lights and stuff
In some regards, okay in some regards. Yes, but I think I had quite a stern upbringing
I was held to incredibly high standards. Uh, it was very non-rebellious as a kid. Um, non-rebellious very non-rebellious
Very very non-rebellious. Um, you know, wasn't going out wasn't sneaking out
I don't think I ever got grounded once the god play role or no
Standards and expectation was a tough standard high very high. What did your mom and dad do?
Dad is an engineer mom stopped working for probably 10 to 12 years to raise me while dad was out working
Uh, but this isn't you know, dad was on the working class of most working class
We live in a a city in the uk that was famous only for having the highest teen pregnancy rating in the uk
And then it lost that so it didn't even have that as a as a title anymore at least you could brag about it
Now we got nothing to talk about. Yeah, we haven't even got that. Yeah, uh, so
But it was it was very formative and you know, I'm just thinking more and more
About this tension between success making people soft
Uh, I spoke to David Goggins about it on the podcast, you know, he's this guy who can command
Millions of dollars for speaking gigs and he's choosing to go smoke jumping. Have you seen this thing that he's doing?
So smoke jumping is when there's a wildfire in the middle of nowhere and they need to air drop in
The firefighters so they parachute in with a
Pack around their waist with all their stuff on and they also put water huge
Water bucket things that they'll attach their hoses to separately parachute them in and they just live in the fire
Until they put it out. Sometimes they're out there for a week pretty sure he makes
It's either seven or twelve dollars an hour
That he makes for doing this smoke jumping as it's called. It's in canada for the most part
Instead of going and doing this speaking to it and I asked him about success making you soft
He says I see it way too much and that's why I don't like it. I'm not about the flash
I'm not about any of that when the best books in business
Was written by a legend see legendary ceo in silicon valley
Who ran intel? I think he's the only guy that for a decade straight
He grew the company a hundred percent every year unheard of what this guy did and the growth hungarian guy
Okay, you know what the book's title is only the paranoid survive
Only the paranoid say that before so I had a question to you around only the paranoid survive
I don't disagree
That paranoia is an unbelievable competitive advantage. It's a very useful performance enhancer, right?
You are paying more attention. You are more detail oriented. You're more fearful
all the rest of it
Ultimately, is it worth it? Do you think is paranoia worth it as a life strategy?
It the you are protected by those who take that seriously
Okay, you know burden is not something that's a sexy sell
You know, there's a lot of things that you and I can sell that's very sexy
Okay, work from home very sexy yet the loneliness epidemic in america right now is record breaking numbers
we've never seen before right on
What people are doing how lonely they are numbers on depression is off the charts right now compared to what it was just 10 years ago
So
Yeah, you can sell work from home. You can sell three and a half day work week. You can sell
Laptop entrepreneur. You can sell
These are all sexy things to sell right you can sell
Set up a funnel and make 20 grand a month and don't have to do anything
These are all very interesting easy things to sell try selling burden
go ahead and sell burden
Oh, dude of the incredible honor of having burden of the responsibility of a nation or a state or a military or freedom
I thought was a
Try selling it. It's no, but it's not an easy sale. It's a hard sale. Responsibility isn't sexy
So why are so many great leaders turned on by that burden?
Why because someone's got to do it
So it all depends, you know
In the in the book your next five moves I talk about how
The most important question you got to answer in life is
Who do you want to be?
What type of life do you want to live? That's simple. Okay, so what does this mean?
Do you want to be a founder? Yeah, you sure?
Yeah
Positive I think so it's kind of cool right want to be a founder entrepreneur
You sure you want to be a founder? You sure you want to be the number one guy?
Tom Ellsworth who is my business partner said one the best things to me
this guy was at
Talk about the legendary interview of all time. It's the last interview of steve jobs and bill gates in silicon valley
Okay, wherever it was
300 people were invited at this meeting tom was one of them said recorded. It's record. You got to see it
By the way sick. It's the red chair when you see the red chair. You're watching the right one steve jobs is super skinny
Tom Ellsworth tells me says pat it took me 50 years to realize
I don't make a lot of money when i'm the number one guy
The most money I ever made
Is when I was number two through number six
Think about saying that
I think about taking 52 years to realize 50 years to realize the most money you ever made
Was when you were the number two guy or number six guy?
Because there's burden with number one
Number one has got to sell the dream
Number one has got to sell the vision
Number one has got to seem like even though we're about to go out of business
They're at peace. They're calm. They carry the burden sleepless nights
Your finances you can't reveal to people if you're about to run out of money. We're gonna make the expenses
We're gonna make salaries. We're gonna pay payroll. That's the number one person who wants that burden. Nobody wants that burden
So no if the idea is to sell that
No, it is not an easy sale
but if you want to know why you right now are here
And we are able to do this podcast at a
Pretty unstable time in the world today
It's probably because around 500 people
Have the burden of making sure nobody messes with you and I where we are right now
And those 500 people have
A thousand people underneath them or 500 people underneath them why you and I are able to sit here
So it's not the most sexy attractive thing like in in smithsonian. I don't know if you've been to the smithsonian in dc
There's a part where you go and it shows
You walk this way. It shows how lincoln aged over
It's an incredible thing to see and there's a quote they buy by lincoln about burden
Okay, the the being a president is the greatest burden
A person can never have right some some quote like that. I'm paraphrasing
So it's not for everybody and it's not a sale the person chooses to do it
Obama before and after
His eight years right. He still looks good though. Oh, he's still got he's still got swagger
But I mean that was 20 years in eight years. That's right
So this is something I wanted to talk about you have spent a lot of time reading about and researching and speaking to
powerful people
Who do you think really runs the world?
You're gonna go there, huh with the question. Who do I think runs the world?
Um
So I used to ask the question I said who who's got the most power in america?
Is it congress is a president is it the CEOs of virtual governments?
We're talking google twitter facebook
You know those guys amazon, you know, or is it billionaires?
Okay, you know the most richest man in the world. Who's got the most power and you'd be amazed how few people said president
Does it come and go?
You know the famous quote with putin that he says, you know
American presidents you don't have to worry about it. They're gonna be there four to eight years
Some suits are running, you know and run the country behind closed doors
And he's got a very good point when he says something like that putin
but to me
There are a lot of
Alliances being built so if you and I were to think about aspirational type of people, okay, you know how they say
You know, well michael jackson eventually got to a point where he got so many different girls that he started trying with this
And he started trying with this and a lot of these people in hollywood have so much sex with so many different people
That they become creative and they do dumb things, right? Okay
Tiger woods the reason why he got these girls because what do you know?
What it is to be the greatest golf golf in the world and everybody throws their panties at you
You want to judge a guy like that?
Why don't you go be the greatest golfer and see what it feels like to be one out of eight billion?
You don't know what it's like. So they're kind of trying and experimenting with all this stuff, right?
It's almost like i'm so much in a prison jail. Everybody's watching what i'm doing
I'm going to break the rules a little bit to see what i'm capable of doing. Okay
So so let's go process and dissect some of these guys that make all the money in the world. Okay, you become a billionaire
And you're still dangerously ambitious not from a good place, but more selfish place
Okay, you took over an industry now you're worth five billion dollars
Now you were 10 if you're a billionaire, you're the best at what you do in your space for the most part or you help build
The best in that space for the most part. Okay
cool, so
Maybe your marriage didn't work out. Maybe you're not the best father in the world
And you're like, well
I want more control. I want more power
I can't be a president
I don't want to be a president because if I run for president
They're gonna reveal the things that i've done in my life and god forbid if that gets all the light
I don't want that that's embarrassing
But you know what i'm gonna do? What if I can take over the world?
Are there other people like me that are driven by wanting to take over the world?
What if we could make the world one place and we make all the decisions for everybody because
I'm probably one the smartest people in the world
I'm proud and you know that conversation is taking place again
You really start having that godlike figure like I don't know if you're familiar with george soros
You know in one of the interviews he gave to la times. He says I always fancied myself would be in a god
I fancied myself would be in a god
This is an la times interview 20 plus years ago if you type in george soros la times god
It's the most disturbing interview to read about this guy a lot of people are very skeptical about him
Right, he's like the boogie man of a number of conspiracies. How many how many people have you heard say?
I always fancied myself with being a god
he says but
What's great about where i'm at right now is it's no longer a
Dream it became a reality
I have a friend who has spent a lot of time with
Super super powerful people and he told me about a meeting that he had with one individual
In particular who spoke about being an apex predator
He said that apex predators don't care about prey and even though
The prey that he was referring to was still his own species
It was really haunting the story the way that that was told to me because you had someone who not only
Had the motivation
to be able to go and enact whatever
nefarious malicious plan
But also had the actual resources to be able to go and do it right those two things together are
They're scary and that was something that really opened my eyes
I'm very non conspiratorial in the way that I think I always lean toward
You know do not attribute to malice that which can be explained by stupidity
Do not attribute to coordination that which can be explained by coincidence
Uh
And yet the more that I read and the more that I learn about things
The more there there seems to be there
right
Yeah, you know people are offended by different things
Some people being offended in their deepest insecurities
They're willing to use their ambitions to go to certain levels
That at that point they're not
Thinking about the consequences of ruining a lot of people's lives. That's not something they're thinking about at that level. So
Hitler was offended when you read my comb for you study what Hitler did. He was simply offended
Somebody offended him. So his entire life was about doing what he did just because he was offended
Now most people who are offended they do what they forget about it
And they move on some of these guys want control some of these guys
Want to make decisions for you some of these guys on the money side at least they go and make money to get power
Some people don't go make money to get power. Some people cloud swab. They're like no, I'm not going to go make money to get power
I'm going to get power by creating laws and thinking. I know what's best for you
So there's a lot of different people that you can put in these steps of organization
You just have to think like if you were to think about
The commission of the mop always go back to it. Lucky Luciano created a commission with the five families
He was the one that ran the commission right up the five families. Okay
When you think about what meetings in the world happens where all the powerful people show up you get the g20
You got the un you got the world economy. You got davos. You got all these guys that come together
You got nato
you got
So nato could be like well nato's
Original when the 12 or 14 countries were part of nato. What was it really all about to fight ussr?
There is no ussr. Why are we still funding it? What's the outcome now?
Are we still fighting communism? So what a lot of people might say is that those organizations are
So obvious that they can't be the ones where the real shit's happening, right?
That's just the smoke screen the real shit is the shit that's behind it and the shit that's behind that and so on and so forth
In your opinion, do you think that nato wef
who that's those people there's no
Further upset of strings that are playing the ventriloquized game behind those ones. Do you think that that's where a lot of power actually lies?
um
I don't know what I will say listen to you is with the questions you're asking
I think
There's a reason why the audience wants to hear what you think about what's going on right now because you're asking some heavy questions
Right now, which means you're curious and if i'm the audience
I would like to know what you can come up with if you took a deeper dive and really wanted to get into these types of
you know informations but
you know
Think about what things people are most addicted to
Okay, addictive personalities video games porn sex
cocaine
ecstasy
weed
steroids
party in
all of that stuff
But what's one of the most addicting things?
That many of those guys can't get power
Are you kidding me power is like
power
porn
The porn of having a lot of power
And getting the look and people that look at you that are afraid of you some people love that
Some people love that you know the quote like if you really want to test someone's character given power. I mean some people
really
Love having power take a company and see some of the guys that they hired they hired a wrong person at the top
The guy was all driven by power. What happens?
Take a president that becomes a president and he realizes he can use the justice system against his opponent. What happens?
They got that power. It's a lot of power to give to somebody, right?
um
Yeah, so you know those people I believe are out there some of them are
100 money people because money talks and you can have a lot of you need funds to do anything, right?
You do it's it's going to be the money people
um
But there's also the other power players behind closed doors that you know in the in the movie money ball
Uh, Jonah Hill plays that. I don't know if i'm saying his name correctly. He plays the role
of the guy that
Brad Pitt is sitting there saying
Why is this gm of cleveland indians keeps looking at the guy?
Doesn't gotten based who the hell are you right in john john maxwell or or
Dale Carnegie wrote about this in a book saying the law of e.f. Hutton
E.f. Hutton was in the room that every time the guy was making a decision
He wouldn't make a decision until he asked about e.f. Hutton
So here's what we're going to do. So what's your proposal? Okay, great
Hey, e.f. Hutton, what do you think about it?
Okay, we're not going to be doing it great
The world is filled with like henry kissinger. I don't know how much you know about henry kissinger
That guy's an e.f. Hutton if there ever was one
There's a lot of
those guys
that
Are the brains behind the faces that we see and most of the times the best e.f. Hutton's
No one ever finds out who they were
No one ever finds out who those guys are
one of the other tensions that I felt when
Learning about you and also when watching your content
You've spoken about this specifically to do with kobe
But I think it also probably plays a role in almost everybody's life is this tension between self love and high standards
Right, it's the desire to maximize everything you can and to not leave
More on the table than you need to and also the ability to enjoy the moment and to be able to actually take some some pleasure in that
And there was a something that came up from a friend that I wrote about this week
So I wanted to explain this to you
He did a psilocybin journey in
Australia and a question came to him and the question was do people love you for who you are or for what you do
This is uncomfortable to consider
People loving us for who we are feels more real genuine caring empathetic and robust
It feels like we're less fickle and more difficult to lose
On the other hand people loving us for what we do feels transactional and transient
The love that we receive becomes contingent on what achievements and successes we can offer in return
And the obvious fear is that if a point came where we no longer had anything to offer in return
Would our love be taken away?
So here's an even more uncomfortable question
Do you love you for who you are or for what you do?
This highlights our hypocrisy
You see we want the world to love us for who we are a balanced caring view of our true value independent of our accomplishments
Meanwhile, our own self-love is largely determined by what we do
If we fall short even though we know we tried our best
We still castigate ourselves for being insufficient, unworthy creatures
So we want the world to show up for us in a way that we are often not prepared to show up for ourselves
You demand more than this demanded of yourself
powerful
Do you see that resonating this tension in high performers desire for more requirement for self-love?
Yes, but for me
There's a part of it. That's also honest
Because again the relationship with between a man and a prostitute
What is that relationship?
Each side is getting something in return
The prostitute is getting what?
Money, what's the man getting pleasure? Okay, and they walk away. It's done. It's a very honest relationship, right?
There's no depth in that relationship. It's straight up. It's honest done. We move on. Okay
Working at a company
Say you work with a company
And he helps the youtube channel go to the next level doing all the work behind closed doors all this stuff
Would he do that job for free?
Or would he do it because you're offering something back to them? How many of my employees would be with me?
If it was working for free
That non-profit would be kind of weird guys. What we're doing is very important, but I need you to work for free
What do you mean? Are you gonna make money? I am but I want you to work for free. It's kind of weird, right?
There needs to be an exchange again. It's honest
exchange, okay
Um
If I go above and beyond everybody else and I work should I deserve the right to get paid more?
Yes, okay. Is it beneficial for me to work with somebody like you?
Of course, why because you're driven
So should I hang on to your co-tail because if I go with you big things are gonna happen in my life? Absolutely
Is that a selfish decision? Yes, but it's also a wise decision. Do you know that you know that do they know that they know that
Do they also know that you have options because now you're at a point that a lot of people would love to be working for you
Of course, they know that they're not dummies, right? They know that
Okay, but you still choose to stay with them and they still choose to choose to stay with you
Is there benefit of somebody hiring your person that's helping with your podcast and paying twice as you pay to go with them?
there is
If he chooses to take that
Just for the money. That's his loss
If you're doing your part, he was never in it for believing in you. It was only about the money part
So these are all and the reason why this is so interesting what what you're reading about self-love and all these other things
Is when you look at some of the people that make it at the highest of the highest of the highest level
They typically have been backstabbed so much
That in the back of their mind, sometimes they're just waiting to see who's going to backstab next
So so the desire to have a straight up relationship is no longer the same. Okay
There's a difference between you dating somebody who falls in love with you
And you're making 22 bucks an hour working at ballies
And she loves you and she stays with you. There's a difference between you getting married when you're making
$300,000 a year
And then there's a difference between you making marrying somebody when you work half a billion dollars
How do you know the girl that marries you at the end is worth? You know is with you because
She loves you versus she loves what you offer them, right? And is that a sin? Yeah, is she making a mistake? You know
I think in an ideal world
I am very comfortable knowing that other people are also there in your life to get what they can out of you
I'm very comfortable with that
Because there's a chapter in the book here
Where I talk about choosing running mates and I put a clear criteria on how to choose a running mate
You know what they bring to the table their level of trust with you
All these ways of scoring people in your life to see hey
Is this a person because the whole concept would choose a new enemies wisely also need to choose your allies wisely
So somebody like you you need true believers in your life. You can't have 50 true believers
That's just naive to think that you can't have 10 true believers
Can you have two to five true believers? Yes. How how valuable is that a lot? So
No, I uh, you know the more and more I moved up
The more I realized almost everybody like and I'm talking 99 percent of people
Listen to the radio show wiifm. What's in it for me?
and
A part in this book that we dissected your question, which is fascinating question is
In in the company. I've been running a sales organization for 20 something years
And when I started the insurance company in online, we grew it from 66 agents today. We have 50 000 agents
We've licensed nationwide. We have a few hundred offices nationwide
but
my
Idea of looking at who's got the biggest upside to contribute to the company has also changed
It used to be men that guy so selfish
All that guy cares about money. I mean this guy's the nicest guy in the world
and then I realized
the nicest guy in the world
Who had no selfish desires
Was happy making five thousand dollars a month
And so then I created a scoring system
What percentage of you is selfish and selfless and what's the good balance?
If you're a hundred percent only you
And everybody else zero well, guess what you're still a bigger net positive to society than the person at the bottom
That's what zero percent selfish and a hundred percent selfless if a person is a hundred percent selfless
They probably don't eat well. They probably out of shape. They're probably not healthy
They're probably gonna have to go to the hospital. It's gonna cost you money and taxes
They probably smell because they don't take a shower. They spend their money on everybody else
So then you'll see the profile
Good people to give you counsel or around the 50 50 range. You can always trust them to give you counsel
Drivers of a company or somebody like you doing what they do 70 30 is a good split
Okay, 80 20 is a little bit problematic
Because 80 20 sometimes will compromise to beat everybody. So you want the 65 70 so so you're asking a technical question
and
I've just come to a conclusion
that
you know
Both parties if they want to selfishly be pleased
if we can please each other
And one of us takes the lead and we're getting mutual love and benefits out of the relationship
You're in a good situation every once in a while you'll find somebody that's going to be a writer that they're going to say chris
Dude, no matter what you do and with you till the day you die and you think they're telling the truth
A year goes by they're still there even more
Five years go by they got married like one wing and money gets married and ask you it's going to change
Still there 10 years later still there you're like this guy's really a true believer. Wow
But it's not going to be that many people. That's a very short list of people
Patrick bet David ladies and gentlemen Patrick. I appreciate the hell out of you. I appreciate how much you pay attention
Very detail oriented and I love that. I really really do. Uh, thank you for today, man
I've been a long time coming. So where should people go?
They want to keep up to date with everything you're doing
Ah, I mean you can go to amazon and search choose your enemies wisely
Or you can find our podcast pbd podcast or valetainment. We're all over the place. You'll find us
Thank you, man. But this has been a blast. I've been talking to you. I've been watching you for a long time and
It's very obvious why you're climbing the way you are. I appreciate you anytime. Thank you
Thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode with Patrick
You will love my three hour long episode with alex homozi
go on
tap it
