What happened with your recent article?
So the short answer is that our recent article has been
retracted by the publisher of the journal
Archives of Sexual Behavior where it was published
Retraction is something I've never had an article retracted before and it's something that I've associated with
terrible
things like
fraud
plagiarism
Grievous mistakes
None of that is true about our article
Frankly and honestly our article was
retracted because of the ideas and the evidence it presented that angered
Transgender activists and their allies who pressured the publisher who
Either agreed with them
based on politics or
Chickened out or were worried about business concerns. I can't read their mind obviously
But I will say that the retraction was a sham
I would also say that
The retraction has
Backfired entirely from their perspective
Our article has gotten far more attention than it ever would have
the publisher springer nature group
Keeps metrics on this
Our article has been downloaded almost 100,000 times, which is
You know, that's not perhaps a big deal for
Mainstream media, but for an academic article that is extreme
We have received more news coverage
we're about
40
Ranked 40 out of 400,000 articles of about the same age in terms of media coverage
Here we are talking, you know, I'm on a big podcast with you
And there have been articles and so on so I'm not hurting. I just want people to
download and read our article and
Don't pay attention to the retraction notice it it's meaningless if people want to get ahold of the now
Forbidden article, where are that? Where should they go? Same place? They ever did
Our article was published open access. That means we actually had
funding from
Society for evidence evidence-based gender medicine
Segem to
Published the article for
Free reading, you know most articles academic articles have a paywall that non academics
Can't get through easily. There's no paywall
The retraction simply means
For practical purposes that Springer stamped the words
retracted article on every single page of
the article
Which you could it doesn't affect your ability to read it and frankly I
Wear those words as a badge of honor now
That makes it kind of sexy it makes it it feels like it's a top-secret seal
So what's there's someone that's listening that wants to go and search?
What's what should they search for on the internet in order to get this article up in the right form?
So
What I search in order to go to the site to keep track on our current metrics
You know, I'm really waiting for when we get a hundred thousand dollar view. I'm sorry one hundred thousand views
Diaz DIA Z
Bailey B. A. I. L. E. Y.
Our O. G. D. for rapid onset gender dysphoria, which is what it's about and then you'll have
Links to choose from choose the one that says Springer and that'll take you right to the site
You can read the article right there. Okay, so we've flirted with it so far
What was in your forbidden study, which was so reprehensible that caused it to be
retracted and
stamped with a wax seal I
I'll
Tell you in a moment, but I just want to give a bit of background
this article was
published by me and
a co-author
Susanna Diaz that is not her real name. I don't know her real name
She is the mother of
A gender dysphoric child whom she believes has rapid onset gender dysphoria
Which is rapid onset gender dysphoria something we need to talk about I assume that your audience
Doesn't necessarily know what it is. It's very important and it is the reason
Why
The trans activists came after us
Rapid onset gender dysphoria is
the explanation of
the surge in
Cases of gender dysphoria that has happened over the past decade and especially the past five years
The idea is this a
subset of
Gender dysphoric cases and now it's by far the greatest percentage are
Adolescent girls
Who never showed any signs of gender dysphoria in childhood? They were not tomboy's they were not
masculine
They did however have issues a
lot of them had some
Mental health problems. They had some social problems and so on
In adolescence
They tended to hang out with a crowd that
was unconventional and progressive and ideological and
they
got the idea
Based on
Theology that all of their problems are due to underlying transgender that they never knew of before
They suddenly or rapidly
announced or they decided that they're transgender and they announced to their parents and
Many of these girls. It's mainly girls about three quarters. There may be some boys, too
But we should talk about them separately a
Lot of them are demanding very serious
Treatments including medical treatments
They want
testosterone
which
has very serious
Effects on the body and some of them want surgery like the amputation of their breasts
And some of them are getting this
Our evidence in our article is
Entirely consistent with that
We surveyed
1655
parents of
Youth whom the parents believed had this syndrome
Three-quarters were of the youth were girls
The parents said that indeed these
youth had
pre-existing
Mental health issues and that the mental health issues actually preceded any
indication of gender issues by four years. That's a long time
The
Youth who were most likely to socially transition now social transition means
Changing their pronouns changing their style of dress changing
What they call themselves boy or girl
The youth most likely to socially transition were the ones with the most problems
That was also true for medical transition which was
Thankfully rare only about seven percent
Had sought medical or had obtained medical treatment whereas about sixty percent had
Taken many steps to social transition parents said after they
Socially transitioned they got worse
and
The best is what does worse mean?
they
Became less happy they became less
Close to their parents
They decompensated and
the best predictor of
Transition was
That the family had received a referral to a gender specialist and
And if parents visited a gender specialist they usually felt that the gender specialist pressured them to transition their child
So there were some other interesting findings too, but those were the ones that got
People upset and I think those are probably the most
Important findings because they are consistent with the idea of rapid onset gender dysphoria
Rapid onset gender dysphoria was first proposed by Lisa Littman who published the first paper in 2018
She also received
tremendous pushback
Her the journal where she published her article did not retract it, but they did
make her make changes to her original article and she suffered personal
Consequences Brown University where she was
Cut off their ties with her
She you know she lost
contracts with Brown University
Activists cannot stand the idea of rapid onset gender dysphoria and I understand why
Because it is threatening to their belief system
They're strong. They strongly believe that
Gender dysphoria is always real and
that the best
Way to proceed is
To transition as quickly as possible and furthermore that youth are
Always right when they say
That they are gender dysphoric
That they're trans just believe them all of these are contradicted by the idea of
rapid onset gender dysphoria and
Our study was strongly
consistent
with
The existence of rapid onset gender dysphoria I
will admit
That ours is only the second
Major study of this phenomenon and there's plenty of work to do and I don't think that we've got this
Nailed shut so that everybody is
Obligated to see this world as we do
but it's an important study and
Instead of trying to silence our search it would been better
if
The skeptical had done their own studies
To try to clarify what they thought was going on but of course
They didn't want to do that
See if I'm right with my conception of this sort of two current
Explanations for what's going on with regards to the increase that we've seen over the last ten years or so
one theory posits that
The world's
Degree of acceptance of trans people at large has changed
It's called the left-handedness argument online sometimes
Which is that during the Middle Ages if you were left-handed you were often accused of being a witch or a wizard or something
And it would cause you to be ostracized or sometimes killed or punished socially in some form or another
Which meant that I think maybe only three percent of people were left-handed during the Middle Ages
But then when left-handedness is no longer seen as wicked and it's socially accepted
I think the true number of left-handed people is closer to maybe 12% let's say so you see an increase in the number of people who
Identify as left-handed I suppose they can be their true
So they're true left-handed selves because there is no longer social stigma attached to it. There is a camp that
argues that the
Rapid increase that we have seen in the number of people identifying as transgender over the last decades to two decades or so
Has been due to this
Releasing of the glass ceiling and and judgment by the group at large
The alternative theory which is being put forward is one of social contagion
That explains why
Females in particular the F to M transition are particularly susceptible to this
females are more
Socially aware socially malleable and influenced. It's part of their sort of intersexual competition and status
measuring
Apparatus that they have a greater
susceptibility to trends around them because they are
It's important for them to remain part of the tribe in that regard
Which would explain or be part of the explanation for why girls seem to be more impacted by this
Ever-increasing number. It's almost like a mimetic sort of feedback loop that's occurring
How far away am I and what have I missed in terms of that conception of the landscape?
You put it beautifully better than I did
So you should have got me on the paper. I could have been cancelled as well. Yes. Yes
You're considered yourself a co-author on future research
Well, I actually I can take it. I get enough stick on the internet as it is already. Okay, so
What is
First question is it
Impossible for these two worlds to exist together. Is there a blending of rapid-onset gender dysphoria with the
Activists theory about about this. Is there a way that those two worlds could coexist? It's certainly and
I suspect they do it's it's a question of which is predominating
Obviously we become
Much more tolerant of the transgender fairly recently I
Wrote a book in 2003 and people back then thought that
Transsexuals were really weird interesting but weird and people were uncomfortable around them
now I think if anything they're thought to be
cool
and
I'm glad that
Tolerance has increased for the transgender
But I also think that it's important to realize
That
There may be trade-offs I
Don't think we need to be intolerant, but I do think that we need to be aware that
Attitudes affect what people choose to do
Being transgender is
Partly a decision that a person makes
Take a very for example a very masculine female
Well, she might decide well, you know, I'm not just a masculine
Teenage girl. I like playing baseball. You know, I'll just be a girl
But or she may say well gosh, you know, I
Could imagine being a boy plus
You know, I get a lot of cred if I am transsexual and
Also really something we haven't mentioned yet which is happening which I think is negative is the binding up of
transgender identity and victim status and
I just think that
That's a problem with our
World right now that we're promoting victim status not just among the transgender
But all kinds of phenomena and I just think it's very negative
It creates a perverse incentive for people to pedestalize things which are actually negative in the long term
Yes, self-harm, you know, if self-harm gives you a degree of prestige somehow in whatever
upside down vastal world it is
There is now an incentive for people to do a thing which there should be a disincentive for them to do
So you there is social renown now for self-harm or for
MP a
Multiple personality disorder. I don't know whether you saw on tiktok last year. There was a trend of people
They would have that others. I can't remember what the word was
It's like that other the other versions of them would would come out and I'm a this person and I'm at that person
Which again, you know
I'm pretty sure who was the guy that created eugenics who was the dude that did it in the 1900s
Francis Galton Francis Galton
Managed to make himself go insane by worshiping a doll as a deity
right
My point being that you can you can induce all manner of crazy psychological maladies if you believe them hard enough
that so I don't want to
Way in on Galton because I don't know what you're just talking about and I do know a fair about
Fair amount about Galton
But what the other thing that you said the key thing is absolutely true and really important and really fascinating that
If people believe
They can
Enact all kinds of things and when I say enact I don't mean they're pretending exactly
They're acting as if
They're acting in accordance with their beliefs
This is not the first go-around were for multiple personality disorder
We had an epidemic in the
early 1990s that was associated with an
Epidemic of recovered memories of sexual abuse. This was
young women typically who went to therapy with a therapist who believed in this
who persuaded these
Women that their fathers typically
Had sexual severely sexually abused them repeatedly over years despite these women never having any
Memory of this and of course these memories
These recovered memories were false
They didn't happen
and a subset of these women
also came to believe that they were more personality disorder and
I think that this what's happening now with ROGD rapid onset gender dysphoria is
The same thing and the women that the the big difference is that the girls this is happening to
Are getting it younger 14 15 16 instead of 24 25 26 and
They're getting it from their peers rather than a therapist. Otherwise I suspect
the same
kinds of people are involved at both
epidemics both times why
Why would it be the case that there are
Psychological risk factors like
OCD
autism spectrum disorder and a few others. Why would they be predictive of
ROGD?
Autism gets thrown around a lot as very common. I
Am not as impressed as many people are by the evidence for autism
for one
Diagnosis of autism
Has become so vague. I don't even know what it means anymore. It's become quite over diagnosed
The youth in our study did have an excess of
Formal diagnoses, but they were very general anxiety and depression
Why would
Women with these emotional problems have this susceptibility
I'm not sure the
1990s epidemic these were
somewhat older
individuals and so they had
More time to get accurate
Diagnoses and the number one associated diagnosis was borderline
Personality disorder which is associated with identity disturbance not knowing exactly who you are
What you want to be being manipulative being?
Prone to extreme emotions
Now do I have an explanation why it's they who
Are most susceptible to these false ideas. I don't think I do I don't think I do I
Had a conversation with David Geary a couple of months ago and David what do you fascinating guy?
Absolutely fascinating phenomenal episode and one of the things that I learned when speaking to him
He was the first person that introduced me to the concept of rapid onset gender dysphoria
the group
that
the
Another ideology that would be associated with some of the people who seem to be suffering rapid on debt gender
Rapid onset gender dysphoria would be a denial of biological differences between men and women
The fascinating thing that's oddly sort of recursive and cyclical and almost ironic if it wasn't so
odd is that
The very reason that we have a sexed difference in the number of F to M transitions is
precisely because of
The biological difference between men and women it is the biological difference between men and women that
predisposes these very goals to the
Increased susceptibility of transition and that's the same group that is denying it
So it's both the supply and the demand and the denial that kind of all rolled up into one. Do you know what I mean?
yeah, they have a very
strange set of beliefs that are mutually contradictory for example, they they believe in the
idea of
innate gender identity that may be hidden and so on but if it's an innate gender identity then and
That men usually have one and women usually have another
That's got to be a biological difference
Yeah, I I
Think that their science is
Not very
Coherent scientific. I don't think that's gonna be a very
Useful way to persuade them
What are the
Given you've had this relative landmark study, you know one of only two massive n-size of whatever it was
1655 pears
1655 parents okay reporting on each parent reporting on a child of theirs. Yeah, yeah
Um
What do you what are the implications of this moving forward? What have you thought about sort of next steps and such?
Well, I don't know my next step. I'm a you know, I'm an academic. I'm a researcher. I'm not a
clinician I
Think that we need to get
better and more detailed
Evidence and I'm involved in
What I think is going to be a really important
Study that is about to launch this summer it's in collaboration with Lisa Lippman
Who is the person who first studied rabbit on set gender dysphoria and Ken Zucker who is one of the world's leading?
experts in gender dysphoria
All three of us have
Been canceled at least once
Uh, so we're uh the
Collaborate cancelled collaborate
Collaboration, but uh, we also are experts who are unafraid to stay in here
We're in this study. We're going to be recruiting both
Gender dysphoric adolescents directly and their families
And we have a very extensive survey about you know mental health and
gender feelings about gender history of gender
Steps taken toward transition and so on
We hope to enroll thousands and we're going to follow these people up over five years at least
To see how they turn out and to see how that affects happiness
Are the ones who transition going to eventually be happier than the ones who didn't
For example, that's that's a big question
Fascinating. Yeah, fascinating. I suppose it's one of those things were
Being able to
Spin explanations without the scientific backing can be done at lightning speed
But being able to test the hypotheses with science is actually a pretty arduous task
So you are always going to be playing catch up behind whatever the wake is that's left in terms of people's bro signs
That's exactly right
We sometimes have been frustrated ourselves. The scientific process
Is slow in part for bureaucratic reasons
We have to be very careful
To get ethics approval for this which by the way was the reason
The ostensible reason not the true reason the ostensible reason why
My latest article was retracted. What's the story there? What what what was the reason that they gave you?
The reason was this
Susanna Diaz is not an academic
She just went ahead and put up a survey
She's allowed to do that
She's allowed to publish such a survey
I am an academic
I have constraints
Any research that I do I have to get approved
By something called an institutional review board IRB
for ethics
Now the data were already collected
It's too late to go through IRB I checked with my IRB and they said well
She didn't have to
and
You seem to be okay
Being a co-author on this
But Susanna have not done this very legalistic thing
That was a conventional
Informed consent which is basically
This is exactly what you're going to be doing
Do you consent?
That is
What springer
Said was lacking. That's why they retracted the article. Here's why that's ridiculous
She made it very clear to parents what the survey was about
They agreed by actually completing the survey
The last line of the survey said
We're going to publish this online when we get enough data
And that's something that springer also said she said you didn't tell them
That their data were going to be published. Well, of course, they want this published
they believe these parents
are sick
Of rogd being
Shoved to the side being silenced
That's part of the reason why they wanted to participate in the first place
So
That that's the reason they gave
I don't believe it for a second
But you know in our new research that we will be launching soon. We went through all the IRB
Procedure we are so covered
That uh, there's not going to be any chance of any problem like that
Moving on to some of the other work that you've done. What is the typical sexual orientation of
F to m and m to f people who identify as trans?
Well, I want to start with
What was typical
20 years ago and
And
Before which which was
Pretty well established
Back then most f2m's that is natal females who wanted to become
men first of all they were
Adults before they were able to achieve that there was no
transitioning of children or even adolescents
Almost all of the female the males were female attracted
Or in the vernacular of
Sexology homosexual female the male transsexuals
Uh, though about 10 percent
Were, um, attracted to
Men
For male the female
These are natal female. I'm sorry natal males
Who want to become women?
There were two types
The first type was
The type perhaps we are most familiar with the kind that comes to mind immediately it would be a
A male who was feminine from early childhood
Little boy who wanted to be a girl
Who became an adolescent who was
Basically a girl and then uh when he could get surgery he did in adulthood
That type uh was male attracted
and
Sexology called that a homosexual male the female transsexual
Jazz ginnings, I don't know if you know who jazz ginnings is she's a reality tv show
I
Have considered her that type though. I'm less sure now for
uh various reasons, but
the other type
is
At least as common, but it is quite unfamiliar because
Nobody talks about it and it is autogynophilic
male to female transsexualism
Autogynophilia is a sexual
Orientation I guess
whereby
A man is sexually aroused by the idea of being a woman
Most of these
Natal males are attracted to other people in the world and they're attracted to women
But they are also
Attracted to and sometimes much more attracted to a woman that they create inside themselves
It starts
typically in adolescence where they
Will put on their mothers panties and bra look at themselves in the mirror and masturbate
fetishistic cross-dressing
Many of them will have fantasies about having breasts and a vulva
And some of them will actually do what they need to to get those
Autogynophilia is very controversial because
Trans activists have tried to
Sweep it under the rug
They're embarrassed by it. I'm not I don't judge these people
Also
Many autogynophilic
transgender
persons
It experience
The theory as a narcissistic injury
Because it really means a lot to them
To think of themselves as like women
The theory says they're not like women
They're men with this weird sexuality
And so that hurts their feelings
So I published a book in 2003 called the man who would be queen
and
only
about
A third of the book
was about
adult transsexualism
including autogynophilia
And the trans activists back then
A few of them got so mad at what I wrote that they tried to ruin my life
Briefly, I thought they might
But you know, they did back then what
Is happening to our paper now they they caused a Streisand effect
so
More and more people have heard of autogynophilia including
Persons with autogynophilia and I want to stress that many of the many autogynophilic males are great people
In my experience if they are open and honest
They're admirable. I have many autogynophilic followers on twitter
I have some autogynophilic friends and so on
And these people are angry
Have the activists who have tried to censor any discussion of autogynophilia
It has
Prevented us from knowing
Things like the best way that autogynophilic individuals should live their lives
Should they transition should they not transition?
We don't know the study studies haven't been done because
People haven't even felt free to ask the questions
Is there a
natal female equivalent? Have you ever come across anyone?
That is the opposite of autogynophilia
This is controversial
That should be that should be the preface for every single sentence that you say this is controversial
I would say scientifically. I don't think anybody is politically upset about this at least yet
Give it time. So the word for that would be autogynophilia
and
I know
Trends gender
Persons who insist that there really is autogynophilia
There's a guy who named phil illy
i l
phil
illy il y I think he's about to
publish a book
called
auto heterosexuality
very smart guy
But he believes that autogynophilia
Occurs commonly among transgender females
I am less convinced. You know, I'm I'm being a hard-ass
scientist, you know, I
May be but I
I kind of doubt it because male and female sexuality are so different
Autogynophilia is something that requires a male type
Sexuality which is very focused and fixed
and strong
and autogynophilia
occurs
kind of
genetically a male finds out on his own and becomes
Even though he's never heard of it before
It dominates his early sex life
and I'm really
kind of skeptical that that happens
In natal females, but we'll see
we'll see does that
if someone and if it's common
That somebody that's never heard of it before kind of stumbles upon this thing
this particular
interest this orientation
Does that suggest that there is a biological
disposition precursor?
I would bet
More money than I have that we will
Find that eventually. I think autogynophilia is strongly biological. Now. Can I prove that? No
but
What is going to make
A 14 year old boy
Decide to put on his mother's panties and go into the bathroom and look at himself and
Become aroused and so on
Nobody teaches him that
You know, there's a lot of I should hope not. Yeah. Yeah. There's a lot of interest now
especially among
gender critical types about
something called sissy hypnoporn, which is
It's a type of pornography consumed by
Autogynophilic males and they're saying that
This porn is creating autogynophilia. Well, I don't believe it. I feel like
these guys
Have this interest and they're finding the porn. I I don't think anything plausibly is going to
To
Raise this idea in somebody that doesn't already have the interest
The other word that I learned when looking at some of your work is
morphophilia
One of the longest words I think I've ever said in my life. What's gynandromorphophilia?
Gynandromorphophilia, so I'm gonna say a word that I I think is fine, but
Um
Some people are touchy about it
Gynandromorphophilia is a sexual attraction to she males
What I mean by a she male
is a natal male
Trans woman who has both breast and a penis still
Um
You know, I I can see it. I can see I can I can see it in my mind's eye. Yep. Well
It's not hard to find it
online that that is a kind of pornography. I have come across
And it actually is
quite a common form
of pornography
and even I think just
Plano normal straight men
Get into that sometimes
But they're they're different than the kind of men
Who need that and prefer it and for example, I had a
I had a girlfriend at one time whose ex-husband
Had that preference and in order for them to have sex
They needed to bring a picture of a she male on the computer screen so he could look at it
and become aroused
That became a problem for her
I can imagine I can imagine that that would create complications. Yes. Yeah, but that's you know, I some other
Just plain old. I think
mostly just plain old straight men
They just I think don't have the hang up
about the penis being there too
This is what you know back in the 90s, you know on allen partridge, which is a famous british comedy show
One of his friends it turns out was going to thailand and he comes back and all he wants to hear about is the ladyboys
He all he wants to hear about is ladyboys. Tell me about the ladyboys. He keeps on saying. Yeah
That's right. The ladyboys. That's that's what they are. Yeah, they still tour as ladyboys of Bangkok in the uk
I don't know if that's the same in the u.s. But I mean there's posters everywhere for ladyboys of Bangkok
to my knowledge they don't come here, but um
You know, there are
She mail escorts that you can find online
I I knew
In writing my book
The 2003 book called the man who would be queen. I actually at that time knew some transsexual
Prostitutes
Some of whom had worked
as she mail prostitutes and then they
Uh got surgery and continue to work
as
female prostitutes
um
Opening opening up to as many markets as possible. Yeah. Yeah. Well the one that I'm thinking of
preferred the
The men who liked women to the men who liked she mails
I think she thought that the ones who liked she mails
Uh
I don't know that they treated her differently as as a very interesting. So this is this is an obvious
uh
follow-up which is
Is this a new category of sexual orientation? Are these people closer to gay?
People or are they closer to straight people?
Great question and so I can answer the second part of that question
They are very close to straight people. They're not at all gay
guys guys who get into she mails
So if we bring these guys in the lab
And we show them pornography featuring just women and the the kind that we use in this situation is two women
having sex with each other
female female porn and
male male male porn
uh, those are
the kind best kind of
Stimually because if somebody gets aroused there's no
Ambiguity about who they're getting aroused by
um
Guys who are into she mails get aroused to the females but not the males
But they get slightly more aroused to
videos
Of two she mails getting it on
And that's a little different than typical straight men who get more aroused
by two females
than two she mails
but
neither
Guy Nant Guy Nant or morphophiles
nor
regular straight men get aroused
to
two men getting it on
right
Next next obvious follow-up question to that is I've heard you say that heterosexual women are
Genitally indifferent
What does that mean?
I would say
Not just genitally indifferent. They're I think that they're
Conscious feelings
Are indifferent in the laboratory
to erotica
so
If we bring
Women into the lab and we show them the same kinds of stimuli two men having sex
two women having sex
Straight women
Show an indifferent pattern
Of genital arousal. They get equally aroused to both by both
And they get and they say
They get equally aroused by both now
they don't
get that aroused
Psychologically
They don't straight women do not get as aroused to watching either kinds of
erotic stimuli that I just mentioned
as either straight men do
or gay men do
But it is interesting that they seem to show this
flat pattern
lesbians in contrast
do
show
both a
genital preference and a subjective preference
for female stimuli is there
a vestigial arousal among
lesbians for men
lesbians do
get more aroused by
male stimuli than they do
to nature scenes
But what about do they get more aroused to gay men than gay men do to lesbians?
These questions are hard to answer
These are the studies that we need Michael. These are the these are the hard
charging questions that we need. Well, they're hard to answer because the kinds of
apparatus that
You must use to measure genital arousal and men differs from that
That you must use to measure it in women and the best evidence that we have
we've taken it out of
the genitals into the brain. We've done
fmri scanning
of
people
looking at erotic stimuli
And it pretty much shows the same patterns as the genital stuff does
And your excellent question I
I
Think I'm gonna have to hold off answering because I don't remember
That's fine. So we kind of I remember I um, I had a conversation with
Christina Durante and she taught me about a study where they brought
Women into a lab and they sat them down opposite
Two different guys one guy was really nerdy and one guy was kind of a bad boy leather jacket and sort of like quaffed hair and stuff like that
and
they
analyzed the
verbal responses and the
Physical responses that women had to each of these different men
Now they had a oscar winning film writer some award-winning film writer write the script that the
Gentleman actor was using so it's like, you know, if you were going to cut it the cool guys like if you come with me
I'll show you the best night of your life and it's going to be really cool
But I don't really care so it kind of it doesn't really matter so much very very high status prestige prestige prestige
Uh, whereas on the other hand the other guy was something else. Now the interesting thing is it was the same guy
The same guy was playing both roles. They just styled him differently in his mannerisms had been adjusted
one of the most interesting takeaways was
There was a a number of uh, lesbian female attracted women
Who were in the study and when they looked at their behavior with the lower status man
It seemed relatively straightforward when they looked at their behavior with the highest status man
even though they had a self report of not being attracted to him and
Their verbal behavior wasn't particularly forthcoming. Their non-verbal behavior was much more flirtatious
So they were playing with the hair more. They were kind of leaning in they were pouting a little bit more and what that kind of
Suggested to me, which I think kind of leads into some of your work
is that
Even for women who are not attracted to men for a very long time
Men have been the gatekeepers to so much with regards to
survivability reproduction protection resources, etc
that it feels like even
Exclusively female attracted women
Just keep this
Skill set in the locker room somewhere where if they need to deploy it because the chieftains come over
And she's just finished up with her girlfriend that nobody knows about secretly in a in a cave somewhere
uh, that she can still kind of
Turn it on and I thought that that was really interesting
That is really interesting. I wasn't familiar with that
also, I think that
lesbians
Women who identify as lesbians are not as exclusively
Female attracted as gay men are male attracted even if they
might deny that
lesbians
Are more likely than gay men
to
Become non-lesbian
You know relapse to go back. Yeah, there's
A researcher named lisa diamond who has studied something she calls female fluidity which
Refers to women's
greater propensity
to
I don't know become romantically interested in somebody regardless of their
natal sex and
Not all women do this and there are some, you know, let's say gold star lesbians who
Uh
would never
go for a man, but
I think there are more lesbians who have the capacity
For sexual attraction to men
Okay, so in your opinion, then is males sexual men's sexual orientation is more fixed and
Is more malleable?
Absolutely, and that's that's part of the reason why men but not women
Not many women
Have parapherias, which are these weird
sexual interests
Autogonophilia is a parapheria, but some others
are for example
Pedophilia sexual attraction to children. What's the what's the amputee one? What's that one?
That is called acrotomophilia. Thank you. Yeah
Right
Yes, which we've been studying
That there's um and zoophilia attraction to animals
Uh lipophilia, which is
Attraction to morbidly obese people and the guys who are into them tend to be just normal weight guys
Uh, and we just we have a paper that is about to be published. It's uh accepted and I'm working on the proof now, which I think is
He modestly says I think it's very interesting
But we studied we we studied guys into amputees
Guys into animals and guys into the really huge fat people
And for each of these three kinds of parapherias
A lot of these guys
also have the
Inversion they are sexually aroused by the idea of becoming
Yes
fat person and animal
uh, which you know
And and I think we have about 10
Guys into amputees who've actually managed somehow to get amputations
Wow, so I first learned this from dr. James Cantor
and spoke to him about it and and he described it in this really lovely way, which was um a lot of the
Sexual let's just call a lot of the parapherias that people have and and the odd fetishes that people are turned on by
Is reflected both outwardly and inwardly. So there are people who are attracted to amputees
There are people who see themselves as amputees. They have their limbs
They have all of their limbs, but they feel like they should not they feel like they shouldn't have that
He also, uh, I don't know whether you believe that this is true
Said that there are people who are attracted to children
And there are people who see themselves as children
There are men often who want to be dressed up as babies. We did the first study of this
Kevin my
PhD student Kevin sue and I did a first study of auto pedophilia and
That's right. Uh, and the most ethical form of pedophilia
Yeah, and when a really interesting finding of that, um
study was that
Men some of these men are attracted to boys. Some are attracted to girls
Well, the the guys who are attracted to girls
Are sexually aroused by the idea of being a little girl
Not a little boy, which is interesting
So you have it that is a great way to
prove
That the relationship outwardly and inwardly is the same
Yeah, because otherwise you wouldn't have this relationship between the two. That's so interesting. Why is everyone not a sex researcher?
Why is everyone not doing para paraffilia sex research the same way? Yeah, so interesting
Oh, okay. So
In your opinion does bisexuality truly exist in men like how how accurate do you think the stereotype is that bisexual women
Are really straight and that bisexual men are really gay
In I think it was 2005 we published a paper
Um
That failed to find evidence
That male bisexuality truly existed
where
By that, I mean that men in the laboratory would show
Arousal to both men and to women
Uh that did not did not make us popular. We were um
You know it got us into the news but not
liked
We have kept studying this by we I and my
Then graduate student now. He's a professor in england garyl freeger
And we've uh gotten
several hundred
Uh
Several hundred uh subjects in the lab
And uh two years ago we published in proceedings of national academy of sciences
A paper in which we
Showed beyond the shadow of a doubt that male bisexuality truly exists
Um
There is a subset of bisexual men who
Clearly produce arousal to male stimuli and to female stimuli
Most of them are somewhat more aroused by one sex than by the other. They're not exactly
Into predominantly gay or a predominantly straight bisexual man. Yeah. Yeah, but they're they're a bit bisexual. Yes. So I now
Believe for sure in male bisexuality
At the same time
If you talk to gay men
Ask just ask them this question. Did you ever say you were bisexual?
About half of gay men will say yeah
Then you say well, were you really bisexual in the same? No
So it really does
happen that
Some men misrepresent
Being bisexual, but it also seems to happen that
Some men are bisexual as I would understand that understood, but it's a small cohort and also
You it's difficult to stress test whether this is the thin end of the wedge
en route to becoming a
Fully fledged member of the gay community or whether you're actually going to just stop at the letter b. Yeah, that's interesting
um
What what about environmental influences on sexual orientation? So we have at the moment
in korea
A very sort of sex negative culture, which you'll probably be familiar with where there is the four b's movement women who are recanting
I can't remember what the four different b's stand for it in korean, but it's it's men
and patriarchy and family and work or kids or something like that and it is
downstream of a whatever
less than one birth rate and it kind of just it's everything's korea is just a mess, but
That seems like whether it be
outright celibacy slash abstinence or
Turning to lesbianism. I don't know whether that's true
That is a sexual orientation response
To an ecological or environmental cue right something has happened that has changed maybe the sex ratio
maybe the
Mate value of the potential available partners that are around
Downstream from that we have declining birth rates across the west, too
We have an increase in cohort of high performing women and an increase in cohort of underperforming men
Hypogamously that means that maybe women are going to be struggling to find men that are of the mate value that they would desire
Even though we're in a society which has been the most sort of sex positive
Ostensibly than it's ever been. I think that there is a bit of a sex recession going on. There's a great
Article in the Atlantic about this
So with all of this folded together
How how malleable is sexual orientation in response to the local environment?
And could you foresee a future given where we're at?
Sexually and with the mating crisis at the moment that this could continue in the future
This is another one of those times when it's important to distinguish
Male and female sexuality
And this is what i'm going to say is speculative because
This hasn't been established and there's a lot of disagreement, but my
gut sense is that
Men's sexuality is not going to be responsive
to
Cultural pressure much
I say much
Because there are parts of the world where men will have sex
with other men
Other males let's not call them men
Men
If the males are presenting as very feminine and perhaps
transgender
so for example in samoa, there's uh
natal males
who
are considered a third sex called the fa fa fina
And you got the lady boys and tylen and so on
It's pretty common for just plain old straight men
To have sex with these natal males now. I don't think that makes them gay
They're not having sex with men. They're
Seeing these people as female like
But
I don't think there's anything
Any kind of cultural change even if I could build society from the ground up
that would make
Straight men
Want to have sex with each other
uh
I think women are likely different and more responsive to cultural factors
Uh and perhaps also things like um
Bad experiences with men there's a uh, you know this belief
that
One route to lesbianism is being mistreated by men
We don't know that's true, but I find it plausible
But I don't think that uh women mistreating
Men is going to make them go gay
No, that's fascinating. One thing that I've been considering a lot as you've been talking about the
thin line between what being gay means
physically
And what it means
In terms of appearance
You know, there's an interesting question
is a
very voluptuous
big boob big lips long hair
um
Thailand
lady boy type presenting person
more female
than
a very shaven head
uh
sort of more androgynous body
type
but
vagina owning
woman
And there's a really interesting question going on here. You know that you highlighted there it is
In some or it's referred to as a third gender
You know, there's a lot of um accusations from the left of genital fetishism, which you might have heard of
Which is that you're actually being uh, you're addicted to the genitals as opposed to the presentation
but
There is an interesting question given that
Our sexuality is so
easily fooled. We are such
rampant sexual beings that a
six inch by four inch screen
That has a small depiction of sex happening on it is enough to fool our brain to think
There's some sex happening here. No, there isn't there was some sex happening there
A long time ago and now you can see around the side of it. You know that it's not here
You know that you're not getting any of this. It's and that that illusion is responsible for the internet
correct, correct. Yeah, so
My point being that you you already can see as soon as you accept the fact that porn is an effective stimuli
You accept the fact that it is not exclusively about the action. It's about the presentation, right?
Is it just a difference of degree not a difference of kind all the way down to
the more
Female presenting regardless of whether it's a xx or xy chromosome person
It it really starts to blur the line between what is and is not classed as
Same sex or an opposite sex attracted sexual orientation
Yeah, I think that all we have
for the most part are our senses are
And you know men especially but humans in general are very visual species and
You're absolutely right that some trans women even those who still have a penis
Can look
Quite
They look like really attractive women
Although often you can kind of see the remnants of their maleness and their bone structure or something like that, but
Yeah, I and I think that
In those cases
men who
don't feel
Attracted to them or say they don't
That's more likely to be
Uh mental, um, you know some kind of a version an idea like that person is
A man not a woman. So despite the fact that they look like a really attracted
Woman, I can't go there
um
Yeah, it's so fascinating because I've seen this, you know, I've seen this argument happen on on
dating shows or on
Right-wing commentary channels and stuff like that around
No, because that would be gay. I'm like, is it
Is it more gay to have sex with what looks like a nine out of ten woman
body shape size voice presentation actions everything
with a penis
Then it is to have the exact opposite all of the presentation factors of a man could be on testosterone could be all of the rest of it
But has a vagina that it and it's a really really fascinating question. You know, there's sort of
It falls in line with a number of other arguments. There's sort of more biological essentialism side of things, especially the people that would say
Um, unless you can change your chromosomes and even not then if you're a natal male
I'm calling you a man if you're a natal female. I'm calling you a woman for the rest of time
Um, so it's a a suite of beliefs
I suppose all of which are into play with each other and would also cascade down from that, but um
Yeah, it's a it's a really really fascinating
consideration around what it means and this is when you get into the
deeper and deeper into the layers of paraphernalia and and the nuances of sexual orientation it all kind of starts to
break apart. It's like the quantum level of of
sex research, I suppose
Yes, yes, we we are going on the outskirts here
Um, what about people's gay dars? Do you think that most of us have an accurate gay dars?
Yeah, this is again something we've studied quite a bit
And yeah, but people have a much better than chance
Gaydar
Now it's not perfect
but they are much better at than chance
at
discerning whether a man
Is gay or straight and they
rely
So gay men, you know just their
outward appearance
In the west currently is not necessarily
very feminine
Although I I think gay men might
present themselves more attractively than straight men, but it's more things like movement
you know
And speech speech patterns are yeah, you found there's like a gay accent. There's a gay accent. Yes
What is the gay accent?
So we we know it when we hear it and and you know actors can often
effect the gay accent even if they're straight
There's interestingly there's a lesbian accent too
I I think a gay accent
may tend to be more expressive
and gay men articulate more clearly
than straight men and lesbians have the opposite they're less expressive and they don't articulate as clearly
Do you think is that in any way gay men modeling female speech patterns? Are there any
Parallels there? Yeah, you you ask great questions and the you know
So nobody knows and I I think there are two at least two
good hypoxies there one is that
Unconsciously growing up gay men
And
You know some of them they had
somewhat feminine gender identity and they
did model
The other is that there's something about gay men's brain, which is
somewhat feminized and produces this speech pattern
Nobody know
well when it comes to the
Ability to present clearly my speech coach that I use for the podcast is gay
Classically trained in theater classically trained in improv
For not just an outrageous communicator and probably the best communicator
That I've had on the show is Douglas Murray who is also
Him and Miles my speech coach are like two peas in a pod that have never met
But just phenomenal like
Out of this world precision with his ability to
Remain cool under pressure to be able to communicate in a very precise way
to be able to use
inflection and drama and whimsy and to then be able to pull it back without being
Fragile just phenomenal and so yeah
I I wonder Andrew Doyle as well satirist from the uk that runs the titanium agrath
Twitter account. I wonder I wonder whether
Being gay is a competitive advantage in the world of online commentary, perhaps
But yeah, it's all of that stuff so interesting and you write as all that you kind of
I I don't think I've been around sufficient
Lesbians to be able to say that I would I could pick up on that
The only real things that I ever notice
With lesbians are sort of the it's the dress. I think that
Lesbian lesbians seem to dress significantly more differently to normal women than gays do to normal men
Yeah, the the plaid shirts the baggy jeans
um
Yeah gay gay men
dress
somewhat differently more stylishly at least
It's just better usually. Yeah, that's right. That's right
Yeah, very funny
What was that paper that you did about male mate value being more malleable than female mate value?
No, that's an old one
um
Yeah, the student who was the lead author on that was interested in the
Explaining the sex difference in the
In depression women are more likely to get
depressed than
Men are and she hypothesized that
it could be because
You know women's mate value is more tied to
their looks which she said you can't
Do that much about whereas men it's their accomplishments which you can and
um, and she got some evidence for that
I'm not sure that I
That's you know an old paper and I'm not sure I believe
the theory because you know
If women if women really can't do that much
About their looks what's the cosmetics industry doing? I mean, uh, and you know, it's it's not that easy for a man to
go out and double his income
so
Anyway, but that that's what the paper was about
Yeah, so I find I had a conversation
with ed hagan as well recently
And ed did a study where they controlled for upper body strength
When looking at differences in depression and anxiety and when you control for upper body strength the differences between men and women
Get smaller and smaller and smaller and then essentially go away
um, and the the the reason that I was interested in
Discussing a malleability of mate value is that it's it's a common discussion that's had on the internet and it's born out of
A contest between men and women about who's got it worse
It's like well, it's easy for you
because you just need to go and
Get a boob job, but I can't make myself any tall taller and women would say well
It's easy for you
Because you know at 21 I reached my peak sexual market value and it's all downhill from there
And you get to continue to accrue status and resources and it's very much sort of um
two people talking different languages that
the
Sexual brains that the sexual attraction mechanism that works for men what they want from women and for women
What they want from men are not the same. It's not you can't
play
A balancing act here. There is no ability to work out the equity
There's no exchange rate between these two like how many boob jobs is three inches of height worth
Do you know what I mean like there is no way of us doing it?
Oh, well, you could wear high heels and put makeup on but you can go out for five years and increase your earning potential by
40% like what what does that even mean when we're talking about this?
um
I had a theory which I think maybe total horse shit, so I'm going to try and bring it back up again
I had a theory that
um
Male mate value to the individual
To the individual is more malleable and to the group is less malleable and female
Individual mate value is less less malleable and to the group. It's more malleable that
You basically have as a man there are more degrees of freedom that you can move yourself on
And there is a longer timeline that you can do it on specifically because of the fact that you know
a guy who's
35 is
More attractive than a guy who's 25 to most women on average
And I don't know when that peaks probably in your mid mid to late 30s, perhaps
But even then, you know, Leonardo DiCaprio has been acquiring and disposing of under 25 year old girlfriends
regularly for like two decades now
So with sufficient status and resources you can continue to cycle through that
um
But yeah, what what do you what's your mindset at now when it comes to malleability, especially with us facing this mating crisis and
and people having concerns around
Being able to be seen by the other sex
Well, I I think that
In the sense that I understand you I think we're probably very malleable
The culture has changed tremendously
You know in a fairly short time and it's kind of
guessing it will
Change tremendously still I hope it changes back in certain ways because I'm not that happy with certain things now
But that's a different question than do I know how to change it and I do not
And that that
has to do with
male female interactions
As much as academic freedom both of which well the latter concerns me more now
Michael Bailey ladies and gentlemen Michael, I really really appreciate your work any opportunity to dig into
People that are looking into sex is is fascinating for me. I've immensely enjoyed talking to you. I I hope that we get
More chances either in person or back here whatever I have
I have a laundry list of things that we didn't get to talk about to do with sexual arousal patterns virtuous pedophiles
the
Birth order effect of homosexuality so we can absolutely run this back. Let me know once your new paper is out
As a reminder for the people who want to check out your article and also follow you online and stuff like that
Where should they go? Where would you want to direct them?
I am
boring academic
We you can
Go to google scholar and search for j michael bailey or there's something called research gate
Where you can find lots of my papers as well or email me
At my university address. It's j m hyphen bailey le y at northwestern dot edu and
Uh, and I'll try to help you if you need it
Yeah, nothing fancy for me
Michael, I appreciate you. Thank you
Thank you
Thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode
Then press here for a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks and don't forget to subscribe
