If it's really the case that sex work is work, then what is the problem with being asked
by your boss to give him a blowjob?
It's work.
It's just a service.
It's like being asked to do it over time or make a coffee.
No one actually thinks that it's just like making a coffee.
Louise Perry.
Welcome on the show.
Thank you so much for having me.
Given your political background, how does it feel to have Ben Shapiro quote tweeting
your work?
I didn't know he had.
Did you not see this?
Let me tell you.
So there is a tweet that someone put out a couple of days ago explaining about how don't
kink shame the naked men doing parades in front of children and twerking in front of
cops.
And that was one photo, which was a news story.
And the other photo was the chapter list from your book, which said things like men
and women are different and loveless sex is not empowering.
And it said, people of the West choose your future, something like that.
Wow.
Okay.
Yeah.
Okay.
That explains things.
I have quite like a heavy notification filter on Twitter, so I don't always see everything.
The contents page though completely blew up like three months ago, long before the book
was published.
The publisher just put up online the cover, the title, the fact that Kathleen Stock wrote
the forward because she's got a kind of existing reputation among her haters, my haters, and
the contents page.
And that was enough to have like a several day Twitter storm.
Why do you think that was?
Those statements.
I mean, I guess because, I mean, I did write the chapters with the knowledge that they're
like, they're simultaneously obvious and also incredibly provocative, which was like
precisely my intention because some people read it.
I mean, some people read the whole book, but some people read the chapters in particular
and they're like, yeah.
And other people read them as like fascist, basically, I mean, like so politically outrageous.
I mean, I'd say that the response to the book so far has only been out for a couple
of weeks in the UK and not yet in the States is like 80% really positive and 20% complete
outrage and not very much in the middle.
I think, well, what do you think's going to happen when it comes out in America?
That's a good question.
I mean, the like the culture is more intense in America in every way.
It's so similar, I think, to what we have here.
I mean, actually, I think we import it really, but yeah, I don't know.
I mean, I did, like British political context is different from American, right?
And I write for the New Statesman magazine, for instance, which is like traditionally
left-wing outlet.
I have come from the left, even if I wouldn't necessarily consider myself still a part of
the left and so on.
So like, I hope the book doesn't just get treated as like yet another socially conservative
take on such revolution because even if I'm reaching some conservative conclusions, I'm
doing it via different priors, if that makes sense.
Yeah.
Well, didn't you say I start from feminist priors and end up with socially conservative
conclusions?
Yeah, some socially conservative conclusions, yeah, which means that there's sort of something
in it for everyone to hate.
Except Ben Shapiro, apparently.
He's not read the whole thing.
I'm not sure how he might think about some of the early chapters.
You've been co-opted by the right wing of America now, and this is your future.
So I was at the Heterodox Academy, Jonathan Heights organization, I was at the conference
for that this weekend.
One of the speakers said something that kind of, I think, sort of is a good synopsis of
the thesis of your book that says, there are many ways to change the world, few will make
it better, many will make it worse.
Yeah, it's true.
There's a real discretion quote like that.
I can't remember exactly how it's phrased, but something like, it's really easy to break
things and it's really hard to make things, which I think is, it's like a really fundamentally
conservative observation.
And true.
What's wrong with the sexual revolution then?
So my argument in the book is basically that there are some really important ways in which
men and women are different from one another.
So some of those differences are physical and should be fairly obvious.
Like only women can get pregnant, men are bigger and stronger than women are on average,
but also that the difference is massive between the, between the means.
And also there are psychological differences, which a lot of feminism of the last half century
or more has been really invested in minimizing, but I think definitely there, if you look
at the research, and it will see just look at the world around you.
One of those differences, for instance, is that male sexuality is different from female
sexuality on average, that men are more likely to be into things like casual sex, watching
porn, buying sex, all things that have become much more socially acceptable post sexual
revolution.
And my argument basically is that the sexual revolution was kicked off by the pill, and
the, which, which did a pretty good job of severing the link between sex and reproduction.
And it's kind of gave the impression that sex could just be a leisure activity that
didn't have to mean anything, it could just be sort of a bit of fun.
And my argument is actually that that idea that sex is just just a bit of fun, it doesn't
really mean anything, suit male interests much more than it does female, because casual
sex in particular is just one, one men wanting more than women do, and two women carry all
of the risks associated with it, like physical risks like pregnancy and violence and so on.
So my argument basically is it's a bad deal for them.
Originally, it was the sort of thing that was pushed by liberals and feminists, right?
This is exactly the sort of thing.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, the, yeah, so the, the popular narrative that I'm challenging is
one that the sexual revolution was like a feminist accomplishment.
And I don't think that's true.
I mean, which is not to say that there aren't some things about it that have been good for
women. I mean, I mean, if you look at the story of recent decades in particular, there
are all sorts of ways in which women are doing great actually, like women are women are going
to university more often than men are, they are right up until they have children are
doing better in the workplace.
You know, this is, it's not to say that like everything is like the battle of the sexes
women are like losing across the board, not at all.
But I think in terms of sexual culture, that I'm concerned, I'm concerned for women, I'm
also concerned for men.
I mean, there's a lot in the book about, for instance, the really malign influence of
porn on young men, like that in a superficial and short term way, it's great to be a really
attractive man in this sexual culture, right, you can basically attract as many partners
as you like, you know, consequence free sex is freely available to you.
But I think actually in the long run, that's not a very, that's not a happy way to live your life.
You say that your complaint is focused more against liberals than conservatives.
Why is that?
I mean, because I'm expecting liberals to read it, I might be wrong about that.
But I that that's the space that I'm coming from originally, I went to, I went to such
a left-wing university.
Where did you go?
I went to SOAS in London.
I don't even know what that is.
It's like a really, really small, really crazy university.
So I, you know, I've, I've read all of the, all of this radical stuff as a student and
I'm coming from a feminist background and coming from, as I said, the, you know,
the new statesman that I work for is, is, is historically left-wing.
So I'm kind of, I'm trying to speak to those people.
But I mean, the books for conservatives as well, because there are bits in it that I
think every, everyone will, will find, will find challenging.
Is it not the fact that a lot of what you're talking about here is
conserving some fairly traditional views around men's and women's roles with each other about
sort of chivalrous conduct and having constraints on the way that men and their
regression and their desire for multiple sexual partners.
Like that, that is a fundamentally conservative value.
So it seems to me like the conservatives would have far less to disagree with you.
Not again, there's something for everybody to disagree with, but that the conservatives
would probably have far less than the new wave of liberals.
Probably, yeah.
Although I should say that the, this idea of like constraining male sexuality,
which is, which is, is, is central to my pieces basically.
It is conservative in the sense that it was,
it was considered to be like a mainstream idea before sexual revolution in the West.
But if you look across time and place, like that's not necessarily considered like
a trad thing to do.
I mean, like, if you look, for instance, at antiquity,
the idea that some high status man would have access to sexual access to his underlings was
like completely accepted.
It's really, I don't know if you've read Tom Holland's book, Dominion.
No, you don't mean Tom Holland's the guy that plays Spiderman, do you?
No, I don't.
A common mistake.
No, no, he's a British academic and historian writer.
And he's got this fantastic book called Dominion, which is about
basically about history of Christianity and the ways in which Christianity influences
the modern world, even if we consider ourselves to be
a religious or post-Christian.
And he has a bit in there where he talks about me too.
And it really triggered a lot of my thinking about this actually,
a few years ago, where he points out that in, say, the Roman world,
no one would think that Harvey Weinstein was doing anything wrong.
Like the idea that this guy who's at the top of the tree of his particular hierarchy
would be able to have sexual access to anyone kind of subordinate to him was like, yeah,
obviously.
And actually, the idea that he should be constrained is, Holland argues, a very Christian idea.
And I'm not Christian.
I'm not coming at this from a religious perspective.
But it's worth pointing that out.
You know, like this is not necessarily a normal thing to think.
The window of trad sort of shifts over time, right?
Like no one's actually going that far back.
So, OK, so the sexual revolution happens.
Like, surely women have benefited with no more shame and stigma around enjoying sex
and stuff like that.
Who benefited from the sexual revolution overall?
Yeah, so the shame and stigma thing.
I mean, yes, that is definitely one outcome.
I mean, like, I think that one of the things that I'm trying to push in this book,
and that is shared with, like, Mary Harrington and Nina Powell that you've had on the show before.
Yeah, we're on the same page about this, like, challenging the idea of progress,
particularly from a feminist perspective, this idea that history has a shape
and everything is always getting better and better.
And everything post-sexual revolution is necessarily better than what came before.
I just don't think it's true.
I think that's nonsense.
Like, we're looking at a massive historical event triggered primarily by technology.
Of course, there are going to be upsides and downsides.
Yeah, so I think it is absolutely the case that women now can be much more open about sexuality
and I'm more able to enjoy sex in certain circumstances and stuff.
That's true.
But I also think that to some extent, like, we're social animals and we're very responsive to norms.
And what I think has happened is kind of the norms have just spun on a sixpence.
And now, whereas previously, it would have been the case that young women, for instance,
were like protecting their virginity and their reputation for being chased and so on,
was considered very important socially.
Now, if anything, it's the opposite or not quite the opposite,
but that now the pressure actually is on for women to be up for it.
And to be just as sexually adventurous as the guys.
And, you know, like, it's like a slightly painful.
There's a contradiction within that, which is really hard to navigate for young women.
We're on the one hand, like, it's good to be sexually open.
It's good to sort of base your reputation on being really sexy,
but also there is actually a penalty if your body count is too high,
which is quite difficult.
And I think a lot of young women don't necessarily realise that as well.
Like, they're actually treading a really difficult tightrope,
which is why I think this idea of like, oh, well, people can do whatever they want now.
Like, you know, we're all free to behave as we want sexually.
I just don't think it's true, because every culture has expectations in relation to sex,
has norms in relation to sex.
I think that what we've done, though, is that we had some quite deeply embedded norms,
which were thrown out the windows of consequence of sexual revolution.
And now there's like a sort of halting effort to maybe rebuild them.
Sometimes they're implicit and it's kind of a wild west out there, basically.
Who's enforcing this, then?
Where's this coming from?
Are you suggesting that men are weaponising women to believe that they should have a particular type
of sexual proclivity that then plays into men's hands because they get more variety?
I don't think there's a conspiracy.
I don't think that anyone is enforcing it.
I think that it's just everyone, like, responding to incentives as individuals.
And that knits together to create the culture that we see before us.
So, like, yeah, it is in the interests of men who want to sleep around to encourage
women to match them, you know, in that kind of behaviour.
So that's clearly going on at an individual level.
But then in terms of, like, women's magazines encouraging their readers to do the same,
I have some, I did a lot of digging through women's magazines for this book.
And, like, there is some really grim articles out there.
What were your least favourite headlines?
I can't remember exactly the wording of it, but there's a whole genre of articles in women's
media about encouraging women not to catch feelings.
Or, I mean, the way that it's phrased is how anyone of any gender can not catch feelings
when they're having casual sex and how to have casual sex in, like, a fun, feminist way, etc, etc.
But, like, we know that women are much more likely to bond quickly with their sexual partners.
We know that they just much less likely to like casual sex.
Something that's really interesting and really marked difference to many women
on average in sexuality is women's sexual disgust threshold is a lot lower.
So women will get the ick much easier than men will.
But if you're going to participate, if you're going to have sex like a man,
you have to overcome all of those instincts, right?
And so there's a whole genre of women's mags that will basically, like, instruct their young readers
in how to suppress their instincts and have sex that actually they kind of know deep down
they shouldn't be having, which I think is really bleak.
And, yeah, and I think that just representing that is feminist in any way.
Interestingly, looking at it from a man's perspective, I agree that this is bad for women.
I don't think that it serves their interests.
I think that the biological predisposition that women have when it comes to sexual partners
trying to decouple having sex.
First off, having sex and making babies was decoupled.
But then having sex and having emotions getting attached was decoupled.
And that second one, the pill for that is, I mean, you know, what is it?
Is it 10 vodkas deep?
Like, does that really help?
You know, you wake up in the morning and you feel.
But you use this analogy about the fact that Marilyn Monroe was a sort of very attractive
woman that was weaponized, commercialized, utilized by a society that wanted to sexualize
women.
And this was at the benefit of Hughes, Hugh Hefner, the sort of high status man who
was able to sleep with lots of women and continue to do this.
I agree.
I think that you're right.
It is bad for women, but very few men are Hughes.
And what you're seeing in the modern society is this most women are probably dissatisfied
with the way that their sexual pursuits are going.
Most men now, the number of men reporting no sex between the ages of 18 and 30 has tripled
to nearly 30 percent in the last 10 years.
So the Matthew principle kicks off here.
So I think on average, it's bad for pretty much everybody.
I think that the sort of amount of sexual satisfaction has lowered for everybody.
And you have this huge underclass of sexless men, which is where incel, black pill, make
tau, some parts of the red pill, the manasphere, men's rights.
All of these movements are, as far as I can see, they're big copes from men who are now
in a sort of sexual wasteland where they're really, really struggling to find connection.
So I think that it's, I understand that from a feminist perspective, it is bad for women
and that there are higher costs that they pay.
But being a listless, liminal space man with no desire from any female that you give your
attention to is not a good situation to be in either.
Yeah, I completely agree.
Yeah.
I'd add to that things like rates of erectile dysfunction among young men are like insanely
high, which is probably suited for maybe also to do with Easter eggs in the environment.
I don't know.
God damn Easter eggs.
So I was eating some edamame beans the other day and everyone at the table who's like big
into health and fitness look disgusted.
Apparently, edamame beans have got tons of estrogen in.
Who knew?
You can have a bit of soy, can't you?
That's probably it.
Don't go into the soy argument.
But yeah, a few men are used, right?
So they're the ones that are losing.
Yeah, no, this is completely true.
And I think as well that there's this like antagonism between feminists and let's say
incels broadly, which does I think very much come down to these innate differences to male
and female sexuality and the fact that we don't really talk about them enough,
which means I think that you end up with the sex is really misunderstanding each other.
Right?
So like feminists will look at incels and like completely not understand why it would be
so frustrating to be a young man who can't get laid.
Like I think a lot of women are like surprising and clueless about male sexuality in all sorts
of ways.
Like definitely the dark side of male sexuality, but also just like its intensity.
I think most women cannot just can't like directly empathize at all.
And similarly incels I think would look at women and be like, but you can walk out into
the street and pick up half feels and guys, you know, within five minutes, you must be
living heaven on earth and women like, but I don't want that.
And so you end up with this.
Everyone thinks that like the other the other side has it easy, which has a lot to do with
of just this like these quite fundamental biological differences, making it hard for
us to empathize with one another.
And this is added to a culture in which like not only are those sexuality differences
routinely denied, but like the the existence of sexual dimorphism is routinely denied.
It's like, how can you possibly like successfully navigate the sexual landscape if you don't
even think many women exist?
That's just great categories.
Do you think that inventing the pill was an error then?
No, because I think.
I mean, socially, no, like that there are.
Mary Harrington will probably talk to you about the environmental consequences of the pill.
And yeah, we've just mentioned each other and that's like that's another story.
Socially, I think no, I mean, I think it is.
I'm personally grateful for the fact that my life is not entirely dominated by childbearing,
which it would have been in a previous era.
I'm not going to expect to have 10 children and to spend my whole life either pregnant
or postpartum.
I think it's more that we haven't really negotiated with the social consequences.
And that's what I'm trying.
That's the sort of conversation I'm trying to initiate because we, you know, we have,
we have the power to.
I'm not like a complete, I have a sort of materialist analysis of all of this.
And I think in the end, it does come down to things like the pill,
things like changes in the economy.
You know, I think so often you get the popular narrative of feminist history
is basically sees it as being driven by particularly inspiring feminists
who just kind of give really strong arguments and everyone's persuaded.
And this is what, you know, this is what gives us the vote.
This is what gives us access to professions, whatever.
I don't think that's true.
I mean, clearly there have been some very impressive feminists historically.
But I think that the real story of the last century is things like the washing machine.
Yeah, you said the washing machine helped deliberate women more than any feminist did.
Yeah, I think Jordan Peterson said the same thing.
He's completely right.
He also mentions tampons.
Yeah, there's all sorts of, all sorts of technologies which make it possible for women
to have lives outside of their home or more outside of their home than previously.
And also changes to the economy, which means that, you know, if you're in a
in a knowledge economy or a service economy where male physical strength doesn't have anything
like the economic importance that it once did, women and men can participate basically as equals.
You know, there are there are like, obviously childbearing makes a difference.
But if you're if you're on the pill, you're delaying childbearing.
You're working at a laptop and you're operating in a very kind of gender neutral social sphere.
You might not even you might not even like work out.
You might have no recognition of the fact that men and women are
profoundly physically different in terms of things like strength.
Like from that perspective, it looks as if the whole world is gender neutral.
And so that's kind of that's that is the sort of social context in which this idea of the
the difference between men and women being socially constructed or being trivial makes sense.
But actually, that's like a very, very superficial analysis of what's going on.
But actually, I mean, one of the physical differences is still profound, but also
like those psychological differences go really deep.
Because we're talking about hundreds of thousands of years of evolutionary history
feeding into us having these really distinct reproductive roles and that
and that leading to us having quite different modes of sexuality.
Didn't you say that the USA women's football team was beaten by the Dallas under 15s football team?
Yeah, yeah, there are like several examples of this of elite women's teams being beaten by
teenage boys.
I think that the the fastest woman in the 100 meters on the planet gets beaten by
about 100 or 200 under 17s in America, 200 under 17 men in America.
I mean, the whole like the discussion around male and female physical strength differences
are purely due to the fact that girls get told that they need to play with dolls and guys go
and lift lift little trucks and stuff.
It feels like lapping to me, it feels like everybody is living this sort of charade
and nobody can bear themselves to to pull out of it like that's wild.
But when it comes to the psychological differences, there's a little bit more,
I guess, plausible room for manoeuvre there because you can't see the manifest as much.
And when you've also got a discussion about people being able to transition from
different genders, the male brain and the female brain and traits that you put them on
and take them off like clothes.
Yeah, and there are outliers, you know, there are there are like less so physically.
I mean, you do sometimes get really strong women or whatever.
But even then, I mean, I do my husband and I are both power lifters and just I don't think
that you can spend five minutes in a power lifting gym and not be aware of the fact that
men and women strength differences are massive, even if there are obviously some really strong
women.
Do you pull conventional or sumo?
Conventional.
What about the husband?
Also conventional.
Good.
It's a family of non-cheaters.
I'm adamant that sumo is cheating.
Yeah, I mean, and then I see I've been, you know, trading this for years and then I see
like novice men warming up with my one red max and then it's just it's just like the
pure reality of it.
But I mean, if people don't participate in those kind of sports, also things like martial
arts, if you don't participate in that, you wouldn't.
necessarily know it.
But on the psychological differences, yeah, there are there are more outliers.
There are some people who are really atypical for their sex and there clearly is like a lot
of space for culture to intervene.
But it's so on an individual level, if you know what, if you know someone's sex, you
don't necessarily know anything really about their personality.
It's more that at the population level, when you're talking about millions of people,
that's when you see it play out.
And like something that is really interesting and really makes clear that how profound these
differences are is you look at things like university campuses and look at their sex
ratio on campuses where there are more women than men.
So men are the rarer sex.
There's more hookup culture because the rarer sex is able to set the terms more easily.
And then on campuses where there are more women than men, so men are the rarer sex.
There are more men than women, you have the inverses, more monogamy.
And that's the sort of thing where, yes, there will be individual outliers,
but you can't deny the differences when you when you see it playing out in those kind of larger
arenas.
Well, that sex ratio hypothesis is kind of the basis as well for a ton of hypergamy,
that as you have an ever increasing group of high-performing women and an ever decreasing
group of underperforming men that are dropping out of college, that aren't getting as educated,
women age 21 to 29 earn 1,111 pounds more on average than the equivalent man.
So during the period when women are seeking a mate,
they're unable to find what fundamentally on average women want to find a mate that is
more statusful, wealthier and better educated than they are.
Those are the cues typically that they were attracted to, but now women are able to gain
status, earn more and become better educated than men at higher rates than men,
which is what's causing this sort of upward tilt toward turbo chad at the top sleeping with everybody,
listless, sexless men underclass down here, and then the wistful women and alpha widows
that are in this sort of world.
I mean, this is the most interesting dynamic that I think there is at the moment when it
comes to dating.
It's got downstream implications economically.
It's got downstream implications when you think about population growth,
population decline, culture, crime.
You don't want this huge underclass of sexless men roaming the streets.
When you get into a relationship as a man, your testosterone goes down.
When you have a child, your testosterone goes down again, because it's advantageous,
it's adaptive for you to not be going out doing reckless shit when you've got a baby
and a wife at home to look after.
So all of this, I mean, this is just, it is by far the most interesting dynamic,
I think, that's happening in the world at the moment.
Yeah, and this is the subject of it.
So my last chapter is called Marriage is Good, and a lot of people who've just seen
the contents page sort of assumed that it's a Christian argument or whatever.
But actually, it's making exactly, it's like a very rational, secular argument for actually,
if you look at what happens to a society when you get rid of monogamous marriage and you
compare our society and as it was in the past, and also look at societies where
polygony is the norm.
Like most society, I think it's about 80% of societies on the anthropological record
have had polygony as a socially acceptable thing.
So you end up with the chads who are having multiple wives, and then you've got men who
never marry at all.
And you do also have some monogamy in the middle, like it's normally not quite that extreme.
But that, it seems, is basically our natural state as a species.
And because it just, it just recurs again and again and again.
And that minority of cultures that have been monogamous, including Western cultures, are
unusual, but and it's not like it does sort of have to be imposed.
Like, you know, like a lot of elite men will cheat, for instance.
And, you know, they take on extra wives that they could.
People, monogamy is not really our natural state.
It does have to be socially enforced, but it also is like amazingly successful.
Anthropologists talk about the puzzle of monogamous marriage in that it is weird to see that
a culture like ours would have developed it in the first place because it clearly doesn't
suit the interests of elite men.
You'd think that the elite men would want would want to have multiple wives, which of
course they do.
But the reason they think that it's become as successful as it has is because monogamous
societies do well.
More stable.
They're more stable.
They're also more productive.
So they colonize other parts of the world, basically, because they're
wealthy and, you know, striving and successful.
And then they impose their marriage norms elsewhere.
Think about it this way.
I've only just thought about this.
The naturalistic fallacy gets used a lot with this, right?
Look, ancestrally, we maybe don't have tons of evidence that we're a monogamous species.
Their form of monogamy is not the strategy that we're supposed to go down.
If you accept the fact that non-monogamous societies are more unstable and are going to
exist for a lesser amount of time, that means that the living standards are going to be
lower.
That means that mortality or all of the things that you care about, right,
are going to be out of the window.
What if monogamy for the individual sometimes can be suboptimal,
but on average is optimal for the culture as a whole?
In the same way as when seatbelts got introduced, people didn't want to wear them.
And a lot of the time it's not just you that you're saving.
It's also other people in the car because if you don't have your seatbelt on,
you bounce around and you smash up everybody else as well.
Maybe a different way to frame monogamy is that it's kind of like following the law
a little bit.
It's a small individual sacrifice that you make that does perhaps make for some people
suboptimal living standards, but only a little bit.
But the reason that you do that is to contribute to the entire stability of society.
Yeah, I've heard, I can't remember who came up with this,
but I've heard monogamy referred to as sexual socialism, basically that reason.
It's a redistribution strategy for sure.
Yeah, yeah, I mean, I mean, we mentioned Jordan Rees again.
He got in trouble for saying something along these lines.
I can't remember exactly what it was.
Enforced monogamy.
I brought it up with them at the start of the year.
Yeah, because it sounds really authoritarian, but I think what he was describing there is
basically a weird describing where it's like socially prescribed.
It's not even necessarily legally required.
It's just considered to be the norm.
Cheating is considered to be bad.
You can't have a second wife.
And yeah, I mean, there are other good outcomes also in terms of things like child abuse and
domestic violence, which obviously something feminists are very interested in.
Like polygynous societies have much higher rates of both because the household with
multiple wives and their children are like full of conflict.
A hundred times more likely that a child is going to be killed if they're in the household
with one parent that isn't their biological parent.
Yeah.
A hundred times more likely.
Yeah, yeah, it's insane.
It's wild.
Okay, so what's sexual disenchantment?
So social disenchantment is basically, I took it from Max Weber, the sociologist who wrote about
disenchantment of the natural world as part of the Enlightenment.
So when people used to believe pre-enlightenment that the natural world was kind of possessed
by spirits and had like agency and specialness like infused within it.
And then we become more rational, whatever, opposed to enlightenment and realised actually
it's all just like scientific forces of play.
I think that it's not my turn.
I borrowed it from Aaron Sabar, an American writer.
Sexual disenchantment is what happens post-sexual revolution where you used to think of sex as
having this kind of specialness.
I mean within Christianity of being like a sacrament within marriage and then now it's
stripped of all of that meaning and it just becomes basically any old social interaction.
Like it's just a means of having fun.
Basically, it doesn't necessarily mean anything.
I mean, the point that I'm making the book is actually basically no one really believes
in sexual disenchantment.
People talk about it a lot and particularly like progressives and liberal feminists will
talk about it as if it's an ideal.
Like we should of course get rid of all these like stupid old fashioned ideas about sex,
having some like innate specialness.
But actually people don't really behave as if that's true because people behave almost always
as if actually sex does have a special status and it's a special status you can't necessarily
define very easily but people feel it.
Like people care if they get cheated on even in the polyamorous community.
Like if you go into any polyamorous subreddit or whatever, you will find people really struggling
with jealousy as this like intense instinctive thing that they're trying to override and they
can't quite do it.
People, I mean it's sexual harassment in the workplace.
I get really frustrated with feminists who claim simultaneously that sex workers work
and that we should like get rid of all these hang-ups about selling sex being any different
from working at McDonald's or selling any other kind of service.
But then they also get so sensitive about any perceived section of propriety in their workplace.
What like?
Like being touched by a boss for instance.
Like not even in a like a really aggressive assaulting way but just you know women getting
touched on the arm or something like that or being asked out in a context that you don't really
feel comfortable.
You know all that kind of me too stuff which is quite low level.
Like if that if it's really the case that sex workers work then what is the problem with being
asked by your boss to give them a blow job?
Right it's work, it's just a service, it's like being asked to do it over time or make a coffee.
Or make a coffee yeah and no one actually thinks that that it's just like making a coffee.
So I think that the sexual disenchantment idea is really just theoretical.
It's a rhetorical kind of move but actually doesn't really describe reality and doesn't
really describe how people feel.
I mean it's kind of just an inconvenient fact that if you're trying to be super rational
and you're trying to resist anything like remotely traditional or religious or you know
anything old fashioned then the fact that people feel very differently about sex and
they do about other things is kind of inconvenient.
It's felt like an aberration right?
It's like oh this is just an analogy drawn with the non monogamy community is so correct.
One of my friends out here in Austin was telling me about the first time that his
wife brought somebody else back and he was on the floor of the bathroom dry retching.
But at the time he's now married at the time was adamant that this was just him working
through his ego and this is in part of the process this is part of the processing thing.
I'm like dude that's you're not choosing to throw up that's something way way way
behind conscious programming that's innate that's built in but is it you that is this
your quote that says few liberal feminists are willing to draw the link between the
culture of sexual hedonism they promote and the anxieties of a campus rate that have
emerged at the exact same time?
Yeah yeah that's yeah yeah because I think what's going I think what's going on a lot
with me too is that what what meets what was described during me too and still is I guess
I mean it's still it's still going on in different forms right was not always right right like some
so with like going back to Weinstein for instance some of what he did was like straightforwardly
illegal and he was convicted of it therefore but a lot of what is described is much more
somewhere in the middle you know much more open to interpretation and often what women were talking
about was just like feeling creeped out or feeling like like exactly this dry retching on the bathroom
floor feeling like your instincts are telling you something even if you can't quite rationalize it
and often this was like expressed in terms of consent because in the liberal feminist
framework the only thing you're really allowed to talk about is consent because you because
all the old-fashioned norms are out the window you're not allowed to talk about chivalry you're
not allowed to talk about um like any kind of instinctive feeling of disgust or discomfort
that you have kind of has to be suppressed but you are allowed to talk about consent and so
everything had to be expressed in the form in like the language of consent so I talk about for
instance the Aziz Ansari case you might remember I can't remember the name of the grace I think was
her her pseudonym this woman who went on a date with the actor Aziz Ansari went back to his house
afterwards and he kind of he didn't rape her and he didn't do anything illegal but he just kind of
subtly pressured her into doing sex things that she didn't really want to do and then later she
wrote a sort of first-hand account of this um and he got in trouble but it was one of those
it was it was a bit later on in me too and it was one of those ones that provoked a lot of
discussion because it was because it was a borderline one like he hadn't had he done anything
wrong he definitely hadn't done anything illegal um the idea that he hadn't that he had violated her
consent just didn't really stack up just based on her own story I think what's often going on here
is it's to do with this pressure that women feel to have sex like men
and to try and have emotionless sex and to try and just like you know to do the sexual
disengagement thing and just treat it like a like a leisure activity but they can't actually quite
do it and they feel like they feel sexual disgust they feel shame they feel like these deep painful
emotions and the only person sometimes to blame is the man even though he actually might not have
done anything wrong really or he I mean he probably wasn't behaving like a gentleman
but he wasn't doing anything illegal and he wasn't doing anything really wrong according to like
the the standards of the day it's just that the standards of the day are not actually very good for
women that's it you've nailed it you've absolutely nailed it there and you're right the the outlet
for pushback and and for distaste the only one that is there is the man and the only
framing through which you can talk about this is consent which is where false allegations I think
sometimes come in that perhaps you repurpose ick as guilt as it must have done something criminal
yeah now it's rape yeah and of course the nature of it is that there are only two people there
there weren't any witnesses and so it's everyone's like analysis of something that's gone in the past
is just really difficult and you know to be fair to a lot of men they're being
they're being raised in the same culture where you're told that this is that women love it you
know they I mean they haven't necessarily watched like Sex and the City but it's the same it's the
same milieu where you wear like having sex like a man is aspirational and the idea is I write a
lot in the book about pop culture examples of women who are clearly aspirational fictional characters
who have loads of casual sex love it like don't have any emotional connection to the men
that they use for sex and this is this is like this is this is aspirational you know and so and
and young men are seeing this as well and they're also watching porn which gives a completely
unrealistic realistic perspective on what women like and so you know they're clueless basically
they're playing by the rules of the game as well or at least by the cultural influences of the game
that they think are going on another another problem that you have here in the asymmetric warfare of
the sexes is that men who begin to get a little bit of resentment for women let's say that they've
had the heart broken in the past but that they are within the standard where they can keep having
sex right they're not one of the underclass they're actually someone that can keep on doing it
if they become aware of the fact that girls are trying to play this game of detached
emotionless sex if they fully become conscious of that they go oh okay let's see who can win at
this game the most because it's not going to be you it's going to be me and they can you know this
isn't to say again on average this isn't to say that some men don't get attached after the first
time they have sex so they go some of my friends fall pretty hard but they if they can weaponize
that they can do a ton of damage as well and yeah i i don't know there's maybe an argument
that everybody just needs to not be able to have sex until the age of 25 and then when they do
they're like look i'm fully emotionally balanced i've been through a bunch of breakups i didn't
have sex during the during the relationship i kind of know what i like and what i don't like
i don't know i it's just so many describing there is marriage chris
that used to be what it was you weren't allowed to have sex before you got married
which gave which gave like men in particular a massive incentive to get their shit together
because if you can't if you can't get married until you've say like achieved certain adult
things like you've got a job you've got a house you know or like you've got whatever the system is
like a certain amount of money that you can demonstrate your sort of eligibility as a husband
if you have to get all of your ducks in a row before you can have sex i mean you can potentially
buy sex but you can't have it like socially illicit then that that's a huge incentive
to behave yourself and to do pro-social stuff whereas if you have a scenario now where either
either you're like attractive enough that you can get sex casual sex without having to
to do anything really except be like moderately charming or you can get sex
through all you all you have access to porn which like gives you the
of gives some of the same like feedback from your environment as if you were actually having sex
like i mean this would get so this will get so much worse with sex robots
where all of a sudden you can like basically bypass all of the effort that you might historically
have had to put in in order to access sex you can just buy a sex robot and you can spend your whole
life playing video games never going to gym never showering never having a job and you still
get access to this thing that your ancestors like fought teeth and nails to get access to
even without the sex robots men are retreating i think from from the dating market terrifying
terrifying rates there's a quote that rob henderson came up with which is this a similar
sort of dynamic that we're talking about here says norms were loosened around being an absentee
father so more men took the option but nobody wants to admit it because it upsets people
instead we retreat to discussions of poverty and economics because talking about family and
parenting makes people feel weird and judgmental but young men will only do what's expected of them
and a lot did use to be expected there were social norms to work hard provide take care of loved ones
and so on today these norms have largely dissolved young men have responded accordingly yeah he's
very very smart rob henderson he's completely right um yeah i mean i think that i think that the
the line i have in the book about debbie dad's is that when
when motherhood became a biological choice for women fatherhood became a social choice for men
what do you mean by that in the when contraception and legalized abortion became available
i mean that basically killed the shotgun marriage pretty much immediately because it no longer
served the same social purpose that it had before um but the nature of contraception is such that
nothing is 100% foolproof and actually the pill particularly in its earliest incarnations wasn't
that great and still isn't that great because it depends a lot on the user using it properly so if
you're using it properly it's like 99 plus effective but in reality it's more like 91 so you
end up with a lot of unplanned pregnancies and there will always be someone who don't want to
have a termination for whatever reason um but if you're in a social context where like
there isn't necessarily considered to be a link between sex and reproduction
and getting pregnant is considered to be like this unwelcome aberration rather than literally the
whole point then it becomes much more socially acceptable for men to not stick around because
they say well you chose this you know you're on your own which is yeah i mean obviously there have
always been cases of people i've had some critics pointing this out you know they've always been
cases of men abandoning their wives or abandoning women that they think that they made pregnant
outside of marriage you know they've always been scandals they've always been unwanted
pregnancies whatever like that's absolutely true but rates of out of wedlock births now are
completely historically unprecedented which is kind of weird because you would think that
giving women the technology that enables them to control their fertility would reduce single
motherhood but it's done the opposite because humans are humans are complicated creatures
that's what i learned from mary harrington that you introduce the pill single single motherhood
goes up like who the fuck could have predicted that right you know that's four degrees of detachment
away you know it's so interesting but also kind of tragic but it's it seems like women it was it
was a perfect storm right you had the the decoupling socially then you had the decoupling
biologically but you haven't had the decoupling emotionally it's still that
fundamentally there will be some women that are able to have sex like a man
and there will be some able there's a man the men that are able to have sex like a man
but on average it used to be something that you work toward for a long time it used to be the
sort of thing and think about now i was uh sent another article by rob the other day where he
was talking about why is it that parents tend to select when when their daughter or son brings
home a new potential partner they look at things like job title earnings family and he asked why
is that the case why is it that you look at these when you know they're not looking at how hot they
are not looking at a detraction and stuff like that even kindness kind of takes a little bit of a
back seat and it's less falsifiable basically the fact is look these are the things that are
going to be the most likely to become grandchild optimizing algorithms do you have status do you
have money do you have the right family behind you if you've got those i'm probably gonna have
grandchildren all of the other ones are wishy washy and and kind of easy to to fake in a way
um why why is it then that loveless sex isn't empowering
yeah i mean because because your animal brain which none of us are completely in control of
for women in particular even if there are some allies as you mentioned i mean often the outliers
like often women who who don't get attached to sex for instance have like a history of sexual
trauma there's often not a very healthy reason behind it but you know like accepting the fact
that there are outliers your animal brain thinks that this guy is going to knock you up and like
you are going to become a profoundly vulnerable mother baby dyad you know like human infants are
insanely vulnerable they need so much more care than any other as far as i know any other species
young um and mothers are also extremely vulnerable in the later stages of pregnancy and in and during
infancy you have to put so much energy and sacrifice so much in order to raise this child
to adulthood and that before like five minutes ago in our evolutionary history was what happened
or was certainly what you risked happening if you had sex had heterosexual sex and so
like our brains are still primed for that and that's the whole that's the whole purpose behind
emotional attachment to a sexual partner and also the whole purpose behind like choosing
your sexual partner and the fact that women do tend to be a lot choosier than men there's these
quite funny studies that have been done several times where they um they get like quite attractive
strangers to go up to men and women i think on university campuses normally in proposition them
and when the women proposition male strangers they almost always say yes or and if they say no it's
because they have a girlfriend or whatever whereas when the men proposition the women they always say
no because women like their filter is impregnable um and there's a reason for that it's because you
don't want some some like to be knocked up by some bozo it's just one of the reasons why prostitution
is as traumatic as it is i mean there are all there are all of the physical risk and bulging
prostitution like rates of murder are insanely high you know it's it's it's it's if we were to
compare it to another profession it would be by far the most dangerous profession ever like rates of
PTSD and much higher than in the military for instance but one of the reasons why it's so profoundly
distressing is that women have this really really strong instinct to like vet their sexual partners
and to only have sex with men who seem like good prospects and women also have a very heart a very
low sexual disgust threshold which means that they get the ick very readily with a man that they don't
fancy and what what women and prostitution are basically required to do is to override that
and to suppress those instincts if you talk to women who've who've experienced it they often
talk about like working really hard to dissociate from their physical feelings it is that is that
retching on the bathroom floor thing i mean actually retching maran whose prostitution
survivor and has written this amazing book called paid for it's a memoir of her experiences
she talks about that the fact that not vomiting is one of the most important skills a prostitute
can have because your your your physical urge to run away and to cry into vomit is that strong
that you have to like fight it down and i think that if you know in a much less extreme circumstances
obviously but when women are trying to like to to to play the masculine role and imitate male
sexuality and to enjoy sex in the way that they think they're supposed to they are basically
obliged to suppress their instincts which isn't isn't at all psychologically healthy
has normalising sex work like only funds been a benefit for women i mean they clearly are some
women are only fans who make a lot of money from it so there are some winners i mean
they they are very unusual most women on only fans probably make a loss in terms of the amount
of time they have to spend because the perito distribution on only fans is wild and most of
the women who do really well on it are already celebrities and already quite wealthy so this
idea that you can just be like as long as you're sufficiently pretty you log on and you're making
a fortune is not true and i'm sure has been deliberately whipped up that idea by only fans
because they're the only people actually really profiting at the end of the day um i mean i think
the only fans is not like street prostitution or brothel prostitution like it's clearly not the same
i like it's pretty gross and the and you will have men asking you to do things that really turn
your stomach but it's clearly not like physically dangerous i think that the main risk of only fans
is your ability to have a long-term relationship afterwards because you end up putting your images
out in the world and you can't get them back that's an issue of the internet and often only
fans creators get their images stolen and so they'll be shared and they don't even get any money from it
and the risk is in the future that even though men don't always admit it
the sexual double standard is still actually really alive and well if you so sexual double
standard being when men are kind of permitted to be a bit promiscuous and that's okay socially
but women tend to be punished for promiscuity i think that only fans goes beyond promiscuity
you know the double standard didn't account it's not men wanking on camera and then trying to find
a wife and them saying uh my friends shared something in a whatsapp chat earlier on and that
kind of looks a little bit like you what about um normalizing uh like love sex workers like sex
workers uh you should be completely fine with your partner doing only fans or perhaps even escorting
i mean crazy what kind of yeah i mean either i think if i think if a man is really comfortable
with that that's like a red flag to me honestly like again it's an example of men suppressing
their instincts because the the instinct towards jealousy is so strong and again has such an
obvious evolutionary origin to it um because if you're putting loads of resources into raising
children that you've had with this woman you want to know they're yours like that's
make guarding is what the um biologists call it and it's it's so common that i think it's
considered to be a human universal and yeah like there are there are loads of sort of unwelcome
phenomena that come from that you know jealousy is often um the motive behind domestic violence
for instance because i you know you mentioned the naturalistic fallacy like the fact that it's
natural doesn't mean it's necessarily good but it does also mean that trying to completely override
it is probably not gonna work like you have to find a way of accommodating your instincts you
can't just try and suppress them and try and like like rewrite the human blueprint well that's where
that's where i think the um it's not men that are encouraging women to do only fans
i don't see men on the internet saying that you should go and the you girl should ditch your
job and go and do it the only people online saying sex work is real work seems to be women
yes men are the ones that are paying for their images once they're in the game but i think
that's because once women cross that threshold and become a sex worker or whatever they're almost
kind of not subhuman but they're in a different category right and it's like oh well they're
doing it i didn't get them into it so i'm just going to continue to fund them but if you were to
say to most men i think would you advise that pretty girl to get into only fans so that you
can see her nudes most of them would say probably not probably not but almost every healthy man would
say no right they'd say no i'll try and go out with her or maybe she should just go and enjoy her
life or do whatever but once they're in the game that's what's going to happen but you have this
this very bizarre sort of cartel i don't know it's like uh self not self oppression but like
self capitalization from women of women encouraging other women to go and do the game
despite the fact that the chances of you making money on only fans is
minuscule low when it comes to actually making the tens of thousands of dollars a day that the
biggest creators make and yeah i mean even even if you were able to have an unbelievably secure
only fans that was never able to leak your photos online you have two choices for the remainder of
your life when you get into talking to a new partner you can either tell them the truth and
regardless of how comfortable that guy is with his sexuality finding out that his miss is
forget body count even if you've only slept with one other person but that was something that you
did you can't like left brain your way out of thinking that that is oh god well if she did that
in the past does this mean that she's maybe going to she's a risk for promiscuity in the future like
the cook radar is so hyper attuned for men which is why we get more jealous or the other one is to
lie to him cook radar is interesting praise good coinage game because i have you because i have
used the i've i've i've don't write it in the book but i um like talked about on twitter non-trader
i think that women have really strongly i mean i think men do as well but i think women in
particular have a really strong like it's i think it's hardly a sexual disgusting is that feeling
of like this guy is creepy and i think that it i think it's like female intuition right and i
think it's coming it's probably partly coming from wanting to protect yourself is also partly
wanting to protect your children you've got that like this guy's bad news yeah if i'm gonna sleep
with him what's he gonna do to the kids perhaps i saw i got to tell you about this uh meme that i
saw so carl benjamin sargon of a cad a guy who uh has incredibly conservative views about this stuff
but aligns completely with what we're saying here he posted a meme the other day and it had a girl
from only fans in like a bikini or laundry or whatever sort of dancing away on one side and
had michael scott from the office on the other sort of looking strangely and the text said
we call it female empowerment and they will dance naked for the price of a cheeseburger
yeah yeah i mean this question you raise about why women encouraging each other to do it you're
right i mean one exception i would give this idea of a friend who went on a date with a guy who said
you're so hot you should be on only fans and she did not go on a date with him again because it was
just so obviously i know failing strategy i think yeah because the way that she interpreted it and
i think correctly was that he was he was clearly not regarding her as like wife material right
and this is this is i think an error that women do make sometimes where they don't have a good
understanding of male sexuality and they don't it's really interesting i don't know if you read
david busser's book bad men i absolutely love it yeah i brought him on for this fantastic book yeah
and he talks about the fact that women tend to assess like short-term partners and long-term
partners based on the same uh qualities they want the same things in all the men they have
sex with men don't do that they have a much lower standard for their short-term partners and they do
for long-term partners and so they will be willing to have sex with a woman that they absolutely
would not marry they would not even introduce to their friends and i think a lot of women don't
necessarily know that and so they will interpret sexual advances from men as flattering when
actually they can are potentially like cheap you know this is the genesis of the alpha widow
right like this is what many girls that are liberated sexually and using tinder and stuff
like that don't get and i think that this is another i'm i'm actually not so convinced about
quite how big of an effect this is i'd need to see rob go and do some research about it
but certainly women are able to sleep with men that they wouldn't be able to get into a relationship
with but the reverse isn't true and there is an argument that the the aftershock of this means that
those women are going to constantly pine after the nine out of ten guy that's worth half a million
and all that i'm not sure about how long that would last for and the echoes of that and stuff
like that but i certainly think that um what porn has done to men which is to teach them that women
are to be objectified is similar in part to what only fans has done to women which is to teach
some women that men are commercial vehicles to be exploited and that their sex is just a
it's a commodity you can trade it like anything else yeah and it's not i think as well some women
who are already like posting a lot of raunchy photos on instagram don't necessarily feel like
only fans is that biggest step it's just a bit more explicit and you get paid for it so you can
sort of see the reasoning and what some women say and i i get it is that you know yes maybe that it
means that some men in the future wouldn't want to be in a relationship with me because i've got
these photos out in the world but i wouldn't want to be in a relationship with a man like that anyway
if he's going to judge me sort of thing and the problem with that is that if you actually look
at research on men it's like that's basically all men they might not say it because it's not
really socially acceptable to admit to but actually it is basically all men like to the point that
if a man isn't bothered i'd wonder if he had a cuckold fetish you know and then and then that
like obviously brings complications to your relationship what did you learn about porn
when you looked at that for the book i mean the thing with porn that i think a lot of people don't
fully appreciate is that online porn is a completely different beast from like playboy
of the 60s i mean i start the book by writing about playboy writing like you have no and clearly
like there were feminist writing at the time about porn being really grim for women there's
this famous cover of an issue of hustler i can't remember what year it was published in probably
the 70s where a woman is being like um ground up in a meat grinder and her legs are just
sticking out the top it's really like of like deliberately grotesque image and feminist got
so upset about it at the time i think rightly but like they had no idea what would happen
with the internet and i think that the thing that's so sinister about online porn is that
there's this there's this quote i use in the book that the nature of like
technical capitalism is that we are all either above the algorithm or below the algorithm we're
writing these we're either creating these these these pieces of tech or we're being influenced
by them because we're using them or we're you know sexually interacting with people who are
using them and porn is such an amazing example of this because it's just profit driven that's the
point of it it's not it's not interested in the well-being of its consumers i mean whatever
like porn have have various like advertising efforts to try and sanitize what they do but
the whole the whole point of it is making money and they're really good at it and the way that
they do it is by basically creating a super stimulus which adults uses brains and the like
they're incredibly adept at basically arousing the human body the human animal like we can't
really resist our animal instincts as quickly as possible so you log on to one of these platforms
and you look at the front page and like everything is designed to make you as horny as possible as
quickly as possible and the the way the platforms are designed is to like introduce you to the
super stimulus and then introduce it to something even more stimulating and even more stimulating
even more stimulating and so you end up and i mean so a lot of people are able to use porn
casually quite a lot of people don't use it at all like a surprising including men surprising
proportion do you know how much that is so i read a survey that about a quarter of millennial men
haven't used it in the last month which quite a lot but the the there's a minority of users
who are like helpless power users yeah yeah like again it's a burrito is a play as well like there
is a small number of men who watch i can't remember the cut the the figure i quote in the book it's
something like two percent of users use it for like seven hours a week or more it's a lot of porn
do you know um mary harrington's law of fap entropy yes whatever you start out wanking to
will get progressively more disgusting over time and you'll be down in the depths of blueberry
porn before you know it well yeah absolutely yeah i mean like just anecdotally there are some
very strange things that compulsory porn users end up being turned on by and like to the point
where they they can't even let erectile dysfunction being a huge problem they can't actually have
sex with a real person what's the name for that it's not ground pounding what's it called it's
it's called something oh death grip syndrome death ground pounding where the fuck did i pull
that from yeah death more unpleasant i mean death grip syndrome isn't that nice either yeah and i
write in the book about um cultural death grip syndrome which is where we've got an incredibly
pornified public life you've got so much more like sex scenes on tv advertising billboards whatever
i mean like sex scenes on tv have wrapped up so quickly just in my lifetime that used to be edgy
and now it's like you know every drama has to have like super super explicit sex scenes every five
minutes whatever so you've got that on the one hand well i don't think we've ever had this much
explicit sex in public life but then also people aren't actually having sex you have the sex recession
with sex depression where you've got as you were saying you've got loads of men who are virgins
up into their 20s and so on it's this really weird um what's the word
this is this really weird contradiction and it's one that the feminists of the 70s who were so upset
about porn didn't foresee interestingly like they were concerned that porn would inspire sexual
violence and like it's complicated because it probably does a bit like in some circumstances so
for instance choking porn has become so popular and is so mainstream in a way that it wasn't at
all 20 years ago it used to be considered a really niche media sim thing and even actually in the
BSN community was considered a bit risky whereas now like survey data is crazy for millennials and
younger the proportion of young women who report being choked by their partners um sometimes asking
for it and sometimes sometimes non-consensually but it's like just become insanely mainstream
really quickly and the only mechanism that i can see for that is porn that it's it's inspiring a
change in sexual culture so so sometimes yeah it's inspiring more aggressive behavior from its users
but equally actually sometimes it's like basically nuturing users that they become
actually incapable of having sex with real person and even becoming capable of being
aroused by just normal porn because they're so they'd like they go they go down the rabbit hole
Laura Pappentrum continues to yeah what do what do most modern feminists think about porn
now then do they think that it's liberating women and allowing them to earn and sex work
is real work it's complicated because i think that the
like most liberal feminists and sex positive feminists would definitely think that there's
nothing like inherently bad about porn and would absolutely defend the right of women to
produce it and so on but i think that there's increasingly a view that actually it's not
it's not great i did a um debate at the oxford union earlier this year and the the proposition
was something like this house welcomes a new porn it was mostly about the new fans but ended
up being about porn in general and i thought i'd be slaughtered because i thought that the
you know the students were going to be so sex positive and so anti everything i had to say
and actually i won surprisingly i had some quite aggressive questions from the floor
but actually at the end um our side one why do i think that was because i think actually
this generation i mean these 18 year olds right so they've or a bit older they they're the generation
who had porn like on their private computers on their phones from adolescence onwards i mean
i'm 30 so i didn't actually have my own smartphone or whatever until teens and above but these are
the kids who who had it from like adolescence and would would expect to be exposed to porn really
young and it was really formative in their sexuality and i think that it's hard not
to not to recognize the like the downsides of that the thing that i see online i don't know a
single guy that is pro porn guys are either neutral porn or anti porn like and the ones
that are anti porn are vehement about it do they tend to be anti porn from like
the ethical women stuff or because of the effect on them i can
not from the effect on women's stuff no um i think that i i i actually think that the guys
that are behaviorally addicted to porn or have got friends that do or are scared that they're
going to become it i actually think in part that they see the women that are um a part of the porn
machine as part of the oppressor i think that they think that they are creating the content which is
causing me to yeah i have to fap three or four times a day and and feel disgusted with myself or
waste time or you have this sort of super normal stimuli problem of not being able to get it up and
yeah i mean it's another one of those things where everybody's losing you know it except the
owners of mind geek they're fine yeah didn't one of those one of those went on a podcast a few years
ago i remember hearing about how huge that mind geek empire is it's like more than 50% of all
porn streaming on the internet goes through them remembering that porn is still the biggest
traffic source on the internet and they've got it's wild yeah i uh aren't they british
basically known one of the guys british as well i'm sure no i'm canadian the guy who only fans is
british yes yeah he's uh i was trying to get him on i was trying to bring him on because he seems
like a very interesting guy and i was really fascinated by their attempted move away from
explicit content it was obvious that they had i don't think that that came from altruistic means
i think that that came from probably investor problems and shit to do with banks so chelsea
ferguson if you know her she owns admiami.vip which is another version of only fans she was on only
fans she found out that it was a problem she's a friend i've been friends with her for a very long
time she was got a huge private snapchat she's been a stripper for a long time in newcastle
and she was telling me that she had to go to germany germany was the only place that she could
get a bank that would process payments when they found out what she was doing so the back end of
stuff i think that that was the the story about only fans wasn't that they were trying to clean
up the image it's that they were probably having investor problems and and operational shit on
the back end yeah interesting because that was one of the my memory of the timeline is that big
new york times piece about pawn hub and monkey came out and these are in particular possibly some
other companies i can't remember got a cold feet and thinking that they were inadvertently funding
child rape images and so i guess that that i mean i mean only fans has loads of kids on it
realistically and i know that they try they say that they try to make sure that it's only adults
but they can't realistically do that there are loads of stories anecdotally of girls
you know 14 15 year old girls whatever putting their images up there it is inevitable on any of
these platforms you can't really protect against it what do you mean when you say that people are
not products so that's yeah that's the when i mentioned at the beginning that i had that
big twitter storm about my uh about my chapter titles and that was kind of the most all these
like left-wing sex positive people absolutely outraged at me saying that people aren't products
i mean it comes back to the sexual disenchantment point that if you
if you really think that sex is meaningless it's just like making coffee blah blah blah
that people can just like sell sexual access to themselves like they'd sell any other kind of
service or any other kind of product like it's internally consistent and it's the sort of
the the phrase that i use in that chapter is that it's the logic of the punter i mean that's
what punters think that they can just they don't really see prostitute women as being properly human
i think i mean based on the way that they write about them that doesn't that doesn't seem to be
how they view them there's like appalling review platforms online where punters will review
women that they've bought sex from and there's like no human feeling in there like there's like
true psychopathy on display so so like that probably is the only population who actually
believe in sexual disenchantment um the women they're buying sex from certainly don't and
and like thinking away from the more extreme end of it in terms of prostitution as well just
thinking about things like dating apps which are also kind of designed like they're also sort of
continuous with the logic of the punter in that they are designed to be like shopping apps that's
how they feel you don't feel using them that different from using like asos or ebay or whatever
because you swipe swipe swipe and select your product um i mean or not of course if you're like
an incel who doesn't get any matches but for for for high status men and for women that is how it
that's how it's experienced and it's got a really really consumerist kind of
energy the cat the whole like casual sex phenomenon um which ought to be the sort of thing that the
left are really opposed to you know my my my colleagues at the new statesman like this ought
this ought to be you know we're talking about this multi-billion pound global empire of the
porn industry we're talking about a really consumerist attitude towards other people's
bodies and minds like this this this isn't conservative or it shouldn't be like this should be
101 anti-capitalist critique coming from the left but it isn't and i think that that's because
a lot of people on the left have prioritized like owning the comms and are more interested
in tearing down bourgeois sexual norms and basically promoting free love at all costs
than they are in thinking about where this has actually led to a led us to and i think that this
the last 60 70 years post sexual revolution period has been has been in a big experiment
in what happens if you disconnect sex from reproduction and you basically discard all
of the like quite finely tuned norms that used to exist basically to keep young horny people
away from each other i mean the way that this is interpret this history is interpreted by feminist
often is is this all those social norms exist to control female sexuality and they did but they
also exist to control male sexuality and the purpose of it wasn't to oppress women it wasn't
motivated by misogyny it was motivated by the fact that if sex leads to reproduction then that's
everyone's concern like that that matters to the community because if you've got people
young couples producing illegitimate children like that's that matters to the family that matters
to the community it it's it's essential in a world without contraception to control young
people's sexuality and that's what those norms existed for and we threw them out the window
very rapidly and we've basically seen this play out over the last however many decades and i think
that the the results are in and they're not very promising
that's really really good i i learned from mary when she came on the show
about the fact that a lot of the rules and the norms that are set are by the elite and
they're usually not the ones that suffer the impact it's a luxury belief right yeah to hold
that um men don't need to hold the door open for you and that having chivalry and constraints on
male behavior that's not needed by some upper middle class woman whose husband has got a
postgraduate degree because there are maybe levels of education or or norm enforcement
that have occurred just through his upbringing and her upbringing that means that it doesn't matter
what you don't think about is the the underclass or the working class guy and girl who perhaps
haven't had those same sort of levels of norms enforced and maybe they don't know that not
hitting your wife is that big of a deal and then when the culture starts to erode and evaporate
that away you go well but the people that made the rules or that encourage the norms to be dissolved
and not the ones that are suffering they're dissolving yeah rob henson actually i think
uses polyamory as his one of his examples as he and his his original luxury beliefs i say
where if you're a high status person let's say in like the bay area where everyone else polyamory
is really is just like cool and you can if it all falls in a heap it doesn't matter because you've
got your money and your status and all of your stability to fall back on and everyone will just
sort of think that you're a bit behemian whereas if you're a working class underclass woman who's
basically you know living polyamory like having lots of different partners and lots of different
children by them people one will think you're trash but two like your life becomes so challenging
because you've got you've got all these children to look after and you don't have the reliable
support of a partner and like you're at risk of absolutely everything falling apart but but this
is but yeah it is a luxury belief in the sense that saying that that's a good thing and and and
resisting the um resisting the traditional norms that used to that used to exist gives status to
rich people well think about i i i really like the idea that um beating the other side was more
important than raising up the people of your political party and i think that that's very true
there was a study that i saw around about 2012 surveys of democrats and republicans the um
proportions twisted and they they flipped from i vote for my party because i like my party to
i vote for my party because i dislike the other party pretty much more people were doing protest
votes because of a hatred of the other rather than a love of the similar yeah you go well
how easily is that to be weaponized you know and how how many perverse incentives are you
going to create there you mentioned at the beginning about um how my book will be received in america
and um not all but a lot of the a lot of my friends who are also writing on similar things
like mary and nina and so on are british and british feminism is much more it's much more
permissible to say this stuff than it is in the states in general and i think the reason for that
is that we don't really have a christian right in the uk so there isn't really any like fearsome
enemy that we all need to be focused against and things like abortion rights are rock solid pretty
much like not in ireland but in the mainland uk um like that doesn't feel under threat and
i think that's what it is that because i think american feminism is just so focused all the time
on like often shadow boxing against the christian right in the sense that i think they overstate
their influence in their power and there's and they're kind of stuck in the past a little bit
and there's this like underdog mentality that we things like constantly having to reassert like oh
you shouldn't be ashamed of sex you should be you know it's like we've won that fight come on
i think it's like look at any any newspaper magazine tv channel whatever like the idea
that women are not allowed to say they enjoy sex it's like 50 years out of date come on so they're
so focused on a like somewhat imaginary enemy that they can't actually interrogate the coherence
of their own views whereas they think in the uk that isn't that isn't so much the case at all
and actually there's a lot more things like trans politics or whatever which we haven't
gone into in in this discussion but is is much more cross-party is not there isn't this like
really fierce dichotomy politically which i think gives more space for thinking critically
like i i feel like i can write this book and i'm not going to get pegged as a crazy conservative
i might be wrong about that we'll wait and see how should people act then given all of this
everything that we've gone through how should people act so i mean i i i do basically make the
case in the book for for for being a bit more old-fashioned on some stuff like i a lot of a
lot of that section of it is directed more at women than at men so like i think for instance
it's a good idea for women not to have sex on the first date or not even to have sex in the first
three months because that that gives you the opportunity to assess whether or not he considers
you to be good time only or if your wife material stuff like that which like you could basically
read in most agony answer from like the 1950s which is obviously what i get accused of in my
reviews um but also they like there was there was a reason for it it wasn't it wasn't motivated by
misogyny you know there was a there was like a proper principle behind it um i mean similarly for
men i i mean i don't know what i don't know what advice i have to offer fit in the cells to be honest
i think i'm probably not the right person to offer any kind of advice because
typically they don't like advice in any case no from like a fish teaching a fisherman how to fish
type thing yeah it just it goes down badly i had a nama kates on um a couple of months maybe six
months ago and she's done tons of work tons of research like first hand research into it
a lot of people were unhappy about the fact that she wasn't someone that could understand their
plight um so okay so for women don't have sex on the first date not having sex for three months
so there's an interesting uh insight i learned from jeffrey miller evolutionary psychologist so
his book mate that he wrote with tucker max which should have been so much bigger than it was
it's such a shame that it didn't do like mental numbers because it's great he explained about
how um slut shaming is a sort of game theoretic enforcement mechanism to ensure that the price
of sex doesn't descend lower than women want it to which is why most women are the enforcers of
slut shaming not men men actually have an incentive for slut shaming to go away um yeah
but one of the problems that you have here is you can kind of see ease of sex or or or speed
towards um being accepting of having sex with a potential new partner as kind of being a price
right and as you start to extend that out the price that the man has to pay continues to go up
and up and up so you really do need a bit of a god's eye view because if every woman tomorrow said
right no sex until three months that's fine that's the playing field maybe you would have more men
that would sort of duck out of the dating game but over time they would acclimatize right because
we acclimatize to no sex before marriage that was there so yeah i think okay so what else what
else can people do i mean yeah so on that point about um yeah i mean strike breakers
really for everyone else the i think that one of the things i hope comes from the book is that
a lot of young women in particular because they've not yet learned through life experience are
phenomenally ignorant about the reality of male sexuality and the reality of sexual difference
and so don't realize for instance some of what we've spoken about the fact that like um the sexual
double standard is alive and well and um a lot of like men can have a motion of sex in a way that
women can't and all of this and so we'll interpret for instance um
though they will misinterpret a lot of male behavior and end up making decisions that
actually not in their best interest because they they think that you know the guy who wants to sleep
with them must want something more from them afterwards and then and then i like you know
learn the hard way that that's not true and i think that actually if if there was more
knowledge widespread knowledge about the existence of these facts i think actually that
young women's behavior could change quite quickly because at the moment for instance the
like you go on tiktok or whatever and you get young women will do things like show off their
bruises that they've got from having rough sex with men who like obviously hate them
but they're a it's a status symbol because it's a sign of being oh look i'm so attractive i mean
particularly things like choking a lot of women interpret choking as being a sign of like passionate
love like in like a 50 shades of gray way like i want you so much i'll do anything to have you
is the way that this is like interpreted in the romantic imagination that's not generally have
the men who are doing it interpret it at all so there's this like mutual miscomprehension
where each sex is doing something they actually don't like realize how the other side is interpreting
it i think if more women realized that it would it would no longer be high status to be showing
off your bruises on tiktok because actually the like the truth of it is that basically any
moderately good-looking young women can get as many partners as she wants and can get them to do
you know if she if if she asks them to choke her they will it's not a sign of being super attractive
but it's misinterpreted as being as such so i think that if there were more
i think there was a better understanding than some of the incentives would change
which would be a good thing for young women
louise perry ladies and gentlemen i really really enjoyed the book i think that the group of women
that we've got in the uk you mary nina we need to come up with a new net this can be a public
service announcement to the people that are still listening um before we started we came up with the
name of based british women but then realized that the acronym of bbw can be problematic
so if you've got an alternative that the girls can use that would be great um but yeah i i think
that it's really great i'd i really really like all of the work that you guys have put out um
where should people go they want to read more of your stuff online where should they go
so there's a book obviously which is out already in the uk the case against sexual
revolution um and it's out at the end of august in america and i write a weekly column for the
new statesman you got a sub stack as well right no i don't actually i i start it one very briefly
but then i got off for the new statesman job and i can't do two columns in one week so
take the money louise i appreciate you thank you thank you so much what's happening people
thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode then press here for a selection of
the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks and don't forget to subscribe peace
