As we master things they become less conscious to us the more we understand and the more we know the more we can allow that to fall below the level of explicit consciousness.
In Miguel Christ look at the show.
Thank you very much Chris delighted to be here.
What is the vision that you've got for your work because you've spent decades multiple decades researching and writing I'm interested by what the outcome is that's driven you to do this much work.
Well the outcome remains to be seen but what what has.
Driven me if you like and it is almost like feeling that I've been possessed by a demon that's driving me to write against my will at times and to complete exhaustion at times but I think that the serious point and it's an enormous project.
These two very long books but the point is can be said relatively simply all my life and I mean you know certainly all my.
Life since my early teens I felt that much of the picture that we are taught about the world or not so much taught as we're in school but just receive from pandits and media and someone is completely wrong this idea that the world is.
Completely unresponsive a lump of stuff for us to grab when we need it do what we please with and none of this actually has any meaning so you might as well just get on and be greedy.
And this seems to me to miss just about every significant point that I can feel about the business of existence which is extraordinary mysterious I mean first of all why is there anything what are we doing here and it's these questions who are we actually.
I think at the moment just as an aside I think that's a very worrying extremely worrying and very rapid tendency to excel to a something that's been going on all my lifetime which is the idea of man as a machine.
What is the natural world and the universe that surrounds it and what are we doing here any of the relationship between us and whatever else there is so these are pretty fundamental questions you wouldn't expect me to give a short answer.
But that's the what I've hoped to have done.
I'm.
Is it least to have given people a lot to think about and very good confidence in institutions they often have themselves that this way of looking at the world is intellectually impoverished morally bankrupt and spiritually dead and that it's not something that they feel is a tool.
Like the experience they have of being alive so is it on that sort of a scale I'm afraid which is why the second book that I've just published the matter with things is as you know a rather long book 1400 pages yes.
Yes I think that's once once it's over a thousand I think it's technically a tome that's when you're allowed to refer to it as a tome but we're now making more rational rules around stuff that probably shouldn't have them what's the what's the common thread that ties all of the work together because it bridges theology philosophy psychology neuroscience all sorts of stuff what's this is there a common thread between those.
Yes I think there is first of all I can't resist a little crack on the word tome because somebody wrote to me calling my book and it was an innocent mistype and my to me T.O.M.B.
Which do you think that's actually kind of true yeah I felt like I've been dead as I felt I felt it had kind of pretty much killed me anyway what is the common thread.
Well you mentioned a number of threads and I suppose that they all the fact that they all seem to me coherent with one another rather than in competition with one another is one of the threads.
I've all my life moved backwards and forwards between what would nowadays be thought of as rather separate even perhaps incompatible ways of thinking about and being in the world for example.
My father was a doctor his father was a doctor my other grandfather was a scientist and I was brought up with a very.
You know I think a live interest in curiosity about things scientific but then when I got old enough to not just be a little sort of brain on legs but actually have feelings I in my teens I started to realize how very much this all left out.
And I studied much more what I call the humanities and then I got a fellowship in Oxford in which I could research in the area of philosophy of literature and philosophy more generally.
I got interested in the mind body problem and that drew me to actually wanting to study medicine.
A long haul in this country six years before you're qualified and then another eight before you become a specialist in whatever it is at least and so I thought there was that only by actually having experience of what happens when something goes wrong with somebody's brain and it affects their mind.
Well something goes wrong with their mind and it affects their whole body can I really crack these interesting issue about how these various strands philosophy science and latter physics although I know physicists but I have a lot of friends who are willing to guide me and make sure I'm not saying things that don't make sense.
The extraordinary thing is that all of these strands seem to me to be leading to a similar place a place which in fact for thousands of years the wisdom literature around the world has been leading one that is quite different from this image of ourselves or the universe as chaotic pointless purposeless meaningless and that we exploit it but instead something with which we have a natural.
Deep deep spiritual connection and which is beautiful rich complex and constantly unfolding and it's our purpose if you like to be part of that unfolding so that's really what holds it together and bring us together as you say in the books first third of it is mainly neuroscience but trying to show the philosophical implications of that the second section is epistemology how do we know anything.
And the third is metaphysics what is that what is there in this universe so I look at things like time and space and matter and consciousness but also things like values and the sense of the sacred.
And the idea of the coincidence opposites which I think is a huge problem for us nowadays we don't understand that opposites often come together and we push further and further in one direction ignorantly thinking we'll get further away from something we're trying to avoid only to meet it.
Head on as we push too far in any one direction what's an example of that.
Well there are many I suppose one other and controversial one would be that just about every people's republic of whatever and it's a zeal for republicanism and freedom has created a tyranny in which the people are subjected to.
The most.
Deconium control and I think there are variations of this going on now in the politics of the public sphere.
In politics in the more sort of Twitter sphere and I don't think we understand the way in which.
The beautiful and the ugly can come together by too much pursuing one we can find the other with their never completely apart the good and the bad there are things that we think these this just is good.
But there's nothing that just is good things are good only in a context when you take them out of the context or push them to try things become unbalanced they fall out of harmony and as in music you get a terrible discord.
So I think this is an idea we could do with them taking on board in our modern world.
One of the things that I find interesting is you've been working at this for a long time and you suggested that your intuition around this lack of intuition and.
I guess a view of quite a sterile view of the world that this has been something that's been bubbling under the surface for yourself for a long time which means it must have existed before you started working on it and yet.
I know it feels like a lot of the problems that we see that might have been around for a long time are quite easy to drop at the feet of big tech or of the super modern era you know last.
Ten to thirty years something like that but it seems like this is a obviously a problem which has been going on for much longer than that.
Yes it is and in my earlier book the master and his emissary which came out in two thousand and nine so twelve and a half years ago now I'm.
The second half of the book I look through the history of western of the western world.
I'm looking at the way in which the balance between the take on the world of the two hemispheres we haven't really talked about that yet but let me go straight to that that the brain is divided it was the two hemispheres work together but they also attend to the world in a different way and know and understand quite different things.
And once you see that you can begin to see what happens when things get out of balance out of kilter and there seems to be a tendency in civilization to begin.
Interesting me rather well balanced and then to go out of balance further and further in the direction of privileging the left hemisphere which.
Spoiler alert is the less intelligent the less perceptive the less insightful of the two which doesn't make it.
Pointless or bad it just means you don't know its place and not try to be the master as in the the narrative the myth that the title the master and his emissary comes from.
So yes I think it does go back much further but.
Technology is a very interesting special case you can talk about technology going back thousands of years or you can talk about the first smelting of iron being technology and so on that's that's true in a way.
But with many technologies and I think we see that very clearly now there is something marvelous in the technology up to a certain point but by extending it further and further we don't necessarily make it better we actually make things considerably worse.
I mean there are everyday examples of this as machines it becomes the rigor for a producer of a washing machine or whatever it is to put more and more and more controls on it it gets actually harder to use it and cars now are so overburdened with electronic.
Gizmos and gadgets that it's often very hard actually to control your own car the way you would like it it's so complex and so difficult to finesse that in fact I'm a much simpler car would be a much better thing to be driving so I mean that's just obviously on the very simple level but I think technology is no more nor less than the extension of human control.
That's exactly what technology is and obviously to some degree to have some control over what happens around one is a good thing although.
Even there the philosophy that you can sort things out and you ought to be in control of them rather than.
I think a wiser idea that you take what comes to you and take the advantages out of it rather than resisting it and trying to make it into something it isn't.
But in any case to go back to what I was saying technology is the extension of human power to control the environment society people and this is neither in itself good nor bad I would say although it ought to give rise to a little bit of.
Fear in any case but it's how it's used and to what end and to have a sudden proliferation of the capacity to control perhaps destroy nature and humanity.
Without any commensurate increase in wisdom is a huge problem for us I don't notice I was getting wiser in fact I'd be prepared to say that this is probably the least wise civilization of which we have any record how would you define wisdom.
I wouldn't necessarily define it at all I think there are certain things if you don't know them when you see them a definition is not going to help you and indeed that of course is the left hand is for this idea well let's get this cut and dried and clear at the outset so what is the soul what is meant by God what is with the point is that in areas of very real experience that we all respond to there are things for which we don't have terms that can be simply.
But to ignore them just because we don't have those terms is extremely dangerous but let me not dodge your problem if I can in any way begin to answer it I think what I'd say it's the capacity to balance many different ways in which we come to know something about the world and not be simply under the.
Sway of one of them so in the middle of the book I look at science.
Reason intuition and imagination as probably the four ways that most people would come up with for saying how do we get to know something about reality how do we get to know anything that's true and anything else.
And I think my conclusion there is that we've lost the balance we think that one of these or two of the most can answer all our questions and they can't we need to bring to bear.
A number of different strands of knowledge in order to have wisdom and I won't go into the detail but in greek there were four or five important words for knowledge.
And there was also separately wisdom software and they showed an enormous sophistication in their understanding of what these things were.
But nowadays we seem to think that if something is rationalistic in the way that a computer could follow it then we've achieved a full understanding of something.
But that actually very rarely leads to a full understanding indeed there is a condition in which people can only reach conclusions by reasoning about them not by experience and not by intuition.
It's not that rare it's called schizophrenia and schizophrenia is of course the archetypal example of what used to be called madness and we used to say that people when they were mad lost their reason but in fact this has been pointed out.
Schizophrenia is not a condition in which people have lost their reason lost everything but their reason and they can only come to conclusions on a rational basis so a thought comes into their head from their unconscious so they don't remember giving rise to it so somebody must be beaming thoughts into my head they hear a sound in the.
Coming from the other side of the wall and they think somebody is there bugging me and so on this is entirely rational but it is actually completely unlikely and the problem is they have no sense from experience and from intuition of what we should understand.
I will stop this but I just want to make this point before doing so.
Intuition has had a very bad rap lately because I'm clever and entertaining psychologists pointed out that quite often it's mistaken which it is as I pointed out quite often reasoning can lead you to very mistaken conclusions if you lead your life only by reasoning you'll be a very strange person things won't work.
But these these occasions on which intuition doesn't work a much rarer than we think I make the comparison with optical illusions which are fascinating and sometimes you can hardly believe your eyes as we say but I don't know anyone who after seeing a really good optical illusion said that does it from now on I'm going to leave my life with my eyes shut.
No because most of the time you're asking a bloody good job and the same is true of intuition and one point that it's worth just finishing on here is that if we have to argue explicitly and rationally for a conclusion only we can express only one line of thinking.
Where is in intuition we may bring together simultaneously and balance without even having to work through it explicitly many strands of knowledge the wisdom that we have gathered from experience and it's been argued and I very much support this that decision makers who are the head of.
Important corporations where the private or governmental should be encouraged to use their intuition instead of reducing their intelligence by following programmatic algorithms.
I agree this is attention that I've been feeling in myself and talking to friends about very interesting.
When you have a conversation that continues to crop up in different circumstances and it's always got this single thread that ties them all together and the one of the most common ones that I'm seeing at the moment is a attention between cognition and intuition that.
Maybe it's because of the age I'm at as well in early thirties a lot of the solutions that me and my friends found to problems throughout our twenties was to apply cerebral horsepower to it right that I'm going to just use more thinking and I'm going to think myself through this problem and then you realize that maybe that was a good tool that got you across one river but you're now trying to carry that boat across river across lands to then get you something next.
What's next for a lot of us I think is trying to feel and find more grace and play and being able to aggregate all of the experience that we've got and this maybe make sense actually because when you're first starting out at something.
You need to be more deliberate because you don't have that intuition to fall back on and yet now exactly the situation that I'm finding myself in increasingly is I'm trying to switch off that rational thinking brain I'm trying to utilize as much intuition as I can.
Well I mean obviously it's a commonplace that young people are more certain than their elders and I'm certain because they've worked it all out.
I mean in the old days people used to go to university in order to learn from people who were perhaps three times their age had thought and read an enormous amount but nowadays they go in order to tell those other people what they should be thinking and what they should be saying.
Well this seems to me to be would be very funny if it weren't so completely tragic and it's destroying our society so yes as we get older we realize that there's far more to it than anything that can be just worked out like a logical puzzle and only people with fairly severe autistic tendencies and pull into doing that.
So yes our intuition is a terribly terribly important and one of the things that used to be part of education was teaching people not in a I hope.
In such a way as to suppress their interest in making something new but to enable them to make something new which was the history of the culture if you like the tradition.
No I mean unfortunately now think of tradition as clearly must be wrong silly explanations of people that didn't know what was happening.
Didn't know enough and so on and so we can dispense with all that but the trouble is that when you do you become very rudderless and rather foolish and the things you come up with are not interesting or helpful innovations.
The point I would like to make is that tradition knowing the tradition is the only way in which you can.
Evolve for something new traditions are always changing a tradition is like a river a river is as it were always there the river outside my house was there yesterday and I imagine it'll be there tomorrow.
But the water in it is changing all the time and it's moving on so this process is what we have as a society once we throw out all of it we need get it we rubbish it we have all kinds of.
More or indeed less sophisticated thoughts about it then we lose the capacity for something to evolve a society a human society a civilization is more like a plant.
Then a machine it with a plant if you wanted to go somewhere you train it that way you lead it you don't cut it off at the root and stick it on a wall because that's where you wanted to go it just die and fall off.
We can't make these things these plants do what they don't want to do but what we can do is kill them.
A gardener I often say can't make a plant not even make a plant grow and only just allow a plant to flourish or not and at the moment we're not allowing.
That's wonderful flowering of a civilization of culture of society instead we're killing it.
It does relate to a belief that we are able to the reality is infinitely malleable because of our access to technological prowess if we can fly around the world if we can put a man on the moon if we can.
Do whatever then why can't we dot dot dot there's a donald kingsbury quote which I love that says tradition is a set of solutions for which we have forgotten the problems throw away the solution yes and you get the problem back.
Sometimes the problem has mutated or disappeared often it is still there as strong as it ever was.
Exactly yes.
What can I say to add to that I agree what I think.
You're referring to when you say we think we've got the answers to things is rather like the story of the sources apprentice which was familiar to people of my great age because of a disney film called fantasia but it's a it's an old German myth best preserved in the poem by Gerta.
In which the apprentice of a sorcerer overhears the sorcerer casting spells and getting things to come to life and do work for him and so when the master goes out and says would you mind sweeping the room while I'm out he thinks no I know the spell I'm going to get the broom and the bucket to clean the room.
But unfortunately having started it has no idea how to stop it well that's a myth and in the end nearly drowns except the sorcerer comes back in the nick of time and.
It says the thing that the source of the sources apprentice doesn't know and stops the process so we're a foolish as the apprentice and just because you know how to make things happen doesn't mean you have understanding of them.
The two completely different things and what I worry about is that the moment we increasingly have the power to interfere in what a human being is there are you know I don't want to join with the most extremely paranoid narratives but I think there was a very true and real and balanced.
Risk that we run of.
Robbing human beings of humanity turning them into what would only really be rather second rate machines when we compare ourselves machines we just find the machines do everything faster but that's because they didn't do any of the things that we do.
And so my very big worry and pretty much equal to the worry the overwhelming worry about whether there will be a world in which we can live in the future given how much we're doing to destroy it.
My very real concern is that even if the world survived we would have actually succeeded in destroying humanity which is quite incredible because the moment humanity is the most sophisticated outcome of.
Evolution that we know but it's a very heavy price to pay you know in order to save the world you have to destroy the things that you cared about within it.
But that's what we're doing whether we like it or not destroying the beauty and life of nature destroying ourselves and society.
There's a quote from Confucius that Edward slinger and put in trying not to try which I wanted to bring up earlier on about.
The individuals requirement to balance this cognition and intuition this deliberateness in the beginning in the naturalness afterward.
In the early stages of training an aspiring Confucian gentleman needs to memorize entire shelves of archaic texts learn the precise angle at which to bow and learn the lengths of the steps with which he is and to enter a room.
His sitting mat must always be perfectly straight all of this rigor and restraint however is ultimately aimed at producing a cultivated but nonetheless genuine form of spontaneity.
Indeed the process of training is not considered complete until the individual has passed completely beyond the need for thought or effort and that's the deliberate to intuitive.
Tension that I think that we're playing with and then as you say it rolls out onto a civilization level as well.
Yes and what you've referred to is something we all have direct experience of and I have it as a doctor but if you're a chess player or a pilot you would have a similar.
Understanding which is that when you start out on this process you have to learn and memorize and think consciously about many many things.
But by the time you're a skillful physician or surgeon a skillful chess player or a skillful pilot.
You don't think like that because that would make you a very second rate performer of whatever that skill is only being able to let go of that degree of control allows you to be the true expert.
And you know when somebody does one of these great feats like the pilot who landed a plane on the Hudson River afterwards was asked how to do it.
I don't know I just I just did it which is as much as to say that as we master things they become less conscious to us the more we understand and the more we know the more we can allow that to fall below the level of explicit consciousness.
And that explicit consciousness is not the hallmark of excellence or intelligence or understanding.
It's a regrettable thing that we have to do sometimes when there's a problem that we need to be able to do away with but as long as things don't.
Bring up a problem of a new kind then we should not be thinking in that explicit way because we will react and respond poorly.
Didn't you look at horse racing and I love man super bike racing as well for this.
Yes I did and it came to me rather than from my will rather nicely.
Somebody who is a physician who looked after the health of the TT races race on this amazing natural course in the Isle of Man.
Approach me with some observations about what he knew of the bikers who are traveling on ordinary roads with all the things like road repairs pop holes.
Walls sudden right angle bends and often achieve speeds of two hundred miles an hour and doing so it's been I think with justice called the most dangerous sporting activity in the world.
But they have to rely very very heavily on things that they mustn't be clunkily consciously aware of they have to be able to master a lot of things unconsciously.
And the same thing happened to me with a man who had started his life as a worker with horses a trainer of horses he did a PhD in animal physiology.
He as a young man had a hundred criteria whereby he would be able to select a really excellent race horse.
And then he found in his last years that he was working as a tipster on these tracks and he was completely dumbfounded by couldn't explain how it was that after looking at a horse for perhaps half a minute.
Walking around in the in the circle before the race he was able to put winning bets on these things and begin with he doubted himself that would bring up the bet bookmakers and say.
Why did I say that no no no make it something and in the end they got so frustrated because his first guess was right and his second guess was wrong.
They just said him just Texas your first thought and don't talk about it or think about it after that and as long as he does that he makes a salary in six figures but if you start thinking about it he's no better than chance.
Isn't that beautiful.
It's it's genuine it's kind of like real world magic you know this fact that you can aggregate all of this.
Information and yet if someone forced you to try and concretize it into words you wouldn't have the first idea about why it was the case and another thing.
You've identified there is this this tension within our own brains which is the subject of your first book so if someone hasn't been introduced to the.
Left and right brain split that we have and how that characterizes its thought patterns and behavior how would you explain that to someone.
Well I say that they've evolved.
For two purposes.
One the right hemisphere in order to enable us to understand as much of the complex experience that we have as possible and the other to enable us to use the world quickly to be able to grab stuff.
And manipulate the world so I sometimes say the left hemisphere enables us to apprehend the world in sense of grasping hold of it in fact it literally controls the right hand which we grasp.
And the aspects of language not all of language with the bits where we say I've got it I've got it I've been down.
And the right hemisphere not to apprehend but to comprehend the world.
And one way of thinking of this is that the left hemisphere schematizes.
It's the hemisphere of theory it has a theory about how things work.
And the right hand is not the hemisphere of theory so much as of experience it understands what it's seeing.
And if you are trying to navigate this world is very often useful to have a map and the left hemisphere holds the map.
The trouble is that the left hemisphere encourages us to think that the map is the same thing as the world that is mapped but the world that is mapped is hundreds of thousands of times infinitely more complex than the map.
That doesn't make the map useless in fact what makes the map useful is it has very little information on it if it had too much information we couldn't use it.
But we have fallen into the habit of thinking that this very impoverished schematized theoretical dogmatic view of how the world works what people are and all the rest that that that is the reality whereas in fact it's what is obscuring the reality.
So what we need to do is to get back to a situation where the right hemisphere is as it were the one that is in control or mastery of the situation.
Unfortunately the left hemisphere when it thinks it knows everything things start to go wrong.
And this was summed up in a saying it's a tribute to Einstein and certainly very much in his spirit that the rational mind is a faithful servant and the intuitive mind a precious gift.
We live in the society which honors the servant but has forgotten the gift and really the only purpose in the rational mind is to help us get to where that intuitive mind can make itself felt.
And interestingly in science although there's a lot of very plodding pedestrian serial thought that needs to go on.
All the great breakthroughs are not made by that process at all they're not made by the scientific method as it's called they are made actually as.
The stories of pretty much all great scientists including in perhaps most strikingly in the case of Einstein come as intuitive insights that they often can't explain.
And then months later they do all the pedestrian work that shows them why they were in fact right there are many examples in my book.
So yes we need to balance these things but two things to say the first is that the left hemisphere sees this relationship as competitive as either or either the left hemisphere or the right hemisphere.
Whereas the right hemisphere sees both and it knows that it needs the information the left hand the left hemisphere gives.
But it's just that it all that information means nothing unless it's taken up into a big picture and there it has its true value if you stop at where the left hemisphere is you're left with a bunch of meaningless fragments of senseless data.
Which leads people who have stopped at that point to say oh the world's just made up a little bit that they mean anything that's because their right hemisphere with which they could put together the context and see everything in context.
Would be able to understand it so that's one point that they see things differently and the other is that the less you see the more you think you know.
This is actually a phenomenon in in human psychology known as the Dunning Kruger effect people who really don't know very much think they know everything as people begin to know more and more they see that they know less and less.
Functionally left hemisphere thinks it knows it all yes functionally how is this.
Manifesting in the brain so you're talking about the fact that the left hemisphere sees almost an antagonistic sort of adversarial relationship with itself and the right and yet the right is able to work more cooperatively.
Functionally what does this mean for what's happening inside of our brains.
I don't know quite at what level you're saying functionally but I mean.
Is there some sort of one way one way street from left to right.
Well the right hemisphere communicates more and more quickly with the left hemisphere than the left hemisphere does with the right although for what the right hemisphere.
Knows to be valuable it needs to get that information back to the right hemisphere.
That's a very simple example but when you look at as I do at length in this new book.
At the examples of patients and what they teach us what we see is that the left house who really understands next to nothing but thinks it knows everything.
So you get this extraordinary situation that somebody will deny something as absolutely barn door is that the left half of their body is paralyzed it will completely deny it.
And say no everything's fine and it all works and so on.
So they're very good at denying and they just don't understand what it is the right hemisphere is talking about.
So when people lose their right hemisphere through perhaps a stroke or an injury or much of the function of it at any rate.
They become incapable of understanding what's going on they don't know what people say what they mean what does what does the meaning of the way this person is talking or behaving.
They can as it were they've got a dictionary and they can look the words up and they've got rules of grammar but the thing doesn't really mean what it means.
Because things only mean what they mean in a context and sometimes the context can completely change the meaning which is why sound bites from what somebody has said take it out of context and whiz around the world.
Should be treated with the contempt that they deserve not suddenly become oh I see so we can now wage war on this particular person you don't know in what context that was said or what other things that person believes or means.
What I have a slightly fist.
I just have a slightly amusing example of the context changing things which I can't resist and which is cereal packets in the supermarket there are four sizes of cereal packets is one called jumbo which means very large and then comes one called economy which means large.
Then there comes one called family and that means medium and finally there's large which means.
But anyway sorry about that.
That sounds like something that Rory Sutherland would have told me.
So if you were to characterize somebody who only had access to the left brain and somebody who only had access to the right brain whether that be through a stroke or through an unfortunate piece of steel that's gone through the top of their head.
How would their behavior differ.
Well the person with the left hemisphere stroke would have obvious impediments.
We mainly unusually to do with speech and the use of the right hand and given that depends what you mean by being right handed because it's a matter of degree rather than absoluteness but eighty nine percent of us are probably right handed.
So for most people a left hemisphere has two obvious disadvantages communicating and grasping.
And however when there is a problem with the right hemisphere the whole of that person's world alters they as I say they cease to have proper empathy one of the hardest things for people caring.
For people after the right hemisphere injuries or strokes is that they no longer seem to have empathy they don't sympathize they don't understand what other people mean they lose what in psychology school theory of mind which means.
I see what's going on in that person's mind and no longer understand it.
And they are really not able to function at more than a very simple mechanistic level.
But because they still have preserved speech and they still can use their right hand doctors have not paid that much attention to them historically they discharged them from hospital and say well you know thank goodness it wasn't a left hemisphere.
But it's still functional they're just a functional asshole.
If you like.
And you know great epiphany or sort of aha moment for me was to come across the work of my colleague John cutting who had painstakingly sat at the bedside of patients who had things wrong with their right hemisphere.
And realize how just how crazy their world was the amazingly bizarre things that they believe and the things that they denied and the things they made up.
And when she realized that you see why it is true that the rehabilitation of somebody after a left hemisphere stroke but in which they may have lost their speech and use the right hand is much easier than rehabilitating somebody after a right hemisphere stroke.
Have you got any idea why the brain would have developed in this way I don't understand why it would be adaptive to distribute differing characteristics based on some arbitrary contralateral line.
It's a very important and interesting question.
In order to help us see what we're dealing with this is not something that arose in humans.
It's true in all animals we've looked at and I don't just mean mammals and I don't just mean animals in the normal sense also in insects and in worms and in the most ancient.
Still surviving creature a sea anemone called nemesis celovectensis which is seven hundred million years old it already and it's taken to be the first example of a neural net.
In any living creature it's neural net is already asymmetrical seven hundred million years ago and every creature has this asymmetry.
Now you might well say but why because the world isn't asymmetrical in that way it's it's it's some it sounds like a big error but to me.
I think a lot of people would agree with me but my belief is that this arises because of the need to solve a very basic conundrum that all living things have how to get stuff including food and stuff that you can use like getting a trick to build a nest and all that.
But at the same time watch out for everything else that's going on so if you are just narrowly targeted on picking up a great piece of grain on the background of great.
If you're a bird you know you would soon end up being someone else's lunch while you got yours because you wouldn't be seeing the predator they wouldn't be seeing.
Your family your conspecifics with whom you should be sharing the food and so on so we need all creatures need to do two things at once keep a broad look out and focus on a target.
So they need to focus on something that they get but be looking out for the predators and the whole of the rest of what's going on and that effectively runs all the way through two kinds of attention.
One very narrow very narrow three degrees probably out of three hundred and sixty degrees so tiny like little window on the world that's very sharply focused and the other seeing the broad picture sustained over many.
Seconds or minutes so from one kind of attention the world seems to be made up of tiny unconnected fragments that are like little stabs in the world that somehow got to be connected to make sense.
Whereas to the other hemisphere the right hemisphere.
The world is made up of things that are continuous that I'm that flow and always changed and not made up of static snapshots but actually part of the say something like a flow or a river.
That a multi be multi connected in fact ultimately connected to everything else.
The you know where the stuff that is not explicit is important where is the left hemisphere only understand the explicit meaning can't understand a joke can't understand a metaphor.
Everything very literally so if you if you look at that you can see that they give rise to in humans are two quite different worlds and meaningless.
Heap of stuff for us to exploit and on the other hand a vast richly complex a moving flowing tapestry of existence that has rich deep meaning to which we are connected to these quite quite different.
Versions of the world and what I do in in the matter with things is to discuss how we can use this information to help us decide what the realities to some extent we can't know ultimate truth of course I didn't suggest we can but we must make.
These gradual decisions that certain things are true and others otherwise we do not know what to think or do we couldn't get out of bed so I'm really trying to help us decide what the world is like and how we should get to know it.
Given the fact that you've just displayed two different worlds that the one that's predominantly left brain and one that's right brain one that's right brain sounds.
Significantly nicer to me that sounds lovely why is it then that we appear to have a bias of drifting toward the left both individually and specifically civilizationally as well.
Brilliant question and.
Individually I'm not sure that we do.
Unless we belong to the society which is doing it so really the question is more about why do societies do this and then the individuals reflect the norms or the preferences that they think the society say they should write yep yep yep.
Exactly but I don't think that it's.
A good generalization that they were lifetime people become more reliant on the left and so I say they give more and more reliance to the right hand actually.
Although I believe the very end of life that that process might maybe reverse it rather depends on the process that's causing dementia if we're talking about dementia anyway I don't get into all that.
But the question why do civilizations go this way is is a very interesting one and in the preface to the new edition of the master and his industry I point to about six ways it's only a very short essay about 15 pages long but I point to about six reasons that societies do this.
One of the most obvious is that using the left hemisphere simply enables you to become.
Good at grabbing things and as societies grow people see more and more power disposable to them and people who are interested in self-aggrandizement and the annexation of power.
Psychopaths narcissists tend to drift to the top of civilizations and we can certainly see this being enacted for us in Europe at the moment so does that.
It makes us feel that we're good at grabbing and civilizations usually over extend themselves before they collapse they create an empire.
And in this case I think the most dangerous thing is the commercial empire of the west although we may begin to lose that soon.
But this business of having an empire thinking you can control large areas of the world feed straight into using the left hemisphere and also once you get outside of decisions that are being made within the context.
Where they're relevant made by huge governmental bodies perhaps for a whole empire literally across the world.
More and more it's impossible to make the sort of decisions the wise decisions the balance decisions the right hemisphere would make because that would mean taking into account individual context.
So instead something is as is he rolled out which is a one size fits all simple algorithmic thing where you can follow the rules tick the boxes and bingo we've killed the civilization and.
Another thing is it's very very easy it to express the view of the left hemisphere is money for old road which is why it's so easy for clever dicks to come along and go.
To believe that there's anything real except just stuff and machines and and thinking the idea that there's a perhaps a spirit or a soul that that's just ridiculous.
It's so easy to argue that because I think where the left hemisphere's picture which is the one that languages put across doesn't talk about.
The weapon of language lends itself more towards that type of discussion yes.
Except the language of poetry the language of miss the language of narrative the language of ritual these things actually express the powerful things that we crave that we feel absent from the kind of electronic manual.
Out of which we're increasingly encouraged to speak nowadays the first one was it's easier it's more competitive.
The left brain seems to be better at competing the second one was that it seems to be better at coordinating and the third one was it seems to be better at communicating.
I suppose so yes I mean you could you could put that I mean it's not really better at communicating because communication is very subtle business when I speak to you.
You're taking in all the things my right hemisphere does which is to make my voice not sound like a computer generated.
So you're getting a tone of voice my facial expression my body language you're also getting jokes you're getting metaphors you're understanding what's going on so actually communication is much more the right hemisphere thing.
It's more effective at communicating at low resolutions or definitely communicating at scale simplifying the world into a lower resolution version of what it is putting it out there easier to understand yeah I can see I mean those.
That's a satisfactory explanation I like easy ways to remember things so competition coordination and communication keeping those there is gonna help help me to do that.
Rolling the clock forwards are you optimistic about the future how do you feel.
How do you feel.
I call myself.
A hopeful pessimist.
Actually quite often truth can only be expressed in a paradox but what I mean by that is that I think to be hopeful is a duty and a virtue and a strength and we never know quite what's going to happen it's only the left hemisphere that thinks that kind of thing.
So I can't rule out that we may have as we have occasionally in the past a sudden.
Change of direction which is happens extensively and fast fast enough to save us and to save the destruction of life on this planet but I'm not very hopeful because.
Technological changes are going on so fast exponentially faster and putting power in the hands of the least savory people the least intelligent.
The most manipulative and the people we don't want to be making decisions about our own future even if you wanted anyone to be making those decisions so the situation doesn't look good.
There are a number of reasons for thinking it might get better and one is that the message that I have is something that seems to resonate with people at all stages of their life so if I travel and lecture which I've done rather less recently because of covid.
I usually find that afterwards as many young people are sort of passionately asking me what we do how can we help themselves in this situation.
And of course I don't have a single ready answer but the fact that they see that there's a problem here and need to resist what's happening is incredibly important.
Often just resisting a process or changing a process that you know has been bad is the most important thing for example the patient comes to me.
And clearly they are having problems and often you can see right away why they're having problems you can't tell them.
It's because you're doing this because if they knew that they probably wouldn't bother coming to you they're not ready to hear that.
So in fact what you have to do is lead them to a place where they see that something they're doing now is definitely wrong and get them to stop doing that.
So if you could actually just stop people pushing further and further down this cyborg path and rehumanize humanity this would be wonderful but to do that would require a degree of humility.
A degree of awe or wonder before the world and a degree of compassion for people who don't agree with us rather than a kind of high handed narcissistic contempt.
So there's a little way to go.
I've been saying for a long time two emotions that I think are missing from my life and from lots of people's lives are all in dread.
You know kind of the sensation you get when you look up at the night sky it's this sort of insignificance it's beauty but it's also it's also sort of vast and forgiving as well so there is all in dread that both come up at the same time.
And yet this the sacred searching for meaning finding out what it actually means to live a life here do we have moral obligations during our existence all of these big questions are things that.
I don't know progress.
It's regression not progression I think towards making people feel fulfilled with those now sadly we weren't able to run census data on people in.
2000 BC or whatever around the battle of Hastings but.
It certainly feels like the progress that we've seen technologically in terms of the rational world view that we're trying to be given here is to explain everything away to make it into a more sterile easy to explain lower resolution environment.
But that doesn't take into account the fact that humans don't just need a formula that can explain some of the things that are going on in front of them they need to frame that in a broader narrative it needs to be part of.
What does this mean for the fact that this stuff exists what does it mean that the universe is this wide and this vast and I am here and I am able to observe the universe and I am able to know that I am an observer so on and so forth.
So yeah I mean there's pockets there's small pockets here in Austin there's a big sort of new age slash psychedelic community of people that are trying to have discussions around these topics that I think are very interesting.
But it very much does seem like splinter factions as opposed to a global movement yet.
Yes I think that there's my impression is that people are less and less satisfied with the inability to contact.
The very real aspect of experience that we call the sacred the awe inspiring.
And it's often been pointed out that in fact curiosity is he not necessarily the same as wonder in some senses it could be the opposite of wonder it's how do I work out how this this is how the clockwork works here.
The opposite of the sense of wonder you know we don't say I'm curious what the meaning of life should be I'm curious if there is a God we wonder and and are inspired by these these questions.
So I mean as can famously said the two great things that inspire all in as one is the starry heavens without us and the other is the moral law within and you mentioned the moral law and one of the things I.
Think is terribly important and towards the end of this latest latest book the matter with things emphasize is that one way of thinking about what we're getting wrong is that we've completely inverted the pyramid of values we worship things like greed pleasure and manipulation which used to be thought of as really at the bottom of the heap.
With things like beauty goodness truths and the sense of the divine at the top instead we explain beauty goodness and truth of their really just ways of priests having power and you know all this kind of stuff were sexual selection well.
Read read my book on those questions and I'm sure you have so yeah these are the parts of the problem and I think that there is a hungry and for something meatier more philosophically rich and deep.
Then it's very thin rule that we're fed at the moment which really almost an autistic child could come up with you know it's just a mechanism it's a piece of clock don't get fast fast.
But there we are.
Do you think that there's a moral obligation that people have while they're existing or do you think that there's a.
A north star or a vector sort of direction that people should be moving themselves toward.
I definitely think that life is a moral business and we make moral decisions all the time.
In fact how we pay attention to things which is at the core of my understanding of the difference between the hemispheres as they attend to the world differently is a moral act how you attend is a moral act.
Because it changes what it is you find in the world either you miss completely its richness its vulnerability its beauty its capacity and potential.
Or you are aware of those and equally it changes you so certain kinds of attention paid to the world impoverished the world and impoverished us they make us simple.
Blinkered people so how we attend is a is a moral act in itself and what we do is morally important I believe it is in a way.
The variety of individuals is that each of us can has a capacity to express another facet to unfold another facet of the infinitely complex whole that is this cosmos.
And in something I've only got to come to grips with fairly recently in my.
Intellectual history is the cabala the the today mystical literature in which one of the core images is left with vessels that have shattered which contains sparks of light from the divine and that it is a human.
Role during this life to piece together what has been shattered in order to make these vessels more beautiful than they were before they were broken I think that's very beautiful and it brings to mind for me this Japanese art called kintsugi where if.
A vase has been broken it can be mended using lines of gold which make it more complex and more beautiful than it was before it was broken so.
I can't obviously get into any more of that but just that hint suggests to me that actually yes our role here is profoundly moral and we don't realize that that is a lesson or failure in itself.
In McGillchrist ladies and gentlemen if people want to keep up to date with the stuff that you do where should they go.
Well and to channel McGillchrist.com and it's having a complete overhaul should be in its new form by the middle of end of April and yes thank you very much.
I appreciate you in I really really like the stuff that you do thank you.
Thanks very much Chris.
What's happening people thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode then press here for a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks and don't forget to subscribe.
Peace.
