What's wrong with being a nice guy? What's wrong with being a nice guy? That's that's a good question
You know when I put out a book called no more. Mr. Nice guy
I'm sure a lot of people picked it up that wait a minute
There's already enough not nice guys out there why somebody write a book teaching men how to be not nice
but
The problem with being a nice guy just a quick elevator pitch is that a nice guy is a guy who?
Inaccurately internalized the belief system every young age. I'm not okay just as I am
So he's trying to do two things very unconsciously usually one has become what he thinks
Everybody else wants him to be so he'll be liked and loved and get his needs met and get laid hopefully
regularly and hide anything about himself that might get a negative reaction from people
Hiding his needs his wants and sexuality so while he's trying to get laid. He's hiding his sexuality
so a core problem with nice guy syndrome is nice guys tend to be un
Unauthentic
There there there's not a real them there. They're trying to become something hide something and
That tends to make them fairly dishonest untrustworthy
Frustrated resentful passive aggressive
A whole list of traits that can go along and and mainly it prevents and I'm a recovering nice guy
So I'm not speaking down to anybody, you know
It keeps us from just being ourselves living up for our full potential
Having what we want in life having a good time and so just a lot of baggage comes along with it
What are the component parts of being a nice guy? What are the traits that they embody or project?
Worry what you'll recognize most often and what listeners may recognize in themselves
Core tendencies often people pleasing
Seeking external validation and and for men usually that seeking validation from women even even gay guys
I find tend to do it even if they don't plan on having sex with the women they
We can talk more about this, but we're
We've learned from birth to please women. So there's that people pleasing that external validation
I'm
Failing to live up to one's full potential a basic court is honesty, you know thinking, you know, I'm a good guy
I'm pretty honest. I always laugh when men tell me they're pretty honest. I say that's actually a contradiction of terms
You're honest or you're not
And
And just you know for most nice guys, there's just a certain dull
Depression that they live with just thinking, you know, I should be happy. I should be getting what I want
I should be getting love. I should I should but I'm not and I don't know why not and
So there's there's a lot of characteristics, but the core piece you'll see the most often is that people pleasing seeking of external validation
Who is the
Prototypical nice guy avatar like just describe him for me
He's you know
He's just just that guy that's you know walking through life trying to make everybody happy
Try not to do anything wrong. Don't want to fuck anything up doesn't want to piss anybody off
Goes along to get along, you know, we've heard that, you know, happy wife happy life
If I just make everybody happy
Everything's good. I have a course that I've taught for a number of years called nice guys don't finish last
They rot in middle management. So he's good
But you know, he doesn't excel he doesn't stand out because standing out is actually really scary for nice guys
It's too much attention. It's too much expectation
So, you know, when I started working with nice guys 30 years ago
Most of the men I worked with, you know, probably were around my age. I was in my early 30s at that time and
So there's a lot of baby
Baby boom generation guys, you know, they they were trying to be different than their fathers the World War two, you know, man
They were in that protest generation against Vietnam growing their hair out getting in touch with their feminine side
And so a lot of the men I worked with, you know, kind of grew up in that era
But I've been doing this for a while. And so, you know, my son's 38 for example
So, you know, I worked with Millennials Millennials men younger than that and what's funny is
Whereas my generation a lot of the men
Kind of attribute part of their nice guy stuff to well, my dad wasn't there or you know, my parents divorced
Oh, you know, he worked all the time or he's an alcoholic
Nowadays I hear a lot of men say, oh, my dad was a nice guy and and about all he taught me about life was don't piss off your mother
And and because he was walking around eggshells trying not to piss off my mother
So, you know, I've seen that whole range all the way from the guys that were reacting to, you know, the
asshole
Patriarchal father to now the guys that were raised by nice guys and they don't know any other way of being
It's like one generation had the tyrant and the other generation had the compliant
That's a good way to put it. That's nice. Yeah, the tyrant the compliant
Yeah, it was but here's the interesting thing, right?
And it's so fascinating that you had one generation that was
Rebelling in their niceness
Even if that niceness isn't that nice. Yeah, and then another generation
That was following in their niceness. So there seems to be a particular
stickiness to niceness if
Tyrants that are emotionally unavailable and not nice are able to create nice guys and
nice
Fathers are also big trouble
What's why is it so prevalent? What is what is this pull? Are we as men are we inculcating or absorbing something from the world?
Is this the way that we were raised by mom and dad is the
What's the gen what's the origin? What's the genesis the seed of this?
That's a good question, of course and this course what every nice guy wants. Well, how do I get to be this way?
You know who cursed me with this. Yeah
I I quickly learned when I started working with nice guys again 30 years ago that there is no one
You know one size fit all how you how you got to be a nice guy. I thought there was it first. I thought they're all like me, you know
Disconnected from their father in some significant way, you know significantly raised by their mother trying to please their mom and
And I thought well that that explains it all but it didn't and
There's so many pieces that go into a lot of men I work with that identifies being nice guys
I think part of it's their temperament part of it's just they're easy going, you know
My my mother would often say in adulthood to women. I was dating. Oh Bobby never did like conflict and I'm thinking
Thanks mom, you know what are you telling these women be nice to my son?
Don't be mean to him, but I'm also thinking who does like conflict, you know
I do tend to marry women who like to fight but I for me
It's kind of like, you know, I can't can't can't you know instead of us you doing something that starts a fight
I say to them can't I just yell at you a little bit you cry and then I hold you in that really what you know
This is all about anyway, and my wife always say no, it doesn't countless. You're really mad at me
So I don't like conflict in particular. So that's my temperament
Disposition that many of the nice guys will have the raw materials of someone that's a little bit
Yeah, part of my nature
But but that's just kind of one category of nice guy the other one that that I bumped into I call often those
I'm so good nice guy. He's the guy that just always did everything right no matter what, you know
But the other side I talk about you know one mr. Nice guy is what I called. I'm so bad nice guy
This is the one that you know, maybe start rebelling at an early age
Maybe at 80 HD undiagnosed, you know, he's always impulsive getting in trouble
You know not following through getting yelled at getting punished starts doing drugs and alcohol at 14
You know drops out of school and then maybe at some point as a come to jesus moment
Religion military gets married as a kid
Death in the family. He goes I got I got to quit, you know self-destructing. I got a I got to be nicer
So there's that kind of nice guy as well. So it's a different temperament than the than the other
One of the pieces, you know, there's so many pieces that go into this but to answer your question, how do we
What's the stickiness part?
Again, I think a real core piece that I see with so many nice guys is this attempt to please women and
I I was talking to somebody the other day it makes perfect sense because if you think about it
We're all born to a woman our earliest caregiver. It is not mom. It's probably some other woman
So from the time we're born our very survival our sustenance our okayness
Depends on a woman and probably us getting along with that woman. That's probably a good thing, right?
And so that's really normal that the our first experiences are how to how to negotiate a relationship with a woman to make that
Big powerful holds our our life in her hands
Person how to make sure that's okay
And I don't know about in the uk but when I was growing up in Seattle. I had one male teacher
Before I got to junior high there's four times more female fighter pilots in the us air force by percentage
Then there are male kindergarten teachers
There you go. You've done your research so so I had one teacher
So that means just to learn how to get from second to third grade not only had to learn my reading writing and arithmetic
How to please a woman. Okay, all of that's fine. There's there's nothing inherently wrong with that
I think that's actually probably the way it's always been
But historically I mean if we go back even two or three generations
But if you go through most of human history
Out of about age 12
The men came into the boys life took him
You know from the women took him out had a masculine initiation taught him how to get comfortable being uncomfortable
How to face his fear how to live in the scary world of the masculine
And therefore and spent most of his time from them on out with men in the masculine
And and so he got he moved through that what do I have to do to please a woman?
So I think that's a really normal thing that to try to please women
The survival for for every young boy
But what was missing is there's no initiation to teach them
How to how to go face their fears in the scary world with the masculine and quit seeking the approval and validation of women
Because there's this really interesting paradox that I took me years to find out and you know a lot of men I work with takes
You know, it's a big surprise
is all
Pursuing women and trying to please them doesn't make them interested in you. It doesn't make them like you
It doesn't make them want to have sex with you. No, it actually doesn't
Actually not trying to please women tends to make a guy more interesting to women in general
That's a big paradox for a lot of the men I work with and it was for me
You mean I mean all this
Me listening and talk about their problems me trying to be different than the jerks they complain about me repressing my sexuality
So it's not like I just want that one thing from them
Oh, you know all that doesn't make them interested in me. No, it doesn't actually
But they do seem to be drawn and attracted to the guy who's comfortable in his own skin
Living a life, you know on his terms connected with men
Putting a big dent in the universe that is really attractive
But there's no note. How do I get this woman's approval involved in that whole mix?
What are the covert contracts? Oh, I'm glad yes that
That's um, that's my favorite part. I'm no more mr. Nice guy and I know
Many men read it say robert. That is the biggest takeaway
The covert contracts are unspoken often unconscious agreements that the nice guy has
With everything that's not him with the world with god with women, you know, which is how things work
and
In the book I I I'm a little bit general, but I've broken it down to three specific covert contracts that nice guys have
They're all if then uh, if I do this then this will happen. They they all are basically manipulative
They all have strings attached and often the nice guy isn't aware of them and nobody else is either
So covert contract number one
If I'm a good guy, I will be liked and loved and get my and and
Going back to and the women I'm trying to impress will want to be with me and have sex with me
So if I'm good, I'll be liked and loved
Number two if I meet everybody else's needs without them having to ask
Then they will meet my needs without me having to ask
now
Unfortunately, nobody else knows this contract exists
So they don't know they're supposed to be reading our minds and figure out what we want like we're trying to do for them
Another core problem with this is that nice guys are actually really terrible receivers. We're not good at letting people do force
We're not good at giving to ourselves. So that's covert contract number two covert contract number three
Is if I do everything right, then I will have a smooth problem free world
So it's kind of a peter panish kind of thing, you know, I I do everything right? I'm a good guy
but unfortunately
We're the player the referee the scorekeeper and we got the big scoreboard. I've done everything right
How come this stuff still isn't going the way it's supposed to go in my life
So nice guys are walking around these covert contracts and you ask, you know, what are
What what what's the core characteristic of a nice guy?
One of them is is that they're often really resentful
You know, they might say well, I'm kind of bugger. I'm kind of frustrating
But the really resentful not an arrangement because I've been doing this. I've been doing it right. I've been following the rules
I've been, you know, being the good guy. I've been meeting your needs. I've been, you know, following all the rules
You know, how come I'm wins at my turn
How come I'm not getting all the all the stuff that I thought I would and that leads to a lot of resentments
And that's one way I can tell I tell nice guys
They well, how do I know if I'm if I'm using covert contracts and I'll go
You'll know because you're walking around resentful and pissed off either because you didn't get back
In turn or you didn't get appreciated for for all that that you did
I heard somebody share a quote the other day that I really liked to me is another really nice way of putting covert contracts
And this I guess was from Neil Strauss and he says
Un unspoken expectations expectations are premeditated resentment. Isn't that that that is what happens with covert contracts phenomenal by him? Yeah
that
So the frustration and the resentfulness
that's coming from
offering to the world something that you think should be
Universally liked you have that there is there's no way that anybody could be
Offended by what I'm doing. I'm following the rules. I'm offering the world lots whilst asking for nothing in return
and
The fact that not asking for something in return results and you getting nothing in return
Finding how that works. I don't know
But it's I suppose this as well plays into the dishonesty bit and it's so I understand
I would say that I'm I'm very much in nice guy category
Very much a people pleaser
My temperament is to be averse to conflict as well
I've made a dent in many ways, but it's been done
It's been done by weaving my way through avoiding
much of the the conflict
That that I would maybe need to
So I suppose I can be at least in some regards a
A paragon or like a a a role model for the successful nice guy in in many ways and me too
You know, again, I don't like conflict, but you know, I you know, I'm doing okay
There's something I always felt I always felt the fact that I wasn't like my go-to isn't typically
Aggression that's not what I lean into
Um
Despite the fact I've got a background of fighting and and doing other things and physical training and stuff like that
I always felt like it emasculated me
The fact that there was something more heroic
About being someone that was quick to anger, you know, there was something kind of typically masculine about that and I think I was
Not strong enough to say ashamed, but it felt it it didn't feel as
grand
to be someone who
Would be I know that there's an ability in you know being under control having your emotions under control
um, but there's also a degree of
Fragility, I think that you can sometimes feel with that also
Well, let me give a one way to maybe look at the model and see if it fits what you're saying
Is that when I was writing no more mr. Nice guy
I really focused a lot on shame being a core foundation of a nice guy syndrome that internalized belief
I'm not okay and
Inaccurately internalized belief from our earliest life experience a few weeks old few few months old
by the time I finished writing the book and it was you know
Getting ready to be published. I by that time. I'd really come to also see that anxiety plays
Maybe an equally significant role in nice guy syndrome. So where everything that nice guys are doing is trying to manage that sense of shame
I'm not okay. I'm unlovable. I'm defective and their anxiety states, you know, I might piss somebody off
I might get rejected. I might get hurt. I might lose. I might look foolish
so, you know, both of those states really play into it and one of the things I've come to see is is that
Whether we've got just just kind of break it down
whether we got kind of the asshole jerk over here that fighter that quick to fight guy
Or the wussy doormat, you know, the nice guy over here. That's the avoidant and kind of doesn't like the conflict
I think they're they're both on the the same continuum
I think they are both in a fight flight freeze mode of managing their interstates of anxiety
The nice guy is in the flight freeze bond sometimes added to that list
And what we call the jerk is in the fight mode now
They're both still just trying to manipulate
People and situations outside of them because they're anxious the nice guy does it by being nice and avoidant and not upsetting anybody
And you know waiting for it to blow over you all that kind of whereas, you know
The guy the other end of the spectrum is it's just he just quick to react with aggression to manage the people and situations around him
So so he doesn't feel afraid and anxious
And so men will often, you know, they'll read my book or you know, they'll hear some of my information
They'll say robert I get that being a nice guy isn't working and I don't want to be that
But I don't want to be the asshole either and you know, where where's that middle ground and I go
I actually don't know where the tipping point is between two
Dysfunctional extremes. It doesn't exist, right?
What what we're actually talking about is is going to a different plane a different level
Where we actually learn to soothe ourselves
We're actually learned to be assertive where we actually learn to have boundaries
Or we actually learn to be differentiated and ask ourselves
What do I want and follow through on it where there's you know, there's a whole different plane of behavior versus just
What do I do to not feel anxious here?
But again, the nice guy and the jerk probably neither one is aware that they're trying to manage their anxiety states
And and it isn't until you actually
Get told that maybe that's what you're doing you go. Oh, wow
I never thought about that before and then then you actually can feel your anxiety
Rather than trying to just manage it to where it doesn't, you know
Make you feel so anxious. Is it a desire to feel safe then to feel reassured?
Yeah, I think, you know
safety's at the core because
Well, I took child development 101 back in grad school
I think the very first thing they told us one of the few things maybe I remembered
Was that for every child abandonment equals death?
So children come into the world inherently vulnerable
All right, there's no one to take care of us
It takes humans longer to mature into self-sufficiency than any other animal on the planet
You know our grandfathers, maybe that was about 12 or 14, you know
My age was more, you know, considered 18 21 22 that was like 35 for a young man to you know
Mature to be able to take care of himself. That's a joke. Um, but but it's true
So we're dependent completely dependent and if somebody doesn't take care of us we die
So if we get abandoned neglected, uh, we die
So I know for me like when my wife, you know, I'm
My wife Lupita and I've been married for seven years now
Mexican woman I met here in Mexico and um, she gets a look on her face and like
I'll go into, you know, this motive. I gotta I gotta fix it. She's upset. She's angry. I gotta make it better
And you know, I've been working on this stuff for 30 years
So you know
Not like I don't know
You know what's happening and I'll just watch myself have this anxiety state
That I gotta I gotta talk her down through over get her back to good, you know, make her happy again
And I'm thinking why am I worried about with this short little Mexican woman? Why what look she has on her face?
I love her of course
But why why is that triggering such depth of anxiety and really is a you really sat with and worked with it
It triggers a really old emotional state that does feel like I'm gonna die
If this doesn't get better right now
I'm gonna die and I don't actually have that thought in my head
But my reaction to it feels that intense. That's the embodied
Sensation if you ask the embodied the nervous system my emotional operating system. Yeah, yeah
I wonder
Stepping outside of relationships for a second
Relationships with anybody including friendships
One of the patterns that I've noticed
Especially amongst some of my friends that are nice guys or recovering nice guys
Is a desire to
Do things right?
Oh, of course to like a task in and of itself
Uh, I would guess that nice guys are probably more orderly
than the normal person sources will be stacked in the in the right way
You know, mustn't have a very room
Because again, you'd think that you'd think that okay. I got to do it right
I got to do orderly, but you know, I've got my camera angled or you can't see what's over on the sides
All right, it's it's it's a mess. It is it's not terrible, but
It it is messier on the sides than it is behind me. Okay. And so
Again, a lot of the nice guys I work with
They may have perfectionistic expectations of themselves
Um, and some worked really hard to to to meet them and then they're they're in a state of anxiety all the time
But others I know they go, you know, I haven't made my bed in years. You know, I don't pick up after myself
I can't remember the last time I I checked my bank account balance
So you'd think there would be that but but ironically
Um, there's not and here's a piece that
That it may sound an odd on on the surface of it
But when I talk with nice guys about their fears and their anxieties
I think one of the biggest anxiety or fear state that the typical nice guy might have
Isn't so much a fear of failure fear of foolishness fear of looking foolish fear of loss fear of making a mistake
Is fear of success?
Because what happens if I do get it right? What happens if I rise up to a level of success and then, you know
There's things that can happen all of a sudden the bar gets raised the expectations are higher
I'm in a brighter spotlight. I might get attacked. I'm more visible
um
There's so many I'll lose control over my time all of these
Built in anxieties of what happens if I'm too successful
So again, a lot of times the nice guys will
unconsciously
I don't really like the word self sabotage
But they'll get in their own way of living up to to their full potential
And keeping things messy around you is actually a pretty good way to you know, you know, not live up your full potential
Not checking your bank account every now and then, you know, I'll bite you on the ass sooner or later
isn't it isn't interesting that the
almost universality of
high ability
of
this honest
Do you want to uh, do you need to sort the dog?
This is a regular occurrence I can see
She's usually in the room with me and and she's a deer. I this is my bringing her in she can chill
Yeah, the problem is she's upset because somebody's out front and I'm the only one home
And I don't want to go deal with whoever might be up
Okay, it could just be my wife getting home with my daughter from school. Okay. Okay. So um
Yeah, she's just being a good girl. Let me know exactly. Yeah, poppy. There's somebody out there. There's somebody out there
Let's go. Let's go and it may have been she just saw a cat. So, you know, I I don't know so be it um
She walked away. So
She's bored of you now. Yeah, it's interesting that there is uh, there's almost universality of
Uh, not having healthy boundaries. Yeah of being dishonest of being manipulative although you don't think that you are you're
Overly pliable in a way that means that you change yourself to get the outcome that you want from people
But it seems at least based on what you've said here that there there appears to be a boundary at least typically
among the nice guys where this doesn't
outside of relationships friendships
family
Dating etc. This doesn't spread out into a
Uh
Overbearing desire for for orderliness and and sort of perfectionism in all areas of life
You know with regards to an obsession about getting it right about being
It can't I just what I'm trying to say is it's not universal
Whereas the other stuff is yeah, but it's what it shows or at least what it says to me is that there's something
It it's obvious that ground zero for this stuff is relationships
You know that that would have been my first thought as well because it is for me and it is for many nice guys
But you know what I've I've seen guys who are total nice guys
In relationship and they get on the job and they kick ass
You know that they're highly successful at work. I've known other people that it showed up
You know at work where they're a told nice guy and going along to getting along and never really stepping up or never launching
You know that that business and but at home, you know, their their wife would say he's not a nice guy
He's nice to everybody else, but he's not nice to me
So it can be interesting and and that would again when I started working with nice guys
I just assume there's a one piece fits all
And and there's really not now there are those certain commonalities
But I think partly because we're also dealing with temperament
That for example, maybe you and I had very different life experiences
Maybe we have some similarities of temperament some differences different life experiences
We're not going to turn out just the same. We may still have those tendencies of you know seeking approval avoiding conflict
You know kind of a uh, oh, you know, I'm so good. Why doesn't everybody like me and everybody try to be just like me?
um
There might be some similarities
But we might be very different and still relate to this. Yes. I'm a nice guy
Understood. What about hidden behavior? They keep things hidden from themselves. They keep
Why is that so common?
Why is it common because you know those two things when you know when we first started you asked me, you know
What what is the nice guy and basically and and I said he's the guy trying to get everybody's approval and validation
You know holding your finger ups. It's which way is a wind blowing
But the other piece is that hiding things about ourselves, you know hiding anything for example that might get that look on my wife's face
You know, oh, she got that look. I must have done something. I better not do that again
You know again that began at a very very early age when getting that look from somebody important to us
might result in getting slapped getting smacked getting neglected getting yelled at getting shaken whatever
so
Nice guys. This is part of that. I got to hide whatever there is about me that tends to create these negative reactions around me
But often there's another piece not again not universal but often for nice guys in their family system
Somebody has been defined as the needy person the most important person
Could be dad could be mom could be a sibling and their needs were more important
All the attention and focus went on, you know making sure dad never got pissed off making sure mom didn't go on a tirade
Making sure, you know, brother doesn't you know, whatever, you know, he's sick or he's he's out of control
So often for nice guys, we try to become this needless
Wantless never rock the boat never be a moment's problem kind of person
so
What we interpret is us having needs
Draws too much attention and and you know my their needs are more important than mine and so
Nice guys, we're
Again trying to avoid that negative reaction the two things we often most hide
Are our needs and wants and our sexuality the sexuality that's kind of easy to put a finger on
You know, we live in a culture that we're bombarded with sexual stimuli everywhere you go
But still there's still that you know that religious message that sex is bad evil save it for the one you love shame
Yeah, just a whole shame wrapped around sexuality you'd think that would have gone away by now
But but it's not it's as strong as ever. So for the the the the very young nice guy
When kind of kind of back up a little bit back to the to the child development 101 stuff again
Every child when they experience discomfort of any kind, you know, the hungry and they don't get fed
They're they're they wet their diaper. They mess in their diaper. They don't get changed or cold. They don't get help
Then you know, they have stomach ache. They don't get burped whatever
Whenever a child experiences discomfort their children are narcissistic by nature
Emotionally, they assume this is me. I I'm the cause of this
I did something wrong. I'm bad
They don't think it because the thinking brain isn't online at this early age the emotional brain fight flight free survival brain is
And so a child will try to do two things in a very primitive way a non-thinking non-rational purely emotional way
They will try to medicate the feeling states they're having
Suck their thumb eat cry sleep
Whatever to try to not feel bad right now
And again in a very pre very primitive pre verbal
kind of way
Try to do try to not do whatever that was it caused the uncomfortable states or do something different
And so that begins at a really early age and so the child is
These these the shame is is inaccurately internalized at an emotional level. I must have done something wrong
That's why this is happening. So
I got to figure you how to do that different or not do that hide
And so all of this comes
So early as part of an emotional language an emotional operating system. It's not in words. It's not in picture memory
And it's it's primitive
So here we are trying to figure out how not to have these uncomfortable experiences and prevent them from happening again
And one of the best things our primitive brain came up with is hide
Hide, you know, whatever that I have needs all I have needs
I I get I'm I'm hungry when I have needs I get slapped. Oh, their needs are more important than mine
so
Just hiding is part of that because we think it must be about me
That's causing these painful negative experiences to be happening to us
Does this mean the nice guys often have coping strategies? Maybe they'll overeat
maybe they'll be compulsive with social media use or porn or video games or
Substances or whatever
The thing about that model. I just gave you that child development model
Every human does that every human
We all just pick usually again based on temperament and maybe just life experiences and birth order
We all pick what are we going to do? How are we going to try to manage this?
And I sucked my thumb times in kindergarten. I think maybe I was trying to
Deal with some uncomfortable self-soothing self-soothing exactly trying to manage some anxiety there
So that's what I did now
We we go through childhood then we hit adolescence and now we really want people's approval and want to fit in and be noticed
and have attention
All of this really, you know, it gets
Fueled with with with our hormones and need for attention
Where you know, they really get solidified and we pretty much carry these routines into adulthood
So yeah, trying to be perfect might be one
You know trying not to be perfect because my brother was perfect and I couldn't you know compete with him
So I'll be the opposite. I'll I'll make the mess
Yeah, when I eat I sure do feel better when I spend all my day and night playing video games
I I don't feel stressed when I'm oh, isn't porn amazing. I didn't know that this existed. Look how I feel
Um, oh, you know, if I get straight A's look, I I finally get some validation
But I don't know if it's ever enough. I better keep, you know succeeding performing
You know, I better get into great amazing shapes so I can be valuable
Oh, I'll never get in good shape. So who cares? I'll just keep eating it can take so many different forms
And the only real logic to it is the the infant logic
That you and I and everybody else had at a few weeks and a few months old
Why uh nice guys bad receivers
Because we think it makes us bad, you know, the the thing is is that
As I said, most of us is is most nice guys internalize this belief. Well, I because I have needs
That's why I I have these bad things that happen to me
If I don't have needs bad things won't happen and often again, they I could I could look around in my family
Oh, dad's needs are more important. Well, let's all make sure dad's okay. Oh now mom's unhappy. Let's all make sure mom's okay
My little brother was a general fuck up at pretty much everything. Oh, okay
You know, we got to make sure little brother's okay because he's gonna fuck up and I kind of like oh
If I don't have needs if I just kind of do everything right, I'll be the golden child
I'll get some validation. You know, I I won't get noticed too much and getting trouble and and so again
That was my story. It's not every nice guy story
but
There's some fundamental piece in there that if if is visible if people know I have needs like that makes me vulnerable
It puts me at risk. It gets people control over me. I'll owe people something
So in my own personal work, one of the earliest things I had to start doing was was making me a priority where I
Put where I did for me. I I'd do for everybody else
But I wouldn't make me a priority and you know, I'd make sure you know, my wife and kids they all went to the dentist
I wouldn't go to the dentist. Oh, they you know, if I saw something on sale, I'd buy it for them
I wouldn't buy it for me. So I had to start taking good care of me
The next step that that kind of came with that but came a little bit later for me
Was actually beginning to surround myself with people who wanted to help me meet my needs and then actually letting them
That was really anxiety producing to let people do things for me and I had to consciously just go
Okay, I'm it's as simple as like I'll take the garbage out
And you know, we got to take the garbage from the kitchen to the front gate
It's 20 feet got to unlock the gate put it out on the street
My if I'm taking the garbage at my wife will go you need help
Well, no, I don't I don't need any help to take a bag of garbage from the kitchen to the front
And and so I my gut response always say no, but then I realize well
I don't need any help, but she wants to be with me. She wants to accompany me
She doesn't want to think I'm doing all the work. Well, she's not she's very hard worker
I go. Yeah. Yeah, come help me. Do I really need the help? No
But it was actually it took me a while. I'm still learning that way
You know, she's not really thinking I need help taking the garbage out
She just wants to come take the garbage out with me just to walk to the street with me and back
You know, that's that's okay. Well, who might have say no to that? That's the thing about being a bad receiver
It robs people of the
enjoyment
Of helping you you've you've stole my words when I'm
When I got I got divorced in my late 40s after 25 years of marriage to two different women
And again when I started dating and started meeting nice girls, you know
Who wanted to do anything for me wouldn't ever say what they wanted wouldn't make it to say
I thought oh, I'd I'd empathy for my two ex-wives what I put them through with being an ice guy
But I remember I was dating one woman and I met her because she sold me shoes at Nordstrom
And she so she worked in retail fashion sales and her one time she came over to my apartment
And I'd done some laundry left it on my couch
She started folding my laundry and I said you you don't have to do that
She goes no, I like doing it and and she goes and I'm good at it
And you know, so she folds on my laundry puts a little stack on the end of my bed
And she goes but I won't put it away for you. I said I'm not putting it away either
I'm leaving it out there to remind me somebody loves me, you know that that somebody wanted to do something nice for me
After that I started leaving my clean laundry on the couch
So she could have the joy
Of coming over and because it gave her pleasure
Now who am I to rob her of that pleasure?
And I need to work on it because how am I going to receive great things in this world?
If I'm not good at receiving if I can't if I can't let somebody fold my laundry
How am I going to receive the blessings of wealth of fame opportunity of adventure?
So it's it's a very conscious practice. It was for me. So how do I let people give and let them have the pleasure of doing it?
So the solution is not being a bad guy because a lot of people and you could try
so, you know
Nice guys finish last the bad guy gets the girl, you know, women will
Sleep with the alpha but marry the beta, you know, pick your meme or cliche of choice
But they're all out there sure to come up with
And it seems let me I'm going to try and interpret what I think the
Your philosophy is and let me know if I get it right
I think
The downsides of being a nice guy
Although subtle and often completely opaque to the nice guys themselves. Yes
are
kind of
evident given
Can become evident given enough crowd sourcing of sense making so people and community
Come up with memes and characters in tv shows and stuff like that
right
The solution that the low resolution solution that then gets proposed is if x x being
nice guy
Is bad and doesn't get what you want
Then opposite of x y which is bad guy must be good
so the prevalence of
In you know, uh treat her like you don't like her
Like why women love chads like that kind of more
Um
Lethario approach to attracting women and and and getting what you want in life and sort of you know being ruthless and stuff
Is that a
an erroneous solution to the problem of nice kindness
it's
A core problem with what you just proposed is it is equally inauthentic
As as the other and it's equally attached to some external outcome
By trying to figure out how to do it right
Right. How about I just do this right again, then I'll get the women to approve of me
We're still in the same boat. We're just looking for a different right way of doing it now
As simple as this sounds, you know, like when I do like interviews with like a female coach that that maybe works with men
and um
And I say something that you know generalization like the feminine meaning all things feminine, you know women but
Dogs cats babies opportunity money weather whatever
I'll say is highly attracted to a man who's comfortable in his own skin
knows where he's going
And looks like he's having a good time going there
And the women, you know coaches interviewers podcasters on the call always go
Oh, yes
Okay, they're they're reacting kind of their nervous system is reacting to that thing. I didn't say the guy's an asshole
I didn't say he treats women bad. I didn't say doesn't give a fuck about
He he's he's centered in his own body
He's he's differentiated. He's asking himself. What do I want? What's important to me?
Following through on that, you know, not leaving the message behind not trying to be perfect not seeking anybody's approval
He's on mission. He's on purpose
And in my experience the feminine is highly attracted to that you don't have to work
At at getting the feminine to be attracted now
Are you always going to have feminine approval? I told someone the other day
This has never come out of my mouth before but I said actually there is no standard of feminine approval
But the feminine is not about standards. It's just about whatever is moving masculine at standards
You you go into the masculine world
You know when you've lived up to the standard when you've hit the ball out of the park when you've scored a touchdown
When you made ace when you you know made x amount of money the masculine doing standards are clear
We can go into that world and go I've achieved. I've made it
We have it. We have the stats rigorous. It's orderly
Requires something of you. There's discipline
The fat there is no such thing as feminine approval
I mean ask any guy even a woman who approved of them dearly in one moment
I'll ask them. Have you ever had experiences where the very next moment she was
unapproving of you and nothing about you had changed you had even
And guys all go yeah, isn't that the way it always works? Yeah, you know one minute when I was dating
I had women tell me robert. You're the most amazing man. I'm so glad I met you. I'm so grateful
I'm so happy and then never hear from them again
Or say robert, you know after two weeks, you know, I'm taking a break from dating or I'm giving my ex another try
And I'm going what just happened. That's the world of the feminine
It doesn't it isn't nailed down and orderly. So we we have to quit seeking
feminine approval
One of my certified coaches wrote a book that that I really like but there's a line in there
It said that a man does not mature
Until he quit seeking the love of a woman
As long as we're seeking love that's a feminine trait long as we're seeking to get that approval that love that validation from a woman
We're in a loop that there's no escape from
But when we when we can self validate when we're on purpose when we're living life on our terms
All of a sudden that makes us very attractive to the feminine. It will come to us. That's that's my experience
It will come
Now as soon as you turn and go, oh is here. How do I keep it? How do I make no no no?
We just blew it. All of a sudden now they're going to get that look on their face again. Like I go what I do wrong
so
If we take the how do I get the women's approval out of the equation
You're more likely to get it does that mean you just don't give a fuck don't care whatever
That's not what I'm again. It's not black and white
We we men want to make it black and white. It must be this or it must be that no
It's this this is
Another level that we rise to that lets us put a dent in the universe that lets us
Live with purpose and passion that lets us connect deeply with others that lets us be vulnerable and courageous
That actually invites the love
Into our life that that we desire rather than seeking it
Well, ultimately I was watching this um
Video from a lander botan from the school of life. Do you know that guy? British philosopher phenomenal insight
You were the second person who mentioned him in the last two or three days
I always pay attention when so whenever I hear someone's name like, you know
Whenever I heard you need to get on chris williamson's show when I heard that three times in the same week
You know, I thought wait a minute that name sounds familiar. Oh
Oh
I'm on he's on my calendar. What do you what do you know? It's um, so I use a
I'll just say what you're referring to he wrote an op-ed article in the new york times
Maybe 10 years ago
He's now the title was why you will marry the wrong wrong person. Yeah, I love I love that article. I copied it
It's it's just class. He's outstanding. Uh, I've he is on my mount rushmore of of of guests
He was very formative for me. Um, one of the reasons that
I'm gonna go on a tangent about why I love a lander botan
one of the reasons that I really love him is he's so
Softly spoken and he's so
embodied in the nuance of
Being fallible of how our emotions run the show. He's not posture. He's unbelievably smart
you know, he's very very well versed in renaissance art and history and poetry and and sculpture and and and
All all this stuff, but there's no posturing
From his left brain. Yeah, there's none of this sort of over rationality. He he
Accepts with complete face value the fact that we can be self contradictory and embarrassing and and all the rest of it
But anyway, he has he has this line in a video that I was watching recently
Where he talks about
A person whose greatest achievement would be after their death people would say they never made a fuss
Oh, they didn't make a fuss. They didn't you know, they didn't cause any ripples
They didn't make any waves and he's talking about largely
An equivalent of the nice guy this person who's you know overly pliable who's concerned about upsetting others who's doing all of this stuff
Anna, I just it really it really sort of struck home like oh my god, like that's the
That's the inheritance and the legacy which is waiting for you and ultimately
You can make it to the end of your life having
Either made all of the messes in the world or made zero messes at all depending on whether you go bad guy mode or nice guy mode
But
Like your legacy as you look back on your life is going to be one of
You playing a persona
You're never going to really be able to connect to any of the things that you do
people
accomplishments
praise compliments adoration
money
Because it wasn't you
that earned that
You didn't earn your money
The role that you're playing earned the money
The role that you're playing got the marriage the role that you're playing got the relationship or the job raise or
Or created the family or the the billion dollar company. It wasn't you
wasn't you
That's kind of messes with your head doesn't it
It's scary
You know when you were describing and I can't pronounce his name pronounce his name a land of botan. Oh, yeah, that's beautiful
When you are describing him i'm sitting there thinking i'm a straight guy
And that guy sounds sexy as hell the way you were destroyed. He's
I mean, he's got the classic philosophers build, but so be it. So be it
Here's something else. So here's something else that i've had in in my mind
um
Since looking at your work and kind of i've spent a lot of time over the last three years
Looking at evolutionary psychology mating dynamics so on and so forth
We don't see especially from women at the moment
Many conversations online
About nice guys about guys being too nice about guys being too pliable
A lot of the conversations skews toward guys being too toxic guys being too immature
But it's immature it it tends to be in a in a toxic manner
It's sort of the use and discard the use and abuse
The the very sort of transient transactional nature
What is the reason do you think?
That there isn't as much popularity if if and i don't disagree
I think that a huge problem will be the pliability and and dishonesty and niceness of men
Is it just less
Tweetable to to have that as the reason that you can't find met
I've got all of these men that keep bending over backward and keep doing things to me
Is it that it's kind of publicly unpopular for women to call that out because it seems like they're being ungrateful
What do you what do you think it is? Well?
Because i'm not in a woman's head. I I can't and because i'm not on social media
I also but I I do know what you're talking about
Of course, there are memes that that that run
and I
I do you know because I get a google uh notice every time
Nice guy, you know pops up somewhere. I I do see what when it does pop up it usually pops up and
write wing republican writing
um most often but
When women do
Write their blog articles about nice guys
It is most often how nice guys aren't nice of how they use basically the covert contracts of oh
I'm going to listen you talk about your problems. I'm going to pay your car payment this month. I'm going to
Pretend like I care about you and then when they you know ask the woman out or wanted to have sex
They goes no I never thought of you that way you're a friend, you know
And then the and then the guy of course that all that resentfulness that passive aggressive that rage comes out
And so, you know that meme does show up, but but it still ends up being toxic masculinity
Here is my thought and it sounds like you've looked a lot at this and you might even have a better perspective than me
My thought is that
You know, I grew up during whatever the wave of the angry feminism was in the 60s and 70s
I don't know if that's first wave second wave
But you know every man's a rapist and erections a sign of aggression and you know that already bought in my mother
You know my mother's generation with the first I think true feminists
She raised my my sister to not need a man raised her boys to be different from their father
You know that was kind of the beginning of that movement
and um
So
From that I grew up with I don't be like those bad men the women are complaining about so
So kind of the toxic masculinity meme has been around for a while
It just didn't have social media and now mainstream media mainstream me
I I can't even listen to like npr anymore because it's kind of like it's just gone so much to like
Let's just run fluff articles, you know fluff stories and stuff like that. I agreed. Um
I think
There had to be a pendulum swing
You know most of that's directed at patriarchy, you know now you just say patriarchy and like we all understand exactly what that means
It's evil, right? But but patriarchy was also providing protect, you know, there was also
Positives a part of it and was there an ownership mentality? Yeah
Did that lead to colonialism and you know abuses towards women and children? Yeah
Uh racism. Yeah, so yeah all of that
Well, you know when we make a social change we tend to throw the baby out with the bathwater
So, yeah, this was rail against this big idea of patriarchy toxic masculinity, you know
You know mansplaining man spreading everything that men do is bad kind of stuff
I
Think maybe it had to go to an extreme and and I think most sociologists that look at big shifts in society
Say when you have an oppressed people
Um the down drawing it almost has to become like a revolution. It has to be at the extremes
It doesn't have to be a correction. Yeah, it's not like a Gandhi that just you know, let's subtly create the shift
Um, so I think there has to be that over correction
And and you know, so we went through the hashtag me too where you know, men were you know, you know, accused tried
You know prosecuted and you know in the media lost jobs lost status purely because some woman said oh
I want to join the me too crowd, you know, and yeah, there was a lot of abuses that were being addressed
Should they've been addressed through social media?
I don't know if that was you know, the most
Democratic way to do it, but it's how it got done and then you know, yeah
If you you know publish something that gets a lot of likes and a lot of
Follows and yeah other people are going to publish it. So yeah, it went to the incentives aligned to make it happen
Of course they do and social media is all about algorithms and you know the more something shows up the more you see of it
Uh, that's why I told one of the reasons I don't like social media
um
But I actually think
That we're actually making an adjustment
You know, I I I saw articles
Yeah, a couple years ago likening anything that had to do with men's work
To like the oh there goes the balloons
Jesus christ
I didn't think it was gonna work. How have you managed to make balloons come up on this?
I promise I promise. I'm magic. Stop doing it
I I wish I yeah, I can't quit moving my hands now. The thumb will probably go up. Maybe maybe confetti
All right. All right. Okay. So even just a couple years ago
I saw articles about linking the january 6th, you know riots, you know in washington dc
To anything having to do with men's work like conflating that that all came out of the men's movement
and I'm going
And this was in main is washington post random article like that, right? So it's mainstream media
I think actually
That I think maybe we've reached that far enough far extreme
And I think maybe it's starting
So we're all of a sudden that's losing this interest is it seems to you know, oh, okay
There's another meme about toxic masculinity. Oh, there's another meme about andrew tape
There's another, you know, blah blah blah and people do get bored and now maybe in this because I'm
In the middle of men's work. It's what I've done for years
And I'm I'm in you know a men's program myself. I built a men's program. I believe in it
I I really do think we're moving to a better space that as men become more conscious
Um of the things that I think, you know, they teach they're valuable
You know being honest being transparent making their needs of priority
Surrounding themselves with people on how to get their needs met living with purpose living with passion, you know
Being generous making the world a better place being open-hearted being loving, you know quality good qualities
That I think
Is changing the world is shifting the dynamic
Women I think will begin to go that that's actually really attractive. That's that's sexy. That's better. I like that
and um
And I think there'll still be a few ones hanging on to but I let's all still stay mad at men
Let's you know, let's still and after a while, you know, one of the things that really was a big shock to me
I was probably in my 40s
When I was I was talking to you know a feminist and I mentioned somebody who identified as a feminist a woman
Maybe on an airplane and and I said, well, here's the feminism I grew up with
And she said, oh, you mean that every man's a rapist you you like
Believed all that I go
Well, it sure was because that was just a few angry pissed off women that got a lot of attention
I go that's all it was not all women felt that way. She goes no and they still don't I go
That's actually good to know that maybe all that noise that you know gets a lot of likes and follows
Maybe that doesn't represent
But even the majority of women there was a really wonderful term that I heard last year called the tyranny of the minority
And it happens. Yeah, I think that that explains it
Another way of putting it is the slowest dumb shit on the freeway is going to control how fast everybody can go
Very good. Yes. Yes. We're controlled by the extremes and the idiots
um
It's interesting to think about why that might be the case. I think that you've probably you're probably not far wrong that
It's still so popular to
fit men into the
impressive
tyrannical
patriarchal overbearing dominating controlling role
that
If women were to if a woman was to post online something which is more more honest, perhaps which would be
Um, I keep going out for men who are overly pliable and because they're so pliable
I'm concerned that they're not being honest with me
What does that sound like? Well, it sounds like a call for men to be less pliable
Which is not far away from men to be more aggressive more controlling
Writing a book that's called no more. Mr. Nice guy. Why would someone write a book teaching men to be not nice?
We do we do
Live in a black and white world and again media social media
Loves the black and white. It doesn't like nuance subtlety
That's the dangerous the real n word of 2024 is nuance. That's the real one that you shouldn't be saying
All right, so getting into getting into relationships, which are obviously
I think ground zero for a lot of this stuff
You know, you can kind of hide things away from yourself when it's on your own
And you're in and out of work and all the rest of it
If you know, everybody is emotionally connected with the work and everybody's emotionally connected with how
organized their source cupboard is
Relationships real ground zero. What do nice guys not understand about how female attraction works?
Well, most of us are believing what our mothers told us, you know, uh, if they told us anything
Which is to be nice to girls with my mother said be a gentleman
Okay, make sense. You know be a gentleman and I am
Uh, I'm a gentleman, but a woman taught me this one. Uh, I always open the door for women
I tell them wait for me. I'll open your door. Now if you really break it down, that's me being dominant
You know, I tell them what to do wait for me. I'm gonna open your door
And of the of the several hundred women who I've told to do wait for me. I'll open your door
Only one has pushed back against it and she pushed back for a while
Then all of a sudden she quit and kind of decided she actually really liked
Actually what she did is she jumped my bones in a public place and a very I said
We need to take this somewhere else after the while she's been pushing back against my dominance
so
For there to be attraction there has to be a polarity
And polarity involves dominance and submission. I know those are evil terrible words, you know
Because we think about dominant men, you know making women be submissive. You're in you're in a safe space here
I'm not I'm not sweating it
But yeah, it is okay. It is going out on the internet, which is fine
You know and what's happened is a polarity has just switched where the females have become dominant the dominant players
And the guys have become the submissive players and then the the women go
How come I can't find a guy that turns me on and the guys you're going?
How come I can't seem to turn women on? Well, it's it's is reversed a polarity
You you can't have polarity. That's attraction without dominance and submission
And the more subtle it is the more subtle the attraction is the more
Latent it is tends to be the more intensity attraction is we've probably all experienced that in one way or another
And I tell people you can't have sex without dominance and submission
Otherwise, there's two bodies lying next to each other waiting for something to happen
You know you gotta have a yeah, you know fight you have a top and bottom
You have a picture and catcher right there's got to be
A polarity now the beauty is that polarity can you can flip it around?
You know back and forth and I think in very conscious relationships
That that happens beautifully my wife's very strong
She grew up eight out of ten kids in poverty in guadalajara, mexico
alcoholic father got beat on by family members beat on by neighbors
You know abused by family members abused by priests, you know, she's she's been through
You know, she goes to the gym two hours a day. She can out squat me easily. She's done my thigh. I don't I don't piss her off
Um, you know, she can get shit done
I grew up in a middle class white bread neighborhood of seattle washington
Surrounded by bowing engineer families, you know, it's just you know, I never had to fight for anything
Okay, so she's tough
But she doesn't she's always told me I love it when you tell me no
She goes, I don't I don't want to be in charge. I don't want you to always ask me what what you know
What do you want to do? She she likes it when I make we're walking to a restaurant
And you know, though here in mexico and they'll say no they'll say should I the last curtain?
Should I get the waiter say should I give him a menu in english? She goes no
He lives in mexico give him one in spanish and I'll say yeah
Give my wife and kids the menu in english
And then they hand her a menu and she goes no, he's my boss
He'll order for me and they always laugh about that and I say yeah
I get to be the boss when she says I can't you know, so we got those the whole stick down
But the truth is she is strong. She's powerful. She can get shit done. She can kick ass
But she doesn't want to be in that mode all the time
She wants to to be led. She wants to submit. She wants to open
She wants to be done too in blissful kinds of ways. Well, that's my job
Right. So and even though I'm kind of more that I'm I'm go along to get along. I you know, I'm yeah
This or that either one's okay with me. I'm kind of more that way
She doesn't like it when I'm that way
So for her she's happiest when I will play the default lead the default decision maker
But she likes it best when I said here's what I was thinking. What do you think?
You know, I don't just say what do you think, you know, what do you want?
I'll say, you know, I was thinking a white with a little bit of tint of gray in it
What do you think?
You know, she wants me to to to lead that and then she'll feel the polarity and then she'll tell me
What she thinks or wants and then you just say you decide
Okay, let's go. Let's go. Let's go pick out the paint
Um, am I being abusive to her by being dominant? No, I've heard so many women tell me
When the guy leaves it all up to them to comply it the women feel burdened by that most are in their masculine
dominant role all day long in their work in their career
Raising children even mothering is a masculine dominant state to be in you're taking care of kids needs
That's not feminine. I don't them want to have to take care of your partner after that
Yeah, then then when the guy says oh, I don't get you want to have sex tonight
Would you or what do you want for and it's just one more thing that they got to check off there to do is
They don't want that
Now am I making a generalization? Yeah. Is it fluid? Yeah. Is it nuanced? Yeah
Is it okay? The guy's always got to be the dominant the woman's but no that's not what I'm saying
But for for men when I start talking about them consciously setting the tone and leading in relationship
When I say that to a nice guy
The response he usually he'll pondering okay, dr. Glover what I hear you say when you say take control
I go no no you did not hear me say the word take control. I did not say it
I don't believe in it. I'm talking about you lead you set the tone you state what you want where you want to go
What you want to eat and and and give her a chance to follow like on the dance floor
She can't follow where you don't lead
Give her that and then
Be open to a discussion be open to her taking the you know setting the tone and leading
But it's not about but guys nice guys will say when you know when you said take control
Is more nuanced than that but again
So that that that's my job is helping guys
Apply the the nuance that that word of 2024
What is the role of emotional tension?
Oh, you've done some research
Yeah, that's a cute little wink of the high that just it was just flirting with you. I'm just
It's reflexive. I'm just trying to flirt with you. Yeah
I know the girls like it. Probably the boys do too. I I live in a very gay community. So, you know
I know how it is
Okay, so the role of emotional tension. There we go. We just had emotional tension going on right there. Yep
I'm gonna I'm gonna make a generalization that doesn't apply to everybody
But it does seem to apply to a lot and that's the generalized statement is
Is that in general for women to experience attraction?
Say towards a man
Arousal and to stay attached to that man over time. She has to experience some kind of emotional tension
She's got to feel something the butterflies and this the that the drama that does he love me doesn't love me
And we men can kind of understand that a little bit. We kind of like the tension we feel of go
Feel it's nice, you know like her boobs whatever, you know, that creates attention for us
But in general men don't like emotional tension, especially in relationship
If you even think about, you know, our sporting events where we do get our tension and clocks on them
You know, we know it's going to end at this time. That's why baseball is falling out of favor
That's why they put a clock on baseball. They put the they put the pitch clock last year
Yeah, you know, how many times you can throw it at first, you know, because oh, we got to have it on a clock
You know, so um, so men's tension is on the clock
Oh, yeah, I I know this, you know, this this adventure flick i'm watching in the hero
This is happening. I know he's gonna get out of it and it's gonna be done in 35 minutes, you know, it's done
We're done. Shoot go home kick back into nothingness, right?
The feminine never gets tired of tension the feminine if it
If it isn't feeling tension is bored. It will create tension
And so that's what's hard for men to understand, you know
We think to be nice to women will make them be attracted to us
But nice creates absolutely no attention no tension really for anybody
Men or women, but we think well, that's what mom told me to do. Go be go go be nice to them
It's what that's what I in junior high all the women were complaining about those jerks who create attention for them
And so I listened to her complain about the jerk since she kept going back to the jerk even after you know, I'm such a nice guy
So in general women need that emotional tension watch it. They create it within themselves
Um and and we guys if we have any kind of tension between us
We'll just have it out. Maybe we'll punch each other and then we'll be done. We'll go have a beer. It's all good, you know
We don't need to keep going back into that tension state to have a bond have a connection
Well, we'll go do something together. We may go compete
We may go bring our a game and leave it all on the field, but then we walk off arm and arm
So it's just the the the difference between that masculine and feminine
So the hardest part for men to understand is that the women need that tension. So even when
I say wait for me. I'll open your door
And now I create a little bit of dominance and she waits for me. That's tension
All right, it's just a little bit. It's a little subtle, you know, even like, you know
Say hey, put the menu down. I'll order for us tonight
There's tension and I'm not being nice. It's actually creating something. What's he gonna order for?
Is he gonna pick something? I like do I trust him? Is it gonna be an adventure?
You know, I tell guys and you know and you know guys will think it's game playing
And it kind of can look like that and but the the real thing is it's actually just is how do we get more conscious?
So I'll tell a guy for example, you know
If a woman sends you a message text message or calls you and if you reply right away or you pick up the phone and answer
How much tension will the woman experience through that?
Well, well, none we've relieved it as soon as we answered the phone or tension went away
But what if you didn't answer it?
What if you called her back in 30 seconds 45 seconds
An hour and she goes, where were you? Why didn't you answer?
And what if you didn't give her an answer to that?
And she's going why didn't he answer? What was he doing now? Here's the thing because those guys
Ten if we do have emotional tension, we like what I call positive emotional tension
You know, it it feels good to us where you're at
For the for women they don't care. Is it positive emotional tension? Is it is it pet or is it net negative emotional tension?
They don't care emotional tension is emotional tension
And so, you know, it means, you know, them starting a fight, you know them doing something knows
They know it's going to piss us off. It's kind of like they don't care
They got our attention
And and that's all that mattered. They got our attention and there's tension
And and even the thing of guys like listening to women talk about the problems. I tell guys there's a an
inverse
negative relationship between the amount of time a man spends listening to a woman talk about her problems
And the likelihood he's going to get laid what you mean
It means that if you say and listen to talk about her problems, you've actually relieved all of her tension
Tensions flowed completely out of because you know, she talked she talked she talked all the tension
Came away and what I tell guys is then you end up looking like
Her girlfriend with a penis and odds are she doesn't want to have sex with her girlfriend
So anything we do to relieve their tension
Actually works against us and robs them kind of like we talked about earlier
Are we going to rob them of the joy of doing for us?
Well, are we going to rob them of the emotional tension that they have to have to feel to feel something
To to want to engage
You had this fantastic example
of how emotional tension
is enjoyed differently by men and women by the
story arcs of romantic comedies and how men and women
Uh, experience experience that can you explain that?
Well, you mean like, you know, you you take your woman to watch titanic and she titanic
You know, she's already seen it eight times and she walks away with her panties wet thinking outcome
I can't have that and the guy the guy's checking his watch checking his phone his fort center on yet
How do I get out of here? I I thought what was particularly interesting was you you explaining and it really sort of hit home to me that
Uh, if you're a man who's watching a romantic comedy you see
um
regulation at the beginning everything is is fine
Then you see dysregulation something happens and everything goes up in the air
Then you see regulation again or more like
Middle movie regulation whether the couple first starts to get together and you're like, oh, well, I mean that's it like let's go home
The movie's done. Yes done. Whereas what the woman then wants is this protracted
Oh, but the ex-girlfriend's back in the picture
But oh my god, he hasn't got his right visa and he's going to be deported
How are they going to keep the relationship going and it's just protracted and protracted and protracted and protracted and then
I don't I don't know what it's like to be a woman at the end of a rom-com
But it may be
Unsatisfying for there to be a conclusion. It's like what could we just let's roll it for another three hours
Let's just continue to extend this and that's maybe we're bollywood figured it out
Let's just do the wedding scene everybody's dancing to a real upbeat song
We know it's over but now they'll do a part two of it
um
and you know
Women I've been in relationship with learned don't take me to a romantic comedy
I'm sitting there going that is so fucking unrealistic. That doesn't happen in the real world
How come every guy has a job he doesn't actually have to go to how come every woman's a fashion editor in every one of these
Yeah, I know he loves dogs, but he lives in this new york loft and makes canoes. That's how he supports himself
Come on. That's not real. Yes
Yeah, you don't want to go to a romantic comedy with me because I live in the world of could that really be real
Could that really happen? Do people really do that?
No, you know, that's not how the real world works
But it creates emotional tension and so that's really what it is all about
It's not about reality the masculine wants to go resolve all the emotional tension to get us back into reality
So yeah, I it's it's really hard for me to watch a romantic comedy
Just twiddle my thumbs and just not not say anything. Oh, it's excruciating. So
thinking about this
Dynamic that we have this emotional tension
this amount of of dominance and and uh direction
Uh and and suggestion that comes from the man. Um
There will be women listening and out there who
Enjoy they're writing a blog article about us right now. It's fine. It's added to the list
But there will be women listening who?
Maybe a little conflicted or there will be men who imagine that the woman might be conflicted because you say well
She wants she comes home. She's had a difficult day at the work because kelly that bitch in the cubicle next door
Has done that thing again that pisses her off and the woman
Wants to be able to vent. She also wants her man to listen to her
and it's this odd duality of
Not knowing what's best for us
And of the things that we want not always being in our best interests and you
Quoted the best onion article which is woman turns man into a partner. She doesn't want to be with
I I got the article the headline alone is is enough right, you know
And and again, this is this is the dance of relationship
Wouldn't it be great if you know, we could just say guys just do it this way every woman's going to like it
No, it doesn't work that way
And but what what you said what was really true is that yeah, so for example
You know the woman in your life's been in her masculine all day doing at work
Putting up with asshole managers asshole customers asshole clients asshole core workers
And now, you know, she comes home. There's one more asshole now is putting demands on her
So for example
Um, the woman that folded my clothes that I mentioned again, I met her at the mall as she sold me shoes
And when after we started dating, um, one of the things where we really clicked is she liked baseball
I like baseball
Rangers fine. I could have been part of a threesome. It would have been great
There we go. You're flirting again
But but you lost to me as soon as you said Texas Rangers, you know
Hey, those of us with the world series championship in the last year. Yeah, you're you're the we you're the homer
Yeah, we we won the world series. Let me see the ring man. Show show me the ring. Okay, so, um
She liked baseball so, you know, she'd get off work four or five o'clock in the afternoon
I'd already have a bar stool staked out at the roost chris that was right next to you know, where she worked
Couple baseball games are already on the screen at the bar
They have this great half rice hamburger during happy hour
She'd come in and she would just start, you know, I'd already have the wine ordered sitting there
You know, the you know the appetizers that come and she's like this about her day
Like that. She's been in her mask in all day. I would take out my phone
Set it at five minutes and say you have my undivided attention for five minutes. Put the phone on the bar
I would give her eye contact. I would face her
I would listen
undivided attention
She would run out of steam before five minutes was up because she's going I sit here complaining
But there's a baseball game on and there's a glass of wine sitting here. What do I prefer?
Before now if I didn't put her on the clock at five minutes
It was a game it was me being dominant but in a loving playful if I didn't put her on the clock
She might
Be crabby all night long and she would not enjoy herself because one of the things I found is that for
Somebody who identifies as feminine to be in their masculine all day
Are often not good at getting themselves out of that masculine
I got to go home and wash dishes and get the laundry done
There's things we got to do before I got to get up and go to work tomorrow
I'll sit down. I have a glass of wine. Tell me about your day. Let me rub your feet
I'm a big fan of of in a sense
Leading her back into her feminine out of that masculine rigid get shit done kind of state of mind
And now all of a sudden she begins opening and she'll tell me your attention
I might even say a woman taught me this. I'll say, you know what? I want to hear about your day
But give me the guy version
You know, and I've never had a woman ask me. What does that mean? I'll say you you want me to be your guy, right?
Yeah, yeah, all right, then I need the guy version when you tell me about the day
Please translate about how Kelly and the cubicle next to her, you know
And I know why she does it because you just insecure and she's always wanting attention and she always takes it out of me
Dear
I love you. Give me the guy version. Kelly pissed me off today. Great
Now I understand why you had a bad day
So, you know
Get playful with it get playful with it
There's definitely one of the common threads that I'm noticing through a lot of the dynamics is a degree of playfulness and
It's my nature. So it is what I bring and
You know, it's it's helping it's helping to it's helping to relieve the tension
relieve the tension it's helping to relieve the
seriousness
Of everything that that it it gives more play
It gives like in the engineering term it gives more room within the system for things to breathe
You make a suggestion, but it's not it's not done in too
Rigid of a fashion. There's there's there's movement in there and it's done
It's evident the reason that you're doing it and it's not in a mocking way. It's not in a passive aggressive way
It's not in a condescending or patronizing way, but the reason that this I think
Works is it shows. Hey, look like we're here to enjoy our time together
we're here you're here to enjoy we're here to enjoy this and
Whether it's someone's had something good happened. Someone's had something bad happened. Someone's sad. Someone's mad. Someone's whatever
The appropriate amount of playfulness I can struggle to think of
Really many situations in which it doesn't make it better
Yeah, I
And that doesn't mean getting silly and everything's a joke because again guys will kind of like oh, you mean make a joke about it
and again
teaching men
to to be lighthearted
But that that that can be a pretty daunting task
Yeah, um now what's funny though if you get men with men
And and let them just kind of begin to let their hair down guys get silly with each other
And you know and but we're I think we're afraid of showing that to women
Oh, yeah, I won't I won't appear manly. I won't be you know
It's a degree of there's a degree of competence. I think
Uh, I certainly noticed this. Do you know who charlie hoop it is from charisma on command?
He's got a very big charisma channel on youtube. It really really great guy very embodied ton of self work ton of men's work
and
he
Helps mostly men but also women become more charismatic
So he's he's learned the principles of confidence and charisma and um one of the best tools that he
teaches is when people ask a question
The best answer isn't always the right one
And you know he uses this example of um, how to overcome your discomfort around trying to be funny
And he says if you walk out of the house and you're with people you walk out of a bar
Or whatever and the weather is one extreme of either hot or cold make a joke about it being the opposite
Yeah, and he was like it's the shittest joke. It is the worst. It's a pure dad joke
But he said it'll get a chuckle out of people if you walk outside and it's freezing hot and you go dude
Wish I'd brought some shorts today. This is great
um like people have a little bit of a chuckle about but it really really
Showed me and I have a friend george who's been on the show a lot
He a lot of the time if you're playing kind of like a game of tennis
So you're playing a game of tennis which involves a linear conversation. Here is a question. There is an answer
Here is a question. There is an answer. Here's another answer. Here's another question
And you played this back and forth. He regularly hits the ball sideways
So he'll call back to a thing that happened a couple of weeks ago or he'll say, oh, you know
I bet that such and such a famous person from the media would have done that or whatever like he'll
Rip the conversation out like orthogonally from where it is and there's play in that
He's not answering the question because he he has the comfort in himself to not need
To get validation by being I am the person that always knows the answer
I am the person that is always able to give the the correct conclusion that draws the line that puts the full stop
And dots the eyes and crosses the t's
I don't need to be that person and it's such a breath of fresh air
Because you're having this conversation and and you're like, I'm excited. I don't know what's gonna and it
Engenders that in you as well, but there's definitely like good boy energy
a nice guy energy in
I will answer the question properly. I will ensure that this
Somebody's asked something of me and to deliver it. I shall and that removes the playfulness. Yeah, you know and
When I work with guys around this again when I said when I learned to date in my 40s and 50s
I you know, I was never good with women and if I got one I kept them way too long
And I started getting successful, you know with dating and getting laid and guys said Robert teach us
I'm not a dating guru
But what you're talking about is it again for most of the men I worked with they get so afraid
I'm gonna do something wrong. I'm gonna make a mistake. I'm gonna piss her off. I'll blow it and then then it's irreparable
and I'd say, you know just
Toucher don't you know if you have the impulse to touch or touch her if you have the impulse to tease your teaser
If you have the impulse to tell her come on. Let's go do this
Don't hold back
It's crazy as it sounds. I tell guys
Blurt and act on impulse
You think that's a recipe for disaster
But the truth is it lets them be themselves because their authentic self comes out and you know, I've had so many experiences
You know around one if I just blurted acted on impulse
You know, I remember one woman I dated on the second date
We were going to go for a walk and she said, well, let me go use the restroom
Restaurant and she went to the restroom came back and I so I'm gonna go use the restroom
I said by the way enjoyed watching you walk away from me
And as soon as I said it, I thought oh fuck. I probably blew it, you know
After we broke up we stayed friends and said
Months later said you remember when you said that to me said, yeah, I thought I blew it
He goes, oh no, I loved it. Well, I it I just blurted it right. I didn't hold it back
I remember another another woman early early first date where we're walking and she said something about her
Her sister or sister-in-law they're they're having a shoe party, you know, where women get together and
Look at shoes
The lamest thing a tupperware. I can think of the a shoe party lamest party in history
But okay, and so I blurted without thinking oh shoe shopping is women's porn
She turned and looked at me and she goes
You get it you understand
You know and and and so guys will say well, I'm not funny, you know, I'm not I'm not, you know, I can't
I'm not talking about telling jokes
I'm talking about whatever that thing that came to the tip of your brain
But you held it back
Yeah, because you're afraid it might be the wrong thing to say the wrong thing to do as soon as you held it back
You killed the tension the putting it out there and sometimes you crash and burn, you know, there's the sweat flops
You go, oh man, that didn't get one laugh, you know, but you got to take that risk every comedian
You know has had plenty of bombs
to but man that one landed and
And it's not about trying to get it right. It's about taking the sensors off
And letting that you that maybe just speaks to the obvious
Out there and people people they'll relate to it or they won't it seems a lot like
one of the key
tactics for
Rehabilitating a nice guy is learning to kind of get out of your own way
That's a good way to put it because what we've been doing is again go all the way back to where we began this
They've been trying to manage their shame. I'm bad. I'm not good enough. I'm gonna be found out. I'm gonna die
Their anxiety. Oh, no, somebody will react negatively. There'll be pain involved
And so that is what's driving the bus is their shame and their anxiety
And so who is really in there? You know, who is the person?
Um
One of the things the comments I get from people that work with me or you know
Come to my workshops or seminars or do calls with me. They'll say robert
I appreciate how how authentic you are
And I'll go
Nobody would have accused me of that 30 years ago
Nobody would have said robert. I love how real you are how authentic you are how you just share yourself
How you share your mistakes you fuck ups. I didn't
And and I couldn't attract a woman to save my life, you know back back in those days
I I kind of could but I I didn't know that what I was what I did that might attract a woman
But I wasn't real. I wasn't authentic. I was holding my finger up checking the wind
I was a chameleon, you know, what's what's gonna give me the most laughs or what's gonna give me, you know
What will kind of go over well, but not too well that you know now I'm not on the spot that I got to follow through
and
man to just take the sensors off
and just
Blurt act on impulse be you
I think is such a powerful rehabilitation and since most nice guys
Their sensors are the most prominent with women. That's a great place to go practice
One of my the same friend I was talking about before mr. Orthogonal tennis game george
He he has this idea called only the irrational behavior survives. What he's talking about
What he's talking about is he imagines
being at the funeral of somebody that he knows and he
Thinks about the conversations that the people are having around the room and they're not having the conversation
The washing was always folded and he turned up on time and all the rest of it
He uses this example of his mum and he says that his mum hates fighting
Just really just does not like physical fighting big big problem with it
And once his brother was in the car his younger brother was in the car with her and they were driving somewhere and she
I don't know 50s year old woman
Normal british woman saw two
18 year old boys sort of squaring up to each other and pushing and trying to fight or whatever on the side of the
On the pavement. She stops the car in the middle of traffic
Gets out and runs over and the brother's like mum. What the fuck are you doing?
Like what the two guys
Twice your size and quadruply a testosterone. What the fuck are you doing?
She runs over and she gets in between them physically gets in between them like no fighting no fighting
Gets back in the car and the brother's like mum. That was
Insane, you could have been hurt. You could be what she's I don't care. I don't care. I just don't like fighting no one's fighting
and he said at her funeral
People will say she was the sort of person that would stop the car in the middle of traffic to stop two boys fighting
And it's like that only the irrational behavior survives is is similar to what you're talking about that there are rough edges
to
our personality and our behavior
But ultimately that is our personality and behavior like if your goal your goal should not be as a person on this planet
to smooth out any of the things that make you anything into this sort of
vanilla amorphous
blob that kind of like just glides
Through it's like no you have things that you want to say and actions that you want to take and changes that you want to make
And just the faith to be able to do that unencumbered
is
That's what life is. Yeah, and and it takes support. It takes practice
um
Yeah, you know talking no more mr. Nice guy about nice guys being teflon men
No stick, you know, nothing. I don't want anything to stick to me
But we do connect as you said around our rough edges, you know, what we remember about people might not even been always a thing
It might even bugged us or got on our nerves when they did it and we're around them
But it's also the thing we miss. I mean, you know
Nala the pit bulls back at my my door again. I've got french glass doors so I can see her outside my office
Yeah, you know when she barks during, you know, I'm on an interview a podcast
It really bugs me but you know if I didn't have her and I'd notice
Oh, I miss her bark
You know, I love when she'd go crazy and let me know that somebody was out front our handyman
The the water guys deliver a while they call my dog's name because they know she'll bark differently
When she's had her name called and well and I would miss that if it if it ever went I go
What's wrong with Nala? How come she doesn't bark at people outside anymore?
Yeah, it's it's it's rough edges bore, you know, all that smooth get it right. No, you know, that's boring
Why is your first sexual experience so important?
You talking about mine
Come on, even that's too far for me. Um, yeah
First sexual experience. Why is it very formative? Okay, you know
That
That's a good question
But it's also difficult one to answer because our first sexual experience is probably
Conception, you know, I'd say birth. We're born sexual
We're the the essence of who we are is sexuality every living thing is built to reproduce
After its own so our sexuality is the essence of who we are
We we kind of live culturally thinking well, you know, children don't become sexual until you know that
particular age whatever that might be
but the truth is, you know
Little boys little girls discover their body parts that are very young age
Oh, there's pleasure before you, you know, they understand the words of parents don't stop doing that, you know
They're they're they're they're finding the pleasure in their own body parts
And the essence of our psyche is is is our our sexuality, you know, if
So many great teachers, you know all the way from from Freud
To david data to osho to david snarch people at least i value talk about the the most profound way into who we are
Young is to our sexuality because it is the essence of who we are. So to bring that back to answering your question
I will often ask people like in a workshop, you know, again, I primarily work with men these days. Well
I 100% work with men these days
I'll ask them
What was your earliest sexual memory and it doesn't matter what it was first time you notice you had an erection first kiss first wet dream
First i'll show you mine. You show me yours first, whatever
Uh, and it can vary for you every what but i'll just say what is your first memory?
And then i'll say get it get clear in your mind. What was it?
And then i'll ask them
Did it occur in the open?
Could you go tell your folks about it?
Could it be celebrated?
Did your parents say that's amazing. Let's go get pizza. That's a you know, it's a developmental milestone
Um, or was it hidden? Was it secretive? Was it guilt-ridden? Was it shame-based?
Uh, even worse. Did it feel good? But you felt bad about it feeling good
All right, so
For about 99.9 of the people on the planet our earliest sexual experience
Was wrapped in shame
And in hidden darkness guilt i'm bad. I can't let anybody find out
So our sexuality gets cross-wired with those features
It's bad it's evil hide it
Repress it don't let it out and then that takes
You know as many different forms as there are people in terms of how that manifests from from there
So then we get to be adolescents and adults and can't figure out why
Sex is so messy so difficult so challenging. So
You know, how come isn't work how come how come it's not easy?
Yeah, people who think that they have a a low sex drive
Might actually just be
psychologically scarred from
The way that they perceived it
That's very possible. I and I've I've often said, you know, I
Will get personal I didn't discover I didn't know I could actually masturbate myself to
Ejaculation until I was a freshman in college. That's pretty late compared to most and and you know
I was kind of a late bloomer in a lot of ways around sexuality
And I was just well, that's just me
But yeah, it's very likely me growing up in a fundamental christian church where I heard messages really early
That if you lust after a woman's breast you go to all you go to hell for all eternity
You know where you know, my mom taught me to be not be like my dad
Where you know, I listen to the women that he's a jerk. He only wants one thing, you know
Yeah, there might have been some scarring that went into the you know, I'm trying to work out
You know, it's better to not have a sex drive. Oh my penis betrayed me again by getting a wreck
You know what stop doing that. You know, you know, I'm trying to work out from a first sexual experience
My first the first time I had sex the girl who I worked with at the
local
Hotel where I was the room service boy
Do you know what?
uh
fucking
What was it?
A vw loopo is a loopo loopo. It's like the site. It's smaller than a fee at 500 and it was three door
and it was in a
Uh, like an industrial estate halfway between did you have sex in the loopo?
I had I
If you think that having sex for the first time is difficult having sex for the first time in a car
That's like half the size of a jumper just turns the turns the difficulty level up to 11
um, but yeah, I maybe maybe that's I don't know what that means. We were next to a
Like a Mercedes bends mechanics. Maybe that's why I love f1 so much. I'm not sure I keep getting an erection whenever I see Lewis Hamilton
I'm not sure
Uh, we could really spend my my first attempt was in a chevy vega
You know, it probably slightly bigger slightly bigger the next time I tried it. It was on a park school bus. I got smart, right?
Yeah, very nice
Very good. Well, I mean the school bus. Yeah, but um, yeah, it's
It's it's very interesting to think about how we sort of internalize these stories
And I had a do you know dr. Paul conty is so that was stanford. I've heard that name
I couldn't tell you who he is but I have heard the name
So he did a four-part series with andrew huberman last year. I've heard that name too. Yes. Yeah, so every everybody says that name all the time
He's fantastic. They're both fantastic and um, paul does uh
evidence-based
unconscious work trauma
and such
from a very medical standpoint and um
He was talking to me. He gave me this really lovely frame very interesting about how
Formative experiences in our past
Can reshape the way that we see the entirety of that world but importantly they reshape our
Memory of what it was like before that as well
so for us to say something like uh, I get in a car accident when I'm 25 and
Then you get travel anxiety which causes you to not enjoy driving or to feel anxious when you're driving and then at 35 you tell yourself
I've never
liked driving you were like no until the age of 25 you loved it. Do you not remember you did that thing?
It's like no no no
I was anxious the whole time and this
this ability that like the fallibility and the malleability of our memory and our sense of self and our understanding of ourselves
um the fact that for sufficiently formative experiences
can
Like manipulate those and mold them in a different way. I just thought was so
It's fascinating but kind of brutal as well
Well, and maybe this is a the same another way of explaining the same thing
Every time we recall a memory we fundamentally change the memory
Because every time we recall it we're now in a different emotional state a different position different surroundings
We
Accurate memory does not exist
Right, you know what even even as we think we're remembering our earliest sexual experience
You know if there was actually a camera they're filming it
We might find out it's completely totally different
Surrounding wise than we thought so every time we recall a memory
We're altering it. So our memories keep changing over a lifetime. So um
but what but
What happens at that trauma we're talking about and that what I call the cross wiring
That's happening at an emotional level and so it doesn't matter even if our memory is accurate in terms of you know, digitally
Accurate what what matters is emotionally
How we move forward with it and so now if you know
We've been a sexual creature since birth and all of a sudden something happens that sex is hidden
Well, I better keep it hidden from from here on out and we don't make that as a conscious decision
It's just an emotional roadmap that we start following
Hmm
It's very very interesting. Okay. So we identified this and people are sitting listening to you and I talking very openly about sexual experiences
And they're going you're not supposed to do that
You're not supposed to talk openly about those things because they're going on their emotional wiring of how you're supposed to you know
Be about sex. Yeah. Well like the vw lupo opens all sorts of doors
Um three of them exactly egg precisely correct unless you can clamber out the back honestly, dude
I I and I remember how not far the passenger seat went back as well
I just thought this is what and you got to do in the passenger seat because of the steering wheel
But you guys have the steering wheel on the wrong side of the car
Well, speak for yourself. Look, we've gone through this litany of problems, right? This big big big big list and
We don't have enough time to
prescribe the panacea for all of the nice guys listening
given the fact that you've done
so many
seminars coaching sessions working with people
What have you found if you were to give the biggest movers?
of
Rehabilitation for nice guys
I don't think i've ever used that exact word for it
What what what are the uh the practices?
What are the places that they should focus on in order to start to embody themselves more honestly?
Okay, yeah be their authentic selves exactly
I'll just walk you through what I did number one. I tell people find safe people
Don't try to do this on your own. You didn't become a nice guy in social isolation
Don't try to get over it in social isolation
We have to have safe people to start releasing our shame to tell people I've got this story about myself and people go
That's not bad. That's not terrible at all. You're know, that's normal what you're describing
So we need safe people to support us release our shame perhaps mentor us
Encourage us help us face our fears. So I tell nice guys go find a coach therapist men's group. I love men's groups
do
A big chunk of my own personal
Rehabilitation in in men's groups. Uh, I was leading five men's groups a week when I was in private practice up in seattle
Um, I just I'm a believer so find men's group. Don't try to do this alone
How do you suggest to interject there? How do you know if it's a good men's group or a bad men's group?
That that's a good question and it is somewhat subjective because something a group you love might not work for me
When I started looking for something about all that existed at that time was the uh,
The robert blei methyl poetic go out in the woods beat a drum have the talking stick and say, oh
I did that I ended up in a 12-step program is where I started it not wasn't by choice. It just where I landed
Um, I got I got lucky. I landed and I was in a men's group led by a woman
Around sexual shame who liked men and so that was good for me
I tried some other men's groups that I just never connected or resonated with
A core piece I would recommend whether you're looking for a coach a therapist a men's group
Is find somebody who leads it who's actually done their own work
You mentioned embodiment quite a bit somebody who's actually gone out worked on their own stuff
You know, I I became a therapist. I got my phd in marriage and family therapy at 29 years old
Started you know a few years later started doing, you know trying to do real therapy
I'd never been to therapy
And you know, it wasn't till I got into therapy and men's groups and started working on my own
Toxic shame and my own anxieties and my own patterns that I could actually really help people
So, you know, um, it doesn't hurt to check out, you know, ask the person
What's your journey?
You know, we're we're if you worked on yourself and then just see do you connect with them?
Let's usually go place do you connect?
So go go find a coach therapist men's group 12 step group something where you get to go start revealing you releasing toxic shame
Start being honest nice guys think they're honest or anything but honest
I remember pretty early in my process
I realized almost everything I told my then wife was whatever won't rock the boat
So I I told her I'm gonna work and be an honest whenever I catch myself
Making up a story to tell you I'm gonna come tell you
I was gonna lie to you. Here's the lie. I was gonna tell you. Here's the whole truth
So I started doing that and actually I used to tell her her middle name ought to be overreact because that's
What she did and every the funny thing was what actually just started telling her the truth about shit. She'd go, okay
Thanks for telling me that I'm glad you didn't lie to me and you know, whoa, that's different
You know when I was trying to get her not to overreact she did when I just told her the truth
Yeah, okay, don't lie to me. That was it. So work on being honest and again, we need safe people usually to do that
Work on making your needs a priority
Sorry to ask yourself. What do I want? What's important to me? You know, am I do I do I need to go to the gym?
Do I need to go to the dentist? Do I need to take some time to relax?
Do I need to rest my eyes? Do I need to go read a good book?
Do I you know, how do I get my needs met and how do I let people
Help me get my needs met and how do I surround myself with people who want to help me get my needs met?
Uh start working on boundaries
That's that's a big one for nice guys is well, nobody grows into adulthood knowing how to set boundaries because
Nobody teaches children how to set boundaries
um
Because in in the real world the big people get to do whatever they want to the little people and because we were all little people
We never learned you could say no stop that i'm going to remove myself now
So learn about boundaries. I was in my thirties
In my second marriage with a phd
Before I had ever even heard of boundaries a therapist. I went to taught me about them
So start working on boundaries and then I just I think the one other piece i'll throw out there that I think is just so fundamental
Especially for guys for nice guys
go
connect with men
Go
Build a tribe of men. I've had to do that a few times in my life about seven years ago when I got married down here in
Mexico
Not yet fluent Spanish my wife only speaks Spanish
And i'm living in here working at home
I I had no guys in my life
And I went seeking and found a men's program and joined it and now
If you looked at my text messaging my calendars my email i'm on zoom i'm messaging with buddies
all the friggin time and it just
It makes everything about my world better. I'm I'm more on point with with my work
My relationship improved. I'm in better health. I'm happier
So build a connection with men. So there's about five things that are a pretty good start
Dr. Robert Glover ladies and gentlemen, Robert I
Adore your work. I think it's very much needed. It's so fascinating that it's been around for quite a while
You know and and yet this single thread of guys being overly pliable
Of resenting despite the fact that they're playing the game correctly. They think that they're doing all the rest of it
is uh
It's so fascinating and I I've today's been phenomenal. Where should people go? They want to keep up to date with your work
You've got
Trota the internet
Yeah, dr. Glover.com, you know good place to start out
It's we're in the process of rebuilding it, but you can go find good stuff
Integration nation net my new men's program
My co-author said be sure and mention the big stick
This uh, go find the big stick. Tony endlman is a certified coach. I I asked him a few years ago
Tony, what do you think about digging into everything? I've ever created and trying to put it in one book and he goes
Yeah, I'm up for that. I go, okay, and he did did a beautiful job. So, um,
dr. Glover.com integration nation net big stick
Hell yeah, Robert. I appreciate you. Thank you very much. Chris. This is a blast. Thank you so much one
If you enjoyed that episode then press here for a selection of the best clips from the podcast over the last few weeks
And don't forget to subscribe
