You've spent a lot of time studying history and writing about current events at the moment.
How would you rate your predictive ability given the current state of the world?
Were the things that you foresaw coming or things that you've been particularly surprised by?
Well, nobody gets to predict with 100% accuracy anything because among other things,
all the time things happen that you could never have seen coming.
I could never have seen COVID coming. I just didn't.
So whenever anyone boasts about their predictive capabilities,
I always think you have to deal with a certain amount of humility
because things happen all the time you couldn't see.
You can only see around the bend of the road you're coming to.
You can't see around the corner.
Yeah, I mean, some things I've written about for years,
particularly in my book, The Strange Death of Europe that came out in 2017,
which I think are sadly coming to fruition.
And I say sadly because people think that if you've predicted something and got it right,
you would feel any pleasure.
And that would only be if the thing you were predicting was something you looked forward to.
And what I was predicting was something I was dreading.
And that was the transformation of our country of birth
and many other countries in the West due to demographic change.
And I mean, every day now, pretty much somebody says to me,
gosh, I used to think what you were saying.
The Strange Death of Europe was a bit out there and now I realize you were right.
But it gives me no pleasure for them to say that.
Because I always sort of think, well, if you'd have agreed back then,
some things might not have happened.
But as Mark Stein said, demographics is destiny.
So it's one of the things you can predict with the most ease.
Did you have Victoria's Secrets plan to bring sexy back on your 2023 bingo card?
Why are Victoria's Secrets bringing sexy back?
After experimenting with 300-pound mannequins, plus-sized models, disabled models, trans models,
a male model and a 38-year-old football player,
Victoria's Secrets have made the controversial decision to switch strategy
and start using hot women to model their underwear again.
That makes commercial sense to my mind.
I'm always amazed that advertising executives find it complex, this stuff.
All you need to do is stick sexy guys on stuff and stick sexy girls on stuff
and sell all the merchandisers, which pretty much writes itself.
Yeah, I'm not particularly surprised that if you stick Lizzo in a bikini,
it's not as appealing as a bit of sales merchandise.
But, you know, live and learn, I suppose?
One of my friends owns a very big clothing company
and for a while they tried plus-sized models, mostly for women.
There's not much of a body positivity movement for men.
No, not like a beer gut movement.
The skinny fat revolution.
And he said, we've split tested this into oblivion, big girls don't sell clothes.
So when you see that, when you see a company, you know,
and some are making double plus-sized dildos or whatever,
the company is actively hurting their top line and bottom line
to be able to send the right message.
And that's all well and good.
Up until some shareholder meeting where some 70s year old guy
looks at the far right column of an Excel sheet and goes,
what the fuck's this?
Yes.
And they go, no, you don't understand.
It's this really cool new movement.
It's very progressive.
And he goes, I don't care.
I want more money than we had last year
and this is less money than we had last year.
Yeah, I mean, I suppose it all starts off from a good place
like some or many things.
But look, if you, you might agree that, you know,
it's not a good thing to sell anorexic looking models
to young women.
And that's, yeah, okay, let's all agree on that.
But you can, you can stop somewhere before morbidly obese.
You know, that's where the whole thing goes wrong
with body positivity thing.
Plus there's a place where the body positivity shouldn't occur.
It should be, I mean, if somebody is so morbidly obese
that they're at significant risk of heart failure,
you shouldn't celebrate them.
You should say, hang on a minute, steady on the donuts.
But they don't say that.
They just, they run all the way.
I wish that you could just have sort of healthy looking women
on the ads and just draw the line there.
But as ever, they sort of don't know where the line is
until you just say something wrenches them back.
And I think wrenches them back is normally,
as you say, the bottom line.
Yeah, I have been thinking about this sort of performative
empathy point for a while.
Got this idea, I need to meme it better.
But I think something like short term empathy
or the shallow pond of empathy, I've been thinking about
what is most popular in culture at the moment
is something that optimizes for its immediacy
to signal that you are a good guy or good girl.
Right.
Even if that's at the expense of the ultimate outcome
for the person.
So let's say you're able to do something giving the child ice cream.
It may be what it wants right now.
It may be bad for it long term.
But if you're the ice cream promoter for the young children,
you will be seen as a good person.
And if you're the person who's saying, hang on a second,
that's not what you want long term.
Maybe responsibility in Peterson language.
Maybe not casual sex in Louise Perry language.
Maybe not as much food as you want in body positivity language.
You're seen as bigoted or judgmental or whatever.
Because there's no countervailing force in the culture.
The unlimited empathy, people have run a long way very fast
because as you say, there's a short term gain to be seen
to be being empathetic.
Let's celebrate yourself.
But ordinarily you would have some other counterforce in the society
and different forces have provided that in history,
including the church.
But if there is no counterforce to say, for instance,
long term gratification, better than short term or whatever,
then yeah.
And that's a sort of unappealing position in our society now.
There's plenty of room for people to be in that space.
But you're still on the defensive.
We're still in a society where effectively to own an ice cream truck
in the sort of language of a child would seem to be a great thing
to have the short term thing.
Yeah.
Not many people want that role.
It's sort of uncool in some way.
It might become cool at some point in the future
when more people realize that the short term gratification thing
was leading to diabetes or whatever.
It's the same as one of the justifications, I think,
for why people aren't having children,
that upfront children, you just see a very, very large cost
on all of the joy and stuff.
What the economists put it is that the child tax,
the amount of money you have less if you have a child,
weird way around to look at the future of the species, isn't it?
If only I died with more money in my bank account.
Life of regret.
Death of regret, perhaps.
Well, it's kind of the, as well, the Mexican fisherman story.
Are you familiar with that?
The parable of the Mexican fisherman?
No, I don't think I am.
This is cool. You'll like this.
So an American businessman goes on holiday to Mexico.
And while he's there.
It's a true story.
It's a parable, though.
Got it.
Fucking hell.
He goes on holiday.
He gets taken out fishing by a local Mexican.
And he asks the Mexican how he spends his time.
The Mexican says, I fish a little on the morning.
I catch enough for my family.
We go back.
We cook.
We laugh around the fire.
And I spend time with my children.
And the American businessman goes, that's stupid.
Here's a better idea.
What you should do is actually spend most of your day fishing.
And then with the surplus fish, you could sell them at the market.
And the Mexican fisherman says, why would I do that?
So, well, once you've got the additional money,
you could start to employ some of your friends.
And they could come out fishing with you, too.
And you could catch more fish, which you could sell at the market for more money.
He says, why would I do that?
He says, well, once you've done that,
you would be able to incorporate an America
and you would maybe be able to start a canning factory
so that you could own the entire production process
and you could then sell the company for a lot of money.
He said, why would I do that?
He said, because once you've done that,
you'd be able to fish a little on the morning
and then go back and spend time with your children around the fire.
Very good.
And I often think about that as a much more direct route to happiness.
You know?
Yeah.
Well, that's the classic thing that the place you end up
is the place you started from.
There are lots of reasons why people aren't having children.
And a lot of them are simple economic things.
I mean, all of the western countries
that have terrible replacement birth rate figures
are because of very easy things to solve,
like cost of housing and things like that.
It's not hard to build affordable housing.
They've proved to be incapable of doing so.
So young people wanting to both get on the property ladder
and start a family think they have to do either or.
And they're not entirely wrong,
but that's something that governments could have sorted out
and none of them do.
They're so hopeless at it and they have been for years
under consecutive governments.
They never build enough housing so young people don't see a future,
don't feel hopeless and then don't have kids
and then everyone wonders why there's a demographic crisis.
Intergenerational competition theory
is something I learned about a couple of weeks ago.
You familiar with this?
Yeah.
I didn't know about it before, but it makes complete sense.
There was always this talk of millennials
are the first generation to have done worse than their parents.
Well, they're not the first in a while.
First in two generations.
And it seems like millennials actually probably
just about managed to get over on average.
But Gen Z materially,
difficulty in getting on the property ladder,
the most common living arrangement for men under 35
is still at home with their parents.
And yeah, it bakes in this sort of
intergenerational competitiveness
and a dissatisfaction when you look at where your parents were
and this felt sense that your parents got advantages
that you never did.
Which is usually not true.
I mean, they didn't suffer inflation at the same rate.
They suffered very high taxation in the post-war period.
We haven't had taxation as the levels it was at
in the 1960s and 70s, for instance, in the UK.
There was a time when people were top rate
taxpayers were paying 99% tax.
A friend who once in that period paid over 100% tax one year
for reasons he could still lock.
How's that possible?
It will be back tax and that sort of thing.
So, I mean, there's a tendency,
particularly among millennials and after,
to think that their parents had it very easy.
And my experience of people from that generation,
the boomer generation, it didn't feel easy at the time.
And yeah, there were certain things getting on the property
housing ladder was a little bit easier than it is,
or significantly easier.
Once you have, what is it, five times average earnings
being inadequate to get to the average property price,
you see the split go on.
But you always have to factor.
I mean, if you say, you know, the millennial,
the first ones or Gen Z were the first ones
who said whoever to have a better standard of living,
you have to bake in things like,
oh yeah, well, they had a world war, you know.
So, that's quite a big PS.
Well, there's a big footnote.
So, yeah, everyone has their challenges.
I just don't see why once you've identified them
and know the way out of them, you don't do them.
I was talking to mutual friend Eric Weinstein about this.
I also spoke to Sam about this.
I've spoken to a bunch of people.
Why in your opinion do you think everybody struggles
to agree on the truth now?
Oh, that's quite straightforward.
We can't agree on what's happened.
So, broadly speaking, an event happens now
and some people believe it has happened
and other people think it hasn't.
I mean, we've been through a number of deranging years
since we first spoke in which, for instance,
you know, they say there's been a global pandemic
which some people believe was something
which killed millions and millions of people
in their own country and think they were just about saved
from dying themselves.
And other people think it was a fake
and other people think we just massively overreacted
and other people think it was all planned
and nobody agrees what happened.
That's just to take one example.
In America, you have obviously the fact
that nobody agrees who won an election.
That's a problem.
And so you just have basic things.
Nobody can agree on it. It just happened.
I always say in America, you know,
it would be nice if we could just agree
that one thing that's just happened happened
but then nobody wants to.
It says you must be a WF shill if you believe that.
So I think it is the problem.
And then obviously underneath that is just the problem,
the fact that the treadmill of social media
has totally changed the way in which we communicate,
the way in which we learn things, absorb things.
And we don't know what the consequences of that are.
We're so early into it.
And it seems to me that among other things,
it's allowed people to have their own version of recent events,
recent history, past few days.
And so when you sit down to talk to somebody,
you can fairly swiftly work out
whether they're somebody who's open to the idea
of things that happened having happened
or whether or not they will fight you all the way.
And that just makes everything much harder
than it used to be.
And that isn't to sort of particularly pine
for the era of a mono narrative.
If that era ever particularly existed
and you read history, not clear that it did.
But it's just massively worse.
And news is coming at us at such a pace these days.
And it's just like, you know, every day feels like,
you know, a month's worth of news in the past.
Things just fly by you so fast
that you don't even have time to absorb it
before it's happened.
So I think that's part of the reason.
And in any case, the whole concept of truth
as being a desirable thing in the society
seems to have eroded from both the right and the left.
Well, truth, for instance, used to be the basis
for a university education
and the basis of university inquiry
that you sought the truth wherever it led you.
That was the point of academia, for instance.
Politics was different.
Politics was always about having to find a way around
truth and deal with it.
Addressing convenience.
Yeah, address it where you could, but, you know,
get around it if it was too awkward.
But inquiry used to be about seeking truth.
And we've been like that for a couple thousand years or more
since the Greeks, certainly.
And then it changed at some point relatively recently.
And truth is now not a desirable thing
because truth hurts people.
And it can be mean.
So it's not only that people have different opinions on things.
They don't agree that the thing we used to agree on
is worth going for.
Well, they have different facts.
But they don't agree that, I mean, they don't agree
that you should just follow truth wherever it takes you.
Because other things are prioritized over truth.
I still prioritize truth over all things if I can and try to.
And I think that's the interesting thing about the world
is finding out what is true and what is not.
But other people don't seem to have that same appetite anymore
and would rather live in lies,
which I think is very dangerous for an individual
and very dangerous for society.
In fact, it's dangerous for an individual
and lethal in a society, I'd say.
It's interesting to think about the motivations
that people have for not believing something
which is already on an unshaky foundation
of we can't agree on the thing that we're not believing about.
And Gwinda, one of my friends has this idea that
if no amount of evidence would dissuade someone
of what they believe, then they don't have a rational belief.
They have a religious ideology.
Yeah, yeah, that's Jonathan Swift beautifully put it
as if you can't reason somebody out for a position
they weren't reasoned into.
Yeah, of course.
I mean, you're dealing with dogma with many people today.
It's just they don't know which faith they belong to.
But it's dogma for sure.
I just am not very interested in their views
because I think they can't defend them.
If you can't defend your views, I'm not very interested in them
because I don't find them persuasive.
I asked Sam this about whether or not...
Obviously, whatever, 10, 15 years ago,
who's a big part of the New Atheist movement
and I guess you were tangentially...
I was a little bit of a whipper snapper.
I was a whipper snapper New Atheist.
You were an orbiter.
I was a short trousers New Atheist.
Okay.
But, you know, your book, The Madness of Crowds,
talks about the collapse of grand narratives.
One of the biggest collapses of grand narratives was religion.
So I asked Sam whether or not looking back,
he believed that his deconstruction of religion
was on balance and net good or a net negative.
What did he say?
He managed to evade being too committal, either way, I think.
But what do you think?
Well, I think it's like a lot of things that you deconstruct.
You only know afterwards
whether or not it's something you could have put back together.
It's like children with bicycles.
Very fine at taking them apart.
Very bad at putting them back together.
Not comparing Sam to a child.
But I mean, I just...
I think that is...
If it's something you notice only once you've taken it apart,
once you can't reconstruct it,
you'd realize what function it might have performed.
I said to Sam on stage a few years ago
that I thought that it would all be fine
if most atheists were as rational and level-headed as Sam.
But it's not Sam Harris all the way down.
It's like Sam Harris followed by total mentalists
and who just will not reason or rationalize anything
and are just screaming harpies of insanity.
So that's a shame.
But yes, I mean, I think that that whole thing works for some people,
but obviously it doesn't work for others.
I mean, religion is...
You know, Schopenhauer, among others,
saw it was religion was philosophy for the masses.
Absent religion completely.
There's several lots of options of what will happen.
One is that the general public
lose the overarching framework of their lives
and have nothing to replace it with.
And another one is that they do replace it with other things,
which are new religions which crop up all the time.
We have the religion of the body negativity movement.
You know, we have the religion of trans.
We have the religion of gender.
We have the religion of race and all these things
have just stepped into this void.
And they're all dogmatic things with their founding texts.
They've all got their own catechisms of a kind.
Priests have priests.
They have excommunication rights.
And my only observation really would be on that
is that I preferred the old gods.
You know, I preferred the old priesthood, funnily enough,
partly because we knew its flaws.
And the sweet point where you see the flaws of religious belief
but can still live through it is one even I can,
where I can especially feel nostalgic for
because I don't like the new priesthood.
I find them as corrupt as any priesthood in history
with the negative attribute that not everyone's woken up to them yet.
I mean, do we have in our culture an equivalent,
for instance, of the meme of the pedophile priest?
I don't think we do.
I mean, for instance, I would love it if the sort of adults
who push gender dysmorphia stuff on children
were regarded as the equivalent of pedophile priests.
I think that'd be fine.
But it doesn't come with that yet.
It's like the Catholic Church in Boston circa 1950.
The priests are still fiddling with the kids
but no one wants to talk about it.
So...
On the planet, they're the only 100% stress-free,
wild harvested venison that you can get.
Here's my super secret hack.
If you are sick of buying meat that always goes off,
put it in the freezer from frozen, salt both sides of it,
put it in an air fryer for 10 to 12 minutes each side,
and you have a perfectly cooked steak from frozen
that will never go off because it's going from freezer to mouth
in the space of 25 minutes.
It's a complete game changer.
All of their cuts are spectacular
and you can get them frozen, delivered to your door.
But their venison sticks are my favorite while I've been on the road.
You can get the healthiest red meat on the planet
delivered directly to your door
and get 20% off by going to the link in the description below
or heading to mowinuivenison.com
slash modernwisdom
and using the code modernwisdom at checkout.
That's M-A-U-I-N-U-I
venison.com slash modernwisdom
and modernwisdom at checkout.
It makes me think as we were talking earlier on
about some of the ways in which
lots of decisions need to be made
and you don't know how the outcomes are going to occur
that there are no solutions, only trade-offs.
I keep coming back to that in my personal life as well
but thinking about what people want to optimize for
in their existence,
there are no solutions ultimately
and you have to give up certain things.
You don't have to give up everything.
Well, no, there's certainly better solutions,
but the world is trying to maximize everything.
It goes back to the shallow pond of empathy
that accepting that trade-offs are an inevitability
doesn't fit into that paradigm.
We will always optimize for what feels most pleasurable
or empathetic in the short term.
I don't know. I don't feel that.
That's how it plays out, I think.
For a lot of people, if they have no character.
What do you optimize for?
I try to optimize for peace.
That seems to be the thing that for me,
in my personal life, I try to do.
If the price is my sanity, the cost is too high
no matter what it is.
I continually throw that rule out of the window all the time.
That's what I try and aim for.
I love the peace in your private life.
I try.
It reminds me of Lady Bracknell's line about the general
at the end of the importance of being earnest.
She says, the general was essentially a man of peace
except in his domestic life.
But you're the other way around.
You're a man of peace in your domestic life.
Except for my private life.
Maybe what I generally am.
You're a highly agreeable person.
I try as best I can to keep a lid on it.
Yeah.
This lack of meaning and people's desire there.
Absolutely fervent desire to try and fill that hole
with as many things as they can.
Like Lizzo.
Like Lizzo, indeed.
Did you see the stories that came out about Lizzo?
Oh, it was wonderful.
About her Amsterdam.
My favorite story of the year.
Long way.
For the people that don't know,
Lizzo was on tour in Amsterdam.
Took her backup dances to the Red Light District.
Yes.
And made the backup dancers,
some of the backup dancers eat bananas out of the vaginas
of Amsterdamian strippers.
My view is what happened here was that Lizzo
thought you could outsource the eating
of your five fruit and veggie day.
To the vagina of the stripper?
She's so reluctant to eat healthfully.
She even outsources the five fruit and veggie day.
That's my view.
Well, it seems to me that both Lizzo,
Ellen DeGeneres, Jimmy Kimmel,
all of these people who up front.
Oh, isn't it wonderful?
It's so great.
It's always nice.
Not the Lizzo look nice,
but the squeaky clean Ellen DeGeneres thing,
just dancing.
And of course, they're horrible in real life.
Of course.
It's a sort of rule that, by the way,
one of the biggest public figures is that the ones
who are most sort of sweetie-sweetie in public
tend to be the nastiest in private.
Sometimes the opposite can be true.
Some people who have thought to have a very hard edge in public
can actually be lovely, lovely people in private.
Margaret Thatcher was a good example.
Very, very nice to people around her,
but could make tough decisions.
To me, it's a counter signal.
If I see someone doing the Lizzo thing
of I am so body positivity,
it becomes their identity
because they're a flaming sword,
card carrying,
paragon of whatever this thing is.
Well, it's also a bit like
the Jimmy Savile,
the hospital,
what was it called? It still goes,
but there was a hospital for children
that he raised money for all the time.
And whenever anyone would try to do an investigation,
Savile would go,
it's going to hurt the hospital for kids.
Are you sure you want to run that story?
That's going to hurt the hospital.
So there are lots of people in our own age
who have a thing like that.
They build the equivalent of the Jimmy Savile
Children's Hospital facade up
in order to protect themselves.
Are you saying that Lizzo's work
with the body positivity movement
is in a case to try and effectively
put a wall of large
bodied people in front of it?
A very difficult wall to get over.
I think it's probably easy to get over.
Getting around it might be more difficult.
Yeah, I got into a car and it ran out of gas.
So,
I had this idea about
why
certain women
are very pro body positivity movement.
And I was listening to Bill Burr
do a live show,
and he said,
ladies, if you could only support
the WNBA the way that you support
a fat chick
who is gaining weight
and no longer a threat to you,
there are more numbers than the NBA is.
And I realized that
some non-zero number
of women may deep down
in their darker moments realize
that they don't discourage
some of their friends from
gaining weight because
they can eat themselves out of their
intersexual competition for potential partners.
It's always welcome on men like that as well.
How do we play that game?
I mean, this is going to show a low side of my character.
But you can't say always that you're sad
if
somebody you're not very close to, but you knew
and you see them after some years and then
they're fat.
I mean, you can't say there isn't a slight sort of
you'll never guess
because you've become fat.
There are different versions of that with men, I think.
And I think men can be
complicit in that as well.
You know, the thrill
would offend bolds early.
I think that's very common.
Well, there'll be a German word for that.
Of course.
For the scalp.
Yeah.
I think lots of people do that.
But it's a pretty bad thing to encourage among people.
But yeah, I think it is part of the competition
taking out of the competition for sure.
I was thinking as well about how
material conditions
you were saying before
people's parents
maybe had it better in some ways, but also
would have had it way worse.
Material conditions
often don't impact
people's demeanors in the way that they might have predicted.
Like, rich people
can be bitter idiots
and poor people can be grateful heroes.
Although, as George Orwell said, by the age of 50
every man gets the face he deserves.
What do you mean by that?
I think that's actually true.
I think there's a certain age, it might not be 50 now,
but it's a certain age where you do show your life
on your face.
Oh yeah, I mean, for instance, somebody
is very profoundly depressed
for a long time
that writes itself across the face.
It writes itself in their eyes, I think.
Particularly unhappiness
writes itself on somebody's face.
Joy does as well.
If somebody smiles a lot, they have laugh lines.
Yes, there's a great truth in it.
We know that
because we judge people by
their faces, by the way they interact with us
by the way they look at us.
It's perfectly sensible.
I've found a quote the other day that said
people with a low self-esteem will always
find a way to be miserable.
And it made me think that
material conditions a lot of the time are what?
Young people, but many people
lay at the feet of their
despondency or their nihilism
or their critical nature
or whatever it might be.
And I've seen enough of my friends
and friends
vacillate through
varying levels of
affluence or
relationship or singletonness or whatever.
And one of the things
sometimes it impacts the way that they show up.
But many times they are the common denominator
between all of those situations.
And the material conditions don't actually impact
the way that they show up all that much.
Well, there's a problem of analyzing this
which is that anyone who's successful
inevitably looks at their own path
to some extent pre-ordained.
I mean, almost.
I mean, there are some people with wild luck.
But most people,
a lot of people, let me say, who are successful
look back and they think, well, I don't understand
this person who hasn't made it to the same
rung of the ladder as I have. Why didn't they work hard?
There's a sort of
callousness actually that can creep in there.
But equally, people are
to a great extent masters their own fate.
And it's a very hard one
to analyze that, as I said, because the outriders
skew the whole statistics.
I mean, the outrider who does very well,
not everyone can do
what he or she has done.
But he or she is likely to think
they could have done.
Well, you retroactively, lots of people that achieve success
look back at the route that was
particularly designed by them,
for them to achieve the very specific
type of success that they managed to get.
And then retrofit that as a universal law
that anybody else could follow.
One of the things I've realized is I've spent
more time digging into personal growth
and self-development and all of that stuff.
So much of it is post-hoc rationalization
about one person's very
idiosyncratic solution for this thing.
And they say, these are the universal
principles of X, Y and Z.
And you go, no, they're not.
They're highly personal.
It's your personality just spun up
and tuned up to 11.
Yeah, I mean, most successful
people I've ever met have some
story of their own
growth which
is both inspiring
and not replicable
because they're unusual people.
Well, what's the alternative, as you said before?
Like, you have to lay the agency at your
own feet because if you were to
perhaps admit the truth, which is
I was in the right place at the right time.
Well, that can be the case.
Not many people say that, but some do.
Yeah, if you're in Britain in the 80s,
for instance, it's a good time to make money.
Easier, better
than today.
Some people will say, yeah, it was a great place at the right time.
But most people do sort of
vaguely think they've made it,
it was sort of preordained.
I will do that to some extent.
I often describe myself as being lucky
and then need somebody to remind me
of how hard I've worked.
Yeah.
I had a friend who joined
Goldman Sachs in 1998
and he said he had
an absolute golden period
for about 10 years.
Yeah, a little bit less.
He said it was already starting to
wind down. Before Lehman, brother.
Yeah.
Some of that was to do with DEI, a very early
instantiation of DEI. That's right.
Yes, there's several books that make that clear
in the subtext, yeah. Several books
that make it clear about some of the hiring processes going on.
Yeah, 2006, he was already seeing it.
But he told me
he made a trade
on 9-11.
He made a very
particular trade
and bypassed all of the
security
concerns, the limits
on everything and
the pit boss or whatever. He's just some young
dude. He's been there for two years, right? Out of
whatever university or something. What did his boss think
of the trade? Came over and said, like,
what the fuck are you
doing? And he said, look
at this. If this, then that. If this, then that.
Ran it all the way down. He said, this is the outcome.
This is what's going to happen. And he's like,
we would like, I don't know what.
So first off, he was concerned that it was going to
go wrong. And then he made
the most
ungodly amount of money in the space of three hours.
And then all the markets shut for 10
days from September 12th.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
And the only
organization that had spare capital
was Goldman because of this
particular trade. Wow.
He was basically told
we may need to cut this. I'll check with him.
He was basically told,
go home. Don't tell anybody.
Yeah, of course. That you made this. He shorted
the market. Yeah, I mean, it was
widely thought of 9-11 that because
the stock market tanked, of course, immediately
and we didn't know if there's going to be a world war, if this was
a world war.
And it was regarded very
swiftly as actually being the duty
of Wall Street to
not do that.
But Bush came back. You remember he did that
ground zero announcement.
And that was as much
for the stock market
as it was for the fucking popular.
Yeah, absolutely. Well, yes, because
stock market collapses. I mean, many, many more
Americans, I can't remember the percentage,
are invested in the stock market than in Britain.
I mean, like three times more or something
Americans. With 401K.
Yeah, more than 50% of the population
in America has some
investment in the stock market. So it's
different from in the UK where
when the pound was shorted in the 1990s
by
Soros and others,
they
a lot of British people are not that sympathetic because
they don't see themselves as being involved
in the stock market, which of course they are, they just
don't know it. You mentioned
George Orwell, the telegraph
recently spoke about his
wife's biography or autobiography.
Oh, there's a new biography of Sonia Orwell, yeah.
George Orwell was sadistic,
misogynistic, homophobic and sometimes
violent. Biographer of the legendary
writer's wife says, darkness
that runs through 1984
is a reflection of his soul.
Should we unperson, George?
Well, it would be the obvious
end point to the full circle.
Full circle.
Yeah, this is just a way for
the author to get publicity is to repeat
things everyone knew. I mean,
George Orwell held the views
of his time about gay men.
For instance, we know he was a little bit homophobic,
but it was the 1940s,
you know,
Nancy Boys and so on, as he would have called him.
Were not,
you know, people weren't
like a 1990s
taxi driver's insult that they've thrown out.
No, it was a sort of word that Orwell
and people of his generation would use,
you know, fairies or something.
And he does in some of his letters and some of his articles.
But I mean, so fucking what?
I don't care.
I mean,
was he sadistic probably?
In some ways,
sometimes,
was, could he be cruel and nasty
probably being a human being?
I just think that the
absurdity of our age of judging people
and passing, well, you know, just, just
wait till people do that to you.
Yeah. You know, wait, wait till somebody
weighs up your own
life in the balance and finds
you wanting, you know.
I mean, I think it's preposterous.
Human beings are what we are.
Being amazed
us in the past.
There's always just an expression of our own vanity
and thinking we've got past all that.
It's like the way, if a
friend of mine was saying to me the other day when I was at Oxford,
if you want to get a grant
to study these days, say in English,
and you would choose
Shakespeare as your
subject of study, which is sort of unusual
these days, you would,
you would, for instance, have to
find Shakespeare guilty of, you know,
racism, colonialist thinking
and so on. And it doesn't seem to strike
these people that actually their job is not
to judge Shakespeare. Shakespeare judges
us.
And he might find us wanting.
How so?
Well, he gives us visions of
the universe and our place
in it, which it would do us well to listen
to.
And that might include
exposing human follies,
human weakness, human pride,
human sin, human lust,
the tendency to
do evil in the name of doing good
or think you're doing good and do great harm.
So much more.
All of this
is in Shakespeare's work and his characters
and the things he created
in his mind and his work.
I think that if you look
at a panoply of a vision like
that, you should think, I wonder
what he's telling us. Rather
than I wonder how I can judge him.
What's the point of the letter?
It's so boring.
Human being from the past, inhuman
being in the past, shocker.
Has it always been this way? Has it always been
people of the
present judging people of yesterday by the
standards of today?
Well, most people didn't
have time in the past to engage in that.
Too busy trying to put food on the table.
Surviving past the age of 25.
But what it is in our
current society is there's a very strange
lack of respect for wisdom.
Henry Kissinger said this in the early years
of the internet. He said all the knowledge
is there, but where's the wisdom?
People might not like me quoting Dr.
Kissinger in that regard, but
again, he knows a lot more than
most of his critics.
I do think that's
a strict oddity of the age.
I think the oddity, the vanity of trying to judge
everyone from the past by our current standards
is just absurd.
You think you know more than Shakespeare?
You think you know more than Orwell?
These are minnows
snapping
giants. I don't care
for them.
One
potentially unfortunate situation is
that women's mental health
is in part down to
misogynistic songs.
When BTS lead singer Young Cook
changed to a more misogynistic
music, a disturbing trend followed.
A psychiatrist's point of view
on BTS' Young Cook and the messages
of pop music.
Early in their teen career, BTS took
a deliberate stance to refrain from
objectifying or sexualizing women.
Despite going against a music industry norm,
BTS achieved huge success.
Now, as part of his solo launch,
different imagery has surfaced
in Young Cook songs.
They include a woman telling her man
that she will be your fantasy
and swallow your pride
to make him never think about cheating.
Lyrics that identify...
You said swallow your pride
in a particularly suggestive way.
I've got more to go here.
Lyrics that identify women
as those hoes over there
with a male rapper telling his female partner,
I wanked before you came
so that I can fuck you longer.
Of course, in reality, Young Cook songs
are part of the course, or even tame.
Does that work, by the way, what you just described?
You've never
increased your stamina by
having a warm-up?
I thought the lyrics were more likely.
I did that before you came and I just let you go to bed.
I kind of got a lie down.
I did that before you came and that's why I texted
saying I'm not so fussed about you.
I don't have a quick dinner now.
One of my friends had
a rubric for this that was masturbate
before you evaluate.
Oh, well, that's true.
That can be sensible advice.
I'm not sure if I liked you or I was just horny.
But no, girls, mental health...
You were reading out these charming lyrics.
Those hoes over there I wanked
before you came so that I can fuck you longer.
Well,
where to start?
Downstream from K-pop is a litany of female mental health problems.
That's what I'm saying.
There's a problem here, isn't there?
Because on the one hand, popular culture does have
a massive impact on the way we see the world.
I was at a gym recently
where I actually asked
the gym staff to turn off the music
because it was a load of
rap, a very unpleasant rap,
with repeated use of the N-word in it.
Obviously, it was a black rapper or so I was assuming.
Right.
Do you find yourself mouthing along to the lyrics
and not worried about it?
That's right.
What problem could possibly emerge
from singing along?
Mate, just to interject there,
someone got cancelled on TikTok
for mouthing the N-word along to a song.
Right.
It's possible.
It's no longer the sound of the word,
it's the mouth shape
that that word engenders.
Well, we know that it's a magical word
in our time, which even the speaking
of suddenly summons up the demons of
the past. Lord Voldemort, yeah.
Very, very strange.
But, no, I just said to the gym staff,
I just don't want to hear it because I don't want
I just don't want it in the background
of my life, you know.
Was it that gym that we trained at?
We can discuss this another time.
But anyway.
No, I just don't like, I have certain things I don't want
on my ears and that's one actually.
I have no interest in hearing the word
as a banned word. So why would I want it
in my mental background?
Yeah.
But anyway, the point is, of course
popular culture has a huge impact on people.
It has a huge impact on the way in which people see themselves.
It does. It does.
At the same time, you can overstate it.
You know, somebody is not generally unhappy
just because of the popular culture.
Apart from anything else because you can easily step out of it
as I try to do.
And, you know,
be a part of your time but not be its creature
that says.
And
so no, I think it's a sort of
weak excuse for unhappiness.
The popular culture happens not to be to your taste
or avoid it. Get out.
Look up from the screen.
When is cancel culture going to come for
rap lyrics?
Because it seems to me that, you know, it's worth fighting
against the misogyny of
air conditioning temperatures in offices
that are conditioned
to the male body temperature as opposed to
the female body temperature or
I mean the
the levity of the era
is just astonishing to me.
You know, lots of people
attribute to me this quote that I was not quite
right. I don't think it's quite from me but
that we'll be talking about gender pronouns
when the barbarians break in.
But I've said something like it
quite a few times but I mean
you know
gender norms and air conditioning
it's the sort of thing that you would be discussing
just before you will get
you know machetted.
I'm totally serious about this.
It's
sometimes it's like
one of the things that actually
genuinely shocked me in recent weeks
particularly after Hamas massacre in Israel
was you know and
something which I do think at some point when it's
all died down a bit
might be a moment
of
I've got to say this carefully
but a moment of
seriousness which is
you know
take the music festival within a few miles
of the Gaza border that Hamas attacked
all the young people there
were at this sort of peace rave
and
this isn't in any way to victim blame
these are people just
wanting to dance
and
dance into the early morning and
I think it was called the peace rave
the peace and love rave something like that
and then this hideous
other world broke into
them and to their lives and ended the lives
of hundreds of them.
There's something
haunting about this I find because it's
especially haunting because
it sort of demonstrates that
your slogans and your attitudes
only go so far
and they can't keep out
some of the things that are lurking at the edges
and I think that when I hear
people whining about
minor things
if you have any idea
of the world out there
if you had any idea of the things that was lurking
you couldn't possibly
be complaining about this
How do you think
Gaze for Gaza will get on long term?
Well the joke at the moment is that there aren't enough tall
buildings in Gaza to throw Gaze for Gaza
off
but
I mean these people
I've said very often
they're part of the same phenomenon as
turkeys for Christmas and chickens for KFC
I mean
I'm fed up with these infringe
idiot cases
they're so mentally defective
for these people
and incredibly narcissistic
I can be queer and also celebrate
so no you fucking can't fuck off
I can both argue for a two state solution
and also celebrate queerness and also not let myself down
no you can't
no you can't
you can't do all those things at some point you've got to choose
I've got a video to show you
let me show you this video
Can someone please explain to me
what this means
what does reproductive justice
mean
free Palestine
what does that even mean
like what does it mean
I'm pretty sure
abortions are illegal
in Palestine
unless it's like a super medical emergency
and the mother will die
from what I understand actually a lot of Palestinians
have to go to Israel
to get the abortions
they want so what does this mean
what
it's such a huge sign
there's
five people holding this thing
it's massive
that's very good
that's Danny the other half of Ryan
who wasn't there the day that you
came
reproductive justice means free Palestine
what do you think
this is just
incredibly ignorant young people in America
who have been taught
this weird
version of the world where all oppressions
are taken into lock
you're either the majority or the minority
for minority rights and issues
or for majority rights and issues
and all minority rights and issues
intersect and overlap
so that if you're queer somehow
no it's not even that
these ignoramuses
who couldn't point to the river Jordan
if you showed it to them on a map
walk along the streets of America
shout you know from the river to the sea
Palestine will be free because I think the Palestinians
where they've mapped a very
specific version
of American racial politics
onto everything else in the world
it's the same thing people who talk about
colonizers
there's this language
of colonizers
apartheid all this stuff
and
they've just tried to map it everywhere
actually it's highly selectively
highly selectively
the people who are talking about
colonizers
when I saw that
the other day on the streets of London
I thought yes if only there was a name
for large numbers of people who came from outside
to a country
and if only we could identify
what they might be called in Britain
oh it would be immigrants wouldn't it
do you want to call immigrants colonizers
in Britain
you sure you want to follow this logical conclusion
talk about indigenous peoples
oh okay great anyway you don't want to apply that
might there be a country
or a continent say oh Europe
where you don't want to start talking about the indigenous peoples
I notice that people don't
but if you do want to
welcome to hell
so
no all it is happening is a very selective mapping
of a particular interpretation of the world
that very
dumb people in America have tried to
put on certain selective other cases
and it doesn't work
but
may they never find out
how much it doesn't work
may they never find out
I wish them bliss
in their ignorance because if their
ignorance ever gets popped it will be
as brutal a day as can be imagined
I've been thinking
for a good while about how
hypocrisy is a purpose
built tool for the internet to use
it's like catnip for the internet
it's the thing because
the reason it's so purpose built
it's like one of those
can you spot the difference competitions on a touch screen
iPad this is what's on the left this is what's on the right
and what you have is here's something that someone once said
or a position that they used to hold
and here is what they hold now
or here is what they do in their real life
here is whatever and it's kind of what
you're identifying here that you have
a worldview which is self-contradictory
you're just using different words for one thing
that is almost exactly the same for another thing
and then complaining about this one
saying don't look over here
don't look over here yeah
everyone is inconsistent to some extent
and I don't think by the way
I mean on hypocrisy
for instance
I can see a scenario where somebody might say
oh Douglas you're hypocritical on this
particular question I might say well
there are some things I think are even more important
than not being a hypocrite such as
I don't know surviving
the worst thing about him is his hypocrisy
hypocrisy
there's a weird
hypocrisy is the easiest one to catch people on
is the truth of that
it's the easiest one to spot
you just
and they do it
as you say on this is what this person said
20 years ago this is what they say now
get human being in growing up
shocker
people
are allowed to evolve
they change their minds
it would be rather boring to say the same thing
and think the same thing only for
70 years
but yeah people find
hypocrisy very easy to see
and it's about the only vice you can really catch somebody on
I think
because if you say one thing publicly
and do another thing privately
it's about the only one that people are really confident on
or most other
moral judgments are better or worse
of sort of ebbed away but people still
are able to judge hypocrisy
but
I think
there are worse things
I think not standing up for your
loved ones not standing up for your country
not standing up for
yourselves in the face of
horrible opposition
from within without probably worse than hypocrisy
I heard you say recently you don't have to agree
with everyone's principle to respect the principle
they're sticking to
did I say that? yeah sounds good
I didn't know I said that but yeah
but the reason that I like that
is
I think it shows
why
the bravery conversation
or standing up for something that you believe in
is something that is a pride
at least then if someone is prepared to stand up for
whatever their beliefs are
that you can assume they're telling the truth
especially if they pay a high price for it
it's one of the reasons why I have
a good amount of faith that Sam believes
the things that he says
why would he not? he pays an unbelievably
high price to continue to flip flop
from one tribe to another tribe
to another tribe
I don't think it's an unbelievably high price but a price
relatively high price
I mean very early
in some people's careers or when people first make it
to public notice people say things like
do you really believe what you say
the answer to which for most people
is or ought to be well why would I say it
if I didn't believe it
there are people who obviously do say stuff
for lolls
or clicks or monetary purpose
but at a certain point
you've got to accept that the person thinks what they think
and you know
respect them for it or at least do them the decency
of believing that they mean it
and I think that even on people I disagree with
wildly I mean it's such a boring argument
that one some people use it particularly on the left
I wonder if they actually even believe it
I think they don't I think they're just doing it for money
well that's an easier way to try to ignore them
than actually trying to contend with the possibility
of what they're saying is something they mean
and believe and trying to work out if there's anything in it
much easier to say the person's
only doing it because they're paid or something
yeah that's the
shill grifter accusation
very boring accusation
I don't doubt there are some people who that is the case with
but way fewer than
way fewer than people think
Michael Malis has a hierarchy
of different
I think it's like the hierarchy of grifters
if you say Michael Malis my face immediately
sort of starts to smile
it's terrible
one of the it's like
industry plant
paid opposition
it goes all the way up
and he said that he descended recently
he's not quite at paid opposition but I think he's industry plant now
I think Lex Friedman is
paid opposition
his paid is different from
controlled opposition
maybe it's controlled opposition I don't fucking know
these are such weird
terms that are cropped up in our area
again I think they're sort of low
resolution explanations
really really low resolution
explanations for things
whenever I hear somebody describe things as that
I always sort of know you're not dealing with somebody who actually understands the world
do you find there's a
definitely a trend of
conspiratorial thinking
conspiracism
much stronger in our adopted
homeland than it is in the UK
yes that's true
what do you think
are you
how conspiracy-pilled are you
do you see
I mean it's
this is the moment when people say
ahhh controlled opposition
hahahaha
this is me allowing you to graduate
I think I talked about this on the boys cast
that's right
briefly and
various people wrote to me saying ah there you go
that's proof that you're paid
you're glowing as it's called
you heard you're glowing
so
tell me if I'm wrong with this Mark
you're the resident glow expert
but you're glowing
means you're like a
planted
person who's saying
something that is outing there
like
it's an intelligence operation
that's breached the surface and people can see it
they comment on tiktok saying
you're glowing
the people that alleged to be FBI
who are at certain protests
or wearing chinos and t-shirts
yeah
so you're conspiratorial
the thing with conspiracy theories is very difficult
in our era because some of the conspiracies are true
of course have come true
well known to be true
lab leak conspiracy
theory probably true
they shouldn't have ever called
nobody should ever have called it a conspiracy theory
because it wasn't a conspiracy theory
it was one of a set of hypotheticals
to explain what happened
with covid
so a lot of things get called
conspiracy which are not
they're just hypotheses
that should be allowed to remain on the table
and that makes a certain type of person increasingly prone
to believe
that everything that's called a conspiracy theory
is not a conspiracy theory
and before you know it you get
sanish individuals thinking
that the moon landings were a conspiracy
that we didn't land on the moon
the American didn't land on the moon
I don't know whether the people who now claim that
believe that the Russians also faked it
it's an interesting question to ask them
do you think that the soviets
were capable of getting to the moon but the Americans were not
the Americans set up
like a blow fan
and a flag on a dodgy
papier-mache set
to make it or did the Soviets and Americans both agree
to pretend to have gone to the moon but not really
have gone
none of it makes sense to my mind
but I have noticed
and it's actually all the literature that demonstrates
that there's certain types of mental
problems
that people have that make them
disproportionately likely to believe conspiracy theories
on
mass
and one of them is paranoia
the more paranoid a person is
more likely to believe that sort of thing
and that's the observation in my own life
I've known a number of people who've gone into the world
of conspiracy and not come out
and they are all people who have suffered
paranoid episodes in their lives
which adds up
so fear and genders
as I say
it's a sort of low resolution explanation
for complex phenomena
and I think
it's also that
conspiracy theories come about and are used
by people who
and this isn't an original point many people have made
the claims about them
are made by and large
by people who
don't understand how unbelievably
chaotic the world actually is
or can't face it
so
they can't face the fact that
yeah somebody you followed in the newspapers every day
all of your life did actually just die in a
freak car crash because the driver was drunk
they can't bear the idea
the world can't be that cruel
it can't be that random
you want a bed
it's got to be coordination it can't be coincident
exactly
so people who can't cope
with the wild frivolity of the roulette
table of our lives
um
always go to the there must be somebody behind it
there must be somebody who's controlling all this
you're joking nobody's controlling this
if anyone's controlling the damn thing I'd want to know by now
but of course they're not
so it's a very unsatisfactory
place to arrive at in your life
and by the way
my own observation is not very good for people personally
because they start to lose agency
themselves
I'm at the mercy of the world
and the real answer is
the world doesn't care
doesn't even know that you exist
it is deaf to you
the ability
for people to hold two conflicting thoughts
in their mind at the same time is supposed to be the mark
of sophisticated thinking
but it does show up here
which is the government is both
so useless that they can't get anything right
and so sophisticated that they're able to coordinate these
oh that's masses of versions the Arab world
is filled with that the Muslim world
is filled with that things like
I've noticed this repeated on my travels things like
um 9-11
was an inside job of the Americans
to allow the Jews out of the World Trade Center
and also yay 9-11
good for Osama bin Laden
they can do both
uh there's a somebody I
knew interviewed the father
of um
the main 9-11 hijacker
his name's gone out of my mind I don't care
he must he should be forgotten but
interviewed the father in Jordan
and he was simultaneously capable
of holding in his head that his son was a great
Shahid Amater for Islam
and that 9-11
was an inside job of the Americans
well what the fuck
like choose
it's I mean
do you think your son was an agent of the FBI
and also a
martyr like hey
people do this the Muslim world is particularly
prone to conspiratorial thinking
because it's a
source of flattery to itself
to explain why they have
created so few successful societies
and Bernard Lewis made this point many years
ago that the problem in the Muslim
world is that there's a they have to
find explanations because
if you're given the revelations of Muhammad
and you're told it's the last revelation ever from God
and that you are the people who have
received this revelation and everything's
going to go great for you because you've got the revelation
and then like the Jews you have one
country that does much better than any of your
countries and you know you
can't get the economy of
most of your country going at all and you can't
provide for most of your citizenry and nobody
is coming up the ladder and the economies
in the dust and all this you've got to
find an explanation for it because like what
we were given the revelation and
they're doing much better
there's massive
things like that that sit underneath the
movements of our time which
maybe billions of
people on the planet believe
and they believe them because it flatters themselves
it flatters the governments
who aspire to run these countries
or claim to run these countries
um yeah
billions of people believe this
shit. I was thinking
about
the extremist world view beliefs
largely in the west but
I guess everywhere and I was wondering
whether
we have finally moved beyond peak woke
and a study came up
recently that was kind of interesting
researchers from change research
polled over a thousand registered US
voters from 18 to 34
a majority of both women and men
consider far rightism and far leftism
to be red flags in a potential partner
76% of women and 59% of men
consider identifying as a MAGA Republican
to be a large turnoff
64% of men and 55% of women
say they'd also swipe left on someone
identifying as a communist
55% of women
64% of men and 55% of women
swipe left on a communist that's a no
55% of men said that listening
to Joe Rogan was a red flag
41% of men
said the same for a woman
being into astrology
oh well that's now you're going with that one
if somebody says what's your start sign
date over
there's a really famous
meme where
it's on iMessage and the
text says
mum
what time was I born at
and the reply from mum says
stay the fuck away from that girl
the heart
sinks when it comes up
it's a question
for shame
33% of men
said
for Black Lives Matter it was a red flag
if they say Black Lives Matter 14% of women
53% of women said
it was a red flag if they refused
to see the Barbie movie
31% of men
58% of women
red flag if they say there are only
32 genders
34% of men
54% of women thought they identify as a
conservative
33% of men for they identify as a liberal
so next time you're vibing with someone
maybe save the podcast recommendations
and daily horoscopes for the second date
55% of women
say that listening to Joe Rogan was a red flag
I wonder if the species has any
future
because they can't listen to Joe Rogan
or anything else
these people are wiping out
very significant numbers
of potential future partners
how weird
Joe turning up in that
that's amazing
what happened to all the good old people
who used to say I don't have an opinion on that
what happened to those guys
I got pulled in
a good bit recently
on the internet for
not commenting on the recent
socio-political
furor that's happening in the Middle East
and I quoted you
pseudonymously
and said
I'm trying to make a habit of something which is very rare on the internet
to not comment on something which I know nothing about
it's a very good rule
and yet
it's the rarest
thing of all
people care about my
insights into health
and fitness
my learnings about
social psychology
why shouldn't my fiscal advice
be important
why shouldn't my views on immigration
it's much to be avoided that
I mean in the end
you make much less of a dick of yourself
if you don't start talking about everything
there's
I mean
somebody recently
sent me an article
a relatively well known person
published about the Middle East
and near the opening said
I don't really know much
about the Middle East
but this is
in that case don't speak
don't speak and say but
if you don't know
just agree not to do it
that's one reason
why there's a lot of
television these days in the UK
where you can be invited on
to debate
the total ignoramus who's only there
for balance
for off-comrelated balance
and I just can't do that stuff anymore
it's too
demeaning
that if there's a subject you know about
a war that you've covered
or covered many times
as in my case with Israel
Hamas wars
and Israel Hezbollah wars
I just can't be sitting there
with somebody
in a basic way but there's a lot of
women
who are currently invited on things for balance
firstly because they're women
secondly because they provide usually a left-wing perspective
and that's needed if it's me
that's on as well
and you know I just is so depressing
to give your informed opinion
about something you've seen and reported on first hand
and then they go to the other person
and they go well like
I think it's
why don't I just at home
why I could be doing
anything else
and I've got to listen to somebody who doesn't know
what they're talking about whisk up an opinion
live on air
it's so depressing
but masses of people are like that and it's just
yeah
if you don't know about it don't talk about it
it's a very good law of thumb or try it out in private
with friends and mates and like
try to learn something read a book
are we morally obliged to
have a take on everything
no
no
most people's opinion doesn't matter
I mean it just doesn't
and I also think
the people who spend their time online
broadly speaking
trying to broadcast out their opinions on things
should be told more often
doesn't matter
doesn't matter what you think
I mean one of my rules on
on any war
is
to write a try to give advice to a government
you know
this is what the Israelis must do
this is what the Ukrainians must do
I need to listen to you
I mean
first of all you don't live in the country
unless you live in a country
be pretty damn sure
you should be a bit humble
about telling other people about
their lives
and also like who made you
the tactician
on everything
well it was the same as Covid
everyone became a virology or epidemiology expert
and then they became a withdrawal from
Afghanistan expert
and then they became a Ukraine expert
and now they're all Middle East experts
and I just think
it should be regarded as a massive red flag
that the person in question is
normally what's happened is they've downloaded
the set of opinions they believe that their tribe
should have
and that's why the morons marching in London
with the exception of the Muslims who just whipped up all the time
by the fact that the Jews do anything
Muslims don't care about other Muslims
Arabs don't care about other Arabs
nobody cares about the Palestinians
nobody cares about them
can't tell you how little they care about them
Jordanians loathe them
the Egyptians loathe them
the Lebanese loathe them
they've done nothing for the Palestinians
for 70 years
and yet
whenever the Israelis do anything
more Muslims across the west come out on the streets
because they hate the Jews
and you know
hundreds of thousands of people have been killed in Yemen
not a peep
on the streets of Britain and other places
certainly not big protests
Bashar al-Assad has killed more Muslims
in the last 10 years
then everybody on every side killed
in every war involving Israel
since 1948 including the war of independence
nobody cares
the Muslims don't come out on the streets
they don't care
the only thing they care about
is the hatred of the Jews
and it motivates them like nothing else
because it hits at the core of their self-esteem
they can't bear it
and so that one is
very interesting to me
but
there are these fellow travelers
who go along with them
who have downloaded as I say
a sort of pathetic American interpretation
of colonization
called justice, reproductive rights
and try to map everything on
and
my friend's got a theory called
Gwinda's theory of bespoke bullshit
many don't have an opinion
until they're asked for it
at which point they cobble together a viewpoint
from women half remembered hearsay
before deciding that this two minute
two minute old makeshift opinion
will be their new hill to die on
that's very good
my friend Freddie Gray at the Spectator
he says each time a new big thing emerges
which is the Bluffer's Guide
to whatever
and it usually involves
saying things like
well they better get this done before the brutal
Afghan winter kicks in
who made you an expert on like
meteorology in Afghanistan
like what?
the Ukrainians have got to make this advance
before the dreaded Ukrainian May
and I just
I mean I tried
the Bluffer's Guide
I try for instance never to write
about any foreign policy issue
if it's about a country I've not visited
preferably visited multiple times
I just
I can't bring myself to do it
I find it too embarrassing
it's so interesting when you talk about
knowing
one opinion that a person holds
and from that one opinion being able to accurately predict
everything else that they believe
that mono thinking
just proves that you're not a serious thinker
well I just
it's fairly obvious if for instance you say
what's the problem with the big bearded guy
winning the women's weightlifting
I go okay I know all of your other opinions as well
and to be fair
that probably works the other way around as well to a great extent
the interesting thing with
most people is where they're slightly out of sorts
with their own political side
well that's exactly the point
that
if it's been a long time since
you were surprised
by the opinion of your favorite
thinker or writer or commentator
or whatever it is
that's probably a reliable signal
that they're not really thinking for themselves
if you're just permanently
it's like an old leather pair of shoes
here we go again
the covid things happened and I can already predict
such and such is
opinion on it
every single time
you know the idiosyncrasies of this person's
very very particular
worldview
well that's because it's not theirs
yeah of course it's everybody else's
it's outsourced thinking
and what's really sad about that is that
it means that you're not really living your life
I mean you're living a
pastiche of
a prescribed set of opinions
that's so sad, I mean it's so sad
the wasted energies and wasted lives
of people who've just
excluded a set of opinions and they're just
running them
well that's not your life, it's just someone else's life
you're just replaying
what was that quote you told me about
being shunted to the side of the road of your own
it's a Philip Larkin quote
from a poem of his, yeah it's a description
of a couple and he says that something is
pushing them to the side of their own lives
it's a beautiful line
terrifying line, horrifying line
should make everyone
judge for themselves
oh well it means
that there's a life that you
hoped to live
you saw yourself living
and you got pushed to the side
of it and ended up not living that life
I think
a large number of people have that
almost all unhappy people I've met
have that feeling to some extent
and then you've got a
choice of poisons, one of which is to
choose the poison of
other people held me back
another is to face up to the fact
that you're in some way a coward
or a victim of
circumstance or something else
but I think a lot, I mean
you know one thing that young people
can be encouraged to do is to set out
the sort of life they would like to live
imagine the sort of life they would like to live and the name for it
and
working it out is sometimes difficult, sometimes not
but if you do
have that image of your life that you think
it should be lived and you end up
not living it, that is
particularly if you can feel yourself slowly being pushed away from it
I think that's a
terrible, terrible feeling
it's like watching your own demise
occur second by second
fortunately I've never felt it but I definitely fear it
where do you go
to find
or to avoid cowardice or to find
resilience or
bravery because a lot of the time
the easier path is easier
and it's the one that's got the least resistance
surround yourself with courageous people
surround yourself
with brave people
and that can be
bravery of all sorts of different kinds
when I turned 40
I had a dinner
which I think you weren't invited to
but it's only because you weren't in town
if I remember rightly but
I did get a lot of my favourite people in the room
at least and it was interesting that
a friend
made a speech in which he said it's striking
the names of the people around the table
but some of whom will be familiar to listeners
but a friend of mine gave a very touching
speech I was very moved by
how noticeable it was that Douglas surrounded himself
with courageous people
and it was from a very wide array
of bits of the world
and different disciplines and so on and I was really touched by that
because I hadn't particularly noticed that I'd done it
but then I realized I sort of had
that actually yes I had
a massive subconsciously but maybe now consciously
I wanted to be around courageous people
because I think that courage is something that rubs off on other people
I think it's enormously
to be desired
to be around courageous people
and there might be different types of courage
some of it physical, some of it
mental
so
that's one thing, surround yourself with courageous people
or at least not cowards
not cretins, not the sort of people who just
say the same things that everyone's meant to say
and so on. There's as many ways people
can get out of this non-life
that they are being shunted into
one of my friends
it wasn't a friend at the time
I just met him for the first time but someone that had been
interested in for a good while
I met in Austin a while ago
and
he'd had an interesting story and he'd
faced a cancellation over the last few years
and he'd sort of told me the
story and he said
he sat on some rooftop
later
late at night talking about this thing
and he was regaling me with the story
and he said throughout my entire life I thought I was a hard man
I like to
do man things and surround myself with masculine
people and I was into
guns and shooting and fitness
and friends with navy seals and all the rest of it
and he said my entire life I was scared that I was a coward
terrified that I was a coward
and he said
in my darker moments
I could always hear my better self
clearing his throat in the room next door
beautiful
and then this cancellation thing came along
and he said
even the people that do really hard things
hard intellectual work
hard training work, hard physical work
all the rest of it
there's a difference in the kind of difficulty
that they do because it's elected
you've chosen to do the hard
workout but when
the entire world comes to bear
on you
in a way that feels like chaos and catastrophe
whipped up into a whirlwind
and he said
yeah I
that was a genuine test
and he was
very grateful he said my better self
stopped his coughing and
kicked the door in and came to help
but just
I could always hear my better self clearing
his throat in the room next door
the thing with that is
the difference between
situations
you find yourself in that are dangerous
through choice and
ones that you've
been thrust into
and you probably know
that the consequence of being
thrust into a dangerous situation is much more
likely to lead to
PTSD and things like that
than
if you choose to
and
I've been fortunate in my life the most
dangerous situations I've been in have been ones I've chosen
to be in
and that's very different
but yes I'm glad he found
out that he was more
courageous than he feared
think about that what a beautiful line
to be more courageous than you feared
you were
almost this war
against yourself
this fear of your own
nature
I mean there's a horrible example I sometimes use
but I mean
if you're ever mugged
for your wallet let alone you're mugged with
somebody else let alone if you're mugged with a girl
that you were with or looking after and you just handed it over
there's like there's several reasons
that it's worth handing over the wallet for
one of which is like
why do I need to risk getting shot for like
or stabbed for a hundred
bucks and a
few phone calls to the bank
so that's like the reason
to hand over the wallet
the reason not to hand over the wallet
is are you sure that you're not going
to spend the succeeding weeks
dreaming dreams of pornographic violence
against your attacker
and thinking
thinking of how you're going to torture him
if you could get your hands on him and the brutal way
in which you would have revenge if you ever
find him
it might be easy to just get your head kicked in a bit
and are you sure you can live with
the version of yourself that is you handing over the wallet
I said this recently in a piece in New York Post
about the people on the New York subway
where there's this awful thing you've probably seen
where people you know like a woman
will be being abused by some maniac
fentanyl-addled
you know
drug addict and
people like either look into their phones
including men or they will get their phones
up and like record
and
I said Douglass is trying to get people killed
and I wasn't obviously but what I was saying was
where are the men
just like stand up
and like confront the guy if he's
got a woman by her hair
and is parading around the carriage
and
yeah the backlash was like
what do you know
these people might get killed if they step in
but might say
yeah but also
maybe we'll have a more civil society
if people don't think they can go around
and do this stuff without consequence
um
I'd like to see
far more standing up like that
I think it's a pathetic position
particularly for men to be in to sit there like
getting out their mobile phones
but you know it's everyone's choice
I don't exactly know what I would do
in some of the situations I've seen
you know read about on the New York subway
didn't that guy do a thing
and now is he in jail did he get jailed for it
he's charged he's coming up
for trial
this is a
Daniel Needy I think
former Marine
there was a guy on the subway who was
clearly off his head on
various drugs
was very very violent
towards people in the carriage
some point tore off his top and was like
I'm going to kill you or something like this
and this Marine at that point stepped in
got him into a choke hold
was clearly not meaning to do it
but the choke hold was too hard
and he
suffocated the guy and he died at the scene
and that man then the ex-Marine
is charged with
I think murder if not I think
manslaughter
um and
he could face a very significant prison sentence
there's a lot of discussion in New York as to whether or not a New York jury would actually convict him
where's he being convicted
in New York right
um because
you could say
that the guy
because there's a racial element like with everything in America
uh and because
the former Marine was white
and the guy off his head
uh was black
there was an attempt of course to put the
racial lens on it
and we'll see if a New York jury
which will be comprised
half or so of women
who have been on the subway
who have probably had unpleasant interactions
um
will convict this man for stepping in
and genuinely think that he meant to kill the guy
or just
this was like a good Samaritan act gone wrong
but it's
it's very salutary that
that sort of stuff
there was a guy in London about 15 years ago
he very much haunted me because
the fiance the girlfriend did a victim impact statement
that was particularly harrowing
that they were on the top of a bus in London
a guy on the bus started throwing chips
like people's heads
and her fiance
got up to say look
mate lay off and the guy stabbed him
he died
and that's an account and in
the wake of a story like that a lot more people
in the society will be craven on the bus
because they'll have
that example in their head
and my fear about this case in the New York Marine case
is that he
the Marine by doing what
he did and it going wrong
and the publicity it got will stop other people
doing good Samaritan
100% will have done while it's pending
while it's pending so a lot rides off
the verdict
that's a lot of pressure
and in America with a jury when you're on one of these
cases where the society
could break out in rioting I'm not sure
it will for this guy because the victim wasn't enormously
um
upstanding as a member of the community and had
I don't think it was videoed or at least they didn't see the
quite a lot of it was videoed but he'd also
had previous things where he had like done
a whole litany like a laundry
list of times that he'd been
arrested for
for violent conduct
so he won't be that sympathetic
a character but then there are quite a lot of
unsympathetic characters who get dragged through
the the laundry of racial justice
stuff in America and become saints
I won't name any names
but
going back to that sort of way you go when you need more
resilience thing and the bravery piece
what was that C.S.
Lewis quote about
about the times not being optimal
oh yeah what's that
oh that's one of my favorite
one of my favorite sermons ever given was by C.S. Lewis
University church in Oxford in October
1939
um yes I love that
Lewis was a master of prose
as well as theological writing and he
um he gave this beautiful beautiful
sermon in which he said
yes he said um you know the conditions
are not optimal at the moment
um the search for truth and beauty
that our species goes through
you know is sort of going through such a trial
um but he says the point is the conditions
never were optimal they never are
he says even those periods of history
which which seem to be
tranquil
like the 19th century
turn out on closer inspection to be filled with
crises, alarms, panics and all the rest of it
he says if
human if humankind
had put off the search for truth and beauty
until the conditions were optimal the search would
never have begun
and the main point he makes
is that
um there is something wonderful
and unusual about human beings
and he says that the ants
for instance have chosen their own route
they've chosen safety and the security of the
hive and presumably
they have their rewards
but as he says he says men are different
and
he gives this beautiful list
I think I can remember it he says
they propound mathematical
theorems in the league of cells
they quote the latest
poem whilst advancing on the walls
of Quebec
make jokes on scaffolds
and comb their hair at the
gates of Thermopylae
this is not
panache he says
it is our nature
fuck that's cool
it's true as well in my observation
absolutely true
well because I've seen people in
beleaguered cities many times
cities under fire, cities under bombardment
cities that are being raised to the ground
and um
and human life goes on
it's an extraordinary thing
people continue their studies if they can
people continue their family
life if they can
they
they've realized that the conditions
will never be optimal
they can be better and they can be worse
but they're never perfect and I think that the real
lesson of what Lewis is saying is
and I think it's an important lesson for young people in our time
don't put off whatever it is
you're meant to do until the situation is
optimal
don't
fail to pursue what it is you think
you're meant to pursue in your life until
you have total tranquility
for instance you know that you have
the house or the apartment you would like until
you have the relationship you would like until
you have the don't put it off until then
or until the world is peaceful
which will never
happen
never happen never has happened never will
happen
don't put it off till then because if you put it off
till then it means you'll put it
off forever
so do whatever you're meant to be doing now
start now if you haven't started already and if you started
already don't go any slower
for God's sake
and this is part of
the you know the cost of our
times I've said this before
but part of the cost of our times
is the enormous expense of energy
on idiotic things that you can do nothing about
I think we should say to more people
don't howl at the moon
don't shake your fists at the skies
get on with what you're meant to be doing
and that will be
different for everybody
but I just
I'm very
well
I'm too irritable to
put up with
going at the slow speed that a lot of people
want to make us all go out these days
so
I
want them out of my way
yeah I think a lot about
the
a rise of victimhood culture
and it's got no time for
it seems to me that
an existential crisis is actually a luxurious position
to be in because the bottom levels of
Maslow's hierarchy of needs have been sorted
and
victimhood culture is so rampant
at the moment because the human
systems
demand for challenge
is outstripping reality's ability to
deliver it to it
all of the problems, most of the problems
that previously would have captured the front of our
attention have been moved out of the way
absolutely
our sensitivity to challenge has now
been tuned up
I think that's true, by the way
I feel sometimes
increasingly like I'm just from a different world
than the one we're now in
certainly a different society
I'm sure it was the same with you
when you were growing up but the Britain I grew up
in was a place which
liked resilience
I mean we
admired resilience
we didn't admire people who
whined and mulled
in fact those are the people you avoided
at all costs
ah she's a whiner
god he's a whiner
you know and people said things like
you know
that's one of my favourites
how are you mustn't grumble
now I would say well actually I've got
stage 4 cancer
I'm not sure that's grumbling
I know but we talked about it like that
people from that generation still say things
I've offended that generation who's got cancer at the moment
she's like oh so boring
so boring
everyone I grew up with was like that
now you might say there's something unhealthy about that
but there's actually something healthy about it too
and
there's something healthy about
assuming that everyone has their troubles
and so they don't need you to add yours to their list
of things to worry about that day
and you know
cheer people up and encourage them where you can
and so on and so they don't bring them down
it's a weird sort of
self-fulfilling prophecy of
pedestalising victimhood
that there is a limitless
sky on how much
victimhood you can claim
whereas if your
status and your prestige
is downstream from your accomplishments
there is a limit
on how much you can accomplish because you need to go out
and fucking do it
reality is going to constrain how
much impressive stuff you can go and do
but there is a
ineffable
universe of
athlete's foot and my gluten intolerance
and my chronic flatulence
you know whatever else
those are things that you can just continue
to accumulate like trinkets
I just find
those people boring
I just don't care for victimhood
I think it's
an undesirable emotion
it's a sign of a rather undesirable
person
but I don't know
why we've given into this
I just genuinely, particularly in Britain
I'm just baffled by it because it wasn't the country
we had
when you said your solution for courage was to surround yourself
with courageous people
if you kind of get this
mimetic wave almost
moving through where fewer courageous people
are around which creates fewer
courageous role models which means to
yeah, yeah, yeah
and you have the thing of men being persuaded
to become cringing eunuchs
not a good thing
well that's another reason why
this conversation
around the guy in the subway is so interesting
because
is he
really supposed to stand up for the women
or is that, is he mansplaining
well if he mansplains
while he stops a woman
being dragged around by her hair
well of course the answer to that is
there's no such thing as mansplaining
or at least it's not very important
get on to something more important
like women not being assaulted on the subway
you know, choose your priorities
with the denial of sex differences
would lead to the conclusion that
that woman can
why shouldn't the women stand up
why shouldn't they use their upper body weight
yes, yeah, to push this
fentanyl fuel maniac off this
lady well as I say
it's a luxury belief that one
then it doesn't meet reality very well
I'm not sure anyone
would be very happy if the men in the carriage
said to the women in the carriage
go on, go on, your turn
yeah, we've had our
centuries of patriarchal
hierarchy
there's one that got my goat recently
with them
it always happens now
whenever anything comes up about conflict
Hillary Clinton was one of the worst culprits
of doing this but they always say this thing
one of the reasons you've got to stop any war
once it starts is they say
the first victims of war are women
they're fucking not
the men are men
who do most of the fighting and the dying
Hillary Clinton's point is
well, they're widows and then
ah, yeah
the poor widows of the men that are dead
yeah, actually the British
MOD has a thing of
there's a special section now
dedicated I think thanks to the impressive
insight of that military expert Angelina Jolie
they have
a special bit of the MOD
dedicated to women in conflict
the suffering of women in conflict
why not have a suffering of men in conflict as well
such weird priorities our age
it's totally unserious
this age is so unserious
so why you can't help thinking that at some point
the maniacs, the barbarians
will just break in
because we've made ourselves so weak
but it's so captivating
right, this is what I meant when I said
you know, have we progressed beyond peak woke
because it seems to me like
both the hyper woke
and hyper anti woke thing
is capturing so much
of the attention
I'm so bored of these people, they're so ridiculous
can't spend any more
of my life listening
to them, I don't want
to listen to the slowest kid in the class
I don't want to go at his or her
speed, I don't want
to talk to somebody so mentally
impaired that they think
that we are a
weirdly hemaphroditic species
or that you can
that the clown fish
is a useful species
to interpret behavior
of human beings
we can't go at this speed
no, no
20 years ago
at the dawn of the internet age
we had hoped that we would get so much farther
in the 21st century
and here we are with this
stupid society
slowed down by maniacs
debating the first thing
we knew boy or girl
like no
not going at that speed
Emo Radacanu
did an advert for HSBC
recently which you may have missed
HSBC rewrote
three classic fairy tales
their book is called
fairer tales and it shows that women
don't need men at all
with financial attitudes shaped as early as 5 years old
the new book challenges traditional
gender stereotypes, the new book
called fairer tales, princesses doing it for themselves
reimagines Cinderella
sleeping beauty in Rapunzel
as successful business women
Prince Charming
successful business women
Prince Charming is a raised as the main character
Emo Radacanu
read to them, so in the end
the princesses didn't need a prince to save them
they set up their own businesses
saved their money and then spent it very wisely
maybe one day you'll buy a tower
or set up your own shoe business
that's a quote
said the tennis player
that's the worst
I read Meghan Markle's book
The Bench
and that's worse
that's worse
wow
yeah
what an inspiring tale
fairer tales
princesses doing it for themselves
have you seen the
South Park episode where
Cartman wakes up
he has a nightmare
you told me about this over lunch yesterday
for the people that haven't seen it
Cartman has a nightmare
he is a diverse black woman
his character is recast
and all of his friends, Kenny and everyone else
are diverse female
or trans racial characters
and then Cartman wakes up from the nightmare
and his mother comes in
are you having another dream where
once again all my favourite characters
in the cartoons have been replaced
by definitely diverse women
and she goes it's okay Cartman
the CEO of Disney
isn't hiding under your bed
would you check
would you check mum
okay I checked she's not there
I'm worried that she's going to come out again
replace all my favourite characters
with definitely diverse women
I love those guys god they keep doing it
yeah I mean it's the same thing with
there was a rather unappealing
young woman who
was meant to be playing
Snow White and the new Disney Snow White
Rachel Ziegler
no no no somebody else
is it?
she said
Prince Charming wasn't a prince he was a stalker
yeah and she didn't need
Prince Charming to discover
that she could be the woman she could be
I mean this is like
sub Barack Obama
circa 2007
the princess is the person
she's been waiting for
your sister's keeper
why don't they invent new
that's what I can never understand with that
why don't they just invent new tales instead of
screwing up every existing tale that's loved
make your boring movie about
an inspirational tale
of a woman who wants to start a business
and then does and has some success
I mean okay
make that intro film
and Ram Sack and Rapal
pillage all of the storehouse
of stories that people liked
Brett Cooper's playing Snow White for Daily Wide
did you see that announcement?
what? you don't seen this
let me tell you
Jeremy Boring and Ben Shapiro
are doing their own live action remake of Snow White
with Brett Cooper
as Snow White
because she's
like West End trained
supposedly a very well trained actor
who can sing apparently
like the triple threat podcast act sing
and they announced it
the other week it's going to be coming out next year
god I hope they'd slay Disney
there's a rumor
that Disney has had to
reshoot a ton of scenes
including all of the dwarf
scenes because originally the dwarves weren't dwarves
they were
like a multi-racial
just group of different people
they were diverse ethnic women
it was the southern
thing again
but apparently
this is just a rumor but apparently they've reshot it
all of the scenes with the dwarves
to CGI actual dwarfs
so they've gone full
yeah because I know that there was
a revolt of the dwarves
which is something you don't hear every day
there was a revolt of the dwarves because
of course dwarf actors who have
their equity cards
are annoyed because there's not many dead
dwarves
you'd have presumed that there should have at least been seven
plus a stunt
actor
one to do all seven
stunts
well you could have 14 I guess it depends how
demanding the acting
how much logistics you want to spread around the dwarf actor community
but the point is that there actually was
apparently a rebellion about this because these are some of the few
dead cert roles we've got
is this not the same
the people who didn't cast that
people that would say we can only have a gay actor
playing a gay man and we can only have a black actor
playing a black man and we can only have
those people are such
I won't use the word
yeah I mean that again
we haven't got time to go at the pace of these people
acting is
pretending to be other people
people will be shocked
that most people who play Hamlet are not
themselves members of the Danish royal family
welcome to the world of make believe
a charity shop
in Swansea asked people not
to donate sex toys
Barnardo's customers have been asked
to refrain from donating used and unused
marital aids as they
aren't quite the sort of toys we're
looking for
when they say we want like
your old books, your old toys, they didn't mean
sex toys
I think that's a perfectly good policy for a second
hand shop
customers were reminded of the core rifling through the second
door
you don't
what have they got in here
is there a dressing room
customers were also reminded
that the branch had CCTV
so that these items can be traced back
to the original owners
oh
that means that you
there's like a
what's he called that thing in Australia
the boomerang
that's a boomerang effect
then it's back on your doorstep
the next morning
why can't I get rid of this thing
get it over the hedge
but he keeps landing in Barnardo's
it's a dildo that will never die
thank you for that story
is there a lesson we can take
from this
I think just be careful where you put your dildos
there's a moral of the story
never leave your dildo in Barnardo's
definitely not in the bargain bin
school in Lafayette
has refused to celebrate Halloween
because it isn't inclusive while going
all out for LGBT plus history month
is there much history
with LGBT
plus gay history
I mean there are lots of gay people in history
and there is that
but it's also what we used to call history
there isn't much
tea history
there's
bee history
I mean there are sort of I'm a bit skeptical
about bisexuality but
there's a bit of bisexuality in history of course
but I mean again these people are such
ignorant nurses they never know anything
I can't tell you Chris I mean I have to deal with some of this shit
and
they just don't know anything and they keep
it's like the Orwell thing
they're so called discoveries as if people didn't know them before
and
everybody knew most of the stuff that they are trying to bring out
and it's just very tedious
and again
what's happened to the mainstream
thing of it why aren't we concentrating on big
subjects big authors big historical issues
instead of this boring slow
pace
we're here at ARC
and we're going to be attending at some point this week
I can't remember
the question is something about a better vision for the future
a more positive vision for the future
a better story
sorry John
what is your
how would
how do you think that we can begin to
tell a more positive
story for the future because it seems to me
that much of the
proposals
are quite easily criticized and often rightly so
but
there's this sort of zero some view of happiness
and growth that somebody else's happiness somehow
detracts from mine
well that's a particularly British view of course
very much yeah yeah yeah
that guy's got something is because I've not got it
he's taking it from me
yeah but what's a more positive vision of the future
well one would be that we're not
facing imminent apocalypse and
catastrophe all the time
from every possible direction
and particularly not ones that people have whipped up a new generation
into a fervour over
I mean I think the green apocalyptic
thing is particularly damaging to young people
I think it's very very bad for their mental health
very had very very detrimental
to their
sense of how they build a future
and I think a lot of young people have been lied to
about the proximity
of
global climate catastrophe
I mean every time there isn't an actual
catastrophe going on in the world
our leaders go straight back to the climate catastrophe
and the climate crisis
they now call it
what is happening is not a crisis
maybe a problem to be managed
but
there's a luxury in calling such things a crisis
a crisis is like
my shoes are on fire
that's a crisis
not like it's possible that in 40 years
we'll need more AC
I don't see that as a crisis
but
so yes
I think that in general there are several things that are
big stories
big narratives of people being spun
which are incredibly innovating
that is they sap energy out of the society
you can feel it
the hopelessness if you tell young people
they're not going to live into adulthood because they're all going to burn to death
the hopelessness of saying
you can't change anything
or that this is the trajectory we're on
one of the other ones in the green stuff
is the hopelessness of saying to people
effectively
you shouldn't leave any footprint on the planet
including children
and
just to put one
thing out there about the hopelessness
of that
there's this new thing that many cities have signed up to
including London
which is a future in which among other things
we will not be allowed to move around
very much and we will be allowed a flight
perhaps every six years I think it is
what's this?
what's it called?
I'm blanking on the name
it's this new proposal for cities in 2030 or something
the city car has signed up London to it
it's one of these carbon neutral
fantasies
no fun 2030
and one of them is that you won't be allowed
to fly more than once every X number of years
and of course none of it
makes any sense because among other things
all that means is
apart from the fact that the airline industry is destroyed
is that what it means is the cost
of an airline ticket will be like
40 times higher
but
so they always assume you can do all of these things
and nothing will change
amazingly you'll be able to put a rule like that in
and you won't destroy the airline industry or whatever
but all of it is just so
anti-human
I mean it is so anti-human
the aspiration of human beings
should not be
to be born fight against
the patriarchy leave no carbon
footprint and die in the most
ethically
fine manner
preferably taken out at
a Swiss clinic
you know and then like burnt in a cardboard box
it's not a very heroic narrative
you know
and I think that
actually we do orient our lives around
stories and around narratives
and we should not have
the
unique narrative that I've just laid out
we should have heroic narratives
I mean for instance you know the narrative of
the of adventure
of life being an adventure
that you set out
on a path and hope
you set yourself out on a heroic path
or at least an exciting path
you know I mean
the counterpoint of the one I laid out earlier
of the one you know
you don't know
the account part of the one I laid out earlier
which is the you know everything that's going to happen
if you go along this path of
things other people have persuaded you
to say
is well you know where you're going
you know everything to say
and you know kind of what trajectory your life will be on
I say well yeah and there's another trajectory as well
and it's the one that I
and I suspect you
we've got ourselves in our life which is I don't know exactly
I don't know with that certainty
I don't know what'll
happen but if I put one foot
fairly sure
footedly in front of the next
and
and tread well
and
orient myself by
things like truth
sure I don't have the certainty
but
it's an adventure
and it's my adventure
your adventure
you actually own it and then
fancy that you'll actually have your life
you can feel proud of what you got to
right because you weren't being ventriloquized
by somebody else's
you didn't spend your life saying things you don't know
or mean or believe
or just
repeating like a parrot
in order to keep in
with a group of people
you shouldn't seek the affirmation
from
you will live your life
remember that the outcomes that most people get
are ones that you don't want in any case
the average American is
obese, divorced and with less than 1k in the bank
so
doing what everybody else does
sounds like a very surefire
strategy but the outcomes
are ones that you don't want
and that can be the case
with financially successful people
I mean it can be the case
with people I often say that
people who go into professions which they don't like
and again it's interesting
some of them are
there are ones that people apologize for as you talk to them
you notice that
normally these days one of the biggest self-deprecating
professions is lawyers
you say to somebody what are you doing
I'm a lawyer
why that
five years in full-time education
three years in developing
and normally it's like they think oh well it's not very
interesting or something but I think
why wouldn't you do something where you went I am a lawyer
it's fantastic I love
doing this
that's British lawyers again for you
I've seen Americans do that as well
my point is they're financially
well rewarded
and there's rules you can follow
on that
there are ones I don't understand
if you are doing a job
that pays you well
and allows you to provide you for your loved ones
that's worth doing
even if it's not your optimal role
doing a role that you don't much care for
and you're not providing for other people
and you don't see any particular purposes
that's probably not a good idea
or you could go
you know that there are other options and other routes open to you
that would allow you to also provide for the family
or the
the bravery narrative is definitely
one that I think is lacking
and this risk aversion that we have
this young people
getting their driver's licenses later than ever
most commonly living arrangement
for men under the age of 35 is still living at home
with their parents
such an awful stat
people going into full-time employment later than ever
and I think about you know when we were
actually no you are the worst person to talk about this
you told me you didn't get your driver's license until some
ungodly age
but most people
couldn't wait
they manifest similarly
most people
17 years old in the UK, driver's license
I want to be free, I want to be liberated
I don't want to have to be asking mum and dad for lifts
etc etc
there's not a narrative of
adventure
I think that is important
if you don't have a narrative of adventure
and success
and an idea of what that looks like
you know you are disproportionately likely
to live a
more miserable life
I think probably both of us
to some extent have worked
our way out as we've
done it and
you know trodden a path
is not completely clear
and if you said to me what are you going to do in 10 years
I couldn't particularly tell you
roughly what I'd like to do
but it's not entirely clear
it might be if I was in
a corporate law firm and hoping to make partner
or something like that but
the lack of
clarity on it
should be energizing
I'd have thought
that's what's exciting about it
also for
the desire for certainty
which is also exactly where the conspiracism comes from
because it removes
random chance from the world
and makes everything coordinated
rather than coincidental
that desire for certainty
really dissuades
people from going and doing something
which has potentially
outsized outcomes
look at what happens the narrative of
leaving home
or leaving the village or leaving the town
there's every reason
not to go
because if you go
you
risk a lot of things
one of them is failing
and
if you go
and you fail
then you have to go back
to where you were from
with your tail between your legs
and then you can console yourself
that you tried it but it didn't work
a lot of people
even make the try
because they think it won't work
so they never leave
and
other people go and they finally make it to the city
and that's as a story as old as our species
they finally make it to the city or large gathering place
and they make it there
you know
and one of the reasons why New York is a thrilling city
is it's filled with people making it
you know
I mean plenty of people
who will fail
it's very harsh in a way
because
the two are so close together
a millionaires blocks
will have
a veteran with a sign
lying on the street
outside
and then you get
that simultaneous thing of success
and the
mirror of it
of desperate failure
I don't mean that a judgmental
in the case of the Vefa but desperate
your life
very close to each other
and I suspect that both of these things
fire up New Yorkers all the time
yeah well you're getting to see how far you could
go and how far you could fall
shown in front of you all the time
there's an interesting study
by Candice Blake in Australia
that looked at
wealth inequality
and local ecologies positively
predicting
self
sexualization
of women in online dating profiles
so I think I followed that
if
there is high wealth inequality
women both see the sort of
partner they could get in their wildest dreams
under their worst nightmares
and it positively predicts
more sexualized images
in online dating profiles and social media
and her
argument was that
it
amps up
a woman's
competitive edge in terms of finding
a partner that they think would be able to
ensure they don't end
up
down at the bottom end of the inequality distribution
and instead they end up
in the clouds where they've seen people's
outcomes occurring
well of course there are also people who fake it
well that's the effective way to play the game
I was once in India
and I had a guide
who I got talking to and I said
I said
we were talking about how
easy or otherwise dating was
in the outskirts of Delhi
which means the slums and he said
the trick is
he did describe it as a trick
if you meet a girl you like
you go for a date with her but you borrow your friend's shoes
for instance
there will be a friend who has a pair of trainers
and you borrow his shoes
for the date and then like another time
you might borrow a friend's motorbike
so like the pool of men
helps like swap
right okay and the idea is
they have one good dating outfit and vehicle
between ten people yes and he said
the idea was that you get the woman to say she loves you
and she'll marry you and then
you do the reveal it was somebody else's shoes
your shit shoes yeah
which I thought was both
horrific
admirable he told it to me like that
and horribly
recognizable
think of all the people who splash
around money in restaurants and things
you don't really have it at all
pretend to live above their means or do live above their means
it's all to try
to entrap a mate
I think people do a lot for sex
yeah I know I've seen
Douglas Murray ladies and gentlemen
Douglas I really appreciate you
what's coming up next what can people expect over the next few months
I don't know
I don't know what I expect over the next few months
I'm going to a couple of war zones and we'll
report back
I appreciate you thank you mate
thank you
thank you very much for tuning in if you enjoyed that episode
with Douglas you will love my full length
over two hour long podcast
with Jordan Peterson
go on
give it a tap
