One of the things that we've spoken about privately that we haven't yet spoken about publicly is
victimhood. And James Cantor came on the show. He's a sex researcher. He gave me this really
interesting quote I wanted you to react to. Shifting from aiding victims to aiding everyone who
claims victimhood has led to an awful lot of charlatanism. Shifting from doing good to looking
good has led to an awful lot of virtue signaling. Their interaction is now western culture at
least online. What do you think about that? I think it's true. And if you think about,
you know, I believe people respond to incentives. That's fundamentally the driving force of all
human behavior. We respond to incentives. If you incentivize victimhood, you're going to get victims.
And I think online is really the shift that happens because the online world rewards it and
it also allows people to fake victimhood in a way that in person you can't really. Like if you see
someone living in a massive house, you go, well, you may be in victim in some ways, but you are
actually well taken care of here. But online, you can create any avatar you want. And that avatar
can be projected onto the online space from a mansion. And that's kind of where we are.
Yeah, the fact that our opinions are more important than our deeds and our words are scrutinized while
our actions are done in private. You know, how many people have we seen over the last few years?
Ellen DeGeneres, Lizzo, who's that late night host that just got popped for apparently being a
Jimmy Fallon, I think, allegedly has these people that outwardly are supposed to be
champion for the underclass, like I'm supporting women of all sizes or I'm supporting people that
have different sexual orientations or I do the whatever. And then you find out behind the scenes
that they can't even treat a PA with dignity. I don't know, it seems to me like
being someone who out front proselytizes about standing up for the underclass
is almost becoming a red flag to go. I probably should scrutinize what's actually going on behind
the scenes here. When I was a stand-up comedian in the comedy world, there's a golden rule of this.
The more a comedian talks about how he's a male feminist on stage, the sleazier he is backstage.
It's like a golden rule never fails, always the same. So anyone who goes on stage and talks
about how brilliant they are, they're always, always, always sleazy and evil behind the scenes.
It's just how it works. And I think it's actually, it's a kind of compensatory mechanism.
People who are hiding a bunch of shit have to go out and then pretend to be something they're not.
The morality sort of stands on the shoulders of this performative bullshit. Is there a solution
to this? Is there a way that we can scrutinize, given that people's deeds and their actions and
their words and their opinions are always going to be far apart? I think that we are living through
a digital revolution for which we're not prepared. Naturally, that's what revolution is, right? It's
a change in the paradigm of how we exist. So I think that 10, 15, 20 years from now, we will
look back at the way we use social media now and be horrified by it. It'll be a little bit like
tobacco companies promoting cigarettes as a healthy thing to do. And then we'll be like, whoa,
this was actually causing a lot of damage. So I think the answer to this is a healthier
relationship with the online world in particular. My hope is that we get past this stage and work
out how to use all of that stuff better. I see it in myself, the way I use social media now is
very different to the way I would have used it even two years ago. I'm much more responsible with
the way I use it. And I mean in terms of my own life, in terms of how much time I spend on them,
what I do, but also in terms of the way I act on social media, because I am trying to be more
responsible in what I say is very easy. And I think especially on X or Twitter, whatever you want to
call it, to get clicks. And I know exactly how to do that, which is dunk on somebody.
And I spend less and less of my time doing that now, because I don't think that makes the world
better. I don't think it makes me better. It's very rare on Twitter to have someone
break the fourth wall and say, that was out of order. You're not allowed to say that. Everybody
plays this sort of permanent game of sardonic tennis. Here's some blasé comment about how you
suck at some smart snipe back at what you said. And oh, I hit it back across the net with something
else. No one actually says what they should say, which is that's fucking out of order.
And then you're approved if you do. This is why it's disincentivized. This is coming back to the
point about incentives. Social media rewards certain types of behavior and punishes others. So
if you're the guy that says, maybe we shouldn't pile on this person. If your team is doing the
piling on, you're like the one who's not willing. Do you know what I mean? You're not willing to
join in with stoning somebody. And that's why you're a loser. That's the model that we operate in.
So being responsible is disincentivized. I love this idea that an absurd ideological belief or
an extreme ideological belief is a show of fealty to your own side and a threat display to the other.
And the more absurd or extreme the belief, the more likely it is that your own side can trust
you and that the other side should fear you. Do you know what I mean? That if you have to put
reason and sensibility and common decency to one side in order to like, here I am holding my hand
in the air for whatever the current thing is, your own side sees you as a reliable ally.
And the other side sees you as a formidable foe. It's tribal mechanics, but multiplied by a thousand
because it's online. With everyone scrutinizing you. Yeah. And so you have these weird pathologies
like you've got, and it's not a comment on him personally, but you've got like a guy who lives
in Malaysia commenting on American cultural issues and getting like millions and millions of views
for his commentary and whatever. And he's going, I see what you're doing there, but are you actually
contributing to anything? Do you know what I mean? Because it's just flaming, fanning the flames of
whatever is going on. And I see that as a, you know, like I say, it's a period, it's a transitionary
period. I hope that we get to a point where we start to use social media in a different way.
And actually, you know, this is an unpopular thing to say, but I don't envy the big tech executives
because it's a really hard job. Because on the one hand, you incentivize to encourage engagement.
And on the other hand, the engagement is achieved by amplifying anger and division and all of these
things. So I hope we can work that out as a society. How do we move forward with social media?
What about the victimhood side of things then? You know, like it's kind of,
it's almost like old trope to talk about snowflakes and all this sort of bullshit. It feels like,
you know, five year ago, culture warrior, horse shit. But the underlying dynamic is still
there, that we've got this sort of tyranny of the minority in some regards, that fragility is
something to aspire toward, or at least it's something which is rewarded in a variety of
different ways. What's your sort of conception and framework of this with a little bit more
perspective that we've got now? Well, I'm going to be speaking at ARC Jordan's
thing later this year. And one of the things I want to talk about is that I think
everyone's embraced us now. We all now do it. I feel like those of us who have been concerned
about wokeness have sort of got into that place where we are like, I'm a victim, I've been cancelled,
I've been this and I've been that. And I think it's time actually for us to step into our power now
and go, okay, well, we've created these new media organizations, we've created alliances,
we've created community, we've created things. And the question really for us is now,
we know what we're against, but not enough people are willing to say, what are we for exactly?
And that's because it's much harder to do. But that is the mission now. It's how do you get past
woke, anti-woke into the future? And the future has to be about offering people a better alternative
to that victimhood, because it's more rewarding for the individual to see themselves in that way,
I think. And this is why Jordan Peterson was so successful when he broke through,
because he was saying to people, take responsibility. And I think we all actually now
are in a position where we have to say it to ourselves. Yes, the right wing snowflake sphere
that nobody really ever talks about. I'm pretty sure that you hate that even more than you hate
left wing snowflake sphere. Using the call out culture to say this is something that
shouldn't be happening, this is pedestalizing victimhood, so on and so forth. While some people
waving that exact same identity flag themselves, it's like, I don't know, man, that doesn't seem
like the way to go. No, it doesn't. I understand it, though. And I think people on the right
could quite credibly say that, well, they did this and now we're using the weapons that they
forged against them. It's understandable. But I'm interested in how do we move forward?
How do we move forward? And I think there's a hell of a lot of questions in modern society
about that that remain extremely unanswered. Where do you get meaning and purpose in your life?
Now, in a society that has fewer and fewer children in which young people are delaying
adulthood longer and longer and longer, where do you get meaning and purpose? Exactly.
For some people, that's online activism, but actually how fulfilling that is, I don't know.
So the big questions remain unanswered and perhaps increasingly so, actually. I think
there could well be an argument that 80 years ago, people had way more meaning and purpose
readily available to them at just through the course of normal life, get married, have kids,
whatever. Now, obviously, that wasn't universally available to everybody, et cetera. But I think
in the modern world, actually, way more people are lost. They don't know what they're supposed to do
exactly. So in the past, we had a set trajectory you're supposed to follow, which hurt some people
because it wasn't the trajectory for them. But when you take away all trajectory, then
everybody is lost. And I think a lot of people are in that position now. And as I said, I think
it's way harder to think about what the positive vision of the future is. But that, I think, is
the task now. That's the mission. If you think wokeness is stupid and dangerous and harmful,
which I do, well, what do you think in addition to that? What do you think beyond that? What is it
that you think people ought to do? If they ought not to be victims, what ought they to think about
with their lives? And that's a very difficult question that I have more questions than answers
about. It's way easier to identify problems than proposed solutions. And you almost see this on
the internet that if somebody identifies a problem, it's kind of hard to criticize a criticism. It's
possible, but it's way easier to criticize a proposal. And it's almost like a defense mechanism
that people have to front load or front run, avoiding the criticism that they know will become
will be incoming. It's the caveat. It's like, I'm not saying that we don't need to care about
such and such. And I'm not saying that this isn't a big deal, but maybe we need to think
about this thing. It's almost like a conceptual equivalent of that.
Yes. And I find myself doing that all the time. Fortifying with caveats.
All the time, man. Because I think the other aspect of the online, the way the communication
happens online is like, if you make a statement, a generalized statement, you might say exercise
is good for you. And somebody will be like, yeah, well, what if you've got an ear injury?
And before you know it, like you hate disabled people. That's kind of how the conversation
happens. But I think when we stop being able to make normative statements, everything else
breaks down. We have to be able to say, for most people, most of the time, pairing up with
someone of the sex that they are attracted to and building a life together is better than not
doing that. We have to be able to say that without the one person who was in an abusive
relationship. Well, what about me? Yes, we understand you, but we're talking about the 95%
of people, right? And you feel free not to go along with whatever we're putting on the table.
It's like, if we put a menu of things on the table, you don't have to eat everything.
No one is making you eat the gluten. It's the Ricky Gervais guitar lessons thing, right?
Exactly. So I think we have to be able to say
all other things being equal, family is good. This is the tyranny of the minority. I
fucking love that phrase. I think it's so smart to optimize for the edges of the bell curve rather
than the middle. And as you said before, it is important to recognize that there are people
who fall outside of the norms of normality and that they need some care as well. And if you
didn't have that sufficiently broad perspective view, these people would just fall through the
cracks and that's fucking shit. And nobody wants that to happen. But when you optimize for that,
you actually end up, if you were to net out what happens, you end up with more suffering because
you neglect all of the fucking fat bit of the middle of the distribution.
That's right. And we've stopped being able to make that point because we... And also,
I think the phrase that I came across and I didn't come up with this, but somebody was saying to me
the other day that we live in a world of trade-off denialism.
What does that mean?
Every decision has trade-offs. It has positives and negatives. And if you go, well, we should do
this and someone goes, yeah, but what about the thing that... And then you can never really
acknowledge. It's like the climate catastrophe. No one wants to talk about the fact that many
of the solutions that are being proposed would be worse than the problem. So it's like, if you say
anything about how we're approaching that issue, you are denying that climate change is real or
you are denying that it's a problem or you're denying that we should address it. No, I just
think your idea of how to fix it is stupid. And we've lost the ability to have that conversation
as well. And I think we'll really need to reintroduce. It's one of the things I talked about
in my Oxford speech, which I think is why it did well is because people went, oh, yeah,
all right, because if we just do the stuff that we've been told we need to do, that's actually
worse. And that sort of opened it up. I think we've totally forgotten that there are no solutions,
only trade-offs. My favorite quote ever from Thomas Sowell.
Yeah, it's lovely. And the difference between maximizing and
satisfying from behavioral economics is an interesting one. So maximizing is everything
must be 100, 100, 100, 100. Satisfying is hitting an acceptable level across everything.
And what the satisfying allows you to do is it allows you to iterate much more quickly.
And as you say, you can do it in your own life. It's like, how many times have you done it?
Going to go away on holiday with the misses. And we're going to have a fucking Airbnb or booking.com
favorite list with 30 hotels or 30 places in. And by the time that you get down to choosing them,
the choice has been made for you, because all of the nice ones have gone and you're now two days
before you leave. Right? That's maximizing. And you're so stressed, you need the holiday just
because it was awful. You didn't even enjoy the experience of it as well.
Yeah. Yeah. I understand, man, like, you know,
people feel like they're being left behind. They feel like life is happening to them
or happening for other people. And they're not a part of it. And I get that. Like,
you know, fucking, it's disquieting. Life is going on. My friends are moving on. The world
is changing. And I'm all confused. But I suppose this sort of information ecosystem
conversation, which you guys have had a good bit. And I've had twice over the last few weeks,
first with Sam Harris, and then with Eric Weinstein. What do you make of this? Like,
the heterodoxosphere has its problems. The legacy media sphere has its problems.
Independent creators that just get to shitpost anonymously on Twitter and Reddit. Also,
I like very unreliable. Do you think about this? Like, how all of this comes together
and how you move forward through it? I see a lot of problems with new media too.
I mean, and I've said this from day one in terms of what we do at Trigonometry.
It's we don't have a budget to employ a bunch of people to do extensive research on things
or to do fact checking for us. So we can't do certain things that the mainstream media can do
and should do. The problem is the mainstream media isn't doing it either.
But there's a really important role for the mainstream media. I just wish they'd play that
role. But I think where I agree with Sam, even though I disagree with him on COVID and
to some extent, well, to a large extent, Trump and all those things, is not everything can be
fixed on a podcast. That is absolutely true. There are certain things that are a matter of
research and deeper study. And it's not everything can be sorted out in three
hour conversation between two podcasters. There's not how that works. And I think
new media has its own problems. It over rewards charisma. It over rewards passion.
It massively under rewards any attempts to cling to truth. It encourages people to go off
in the pursuit of the most exciting take. And truth isn't always exciting.
So I think the truth is we need a vibrant ecosystem in which all of these different
pieces play their own different roles, which is why I'm in favor of maximum freedom because
that's where you get everybody doing their thing. And then over time, people who want
wholesome content, if you like, when it comes to facts or information or whatever,
can seek it out because people aren't stupid. They will eventually see through someone being
super charismatic or whatever. They'll get to a point where they go, actually, what I'd like to
do is have a look at what different sources are saying about this and make up my own mind.
You saw with COVID, the mainstream media really suppressed a lot of very legitimate points of
view, a lot of important information. But then you get the response to that, which is to go
quite far off the other end. And I've ended up somewhere, what I hope is a kind of reasonable
middle ground between those two positions. There's a really great blog post by Gwinda Bogle,
gowinda.substack.com, one of my favorite writers, why you are probably an NPC. And he frames out
five different types of NPC. And the most obvious two, like sort of the mainstream NPC and the
contrarian NPC, he makes this really great point, which is that the contrarian NPC is no deeper
thinking than the mainstream NPC, they're just the inversion of it. And he uses the line of
being a black sheep might make you different, but you're still a sheep. And that allure, this sort
of romance of being the independent thought leader, maker, sense maker, person. I understand
why it happens. But yeah, reflexive contrarianism is no more nuanced than reflexive belief of the
hegemony. Yes. And I don't judge people for that because I think that's an element of my thinking.
I think it's very understandable, disillusionment with the way the institutions have been captured
or have been corrupted or perverted or whatever it is that's happened to them.
It is natural that that would produce an equal and opposite reaction. I encourage myself and other
people to go beyond that. I try as best I can. And to go, okay, well, we're reacting to this. This
is how we're behaving. What's the actual truth? Because that's where we started. We started from
the position that we cared about the truth. That's why we're so annoyed with the mainstream.
Can we find somewhere in between those two positions that actually is an attempt to find
that truth? And it's the case with everything. We've had a bunch of, we just had the co-founder
of Navara Media on Trigonometry, the far left YouTube, or maybe not far left, is a kind of
Corbinista supporting kind of people and others because we're trying to speak to different people
from different places and really get to what the bottom of is of different issues because
those perspectives are valuable too. One of the things that Sam brought up on the episode with
me was his infamous Twitter clip with you. What was the experience of that particular 180 seconds
catching fire like? You know, I felt terrible when that happened. Really, really terrible.
Because I've never been on the end of a Twitter shitstorm to that extent,
but it's not pleasant. No matter how strong-minded you are, whatever, there's a reason that
Rogan always says, don't read the comments, right? Like the great man Joseph Stalin says,
quantity has a quality all of its own. So there's only a certain number of negative comments you
can ignore until just the volume of shit becomes overwhelming. So my primary concern actually,
I don't know Sam well, but was for his well-being actually. I just worried how he would experience
that more than anything. That was my concern because our approach is always about giving a
guest an opportunity to reveal themselves in the best light possible. And for some people,
that light shines very brightly and can burn. But that's not our intention. We never go into
an interview with a desire to out somebody or expose somebody. It's not a gotcha.
It's not a gotcha. So I was worried about him. And I emailed him straight away just to check
up on him. And also, we didn't put that clip out. We could have done because we obviously
understood that it was a controversial thing he said. And actually, most people don't know this,
but that was not the most controversial thing he said in that interview, in my opinion.
We talked about COVID on locals, which was the paywall section of the interview,
and what he said there, I found quite... What did he say?
I don't remember the wording of people who have to go and watch it, but I came away from that
thinking that he's overestimating the threat. And as a result of that, I was prepared to do
some pretty drastic things or demand drastic things to be done. So first and foremost,
as somebody who interviews people for a living, I was concerned for him,
but I also felt that what he said was wrong. I didn't agree with it.
My view on it is that if you overestimate the nature of the threat, all else follows. And I
think on Trump and COVID, that is where Sam, in my opinion, is... Well, that's why he's doing what
he's doing and saying what he's saying, because if I thought Trump was as bad as Sam thinks,
it'd be very tempting to think along the lines that Sam thinks along. And likewise with COVID,
if I thought this was like Ebola that spreads, I'd also be... We should also be honest. The
conversation, people were like, well, there's never, ever, ever any reason for the government
to mandate vaccines. And I broadly agree with that, unless the disease is really dangerous and
deadly. I said this at the beginning of COVID. Imagine that the disease had 100% mortality
rate for all women, or it was 100% mortality rate for all people under the age of 10.
Maybe some people would support it. Well, yeah, but I think that the... Fundamentally,
it came down to a risk and reward equation. And most people considered that the risk of getting
COVID was not greater than the risk of either getting the vaccine or of opening up mandated
vaccines as a pathway overall, right? And it's just, where do you sit on this equation? There's
lots of other things, but broadly, I think it's where do you sit on this equation. And Sam,
I completely agree with him that I think COVID, as an event, was like the worst kind of vaccine that
we could have given our epidemiology, our medical system, the view of vaccines overall.
Vaccine skepticism at large, I bet, has gone through the fucking risk.
It has. It has.
Have you had a look at this?
Yeah, of course it has. I know anecdotally, just speaking to people, how much that's the case,
yeah.
So if we are to have something that comes around the next time, and it does kill fucking all
children under 10 or all women or whatever the fuck, it's got some incubation period of 28 days
and a mortality of 40%, it's just a Psyop. It's another Psyop. This is Klaus Schwab doing it again.
This is the WEF. And it's like, oh, God, like that's, that's, it literally would have been
better if COVID hadn't happened, right? Sure enough, we can get masks out of the way more
quickly. And we've got like some, some inefficiencies in the system were opened up.
But if you were to look at COVID as a like operational logistical vaccine, our response
to it failed us way worse than if we'd never got it at all. And we got a vaccine injury from COVID.
Yes. Yes, we did. And, and I also think the one thing that is sort of inexplicably neglected
in all of this is I'd really like to know where COVID came from. I'd really like to know, don't
you think that's important? Don't you think we should know where it came from? Because there
are some credible assertions about its origins that would suggest that we may have another pandemic
soon. Is that right? I haven't seen this. Well, if this came from a lab in Wuhan,
because of gain of function research, and we are not willing to be honest about that,
and gain of function research continues, why wouldn't we have another pandemic?
I never looked into this much. I know that Sam had Matt Ridley and somebody else,
somebody else on his show. We've had Matt on to talk about this as well. Okay, cool.
And the truth is, we don't know. But I'm using the kind of the smell test here because
I grew up in a communist society. And what communist societies do when there is something,
and all societies do this to a large extent, because people don't like to expose their own
flaws. And no one wants to be like, oh, I was responsible for killing millions of people,
but they will cover it up in a way that is proper. And Matt actually gave this example of
there was a leak somewhere in the Soviet Union, which was a radioactive leak, I think, or maybe it
was a biological, and they covered up for ages. And then when the Soviet Union collapsed, we finally
found out, no, no, it was actually a leak. So if this is a product of gain of function research
getting out into the real world, which is credible, that there's very credible assertions about that,
the world needs to know, and this type of research needs to end. But if we are unwilling to have that
conversation, honestly, and do the proper investigations, which would be difficult because
the CCP wouldn't want that. And on top of that, you've got all this other bullshit about how it's
racist and all of that, we've got a problem. So I think my worry with everything that's
happened with COVID is not only have we not learned the lessons, I feel like, like you said,
we've got a vaccine injury from the experience, and everyone is sort of stuck in their corner.
And like Sam said, to you, everyone's got their own facts about it now.
Correct. That's a problem.
It's interesting what you said about the felt sense of being in the blast radius of Sam's
online experience. I noticed it, is someone called it Sam Harris's World Embarrassment Tour,
because he did my show, he did Steven's show, and he did Tom Billu's show.
And I don't know, man, like, there seems to be something, it's almost like there was resentment
sat on the internet, latent resentment sat on the internet waiting for Sam to fuck up.
And then he did a thing, or maybe maybe it's right.
I don't think it was personal. That was the reason I paused there. I don't think it was
personal to Sam. I think, particularly on his Trump comments, there are a lot of people who were
like, this is what we always knew the Trump haters think deep inside. And Sam was willing to vocalize
it, which is, I don't care how big the transgressions are on the other side. I don't care what Hunter
Biden has done. I don't care what Joe Biden has done. No matter what they do, it can never be as bad
as Orange Man bad. And that's sort of how he came across. And so the people who felt gaslit this
entire time about, you know, the overestimation of the threat of Trump, they were vindicated in
that moment. And I think Sam just was caught in the rage of people feeling like-
They're kind of like the perfect time storm. Yes.
With the perfect pebble in the perfect river that directed it. Yeah, it's so interesting,
man. I had this conversation with a fitness influencer called Sarah Safari in LA a couple
of weeks ago. I'd be interested to get your thoughts on this. I think it's analogous to this Sam
situation. A lot of people, especially right of center, say things like, you can't judge somebody
on just one thing that they say. Yet, when it came to a six pack of Bud Light being sent to
Dylan Mulvaney by some marketing intern somewhere deep in the annals of the Anheuser-Busch thing,
or Miller Light release one video, the Miller Light thing felt a little bit more produced.
It's probably gone through a few more layers. But largely, I just wondered, I thought it was
interesting that the charity that a lot of people right of center ask to be given to their
commentators or, you know, their champions that are canceled for taking out of context points.
There was that Rosanne Bar bit with Theo Von, where she made a joke about the Jews,
which was the most egregious clipping that I've ever seen from anything ever,
the end of a three minute long bit. And they took the final 30 seconds and put it up as if it was
representative of the whole thing. It was so fucking bad. But I did notice nobody decided to
use that same idea about, hang on a second, maybe this is just one small department in one small
corner of one small brand's marketing push. And they gave this person who is very unpopular on
the internet, a six packet Bud Light. And before you know it, Kid Rock's got an AR15 pointed at
a few cases of your drink. What do you think about? So I would separate those two out. So Sam, I think
that point applies very much. And this is the angle I'm coming from. And by the way,
we're about to go back to America and we'll interview Sam, the sequel. So we'll see how that
works out. I'm looking forward to it. But with Sam, what I felt was,
for me, I don't know if it's true of other people, but for me, Sam has a lot of credit in the bank
with me. And so I felt that while I strongly disagree with what he said, and I think that was
clear in the interview, he has enough credit in the bank with me that I'm willing to have a lot of
understanding and a lot of grace with him. And what I would say as well is,
we were having a lot of tech issues on the day that we interviewed Sam and he sat there for
like a good hour while we were trying to scrambling to get the microphones to work. And he was the
most decent human being that we've had on the show. You see who someone really is when the cameras
aren't rolling. That seemed to me like a really important thing that other people obviously
wouldn't have seen. So I have a lot of time for Sam and respect for him. I don't have the same
relationship with Dylan Mulvaney. And I also think- You haven't taken a world of wisdom from
Dylan Mulvaney over the last few- You'll be surprised, man. You'll be surprised. And so I think, look,
Dylan Mulvaney is a symbol to many people, like Sam is a symbol to many people for different things.
But I think it's a slightly different issue because, I don't know if you saw, but immediately
after the Dylan Mulvaney controversy, the marketing executive who was responsible for this,
there was a video of her talking to, I think, a reporter about the thinking behind
what the idea there was. Because it seemed a little bit more thought out.
It was thought out and her angle was our customers are shit. That was her angle.
Our shit. What's a shit customer? Well, it's just these guys who've got an old-fashioned sense of
humor. Do you know what I mean? We're going to educate our customers. And I'm like, you sell
beer. That's not your job. Sell them the fucking beer and shut up. And look, the trans issue for
reasons I actually think are quite understandable and obvious is the lightning rod of our time.
So, I'm not surprised that that caused the reaction that it did. And I understand it.
I do think, and I wrote a substack on this at the time, that perhaps the giving so much attention
to it is what prompts these brands to go down this route. Obviously, with Dylan Mulvaney,
it backfired for sure. It's a role of the dice for attention.
It's a role of the dice for attention that I don't think they'd consider. And I think that
executive ended up being fired. I do understand why people got as fired up about it as they did,
because you're rewarding behavior that a lot of people would feel is the wrong behavior to reward
in the public eye. Dylan Mulvaney. But that woman is one lady. Maybe in her interview with the
reporter, she said, this went all the way up and the director, CEO, the fucking chief marketing
officer or whatever was involved in this. But if it wasn't the case, I don't... If it turned out
that it was one small group in the corner, as I guessed or whatever, I don't think that the
internet would have given Bud Light any more leeway. I don't think they would have said,
we need to separate the art and the artist here. They've made beer for three decades,
for however fucking long it's been around. And maybe it's right. Maybe it shows their
woke bona fides. It shows that they're the man-hating, left-leaning, blue-head cucks that they always
were. But I don't know. It seems like a lot of the time people want... It's a smart idea to be able
to say, Rogan has been in a few controversies over the last few years. Most people said,
I have faith that you're telling me this is the tip of the iceberg. I've seen the whole iceberg.
I know that there is nothing lurking deep down in the depths. Massive advantage he has is he's
published like 5,000 hours of content over the last decade, which means that you have a pretty
good body of evidence that sits on the other side of the scale. But you don't know much about what's
going on inside of the marketing department. But I just thought it was interesting. I thought that
maybe this is a time where it would be illustrative and you should be careful about transgressing
rules that you want to be enforced. So if you want the don't judge somebody by one single occurrence
rule to be enforced and then you don't enforce it, that, as you said before, that tit for tat game,
it opens up what they did it. So this is playground mentality.
I understand what you mean, but I think I disagree actually. I think the reason that people
were as upset about as they are is while these are different companies, the sense is... Imagine
it wasn't just Rogan who said something, but it was Chris Williamson and Trigonometry and all the
other podcasters who do what we do all at one point said the same thing. And then there was yet
another example of a podcaster saying it. So when you look at the Gillette
Mattoxic Masculinity ad, if you look at all the other instances where corporations put pride
flags, they replace their brand with pride. But not in the Middle East. Well, obviously not.
Do they do it in Russia? They can't do it in Russia either. I doubt it. I doubt it. I can't imagine why.
Mother Russia gay has you. Yeah, exactly. So I think what people felt was here again,
we've got a corporation just absolutely taking the piss, lecturing the ordinary public,
and thrusting these very niche issues onto what is a very, very like normal household
beer. And you just can't escape this shit. That's what I think people feel.
So it's kind of a straw that broke the camel's back. I agree.
Big corporation overall. That's interesting. Because what I was doing was I was taking
Bud Light as a individual instance on its own. What you're saying is this is more endemic
of a broader trend among big corporations. Well, broadly speaking, if you think about what the
anti-woke narrative is, the anti-woke narrative is, and I agree with very large parts of it,
is that most of the major institutions, whether that be media, whether that be the civil service,
whether that be the political systems, the parties, the corporations, the education system,
they've all been captured or corrupted or through some other mechanism become
the projectors of a certain worldview onto the public who do not share that worldview.
And so when you see the toxic masculinity Gillette ad, which is like, hey, you're a man,
you're a piece of shit by a razor. You're a piece of shit by a beer, et cetera.
It sort of builds up to a point like, why is everyone telling me I'm a piece of shit?
And it gets old. And particularly this anti-masculinity narrative that you see
everywhere in movies, in advertising, in all sorts of different genres,
I think it's really, really dangerous because if you think about Gillette ads in the 90s,
you're a bit younger than me. I don't know if you remember them, but they were
the best a man can get. And it's like some blonde hot chick in like a whatever. She's like
actually that wasn't the 90s Gillette ads. The 90s Gillette ads were a bunch of men
being healthy masculinity. It was a man putting his tie on as he holds his baby up before he's
going to work. It was a man hugging his son on his way to his wedding. It was a man protecting his
wife. It was a healthy view of men and relationships and men and women and so on.
And I sort of say healthy masculinity is the 90s Gillette ads. That's what it looks like.
Men being responsible, men in relationships with women being respectful, being kind, but also being
strong, looking after their children, teaching younger versions of men how to be men, etc.
And I understand why people, men and women are fucking tired, really, really tired of this idea
that men are bad and evil. I always say my wife is completely apolitical and as a result of that
extremely based. She hates this shit and I can't tell you how many women I speak to
who are very, very tired of men being demonized in this way and so am I.
Especially given that a lot of those women will have sons.
And they want their partner to be good and healthy. They don't want them to be feeble,
you know. So I actually, I understand the pushback against that I really do and I think it's necessary.
Yeah, I mean, I've spent a lot of time talking about modern masculinity and the challenges that
everybody is facing. What do you think, like looking at it from your perspective, growing up
where you did in a communist country, coming here at 13, remember that, coming here at 13,
do you think the conversation around modern masculinity from both sides of the fence is
missing? Like what don't they understand about being a man in 2023 and the challenges and the
way that the culture sees them? I think we should zoom out more, even more than that and ask the
question, what is it that we want as a society? And I pissed both sides of the spectrum off by saying
what I'm about to say, which is any ideology, and I mean any ideology, that pits men against women
or women against men is toxic and damaging and dangerous and unhealthy. And that includes
some forms of feminism and that includes, you know, the incel worldview and all sorts of things.
So the thing that we're really missing is a reminder of the fact that I'm going to do the caveat
thing we talked about. Yes, some people are not heterosexual, but for the vast majority of people,
the single most meaningful thing in your life is going to be the relationship you have
with your intimate partner, almost always of the opposite sex, right? And we need each other.
Men and women need each other. We've been working together for millennia and anyone who tells you
that your enemy is the opposite sex, that person is your enemy. That person is your enemy,
that person is my enemy, and that person is our society's enemy. They are destroying or
attempting to destroy the very building block of our society. That comes from both sides of
the advice as well. Yes. The red pillar sphere teaches men that women are adversaries to be
avoided or resources to be used and discarded. Those are the only two ways. And, you know,
that's black, that's the entire man's sphere, actually. That's black pill, migthau, incels,
pick up artistry, red pill, sigma male, all the way, like the full, that's the entire gamut for
anyone that doesn't know the memes. That's the entire memeosphere of the fucking man's sphere.
And yeah, there's no one in there, very, very few people in there who say,
you're supposed to be a collaborator with the opposite sex. Most of your competition is
intracexual, not intersexual. Men and women have worked together for eons. You need each other
to survive, just because you've outsourced protecting and provisioning to the police
department and the local supermarket. And you women have outsourced the resources
and the company to your ability to gain education and employment and Netflix.
Still, broadly, we're not going to be able to out-technology ourselves from the last
120,000 years of humans being the way that we are. There's more to relationship than dildo,
right? You're not a dildo to your partner. There's more that you bring to the table.
Sometimes. Well, I'm speaking for myself, maybe I'm not sufficient in that department. But
my point is, let's frame this in a positive way. What is it that we're trying to say?
Well, what you're trying to say is men and women need each other. Men and women need to work together.
Men and women are not enemies. The most powerful you are ever going to be is with a
good woman by your side. What do you say to the people that go,
this is Treadpill nonsense, like Treadcon talking point 101. This is just another NPC
meme but coming from someone that's steeped in a type of relationship that men or women
don't need anymore. Well, you know how Bitcoin is saying have fun staying poor?
Have fun being a loser. You want to spend your life being unhappy with the opposite sex,
whether you are a feminist or one of these people, go for it. I'm not going to tell you
how to live your life, but I don't think it's going to lead you to a good place.
You know, I have male friends who've recently found their soulmate or their partner and they
blossom. They blossom the moment that it happens because we evolved to be together. We evolved
to work together. We evolved to drive each other forward in really powerful ways. I wouldn't be
a 10th of the man I am without my wife. Did you read the post I put up a couple of weeks ago
about the fuck you family? No, I didn't see that. So fuck you money, right? You're able to become.
Oh, I did see that. Yes.
It's sufficiently financially independent that money, you don't need to do things you
don't want to do. Fuck you freedom. You don't need to do things that you don't want to do.
But then the final stage I see amongst my male friends who are, you know, 30s and 40s
is the fuck you family, which is a all that I fundamentally care about in the end is me
and the people that are a part of this nuclear pod and everything else can go to hell.
Everything else can fall apart. Jimmy Carr was just sat in that seat.
He's been through his fair share of like roller coasters and he's been with his partner
like a decade and a bit like fucking forever, like maybe even 20, like 20 something years.
And now he's got a son and a daughter and yeah, the coming home to know that as long as that's
okay, as long as that's set and presuming that you've stacked the fuck you money with the fuck
you freedom and then you add the family on top, it must be kind of similar to being indestructible.
I'm still working on the fuck you money. It's still a long way to go on the fuck you money.
The freedom and the family. The freedom and the family, yes.
My wife and I, we met by complete accident when we were 18, married by 20 and been together
ever since. And just on a very practical, like what did I get out of it level,
it's been the single most beneficial source of inspiration, comfort,
pick each other up when you're down, all of that. I mean, I admire people who don't have that and
still do lots of stuff in the world, but it would be so much harder, so, so much harder.
So again, I'm not telling other people how to live their life. I'm just saying
this has been one of the most tried and tested solutions to various problems that human beings
experience throughout history. We evolved to be together. And if it's a trad talking point,
then maybe that's right. Maybe that some trad talking points are correct.
Getting back to the masculinity conversation, why do you think it's so difficult for people to
publicly advocate for the problems of men and boys?
Because victimhood doesn't work for men the way it works for women.
We don't feel sorry for men. And rightly so, by the way.
Rightly so. I mean, biologically, men are disposable in a way that women aren't,
for the obvious reasons. If you have a tribe of 10 men, 10 women, you send the women off to war,
you're screwed, you send the men off to war, one comes back, you can still replenish
the population. So men are disposable, always will be, much more than women.
And so we don't feel sorry for men in the same way. And I'm not advocating that we feel sorry
for men because I don't believe that's the solution to men's problems. The solution to
men's problems is for men to be better. What does that mean?
It means, you know what I mean. Look at you. This is what your entire life is spent on bettering
yourself physically, emotionally, psychologically, mentally. You're obsessed with performance.
You're obsessed with being better. You're obsessed with being happier, more fulfilled,
all of these things. It's a pursuit of your own greatness.
There are structural disadvantages that are faced by men as well, right, that very few people
are willing to accept at the moment. Socioeconomically, men are falling behind, education, employment,
mental health, we're currently suicide awareness, suicide prevention week in the UK.
According to one of the guys I was literally talking to, half an hour ago,
if you are a man, the single biggest threat to your own life is yourself.
You are more likely to die by your own hands than by any other way.
Are you? Am I? I've got suicide in my family, so...
I know, but I don't think you are the greatest threat to you.
That's true, but...
And I'm not the greatest threat to me, and why is that?
Not everybody has the same genetic predisposition.
Sure, but you just said you do, and yet you're not the greatest threat to you. Why is that?
Because you're fulfilled, because you are successful, because you're striving and achieving,
because you have in life what you should have in life,
the meaning and purpose and the pursuit of a goal, right?
And for men, this is one of the problems with this mental health conversation.
One of the reasons that men's mental health is not as good as it could be is that,
A, we do live in a society which discourages them from being men,
and being the way that men are supposed to be.
But the other reason is that most of the personal development and psychology fields
are geared towards female ways of being, and most of the ways that we treat, for example,
depression, men don't need the same thing as women do when it comes to that.
What men need is to feel powerful and capable, right?
The reason you are not the greatest threat to you is that you feel in charge of your life,
right? And that's what men need to pursue with every fiber of the being.
That's what I mean when I say better. You need to struggle, and you need to fight,
and you need to achieve. And then all of this other shit falls by the wayside,
and it's always been like this. I'm someone who's been depressed at points in my life,
and it's not because I was having a mental health problem, it's because my life was shit,
and I was shit. That's why, right? So what men need is to pursue their dreams,
to fight and struggle and to achieve. There was a point that you brought up earlier on about how
no guidelines is liberating and terrifying altogether. And I think it's interesting to talk
about how there isn't only one way to be a good man, but there aren't an unlimited number of ways
either. And the problem of breaking open the expectations around men means that guidance
for men and boys also largely dissipates. I had this conversation in Qatar, and the guy I was
debating had this conception of the man box. And he said, if you're inside of the man box,
it can be constraining because he was a member of the LGBT community,
Kuwaiti American group in the Middle East and wanted to be a dancer as a boy. I imagine it's
pretty fucking difficult for you to find a man box that fits that conception of you in it.
Sure.
But if you completely blast it open and you can be anything that you want to be,
there's no guidelines at all. There's no guidance. So how fucking hard is this going to be? You've
got to reinvent from first principles what it means to be a man. And I mean, you've heard this
from Mary Harrington and Louise Perry, but a lot of the guidance that was given to men previously
around chivalry, it is simply a difference of degree, not a difference of kind to go from
men should hold the door open for women and make sure that she gets the front door safe at night
to you shouldn't hit your wife. It is one single thread between those, which is women
are more vulnerable and should be protected, right? Lovely conception that Mary in classic
Mary style said the bourgeois rules that benefited women who had had a partner that
grew up in a two-parent household that went to some highfalutin institution,
was around people that had good male role models. Yeah, sure. You can break open the doors of
chivalry and maybe pay for the first date or maybe you can drive yourself home or get the
taxi on your own or whatever it is, because the environment that you're in is largely very different.
The guy that grew up or the woman that grew up in a relationship with a man who comes from a
single-parent household whose mom or dad was addicted to alcohol or drugs or there was multiple
partners coming through the house, they never got taught not to beat your wife,
let alone not to hold the door open. And like the rules for the, but not for me, it's like
the rules for us protect everybody, not just me. And yeah, I think it's a really interesting
frame to think about where the cultural changes come from. A lot of the time they come top down,
but the environment can be so different that getting rid of something that seems quite innocuous
up here can actually cascade down to the bottom. And the same thing goes for this tyranny of the
minority again. Absolutely. There are people that will be outside of the man box and maybe we
should expand it so that they can fit in it. But if you blow the doors open, where's the guidance?
Like what does it mean? And this is also a consequence of luxury beliefs, which is Rob
Henderson's term. I'm sure you've had him on the show. And the principle luxury belief of our time
is there's no difference between men and women. That's a luxury belief. There are people who
can afford to have it, but most people can't afford to have that belief. And then all else
follows from this. Because if you accept that there are differences between men and women,
then men and women should act differently. And that also means that it's okay for men to be men,
and it's okay for women to be women. One of the things that I find really fucking weird, man,
since we had our son is people will go to my wife, oh, you're just at home. And I'm like,
what do you mean just at home? Are you fucking insane? She's raising our son
and providing everything that we need as a family. And that you're calling that just a thing.
But a lot of women will judge other women for just being at home. And actually, I think,
and it doesn't apply to everybody, caveat. But for most women, the greatest gift their partner
can give them is opportunity if they want to be at home with the children to do that.
About 85% of women say that being a stay-at-home mum is an opportunity,
an option that they aspire to have. Yes. And financially, for most people,
it's very difficult right now. So it's the greatest gift. And so it's not just like men
are treated badly or women, it's this whole dynamic hurts everybody. And so men and women
need to work together. Dads need to be involved in their kids' lives. These are some, yeah,
they look their trad points one-on-one, if that's what you want to call them. But it's what works.
It's what works for the kids. It's what works for the family.
Did you read the Men Are Lost Can We Find a Way Out of the Wilderness article by Christine Ember,
who's in the Washington Post a couple of months ago. Was Washington Post? It's in the something.
Anyway, she had this beautiful conception in it that said many young men feel that
difficulties are often dismissed out of hand as whining from a patriarchy that they don't feel a
part of. It seems like a lot of modern men are being made to pay for the sins and advantages
of their fathers and grandfathers. And I thought that that was very interesting that
kind of like in comedy, right? You're allowed to punch up, but you can't punch down.
And because men have had it good for so long, you have this concern in giving them any sympathy.
And even though largely pick most of the extreme negative outcomes that you want in life,
apart from sexual assault, and you're going to find a man on the receiving end,
whether it's homelessness, drug addiction, violent crime, mental health, being in jail,
suicide, like all of it. And there was this video of a, I think it was a trans man,
so a woman who became a man or looked like a man or whatever, who was absolutely horrified
by the lack of attention. Oh, people cross the street when they were walking.
It wasn't even just that. It's just like people ignore you. When you're a woman, you get attention.
And people just ignore a guy most of the time for most intense and purposes.
But those are, in my opinion, in erratical differences between the sexes,
the way our biological roles are, when women are going to get more attention.
I think you can definitely see, listening to your, pull yourself up by your bootstraps kind
of mentality, especially when it comes to men. You can definitely see that sort of Soviet,
like man be hard, man lift thing, man protect woman. That was actually money and a throw,
but that's the best rush you can get now. Yeah, I think that you can see that. And this is why
there's a multiplicity of opinions about how to do this. And I think it's why it's interesting
that everybody can contribute in it. Give me a critique of what I'm saying. I'd love to explore
that with you. There's nothing that I would disagree with massively. I think that it's
important to recognize the structural disadvantages faced by men and boys at the moment, going from
a brawn based to a brain based economy, when you have a disposition to be less conscientious,
where you are put into an education system that doesn't suit the disposition of boys,
but you're graded in the same manner as an entire sex who does boys are naturally going to fall
behind. And I think that you're seeing the outcomes of this in the way that schooling
and between the ages 21 and 29 women earn a grand and a bit more than men do. The gender pay gap
isn't a gender pay gap, it's a mother pay gap. That's the penalization comes to mothers.
I don't disagree with any of that, but the question is what's the answer? What's the solution to that?
I think that creating a positive view for masculinity, creating, and this is again why
Peterson and Andrew Tate as well have been so successful because they said, you can be something.
You can actually step out there and wrangle the world and I believe in you and I'm proud of you
and it's not wrong for you to try and want to get mastery or conquer something or achieve something,
have ambition, to be able to make decisions easily and stand up well under pressure like,
you know, these are all fucking good things that are not only good for you, but they're good for
the world as well. I think that there needs to be a positive vision, that would be one.
I think that that creates a positive feedback loop for men. I do think that there's some manning
up in the most transcendent and include like Wilburian way that we can, but I also think that,
you know, we need to look at structural initiatives that can help boys and men
because there's no other group on the planet who, when they fall behind, are pointed out and said,
this is your problem, you need to sort it out. Every other group, we would spend billions in
taxpayer-funded money to create committees and charities and initiatives that actually work
out what's going on and help them boots on the ground to be able to do this. I don't think,
like, if a man has a problem or if a woman has a problem, we say, what can we do to fix society?
If a man has a problem, we say, what can a man do to fix himself? Now, maybe that's the fundamental
asymmetry at the heart of the sex difference, but in a society that has surplus resources
that can help, I don't see why we wouldn't afford the, why we would make men unnecessarily swim upstream,
if that makes sense. It does make sense. However, I think that my view is what you said earlier,
it's the fundamental asymmetry between the sexes. Now, it's true that all groups face various
structural inequalities. For example, I'm 5'9", barely. And do you play basketball? Not very
well, I should say, for that reason alone. Actually, if you look at the evidence,
heitism is one of the biggest openly available forms of discrimination that isn't condemned
or dealt with in any way. And one of your team is Scouse, so that must be...
He's even shorter than me, believe it or not. It must be awful.
Yeah. So, what's the answer to that? My answer to that has not been to get leg extensions,
or to complain about structural heitism. Do you know that like...
Structural heitism.
You joke, but if you want to play this fucking game, this is my point.
I'm not laughing at that, I'm just... Structural heitism is a term that I haven't heard before.
So, if you look at the CEOs of the top Fortune 500 companies, like 90% or something,
don't quote me on it, you can look it up. A very, very, very significant portion of them
are over six foot tall. Almost always the taller president wins, I think as well.
Right. Now, is the answer to that, not in Russia, by the way.
In Russia, you don't need that. So, do we complain about that?
Should we complain about that? Should I sit here and be like,
Oh, because I'm five foot nine, I don't get the... It doesn't help anything,
it doesn't change anything. And I remember it's so funny because I have a friend of mine,
he was like a Green Party voter, the most woke person that you could possibly imagine.
And he is like five five. And I made this point to him, I said,
yeah, but you talk about only structural issues with this group and that group and whatever,
and you're five five, did you know about heitism or whatever? And he was like,
yeah, but being five five has just made me who I am. I was like, yes, yes, you are what you are.
The world isn't going to change to you. My favorite scene in Game of Thrones,
have you seen Game of Thrones? Is Tyrion, when he's talking to Jon Snow and he calls him a
bastard and Jon Snow takes offense and he goes, have I offended you bastard? He goes,
let me give you some advice, bastard, never forget what you are. The world won't wear it like armor
and it can never be used to hurt you. That's the answer to all of this, right? And you're right
about Peterson and Tay who I think are very different figures, but nonetheless, their success
is based on the fact that they're telling men what men do need to hear in that respect, which is,
it's okay to be a man. It's okay to have drive. It's okay to have ambition. It's okay to have
aggression. It's okay to want things. It's okay to want status. It's okay to want money. It's okay
to want power. These are all things that are okay. They have pathological side effects when
not handled properly, but the drive to achieve, the drive to succeed, the drive to dominate,
the drive to win, these are good things and pursue them. And by the way, here's the interesting
bit. Those woke women, they love that shit. This is what I'm going to teach my son, right?
Whatever the society tells you about how it's wrong to be a man, at the end of the day, they're
all going to reward you for being a real man. This is the best time in some ways to be a real man
because you clean up. The competition is outing itself, is taking itself out of the picture.
If you act like a man, you clean up. That's the position we're in.
Well, there's a number of left-leaning women who are lamenting the fact that they can't find
a man who meets both their political preference and also will woo them appropriately on the date,
right? It's like, why are all of the men who do the things that I want from the other political
party? I think it's like 30% or 40% of Democrats and Republicans fear that their son or daughter will
marry somebody of the opposite political belief. This tribalism that we spoke about earlier on.
Speaking about toxic masculinity, as part of that debate, I did a little bit of preparation
and I found some of my favorite headlines of things that are toxic masculinity.
Mass shootings, gang violence, climate change, the financial crisis is toxic masculinity, Brexit,
the election of Donald Trump, not wearing a mask, eating meat, physical fitness, fast food,
capitalism is toxic masculinity and communism is toxic masculinity, hip hop, smelling of
ax body spray, which is links for the British people, being stoic, risk-taking, religion,
but also secularism and atheism, playing board games, being interested in cars and saying hello
or have a nice day, all toxic masculinity. I'm saying hello is fucking atrocious, mate.
Yeah, that's sort of, I think that's part of the male gaze. There was this,
I think it was a rule, was it not put on the London Underground for a while that
like the men's wandering eyes or something, that was a concern. But here's another thing,
right? I'd be interested to get your take on this. I brought this up with that same
fitness influencer a couple of weeks ago, Sarah, really good response as well.
Internet incidents, big ones. People in the real world use the response of the Internet.
They crowdsource their sense-making to how other people responded. So you'll have seen
these Jim TikToks of girls videoing themselves, working out, and sometimes there's a guy in
the background. And if the guy looks over a bit much, because for whatever reason, he's looking at
her, he's looking at the camera, he's looking at himself, he's doing whatever. Sometimes they make
a big song and dance about it. The first big one of those that happened, it could have gone either
way. You could have tossed a coin and I would have said, I don't know. The Internet may say that
this is reprehensible. I thought it was fine, but I could have seen the Internet going on the
other side of the fence and saying, sure, find this guy, dox him, shoot him, blah, blah, blah.
It didn't. And that now has created a new bar of behavior, expected behavior, both for men and
for women. The interesting thing that it made me realize is the women who saw that TikTok,
had it have gone the other way and had it have been completely reprehensible and totally not
allowed, would then have reset their worldview expectation way more sensitive. Their radar is
now looking for, did that guy glance over three times or more in the space of 90 seconds? If so,
this equals a dangerous situation, because the Internet told me so. And it's a very sort of
slippery slope in one direction only. It only moves towards more sensitivity, not more robustness,
right? I thought that was interesting. Perception is projection.
What's that mean? It means that you see what you expect to see. You perceive your own projections
of the world. You had that fucking hyper viral moment about the scar makeup. Tell it again for
the people that don't know. So they did an experiment where they told a group of women that
they're going to put scarring on their faces or visual disfigurements of some kind. And then they
would go into an interview. And the purpose of the experiment is to work out whether the interviewer
is going to treat them differently because of their facial disfigurement. What they didn't tell the
women is as they were leaving to go for the interview, they touched up their makeup and
without showing them the facial disfigurement removed the scarring. So they went into the
interview thinking they're facially scarred, but they weren't. And they came back reporting massive
levels of discrimination, specific comments that the interviewer had made about them that they
perceived. So you see what you expect to see. This is why teaching people victimhood is so
dangerous because it makes them victims. It makes them expect certain things and then they will
react differently. I mean, you know, police interactions are a good example of this. If
you expect the police are going to treat you badly because of who you are, you're going to act in a
different way and therefore cause more problems. And I say this to somebody, you know, I was a very
angry young man and my wife used to piss me off so much. She would constantly say, like,
I'd get into an argument with somebody and I'd be like, that guy's a prick. He did this. And she'd
be like, you are creating those situations. You know that, right? And I was like, no, you're
forever. And it took me like a good 10 years to work out. Absolutely, I was.
Absolutely, I was. Right? So we perceive the things that we put out into the world. And this is,
you know, Peterson talks about this is you can't see without hierarchy because your brain has to
know what to focus on. And what you focus on is a function of the filter that you project onto the
world. I'm focusing on you now instead of the bookshelf behind you. I could have been sitting
here picking out a good book this entire time. It's been a waste. But so that's what's happening
there. But it's interesting. I mean, I said something at the time, I was like, look, these
creepy men need to stop staring at women in gyms. Otherwise, they're going to stop wearing lingerie
to go there and then everybody loses. And what I'm trying to make is that like, you know,
this is a very, I'm going to say something very controversial here, Chris, you ready?
Men are attracted to women.
I've heard about that. Let's sit with that for a moment. I've heard about that. So, you know,
this idea that you're going to be barely clad, and men aren't going to notice that.
Sorry, that's not what our brains are for. Our brains are for looking at your ass. That's what
they're for. That's what they evolved for. I know it's crudely put. I learned the term for this new
style of gym short. It's got what's called a butt scrunch. Right. Have you seen the butt scrunch?
Yes. Right. Yeah, you're a married man. Online. Of course. Yeah, someone showed me a photo. I
tried to look away. Yeah, which is for the people that haven't seen it and aren't training in gyms
with like 20 year olds in, it's like a normal pair of shorts, training shorts for a girl,
like kind of tight. But then it's got kind of like a thong bit that separates the ass cheeks out,
which has been normalized very quick. Do you remember the first time that wearing just leggings
became a thing? Because I do. Because it wasn't when I went to uni. So it was after 2006. It was
after, maybe it happened while I was at uni. So maybe before 2010. But I remember thinking, wow,
that's like, that's like everything on display. That's kind of like, kind of like no pants.
But then also kind of not. And then now it's like, oh, that's kind of like
no pants. Well, like that's kind of like just a thong, but blue or like purple or lilac.
I feel you've dedicated a lot of time to describing this accurately, which I appreciate.
I mean, casual ornithologist on the side. I wanted to tell you about this.
Can I say some just on that before you move on? Because I think we sort of like,
we're trying to pretend things all the time, which, yes, men shouldn't be pigs.
We can all agree on that. But in order to not be a pig, I first have to see your ass that you've
shoved in my face. So I see it. I am then after that, not a pig. But I see it. And it's there.
And my brain isn't calibrated or designed or evolved. I mean, the sole purpose of our genes
is to reproduce, right? How is that just what I'm saying? Well, there's a female frame that's
placed around this conversation specifically that I don't think fully, maybe goes far as to say,
like sympathizes with the male brain reward system. There is an inbuilt reward system that men have
for looking at sexually gratifying objects, even things like two rocks that look a bit like boobs.
Right? What's the first thing a boy does when he gets a calculator?
Right boobs. Yep. Now, is that because of toxic masculinity or is that because
men evolved for millions of years throughout evolutionary history, including pre-human animals,
to seek the opposite sex and the drive in males is just overwhelmingly strong? Now,
once you have noticed that, how you act is where culture and society and civilizing men
comes in, right? Just because you saw someone's ass doesn't mean that you're allowed to go and
stare at it or grab it or whatever. But you saw it. And you're not... It's almost like it happens.
And then you're like, okay, I need to... Fuck, yeah. Yeah. That's how it works. Now, what do
you want me to do about that? What are you supposed to do about that? I'm open to suggestions.
Blinkers. Blinker men. Big... Some people would be in favor of that. The big veil that goes over the
top. Right. A little bit of inside baseball for people who aren't familiar with what's going on
in the podcasting world. And apparently this one's slipped by you as well. Theo Von and other
significant podcasters allegedly defrauded of approximately $4 million and then calls out
the fraudster in a video. In an unexpected turn of events, Colin Thompson, the man who was working
under cast media and with Theo Von, is accused of orchestrating a fraud operation that cost Theo Von's
podcast this past weekend and potentially other podcasts an estimated $4 million. Theo Von and
his crew detected inconsistencies in their payments, which is when trouble started, advertisers
allegedly paid Colin Thompson and cast media directly, leaving Theo with less money than
anticipated. And I know, from my side of the fence, that there are quite a few other podcasts
that were with this particular company. And it seems like this gentleman has been living a good
life. Meanwhile, he's been robbing Peter to pay Paul to keep on cycling this through photos of
Lamborghinis and nice houses allegedly. And people aren't happy. And then Theo did a 10 minute video
that said, sorry, brother, you messed with the wrong rat. And this video, I think within 24 hours,
it hit a mill, plays photos of the guy, all the rest of it. So ructions, ructions in the podcasting
world. I can't wait to be able to be defrauded of $4 million. That's my dream goal to get to that
position. Yeah, you got to be careful, man. You got to be careful. That's why what we're building
trigonometry and we've got some big plans beyond just trigonometry itself is
bringing cool people together, but doing it under our own steam, under our own umbrella,
having everything managed by us with the right values and the right team. It's really important.
For the people that don't know how podcast advertising works, I handle almost all of my
big partners as well, directly. But a lot of the time, there'll be an agency that sits in between
you and them invoicing is kind of hard. Oh, there's an IO and did the deliverables get done and how
many numbers did that podcast hit and so on and so forth. And also, who's advertising at the moment?
Oh, there's a new company in town, maybe we can increase the costs or the price that we're charging
for this all that like it's messy and it's back and forth and whatever, whatever, especially if
you're doing lots of little deals as opposed to how I have it, which is a small number of larger
partners. And yeah, you have these guys that sit in between you and them classic agency model,
it's like a modeling agency, right? Like you have a model, there's your talent, you have
clients that want models and you take a bit off the top, take somewhere between 10 and 25%
depending on who the partner is and how big the deals are. But they hold the money, like they
get paid the money from the advertiser and then less they're cut, they'll pass it down to the
podcaster. These podcasts are largely run, I mean, you'll get your YouTube AdSense revenue,
which is not nothing, but fucking hell, it's not what you're making from your proper partners.
And yeah, if I don't know, man, I mean, it's such a it's obviously you can chase these people down
for like, we're going to fucking get them for fraud, but they're just going to declare bankruptcy,
you're fucking moved to the Cayman Islands or whatever. So yeah, I feel this is the first
time that we've seen a big case like this, which is slap bang in the bullseye of the
of our world, right? It's the first time that this has happened. And
kind of surprising it hasn't happened before, but hopefully it's a formative experience that
that's one other thing. If you want to fuck some people over for $4 million, don't fuck people over
that have a combined reach of 20 million YouTube subscribers, you know what I mean?
Absolutely. No, it's not a smart move. But look, I think we're sort of living through a wild,
wild west of the internet. I mean, actually, the wild, wild west of the internet is over,
but the podcasting world, it's very new. So there's going to be a lot of this shit going on. I
imagine this isn't an isolated incident, actually. So yeah, I think we all got to be careful and
smart about how the way we build, we build things that we build. Rule Britannia. Rule Britannia.
Rule Britannia. Come on, mate, you're actually British, unlike me. I'm trying. Rule Britannia.
At last night of the proms, hijacked by activists waving EU flags.
The site of hundreds of European Union flags. The last night of the proms have prompted an
outrage from Brexiteers and a call for the BBC to investigate those waving the EU flag.
And the Royal Albert Hall appeared to outnumber those waving the Union flag at the event,
which is usually a patriotic display following a campaign by pro Europeans. The spectacle of
so many EU flags being waved as the whole belted out rule Britannia provoked disgust
from leading Eurosceptics. What's going on? That's from the Guardian.
I voted to remain in the referendum and I've largely, I don't know if I've changed my view
of that, how I would vote, but my view of that issue has evolved so much precisely by seeing
these fucking morons who just completely are incapable of understanding what democracy means.
Democracy means that when you lose, you accept it. There's some other parallels for that particular
statement. When you lose, you accept it. And we've had for the last seven years, these just
absolute fucking lunatics running around acting like what democracy means as they always get their
way. And they have to insert this into everything. They've just become obsessed. And it's mind boggling
to me. How we're still talking about Brexit is mind boggling to me. I don't get it.
Yeah, that's insane. It's insane. That's like a Eons old talking point now.
I think if you are still talking about Brexit, your brain is broken.
When do you think that rule gets applied to COVID?
I think that with COVID, I actually said this before COVID was over and in this instance,
I get things wrong all the time, but this was something that turned out to be right,
that people will want to forget very quickly. And they have done. Even I want to move on from
COVID. We talked about it earlier, but I don't have any great desire to talk about it. Most
people have moved on without learning the lessons of the thing. So I think the reason to still talk
about COVID is that there is a future pandemic coming and we ought to learn the lessons of this
one while we still can. With Brexit, it's a political decision that is not reversible unless
you have another referendum, which in which case you're free to campaign to have another referendum
if that's what you'd like. I'm not sure showing up with EU flags at the proms is the way to achieve
a second referendum. I'm not a political expert, but that's my type.
Yeah. There is a resurgence of activism occurring at the moment, but it's always in criticism of
stuff. So George Mack, one of my friends, highlighted that the last time that there was a
ticker tape parade for someone that wasn't healthcare professionals in America for
something, not against something, was Nelson Mandela in the 90s. So you have a culture of
activism and of public displays of passion, however, can only be against something,
while people are only choosing to do it against something.
And people respond to incentives. What's that saying? Ever a great cause begins as a movement,
becomes a business, and eventually it degenerates into a racket.
And there are many people in this country who made a career out of being prominent
remainers. And when Brexit was over, what are you going to do? So they just carry on.
And the people, they feed this crap like having this crap fed to them. So they just,
they keep going. It's a reward incentive-based system because it's a pointless conversation.
You're not going to change the result of the referendum. Even if you succeeded in proving
that Brexit was a bad idea, it's already happened. So you can argue for a second referendum or
another referendum if you want. But that's it, right? But talking about how shit Brexit is,
isn't about achieving a result beyond your own personal enrichment satisfaction status, etc.
And Femi, this Marina Perkus woman, there's a shit ton of these people on Twitter whose only
thing that they do is talk about Brexit and get thousands and thousands of views.
Yeah, it makes me sad to think about people who, I know there's one incident that occurs,
especially like public stuff, like some catastrophe or news stuff, like people that
are still talking about Madeleine McCann. Do you know what I mean? Like I understand
fucking terrible situation, but there are people whose entire lives I want-
I mean, they are her parents.
I once stepped into-
Fuck's sake, Constantine.
He was there. You left an open goal out to me.
Yeah, you can take the comedian out of comedy. I once descended. I got hit with the fucking
like blast radius of these two investigative journalists. I had them on the show when
the disappearance of Madeleine McCann came out on Netflix. And these were the two main people,
her husband and wife. And I brought them on. I thought,
fucking hell, like these are the two, these are the fucking experts. These are the guys that
Netflix went to. They must be like fucking legit, you know what I mean?
Brought them on. Turns out there is an ardent fucking group of people who really do not like
them on the internet. And I was a part of like Madeleine McCann law for a couple of weeks,
because this guy has platformed these people that we know they're a part of the,
like whatever the fuck cover up scheme and they didn't know the thing that went on.
Do you haven't read the original police report from Portugal or wherever she was from?
And it's, there's part of me that thinks like noble cause you're chasing after it.
It's part of me that thinks, holy fuck, you've been captured by this one thing,
like this one incident has just completely controlled your life forever.
I mean, the one thing that doesn't get set off and enough is, you know,
there's a certain proportion of society that's not mentally well, massively overrepresented online,
right? So I think a lot of people are just, you know, it's, it's, it's an obsession of theirs or
whatever. You don't get to see what's driving. This is what I often think when I'm reading
Twitter replies, because I'm like, well, these people are like, you know, normal and right,
and most of them are, of course they are, but like you read something weird and then I sort of like
go, okay, let's imagine what sort of circumstances I would have to be sitting in to write this.
And then I see that picture and I go, okay, this makes sense. You know what I mean?
Like when I see people saying really crazy shit, I'm like, so this, I just think what we forget
sometimes is a lot of people are, you know, in that situation. I was telling you about this
preventative medicine place that I've been to in America. So it's called Fountain Life.
And I did a podcast with the founder forever ago and thought, that sounds fucking cool. Didn't
really know what preventative medicine was, although it's kind of encapsulated in the name.
And I ended up getting like everything done. Full body MRI, CT scan, heart angiogram, brain
angiogram. I need to do that, man. Full works. Yes. I will 100% link you with them. One of the
things they do, I think it's called contrast. So you're hooked up to an IV, which is like a
mechanical IV. So when they press a button, just shit goes into you. So they've got you in the
fucking cannula or whatever it is, they've got the thing in there. And then there's this huge,
big wheel spinning around you unbelievably quickly. So you're kind of an MRI machine,
it's a little bit more open and this huge fuck off wheel that's obviously like scanning shit.
And then this, they pump stuff from this machine into your vein. And it lights up your heart
it goes into the ventricles of the heart while this thing's in a very specific position
over you and blah, blah, blah. But the felt sense of it is heat starting in your neck
and going only through your torso doesn't touch any of your limbs going only through your torso
and finishing in like your bladder. And then it cools off around your bladder for about 20 seconds.
It is one of the strangest fucking experiences. It's not unpleasant, strange. I would definitely
wouldn't even say it's that unpleasant, to be honest. It's like, must be what feeling like a
dragon is like, just fucking heat moving around inside of you. So yeah, that was very interesting.
I can't wait. Preventative medicine though, we were saying it before.
Playing a game where you try to catch up to a disease that's already happened
by design is a losing fight, right? Absolutely. No, I think that seems to me to be the future
of the direction that we're going is like looking into genetic predispositions. I know people who
are having procedures because they know they have a certain risk, etc. Chris Hemsworth found out on
that discovery documentary that he's got, I think he's got genetic predisposition to alximers.
So he's spending way more time with his family and he's doing other things. He adjusted his entire
life because I might not be able to remember this. Should learn a second language. That's protective
against alximers? People who speak multiple languages are much less likely to have it.
I wonder... Which way the causal effect works, I don't know. But I imagine exercising your brain
in multiple ways is helpful to protecting yourself against things like that.
Yeah, I don't know, man. There's a multiplicity of ideas about how we're supposed to live our lives.
And in some regards, it's amazing. The promise of free access to information 24 hours a day,
all of human civilization's knowledge at your fingertips, that combined with the falling
away of the gatekeepers and this loss of trust in institutions actually makes for really fucking
disquieting journey for a lot of people. Because who do I trust? Do your own research?
Fuck, I've got a life to live. I've got to try and... To the family and the kids and the house
and the dog and the me and you want me to... I've got to go and do my own... Give me the medical
journal. I'm going to go through this, whether it's about health. Are carbs good? Is sugar good?
What about... Should we be eating more butter? What about meat? Is meat killing me or should I go
vegan? What about paleo? Libert King says I need more testicle and it's everything.
I'll see you and I'll raise you, which is what if the way for you to live your life that's optimal
is different to mine? My wife's very into Ayurvedic medicine and that's the entire concept of it,
is the different types of people that need different food, different times that they eat,
all sorts of different things. A lot of it is experiential. When I found out that you could
just eat protein and greens, I was like, whoa, this is amazing and that's what I do. I have carbs
every now and again, but it fits how I am wired and my wife's the exact opposite.
She's water, wind, you're fire. Fire is the lead for me.
Anton. Anton's wind. Francis. Water.
Knew it. Bloody water. It's pretty obvious. Bloody water. Water is great if you can get it off the
sofa. Then it's like a bowl rolling down the hill. You can't stop it. It becomes unstoppable,
but it's a fucking hard... It takes a lot of fire to get water off the sofa.
Yeah, I was fascinated. He taught me about this in Austin when we were hanging last time. I thought
it was really fascinating. He taught me as well, ambient water, ambient, not refrigerated water,
should avoid drinking cold water too much. Yeah. That's their way. That's how they see it. I'm
by no means an expert, but generally, ingesting cold things is not good for you.
Yogurt. I love yogurts so much, though. Dairy also not great, as I understand it.
I mean, look, I'm not supposed to eat red meat and I mostly red meat, so you break the rules
sometimes. Yeah. But no, I understand what you mean, that different strokes for different folks.
But fucking hell, even if there can be different strokes for different folks,
I should be able to find a source that can... I'm this kind of a person, therefore, I can do this
kind of a thing. This is where the... If I was more conspiratorial, I would say that the goal of a
messy information landscape is not to convince you of any one narrative, but to convince you that
no narrative can be trusted. And it seems to me that if I was maybe even in a various domestic
actor wanting to make a sort of nihilistic, fatalistic, placid, not compliant, but just like
surrendered populace. Well, you know the rat electrification experiment, right? Where they
put a rat in a cell where the floor gives them an electric shock. And what they found was,
in psychology, this is called... What's the term? Learned helplessness? Yes. This is the
Learned Helplessness Experiment, where if the rat is able to end the electric shock by pressing a
button, then the rat will continue to do that. If the rat has no control over the electric shock,
it will just lie down and take it, right? So I think this... What you're talking about is a system
that creates learned helplessness in people, which is one of the reasons... While, of course,
it's super tempting to bash the mainstream media and they deserve a lot of the bashing,
we need a media ecosystem that's trusted. We do need politicians who can be trusted.
I'm not happy with the status quo that we've got the moment where we trust no one and with good
reason. But the solution to that isn't to trust the mainstream. The solution is for the mainstream
to become trustworthy. Yeah. Do you think that's even possible? I think it's very difficult in the
modern environment. It's very, very difficult because I just see that us, we're running a small
media organization, just you are too, right? It's like, do you get everything right? Is your
research always on point? So it's very, very difficult. Interesting what you said earlier about
there are certain things that they're able to do that we're not, like fact-checking and stuff.
They're also, because of how they're incentivized and subsidized and the expectations,
like non-sexy stories, digging into weather and accounts and stuff, tell me which
YouTube channel is going to predict tomorrow's weather. No one, right? Not sexy enough. Too much
of a cost to be able to do. And no one's saying the fucking Met Office, they're captured by the
woke. Although there was that thing this year, right? Where they made most of Europe look like
it had turned to ash because anything over 35 degrees Celsius meant that it was like
the blackened end of a cigarette. So maybe there is a little bit of fuckery going on.
Yeah. Well, there is a lot of fuckery going on. What's interesting is I find the climate issue
absolutely fascinating. It's genuinely fascinating to me because the historical ignorance on that
issue that is being deliberately spread is like mind-blowing to me. Do you know the Romans when
they occupied Britain? They grew grapes on Hadron's Wall. Hadron's Wall for people listening used to
protect England from what is now England from what is now Scotland, right? One of the
northernmost points on the British Isles. Now, if you don't know Scotland,
fucking cold. It's average weather in, I used to live in Edinburgh for seven years,
average weather in Scotland in August is like 18 degrees and rain at best, right? So
what we are being told about that issue is absolutely mind-blowingly, incredibly
unhelpful and inaccurate. Wasn't there, I think it's still around somewhere in London
or somewhere in the South Coast, 40 miles inland from the coast, there's ports.
Pevensey Castle. Yeah. Pevensey Castle, you go there and they're like, yeah, the sea used to be here.
I don't see this. 2000 years ago. Yeah. So this whole conversation is very, very odd to me and
after my Oxford speech went viral, I had a lot of invitations to go and speak to different people
and I was talking to this guy who works for the Indian government at a high level and he told me
when India became independent in 1947, average life expectancy was 37 years old in India and
today it's I think 82 and that's because they burn fossil fuels. Now, are we saying to a billion
plus Indian people they're not allowed to do that anymore? Do you know what I mean? Like the way we
talk about this issue, just it's a cult. It doesn't make any sense. It doesn't make any logical sense.
The things that are being suggested that we do don't make any sense. The way we're approaching,
it doesn't make any sense. It's incredible to me the way this conversation is being had
and I'd love to understand, you know, Eric, who you just had on, he always says this, like
we're lying about the climate for the wrong reasons. Do you know what I mean? Like his
point is climate change is happening and it's a serious issue, but we're lying about the way
to deal with it and lots of other things around it. That's one of the most weird things to me about
what's happening. Like Bjorn Lomborg during that, oh my God, heat wave, we're all going to die,
posting stuff about, you know, like actually the number of forest fires is the lowest it's ever
been and the number of hurricanes in America, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera. And I would love
to know what's going on with that shit. I would love to know. Do you need theories?
Well, one thing that's interested me a lot is obviously people are familiar with the concept
of group think, but there's another thing which is the Abilene paradox. I don't know if you're
familiar with it. It's basically the idea that people will often do things because they think
other people want them done. And you combine that with mass panic, indoctrinating kids into being
terrified, et cetera. And I also think human beings love a doomsday narrative. And a portion of the
sort of side that I've been arguing on, which is this anti-work side, is like the barbarians at
the gates. Now, I genuinely think that's true. I think we are undermining the founding pillars
of our civilization, but there is an appeal to that worldview. And if you look back, neither of us
are old enough, but in the 1970s, the planet was cooling and everybody was terrified of global
cooling. Terrified. Terrified of the population bomb. Absolutely. Now we're terrified of the
depopulation. It's what we love. We love to think. And I think there's a kind of like,
we live in special times. Oh, like a mass solipsism. Yeah. Yeah. Like, look, look,
last 2000 years, shit has happened and you had Jesus in World War II and whatever,
but now is the real time when shit is happening. And he knows, maybe it is happening.
Not on this issue, I don't think. But yeah, the idea that we are living through a climate catastrophe
seems highly suspect to me. Highly suspect. But also somehow very sexy. Very sexy. Now,
that's not to say the climate isn't changing. The climate is changing. But the question I think
we also ought to be asking is, is the climate changing a bad thing? Well, climate-related
deaths have decreased by 50 times over the last 100 years. That's Alex Epstein's he
been under. Yes. We haven't had him on, but yes. Oh, dude, you guys will fucking love him, right?
I'm sure. He's an interesting dude. Climate-related deaths have decreased by 50 times. More people
are killed by cold weather than hot weather. Yes. Way, way, way more. And we know that because
this is the thing about the idea of pursuing net zero is it makes energy more expensive.
That's the method by which you achieve this to some extent. And pensioners freeze to death
every winter in this country. Now, that doesn't seem like a good thing to me. I don't think
making energy more expensive for poor elderly people and them freezing to death on their own
in their homes in the winter, I don't think that's what, I don't think if we were setting out to
improve the world, that would be one of the ways that we'd do that. But because we're trade-off
denialists because we refuse to understand that actions have consequences good and bad,
we ignore that. And this hysteria, it's cut like and I find it very strange. I find it very strange.
Whatever you think about the climate issue in and of itself, our response to it is strange.
People are just looking for a cause, right? Yeah. And this is why COVID was so captivating
on both sides because it gave us a righteous war to wage. And again, when you've got a
multiplicity of ways that you can go with your life, the man box has been blown open.
Nobody says that you should be this for masculinity. Maybe I don't even need to get
into a relationship. I can just boss bitch or like incel my way through the next however many decades
of my life do all this sort of stuff. Ah, here's a single vector along which I can move. I'm no
longer in an open field. I'm on a set of railway tracks. And yeah, you know, Peterson had the
ordering chaos, like paradigm out there. It feels like there's a fucking hell of a lot of chaos and
not a massive amount of order for people. And then the people that live in chaos land and prefer
that look at the people in order land as tyrants and the people in order land look at the people
in chaos land as fucking vigilantes. And yeah, it's, it doesn't surprise me, man. You know,
and this is where I said to Eric, I wish that I'd got Eric to watch the Sam episode
before he sat down with me because it was difficult for me to
portray a three hour conversation in 20 seconds. But I don't think that those guys are too far
apart. Like Eric saying we've lost faith in our institutions, but we can't get rid of them.
Independent media is both advantageous and not going away. But we fucking can't like
outsource our sense making to them as well. How do we live in this new world? What does success
look like in this regard? I thought it was fucking interesting. Look, I think we're living in a,
this is a metaphor that is overused, but it's sort of the invention of the printing press kind of
situation. I mean, that caused two centuries of religious war. So I think what the social
media in particular and the internet more broadly has done, it is as broken our ability to make
sense of the world and we are all reaching for a way to do that. I think it's going to take some
time and it's not going to be without consequence. And it's interesting because the argument about
free speech is made very complicated by the existence of social media because there are people
who say they're free speech absolutists. I've never called myself that because I don't believe
anyone is a free speech absolutist. What's your conception on free speech? Give me the
framework. Well, think about this. So Elon Musk says he's a free speech absolutist. He buys Twitter
and then the moment people trigger his personal preferences, he shuts that particular form of
conversation down when it was about children or something like that, so spreading something.
I think he said it about Alex Jones or whatever. Anyway, my point is X, Twitter, whatever has a
moderation policy because it has to because the technology is so powerful. I'll give you
both sides of the argument, right? But the argument for moderation as in content moderation
is that the technology is so powerful if you can start an assault on the Capitol or an undermining
of an election or whatever it is or a riot or a mass shooting or whatever. If you can start that
from your phone, the technology is too powerful to be left uncontrolled. I have a lot of sympathy
with that argument. However, let's flip it the other way around. You live in the United States,
now a country for which I have a tremendous regard and the history and the formation of the country
is very interesting because it creates a country that is fundamentally very different to every
other country that's existed before. Do you get 1776 if there is Twitter and it's moderated?
I don't think you do because who would allow a revolution to happen? You think King George would
allow the spreading of misinformation, right? So we are stuck in this place where on the one hand,
yes, free speech is absolute and is really super important. On the other hand, actually,
most people, it's very easy to be a free speech absolutist until you're in the hot seat making
the decision and imagine you are in the hot seat and you've got the CIA, the FBI, the heads of
government, whoever's your friends coming to you and going, if you don't do something, people are
going to get killed and they are going to get killed and that's on your conscience. It's up to you,
right? So it's a very, very difficult thing with the power of the technology that we have that has
the ability to multiply information, narratives, opinions, whatever to such an extent. So we have
not worked out how to handle that at all and everybody who says they have a solution to it,
I'd love to see them be in the hot seat for a day and then we'll see how absolutist they are about
free speech or how pro censorship they are because there's a flip side to the coin which is you do
moderation, you're going to get accused of bias from both sides, right? So I don't have no envy
for those people. Now, I do think they've made a shit ton of mistakes. I'm just saying, I suspect
I probably would have done too. Yeah, Sam had an interesting analogy where he was saying, if I
spend five years building up the waking up social media platform and I want only Nazis to be allowed
on it, I should be allowed to only have Nazis on my social media platform or the inverse. I should
be allowed to kick Nazis off. It's not my job to have people I don't want on my social media platform.
And this comes back to the pipeline versus public service argument. I mean, there's a very strong
counter argument to that argument, which is the one you've just made, which is once you've captured
the entire market, you're a monopoly and we regulate monopolies for a reason, which is
to be kicked out of the local pub does not prevent you from going and having a drink in a pub. To be
kicked off Twitter prevents you from communicating in that element of the public square.
Has there been any, there's usually concerns around monopoly. Has there been any of that
to do with online platform? Is there such a thing as too big of an online platform? Like fucking
Facebook and TikTok and YouTube have got like, you know, large portions of the planet as users.
So this is a new category in that regard. Absolutely. The banks got so big that they
needed to be split up. You take large things and make them into smaller things, right?
But you can't not with this because no one wants to be on the third best Twitter. Nobody wants to
use the third best Google, right? You do it, you split them off and then everyone just converges
back on which is the biggest one. The monopoly is what makes it valuable. The fact that it's on
there is what makes it valuable. That's why Elon Musk bought Twitter rather than building his own
from scratch. Because he has the money to build his own Twitter, but you just can't drag people over
enough. So the monopoly is the point. This is why it's such a tricky thing. The new category of
business. That's why it's the point. With sort of frictionless gravitation
toward whichever thing you want to choose to use, people will always converge on the biggest,
the best, the whatever one. Whereas, yeah, if Jim Shark gets two and a half billion
users or to customers and they say, you need to split up into Jim and Shark, right? Or Lloyds and
TSB. It's not quite the same. Not everyone's going to converge on this particular one.
It's interesting. One of the analogies I used to use from my nightclub days,
and Twitter's kind of like this. In nightlife events, it's one of the only industries where the
other users of the product are the primary value of the product itself. So if you ask one of your
friends on your 20s, mate, how was last night? And they'll say, mate, it was amazing. So many
girls in that club. No, I asked you how your night was. I didn't ask who were the other people that
went to the event. You don't say, why do I use an iPhone? I use an iPhone because David Beckham's
got an iPhone. So I use an iPhone because the camera and the apps and the battery life and
stuff like that. But nightlife was very, very interesting in that way, which is why it was
so mimetic. It's the same reason why, I'll open this up to you, internet, some industry secrets
here. Sometimes nightclubs hold cues and sometimes they make the cues thinner than they need to be.
So they look really long and then they take a photo because it looks like it was busy.
We did that. We did that all the time. We still do. It's Freshers Week next week in Newcastle.
It's exactly what every single nightclub will do. But you have that same thing with regards to
the social media as well. The other users of social media largely determine your experience on it,
which is why Rumble is this and Truth Social is whatever, right? Is there a left-leaning?
Well, they had one, Mastodon, didn't they? I don't know what happened, which tells you quite a lot.
Speaking of Mastodon, I had a guy called Ben Lam on the show. He's the CEO of this company called
Colossal. He is using ancient genetic information to bring the woolly mammoth back to life.
Within 20 years, we will have actual woolly mammoths walking on this planet. So they found,
in the Arctic, very good for preserving DNA. They found bones and all sorts of other stuff.
Mammoth carcass remains. From that, they've taken, I think it's maybe 40 or 50 different because you
don't get a full DNA sequence in any one of them. Then they've brought them all together,
used AI to fill in the little gaps. They're then going to implant a, whatever it's called stem cell,
pluripotent stem cell, inside of the Asian elephant. So an Asian elephant will give birth
to a woolly mammoth. And then after a sufficiently long amount of time, they'll get placed up north.
And they can do all sorts of awesome stuff for helping to fertilize the Arctic. And he also
wants to bring back the dodo bird. The interesting reason he wanted to bring back the dodo bird was
the reason that the dodo bird was killed off was because of unsustainable hunting practices.
So you'd think that the mammoth has a real function. The dodo bird, people laugh at it for
being this stupid pigeon that couldn't fly away. But maybe it was because of the introduction of
a particular predator or whatever. Yeah, it might have been ecological imbalance that was done by
manmade. And his point is mammoth does a thing. It's like the farmer of the Arctic.
Dodo bird is like a symbolic representation of, do you see all of the work that we had to
fucking go to, to bring this thing back to life? Be more careful when you introduce invasive species
into different ecologies. I was like, fucking hell. And he's super fired up about it. I found
him really charming. So I had a conversation with him the other day. I thought that was cool.
So they're going to bring back prehistoric animals. I think I remember seeing a movie about
that. I did say, you know, how far back can we go? Real problem, bones and teeth don't
hold much genetic information, which is a fucking massive shame. But we can do stuff like
sabertooth tigers, like particular types of sabertooth cats. I was asking him, what else
did he want to bring back? There was this huge fucking sloth, this massive thing that it was
like the largest marsupial. They live like on an island, but there were no predators.
I think so. Yeah, this gigantic fucking sloth. So there's like a laundry list of different
ridiculous megafauna prehistoric animal, prehistoric, like deceased. It's called de-extinction
extinct animals that he wants to bring back. I just thought like between that and preventative
medicine and AI. What do you thought on AI? How are you feeling? Are you fucking scared
that you're going to lose your job to GPT-6? I'm not scared I'm going to lose my job. No.
He's going to make a very significant impact on the world, but what that's going to end up looking
like, I don't think anyone really knows. I think there's probably, there's a lot of fear porn about
it and it may be justified or maybe I don't have any profound thoughts about it. I think
if you look at human history, people always use technology for basically the same things,
right? Getting laid, killing each other, etc. So you'll produce amazing porn,
you'll produce amazing weapons, you'll produce amazing everything and then human beings are
going to do what they always do, I think is the truth, right? Like I remember, I think it was
Desmond Morris, I used to read a lot of his books. I don't know if you're familiar with them,
but it's one of the things he talked about. He said like when you dig up a clay tablet
in Egypt from 4,000 years ago, you read it is basically the same shit that we talk about now.
My son doesn't write to me or doesn't visit me or whatever. Human condition doesn't change.
The tools we use to express it do. I saw a report from an ancient stone tablet
from I think Egypt or ancient Rome that was a justification for why this
employee hadn't turned up to work. It was a sick note that he'd written and it's this
fucking elaborate story about what happened and the wife and there was a catastrophe and all
this stuff and yeah, you do realize that human nature is pretty fucking resilient over a long
enough period of time. But coming back, here's another thing I'll say about the free speech
conversation, which is that we haven't made nearly an honest enough case about free speech,
which is why we're having a stupid debate about it, because no one wants to say the truth,
which is free speech has consequences that are bad. There are people who say
are atrocious, horrific shit. There are people who will use the opportunity to be on a social
platform to mobilize and do terrible things. Now, there's a big conversation now about
whether there's a lot of antisemitism on X and actually there is. I have to block more people
than I used to have to block to on Twitter, but I'm still in favor of that being allowed
because I'd much rather these people were in the open and people could see what they are and they
can have their conversation instead of going off into a kind of like a private place where it's just
them and arguments are never challenged. So I think one of the things people don't say enough
about free speech is yes, it causes harm, but the harm's worth it. And we don't make that argument
because it's too honest and complicated and unpleasant and whatever. But the other side of
the argument is terrifying to me. I don't think I've told this story publicly, but last time I
did Question Time. Question Time is this big political discussion program here in the UK.
Before they show, they do a warm-up question that's not recorded and it's not released.
So it's like a warm-up. And the conversation at that time was Donald Trump had just been
unbanned on Facebook and they were asking whether that was okay. And they went to me first and I
was like, look, not that I'm his biggest fan, but I do think the former or sitting president of the
United States should be able to speak in public. Yeah, I do. Controversial as that is. And then
they went around the table and whatever. And then they went to the labor woman who was there. Very
nice woman. And she without batting an eyelid went, I think we should have the safest internet in the
world. And I would say for the North Korea, right, this is coming back to this point about trade
off denialism. Like they think safety doesn't have a price. And the other argument is freedom
doesn't have a price. And the truth is they both have a price. And what we're trying to find is
the right point in the middle between those two. We want enough freedom and enough safety. And
that line is somewhere in the middle. Because if you think about it, that's true of any issue.
I can end murder outside of the prison system today. I can stop murder and rape. Do you want
to stop murder and rape? Yes. Okay, let's lock up all men between the ages of 15 and 40 until the
age out of it. You've ended murder. Right. But we don't do that. Why not? Because there's a trade
off between safety and freedom. And so it's the same of everything. And it's the same with free
speech. You mentioned Trump. What do you think happens in 2024? I'm not an expert on it, but
it looks like they're going to try and put him in prison. And it also looks like he might win.
Is that possible? Yeah. Can both things happen? Can you be president from prison?
Yeah. You can be president from prison. Yeah. Fuck off. You can't be president from prison.
Look it up. You can be president from prison. Oh my god.
And you can run from prison. More interestingly.
I wonder, maybe if you are, I don't know, maybe you can't be president. You can definitely run
from prison. Maybe you get elected and pardon yourself.
Right. So you're okay. Let's say, let's say that there's no prison. What happens? Presuming
that everybody is a... But why would we presume that? I mean, I think it's pretty clear that
that's what's going to happen. Okay. The path that they're on, it looks to me like they're going
after him. We just had to score Adams on the show. And this is, he said Trump needs to win
to stay out of prison. That's what he thinks. And I also think that the other thing he said
is like, he actually interestingly said that he thinks Trump started this because when he talked
about Hillary and he said, I'm going to lock you up, they were like, oh, oh, you want to play?
Let's fucking play. So I think they're going after him now and they want to put him in prison.
And I think they will. But you also think that he...
I think he'll win the nomination for the Republicans. Yeah.
And then it's, I mean, who the fuck? Look at the last election. Who the fuck knows what's
going to happen? But he can run from prison that much, I know.
That's fucking insane. Vivek Ramiswani playing tennis with his top off whilst Trump's in prison
as the Trump Ramiswani 2024 fucking thing. That looks like what it's going to be, right?
I think that's what Vivek's going for. Yeah.
He's angling for it for sure. Yeah.
And who do you think gets nominated for the Democrats?
Well, it's going to be Biden, isn't it? I mean, they're not going to abandon him.
Unless...
Well, he falls down a flight of stairs.
Yeah. And in his case, it wouldn't even be a conspiracy.
Who do you think's the running mate? Any idea?
Nah, man. Look, let's be honest, neither of us is an act. Well, although you are now
an adopted American, so you probably...
An immigrant to that great nation, I know even less than you.
You know, I try... The more people listen to what I say, the less I try and talk about things
I don't know enough about. I mean, that was a Douglas Murray thing. He was... Someone had asked him
about two years ago, had asked him why he hadn't written many articles. He writes like four,
five columns a week. It's like 3,000, 4,000 words every week. And then his books and then
his speaking on top. Someone had asked him something along the lines of,
why haven't you commented that much on COVID? He says, I'm going to do something which is very
rare in the modern world, just to not comment on something which I know nothing about.
I thought, what a fucking beautiful and outlier philosophy to have. But this is...
I see this allure in myself and I have to check myself and probably fail almost all the time at
doing it. People start to listen to you about a thing or for a thing and you go, well,
why shouldn't I comment on the Ukraine? Maybe my take on the Ukraine is
useful. Maybe the world does deserve to hear what my thoughts are about immigration crossing the
channel. And then you realize... I mean, I've commented on both those things, but thanks mate.
But you are from the fucking region of the Ukraine and an immigrant to the UK, right?
That's a lived experience. Yes, exactly. I know exactly what you mean. Your point is very,
very, very valid. It happens with comedians incidentally, which is why comedians political
opinions generally speaking are so demented. Because you stand on stage all day making other
people throw their head back and admire you or be enthralled by you or whatever. And you're like,
oh, maybe I do know something. Let me give you my opinion about Brexit. It's like, no,
no, just be the clown. Shut the fuck up. Now, that's why I don't do comedy actually,
it's one of the reasons. I was more interested in making a point than I wasn't being artificially
funny. You know what I mean? And I always thought of myself more as a satirist anyway,
which was a different thing. But yeah, being in front of a microphone imbues you with a level
of confidence that is very often inappropriate. Right. It's like permanently being on
oratorial Viagra. Yeah, if everyone's listening to me, I must be worth listening to. That's
what happens in your brain. Regardless of what it is that I'm talking about, regardless of the
format or the, yeah, I've got these live shows coming up towards the end of the year, November,
mid-November. That's awesome. Thank you. What's your advice for someone who have touring comic
played fucking thousands of shows across your career? What do people who haven't put that time in
on stage not know about how being on stage works? This is going to sound like a shit answer. But
actually, it's stage time is just like air miles on the clock. Like with pilots, you have to fly a
certain number of miles. But I always think about whatever charisma, whatever else it is,
is really about a comfort with yourself in front of other people. Not everyone is equally charismatic
naturally, but if you're comfortable with who you are and you are able to do that while you're on
stage or in front of a camera or wherever, that's the magic ingredient. It's like my favorite quote
is the most important thing in show business is authenticity. If you can fake that, you can do
anything. Authenticity is the key ingredient, which is why I think you've been successful. I think
it's why Joe is successful. I think it's why Francis and I have had the success we've had.
I almost feel, I don't know if you feel this, but the longer we go, it's like the more layers of
the undone we peel off to reveal more of who we truly are. Yeah, I would say so because
you become more comfortable with things that you masked over before. Yes. There's uncertainty or
like nerdiness, I suppose, like unnecessary rabbit holes that you want to go down. And I've never
had this before. Obviously, you had this and you may have had it before comedy, I don't know.
But I never had a single pursuit that I got to go as narrow and deep on as I have on
having conversations with people. And when you really, really start to fucking like drill down
into, okay, what does mastery begin to look like? Which I'm not at, but I can glimpse.
I'm like, okay, what does that actually look like? What does that feel like? What does it look like
to make rules and then break rules and then put them back in again and do things? I'm talking
to some of the guys now I want to start doing slightly more scripted bits as a part of maybe
some of our ad reads as a part of maybe some of the intros. And that's like, if you actually look
at that, that's a very inauthentic way of doing what is supposed to be an unbelievably authentic
relatable medium. We're taking the rules from, you know, like sitcom legacy media to try and apply
that to this. But I actually think that that's breaking rules that have been made. And the
reason you can is because you've learned them unbelievably well, right? It's not not knowing
the rules. It's disregarding them purposefully. And I'm just excited. I'm excited by all of the
different options and opportunities and ways that there's cool stuff to do. And it's fucking awesome
to see what you guys are doing at Trigonometry. What I know about what's coming that more people
will find out at some point over the next however long is fucking amazing. I think that the UK needs
a nice movement, a good conglomeration headed by people who understand this industry
that can be a platform for others who have amazing and interesting things to say
but don't yet have the platform that they deserve to be able to say them on.
Well, this is what we've been working on for a long time. And I can't quite say exactly the
people and who are going to be involved other than to say they're going to be fucking awesome.
But we want to use the platform that we've built to make it so that Trigonometry is the
main show on that platform. But there will be other shows with other people and me and Francis
interspersed with other interesting, funny, hilarious, clever commentators, etc. So rather
than two Trigonometry interviews a week and some raw shows and a bunch of them,
we've started doing a lot of scripted stuff ourselves, comedy. I often record my sub-stack
pieces now and we put them out as videos. We had a couple of really viral ones. One I did
about communism and fascism. You did one about Jordan Peterson recently.
I did, yeah. That one's done very well, surprisingly.
But also we want to start thinking about how I'm thinking about us now as a media organization.
That's my frame for what we're doing. I want to bring other people through, help them make
exciting content that fits with the values of what we do. There's going to be entertaining
for our audience. There's going to be informative and grow it over time into a real hub for awesome
content. That to me is a super exciting next phase of this because I think the media industry
that we are in, the new media industry, is going to change rapidly. One of the things I see coming
down the pipe quite quickly actually is consolidation. This idea that you're going to give five quid a
month to your favorite 70 creators, it's not going to happen. The admin alone will kill you.
People are going to want a place. Obviously our politics are very different, but the model
of the daily wire is, I mean, they've executed it incredibly well. I went to go and see them.
I filmed on Brett Cooper's show four, five months ago, something like that. Anna, dude, it's a
machine workshop for creating content. Over there is the merch team. All they do is make
fucking tumblers and designs for t-shirts. Here's an entire three by 10 row of editors all
working away. Millions of meeting rooms. Here's an entire different building with everyone's
studio in it. Here's a control center that allows us to edit anything at any time. I found this out.
I'll check that this is okay to say. Shapiro has got some special fucking landline thing,
some special type of connection that runs from where he is in Florida to where the hub is in
Nashville that allows them to cut his show live as if they were on site. Wow. I didn't know that.
I've been in that studio a couple of times now in Florida. I've been to that one, but I've been to
the pipeline where that shit ends up at. Yeah, I've been there too. It's impressive. It's very
impressive what they built. Here's an interesting thing for you. Two analogous stories that I'm
sure that you've thought about before. The slow dilution or fucking explosion of the young Turks
and Crowder Daily Why, that you're talking about congealing or bringing together.
Meanwhile, a lot of the groups and affiliations and organizations, IDW, largely disbanded,
that wasn't an organization though. Loose affiliation of people. Young Turks, you say the
wrong thing slightly and downstream from that. Some people on the network don't agree with
other things that you've said. Like fucking apparently Ben Shapiro was Crowder's first
ever lawyer or some bullshit as well and then they've split off and they're big C conservative and he
turns out that he bought the URL only a couple of months after they spoke, but months before he
announced that he'd recorded these phone calls and all this sort of bullshit. So I think that
sometimes we're too quick to try and pattern match stuff. Yeah. And it's like, oh, all organizations
devolve into fractured individual groups or whatever, or all power becomes centralized
into one thing. It's like maybe it's just flux. Maybe it's just tides. Maybe there's like ebbs
and flows and stuff. Well, I think you're going to be able to continue to do what you do in
whichever way you want to do it. I'm interested in bringing people through who are very talented,
but who basically what we had to do with trigonometry and one of the reasons I haven't
made there a few money is that we have a big team as you do, but we've always had a big team
because we wanted to create the foundation for what we're about to do. And so Francis and I
really don't make a lot of money from it because we're investing in the future. And what I want to
do is we've kind of created a factory for making content. I want to bring people in who don't want
to build their own factory, but who are very good as creators of making content. Yes, exactly.
I mean, Carl Benjamin, load the seat. Yeah, he's done that. Spanked it. Yeah, he's doing very well.
They're playing a game of monopoly around the fucking some like transport police bullshit
somewhere in the country. And it's like they're slowly taking up the transport people have got
the corner office and got all of the ones that I decide. Apparently one of the guys was telling me
that he had some incident that had occurred at the railway line. He had some sort of stalker
that followed him at the railway line. And because it happened at the train station,
it's the transport police that pick up on it. And he rang them and the guy rang him back and he
could hear him through the wall. He said, mate, should I just come through, open the door and
was talking to the guy that was dealing with his case. It's like, fucking hell, that's interesting.
But yeah, you know, this, it's cool, man, it's cool. And it feels way more cool to see it happen
from grassroots, where you can watch episode one of some horse shit show.
Thank you.
With terrible lighting, fucking audios all over the place. And no one knows what they're doing.
Ugly host.
Ugly host. Yeah, that wasn't shit. And then you work to the stage where you're like,
holy fuck, like I can actually see the full trajectory of this entire thing laid out in
front of me, as opposed to like, oh, fucking Rupert Murdoch and is it part of...
Shady McShade face invested a million dollars.
Nameless fucking like hooded figures drinking adrena chrome dancing around a pentagram.
Yeah. Yeah.
That's where we want to go.
I understand.
No, but closing the loop on all of that, I just think this is the next phase in terms of what
we started with, which is let's stop whining about how we've been cancelled. You know, I think
it's been a thing of mine, which is like, we keep saying, well, the mainstream media isn't
doing this, then well, let's fucking do it.
Make your own mainstream media.
If you think that they're doing it wrong, let's fucking do it right. Let's do it.
And let's see who wins. That's the thing for me is like, I love the competition. I love
attempting to build new things, the creating the challenge of that,
working out how to run a business with...
Fucking immigrant mentality, man.
To me, this is the most exciting thing.
We were talking with good friends of mine last night about how much money you need to be happy.
And I was like, and somebody said that the statistics are $70,000 a year.
And maybe it's in like $2,000, but whatever.
Beyond that point, it doesn't really make any difference.
And I was like, well, for me, it does make a big difference.
And then I thought, you know what, what if I made a million dollars a year,
which is way more than I make now, but I wasn't having the experience of growing,
working with my friends, all of that.
And then I was like, actually, yeah, I don't think it is the money.
It's the doing it. It's the creating. It's the building.
This is why of all the people that I love to watch, I love Dana White interviews.
I was about to bring in Dana White.
He's a fucking... I just, I cannot wait to interview him.
You got him in America?
We are working on it.
So he's basically, he's open to it, but it's just about finding the right time.
As you can imagine, he's a busy guy.
I fucking love that guy. I love listening to the guy.
I love the way he dealt with COVID. I love everything about it.
You've seen that clip.
It went super viral a couple of times where he says,
bet against me. Fucking bet against me.
Tell me it's not going to work. I love that shit.
Every single time, man, like that energy.
I'm the same.
I really, really enjoy it. And I think that it's missing.
I think that there's not enough like conquerors in the world of personal development and business.
There is from a performative level, but I don't look at Dana White and think that he's saying
what he thinks sounds cool for people to hear.
I think he's speaking his philosophy forward, which is one of,
stand on this hill, come and have a swing.
Yes. Yes. And I've always been like incredibly competitive.
I thrive on it. I love it.
One of the things, by the way, you've told me, I will say this, is you were the first British
podcaster who was in our space who, when I've met, has been from a, who had a growth mindset,
which is why I said when we first started, how unsurprised I am by the amazing success you're
having because you've always had that attitude and it shows. And that's why you're successful.
And that's why you're friends with everyone in the industry. I just, I think it's a natural
concept. Your success is not an accident is what I'm saying at all. It's a natural consequence
of the person that you are. And Dana White inspires me in the way that I'm inspired by
your success as well, because it's just like, this is a guy who got his friends together.
They bought this thing for $2 million or whatever it was. At some point,
there were 30 something million in the hole and they just kept going until they crushed it.
And there's a lot of other things that they do very well. I think as a,
if you just switch on the fights on a Saturday night, you wouldn't see, but
they make it entertainment. They make reality TV shows out of the content. The way they present
the fights is like very well organized and it's beautifully shot.
Think about it this way. Think about what, if you watch boxing now, how fucking pedestrian,
unnecessarily ceremonial it seems. This fucking guy carries out a mace and Doth's cap and fucking
a list of 50 people who've donated money to this thing. We are here in the presence of the
by the Nevada state and the this and this and this. You're like, no, fucking just tell me the fight.
Yeah. Show me the fight. Give me the tail of the tape. Get me amped up. Let them punch each other.
And also what they've done incredibly well is with boxing, no one gives a shit about anyone on
the undercard or the card. They just care about the headline fight. UFC, the headline fight may
very often isn't the best fight that actually happens on the night. They'll be the best fighters
on the night, but it won't be the best fight. So you fight of the night will, I would guess,
only maybe 30% of the time go to the main car. Yeah. And it's just they, and therefore they
are building up other talent. This is what we're talking about with what we're doing. They're
building up talent who are not the headline fighters, but you're seeing them from an early
start and you follow them and you're like, oh, this person is getting better and they're fighting
this guy and whatever. So just from a business perspective, I am so inspired by that attitude.
I think it's, I love it. And I think we're probably going down very different paths in
that you've gone to America where that attitude is prevalent. I'd love to take it. Every time I go
to America, I come away buzzing, but I'd love to bring more of that shit here. That's how I see
our future. Sat next to the opposite Stephen Bartlett yesterday and said,
if I could gift the UK anything, it would be enthusiasm. Yeah. You know, there's just so
much enthusiasm in America. And there's fucking, there's also stuff that they're super shit at.
That's trade-off. Yeah. That's trade-off. I wish I could take some of Britain to America as well.
I went to LA, man. I spent three days in LA, sort of in the kind of like entertainment world,
you know, doing Bill Maher and stuff around that. That is a different fucking world, my friend.
How so? Oh, it's, I'm not a religious person, not yet anyway. But when I was there, I was like,
I can see why people need religion. This place needs God. It fucking does. I'm serious, man.
The way people think about other people, if all you have is your success, if your value derives
from your status and success, whoa, that gets dark quickly. Whoa, that gets dark quickly.
Finding disposable objects everywhere. Oh, man, it's fucking, the way people see each other,
there's no humanity there. It's just like you're an object for what I'm trying to get to.
And that was eye-opening to me. Hollywood makes sense to me now. The movies they put
out make sense to me now that I've been there. A lot of it makes sense in a way that I'd never
realized. See, I never realized how powerful Hollywood is at shaping our idea of what reality
is because the movies, like, we in Britain, we think we understand America, right? Because we
watch their content. That's why. But that's not the reality of America at all. And the more you
travel around America, the more you are confronted by that fact. You know, the more time I spend in
the US, it makes me more right-wing in the American conception of, like, states' rights.
Because I'm going, I had a flight from Salt Lake City to LA. And you get on the plane in Salt Lake
City and you arrive in LA, which is not that far. And you go, these are different fucking,
these aren't just different countries. These are different worlds, different religion, different
people, different way of thinking, different philosophy, different culture, different everything.
And the values are completely different. You know, America's an incredible place.
I'm really enthused by it. And there's also trade-offs to some of the way that people are
there as well. So it's actually, you know, we talked about masculinity and femininity. And I think
I actually know what people mean when they talk about toxic masculinity and toxic femininity,
which is you need both. You want to be thinking about it as raising both bars at the same time.
If you want to be a good leader, for example, right, you need to be strong and you need to be
able to say the thing that people don't want to hear and make yourself say the thing that you
don't want to say because you don't want to upset people. And on that hand, you also need empathy
and compassion too. Like you want to be raising both up. And I see that in the same way as culturally.
I want to take the best of the US stuff and the best of the British stuff and meld it together
into something really exciting.
Truck, yeah. Constantine Kiss and ladies and gentlemen, where should people go? They want
to keep up to date with your stuff. The best place to find my work is Trigonometry, of course,
on YouTube and the podcast. And I write on Substack, which has got really blown up at the moment.
I'm excited about that as well. And Twitter at Constantine Kiss and everywhere.
Hell yeah. Constantine, I appreciate you. I appreciate you, my brother.
Thank you very much for tuning in. If you enjoyed that episode with Constantine,
then press here for the full-length three-hour conversation I had with Eric Weinstein.
