I want to start this lecture with a very simple game.
It's not a game like Jeopardy or Wheel of Fortune that you've heard of for, but it's
an easy game called How Tasty Does This Sound.
I'm going to say something, and I want you to think about how tasty that thing sounds.
So for example, if I said pizza, and you'd like pizza, then you'd think it sounds pretty
tasty, or if you hate Brussels sprouts, then I said Brussels sprouts.
You'd think it doesn't sound so tasty.
And to help, we'll use a scale from 1 to 100, where 1 is not at all tasty, and 100 is extremely
tasty.
You ready?
Okay.
If I said the name of your favorite food, for example, you might give it a 99, and if
I said some name of some food you hate, again, like the Brussels sprouts, you might
give it a 10.
If you like Brussels sprouts, you might give it a higher number.
Okay, here we go.
The first thing is 75% lean beef.
How tasty does that sound?
How tasty does 75% lean beef sound?
Got a number in mind?
When scientists did this study, they asked one group of people exactly the question I
just asked you.
How tasty does 75% lean beef sound?
And then they asked a second group of people how tasty something else sounded.
They asked that second group how tasty 25% fat beef sounded.
Think for a moment about 25% fat beef.
If you had to rate how tasty 25% fat beef sounded, where would it rate on that 1 to 100 scale?
Got a number in mind?
Well, not surprisingly, people thought that 25% fat beef didn't sound very good.
In fact, when scientists compared the numbers, they found that most people thought the first
thing I asked you to think about, that 75% lean beef sounded pretty tasty, and the second
thing I asked you to think about, that 25% fat beef didn't sound so tasty.
And this makes sense until you consider just one thing.
Those two items are exactly the same.
75% lean beef is exactly the same as 25% fat beef, because 75% lean means 25% fat, and
25% fat means 75% lean.
So why did people think one sounded tastier than the other?
If the two are the same, why did one way of describing that information make it sound tastier?
In this session, we're going to talk about some important aspects of consumer psychology
and information processing.
These are exposure, or coming into contact with something, perception, having some response
to that thing you came in contact with, and memory, remembering things that come in, and
by implication, often remembering a response to it.
To understand social epidemics, the really powerful spread of ideas, it's going to be
important to understand these aspects of consumer psychology and the way human beings naturally
process information, the way our minds work.
We'll talk about what happens from the moment people are exposed to information throughout
the process in our minds, and it'll take us to think about memory and how memory works
as well.
How exposure affects when we think about something, how subtle cues shape how we interpret information
and ideas, and how memory shapes how information is structured.
Along the way, you'll learn why seeing something more frequently might make you like it more,
why tasting the same wine tastes better when you think it costs more, or when it comes
from California.
To start, let's begin talking about exposure.
Exposure is the act of being exposed to concepts or information.
Think about the first time you meet someone.
If you've never met or heard about that person previously, meeting them is the first time
you've been exposed to information that this person even exists.
Exposure to products and ideas is the same way.
Without exposure to information, there's no opportunity to process it.
And one big impact of exposure is awareness.
It's pretty hard to purchase a product if you're not aware that it exists.
How would you know to buy it at the grocery store if you don't even realize it's there?
So one key goal of marketing and advertising is to expose people to the product.
Because of Reese's Pieces, for example, that little candy that's black and orange went
up after it was featured in the movie E.T.
The idea here was simple.
Many people would see the movie, and so the brand paid money to have it featured, to have
it placed inside the movie to remind people and make them aware that that product exists.
And indeed, companies pay huge fees to movie producers to have film characters use the
company's products.
Again, to expose people to the product and make them realize that that product exists.
This is called product placement, and product placement helps people see all sorts of things
and make them realize that they're available.
Now the fact that exposure increases awareness may seem obvious, but it has some pretty interesting
consequences.
Let's think for a moment about negative publicity.
If we think about it, negative attention often hurts.
Negative attention to a movie star, for example, might be a bad thing.
If Tom Cruise gets on top of a couch and yells and screams at a talk show host, sales of his
next movie might go down because it gets negative attention.
Or if someone in the office does something bad and gets negative attention, people might
not like that person in the future.
So you might think that negative attention is a bad thing.
It often hurts.
If a restaurant, for example, gets a terrible review and people say, don't go there, you
think it would decrease sales.
But one interesting question is, could negative publicity actually increase sales sometimes?
We studied this question by looking at book reviews in the New York Times.
We looked at over 300 books that were reviewed over a long period of time.
All sorts of different books, fiction, nonfiction, like.
Now some books received positive reviews, glowing reviews about how wonderful the prose
was, how developed the characters were, and how interesting a read it was.
Other books received more negative reviews.
Don't read this book is terrible, the plot is underdeveloped, the characters aren't
interesting, skip it all together.
Positive reviews on one end and negative reviews on the other.
And then we looked to see how reviews impacted sales, whether a positive review increased
or decreased sales, and the same with negative reviews.
Did they help or did they hurt how well that book did?
Now you might think that positive reviews increased sales, and indeed they did, by
over 40%.
And that makes sense.
When people read a positive review about a book, they're much more likely to think positively
about it.
You read a book review that says this book is great, you'll enjoy it, you think, well,
I might actually like this.
And so you're much more likely to go out and purchase it or buy it online.
But you might not expect the same thing for negative reviews.
You might expect that negative reviews would hurt.
And indeed, for well-known authors it did.
For authors like John Grisham or Stephen King, well-known authors, where many people know
their books and are excited to see what's going to be released next, a negative review
hurts sales.
Someone saying that John Grisham's new thriller is terrible, or that Stephen King's book
is boring and not worth reading, will hurt sales of those books.
But interestingly, when we looked at unknown authors, we saw a different pattern.
For unknown authors, first-time authors, or authors that others didn't know very well,
a negative review actually increased sales by around 20%.
And the reason is awareness, because if people didn't know about that book previously, they're
not going to buy it.
So even negative attention could be a good thing if it makes people more aware that the
book exists.
There are thousands of books out there, if not tens of thousands, if not hundreds of thousands.
And there's no way people have time to read or find out about each one.
But negative publicity by making people more aware of that product might make people more
likely to purchase it.
As long as they don't remember why they think about the book, they don't remember that the
review is negative, they may be more aware of it, and they may purchase it anyway.
The same thing happened to the country of Kazakhstan after the movie Borat.
You may remember this movie from a number of years ago.
It was a movie that ridiculed Kazakhstan a number of times throughout the movie.
In fact, the main thing people walked away with was how silly the country of Kazakhstan
was and how basic and simple the people were.
Yet after that movie came out, interest in visiting Kazakhstan went up over 300%.
And again, the idea was simple.
People hadn't realized that that country existed previously.
Some had, some have been and enjoyed it a lot, but many people hadn't.
There are many countries to go to, and they might not have realized that that one was
available.
By making people more aware of the country, it increased interest and people's likelihood
of going.
These ideas also apply to issues like naming.
Think about what should happen to a name, for example, after a scandal.
You might predict that no one would give a child a name after someone who had been scandalized.
Take Monica Lewinsky, for example.
She's mostly famous for negative attention.
She was an intern in the White House and received this negative attention for an illicit relationship
with the president at the time.
Now what do you think might have happened to the name Monica after the Monica Lewinsky
scandal?
If you think about it, you'd imagine that people should stay away.
If Monica Lewinsky's just happened, why would I want to name my daughter Monica?
I want to stay as far as possible from that association.
But if most people didn't think about that name before, it might actually increase the
number of people that got the name Monica.
Because if people hadn't thought about it, that negative attention might have creased
awareness through increasing exposure and increased people's likelihood to choose it.
So far we've talked about how exposure influences awareness, but now let's talk about how exposure
influences something else.
Liking.
There's a very simple idea in psychology, but a very interesting one, called mere exposure.
And the idea there is that merely being exposed to something can increase the amount that
you like it.
The more you see something, the more that you should like it.
One experiment conducted to test this idea looked at fertile chicken eggs.
You'd imagine who would look at fertile chicken eggs, but they wanted to see where we played
tones to these eggs before they're hatched.
Eggs were played certain tones, other eggs were played other tones.
One frequencies in different types.
So they played one frequency to a certain group of chickens, one frequency to a different
group of chicks, while they were still unhatched in their eggs.
And then they looked what happened to those chicks once they hatched.
And they found that once hatched, these chicks preferred the tone that they had heard previously
in the egg.
They consistently chose that tone that had been prenatally played to it.
Even though ahead of time, those tones were equally good or bad.
The chickens that had heard in tone A, for example, preferred that tone, and the chickens
that had heard tone B preferred that tone.
Actually being exposed to it increased how much they liked it.
Other work has looked at human subjects.
They exposed people, for example, to different shapes or Chinese characters.
The people were told that these symbols represented adjectives, and they were asked to rate whether
the symbols held positive or negative connotations.
Now, what they looked at is symbols that had been previously seen by those subjects,
and symbols they hadn't.
So imagine if you were in this experiment, you see certain characters, and you don't
see others.
The ones you've seen, you're asked later to rate how much you like them, whether they're
positive or negative, and they also throw in some that you haven't seen before.
And they looked whether you rate the ones you've seen before more positively.
Now, even though ahead of time, those two types of symbols would have been equally liked,
and even though people can't remember what they've seen before, subjects prefer they
like the symbols that they've seen previously, even though they couldn't remember again
which one they saw.
So even though you may not remember having seen something, the mere fact that you saw
it previously should make you more likely to prefer it.
My favorite study about liking though, and mere exposure, is about this idea of attractiveness.
Could mere exposure, could merely seeing the same person again and again make you find
them more attractive?
Well experimenters looked at this idea.
Some scientists, very clever, they had confederates, essentially actors, attend a class of theirs,
either 0, 5, 10, or 15 times during the semester.
So these fake students showed up to class either a lot or infrequently during the semester.
And at the end of the semester, the professor asked the real students to rate the attractiveness
of the other people in their class.
They showed them pictures of all the different students that rate how attractive this student
is.
Now, if students had been to class more often, those confederates that people had seen more
often were actually rated as more attractive.
People had come to class more often were seen as looking better because they were more familiar.
Mere exposure makes things more familiar and makes them seem more liked and be more attractive.
So if you're single, this study has some obvious implications.
Want someone to find you more attractive?
Try to run into them more frequently.
The more they see you, the more attractive they should find you.
So so far we've talked about exposure and how exposure can influence liking and awareness.
Next, let's turn to interpretation.
How people perceive information and how they interpret it.
And the idea here is how subtle cues can impact how we interpret things or perceive them.
And perception is no less important than exposure.
Think about wine, for example.
Most people who drink wine think they have at least some expertise.
They know at least a little bit about what they like.
If you drink wine, for example, you might have red versus white preferences.
Or then red versus white, you might have some individual preferences within those varietals.
You like a certain grape or a certain year or a certain country that makes that wine.
You prefer ones that are a certain price point because you think they taste better.
You think you know what you like.
But might simple features like where the wine happens to be from or how much it costs bias
our judgment?
Might we think we know what we like and like what we taste but actually be biased by subtle
cues in the environment?
Well, scientists looked at an interesting experiment to test this idea.
They looked at diners at an Illinois restaurant.
And along with dinner, these diners got a free glass of Cabernet Sauvignon.
Seems like a pretty good deal, right?
Imagine you're at dinner and someone comes up to you and says, hey, here's a free glass
of wine, just for you.
Well, in addition to getting the wine, everyone was given a little bit of information about
where it came from.
Everyone was given the same information, that it came from Noah's Winery, which is not a
real brand.
But half were told that the wine was from California, while the other half were told
the wine was from North Dakota.
Now, in fact, everybody got the same wine, the same thing, and it wasn't really Noah's
Winery.
It was something called Two Buck Chuck, a very inexpensive but brisk selling wine from the
Charles Shaw Winery.
The wine is the same, the brand name is the same, Noah's Winery, but would merely telling
people it's from California versus North Dakota make a difference?
It shouldn't, right?
It's the same wine, how it tastes should be the same.
But people actually saw the wine tasting better when it was told that it was from California
rather than from North Dakota.
The California wine was rated as being better than that North Dakota wine, even though it
was exactly the same wine.
Another study looked at price.
Again, you might have some sense, some sense of what you think wine tastes like and what's
good or bad.
Could the price of that wine influence your perception?
Might the same wine taste better when it costs more?
Well, in this study, participants were asked to taste sips of wine, but the experimenters
manipulated whether people thought the wine was $5 or $45.
Now, again, same wine, exactly the same varietal, exactly the same taste.
They merely manipulated whether it seemed like it was cheap, a $5 bottle of wine, or
a $45 bottle of wine.
And in addition, they did something interesting.
Experimenters did the study while participants were in an fMRI scanner.
They were essentially having their brains scanned while tasting the wine.
They had a little straw on the corner of their mouth.
Imagine lying there on your back and getting some squirts of wine in your mouth during
an experiment.
Not a bad way to spend an afternoon.
And what they looked at was the parts of the brain that experienced pleasure.
Because they were wondering, would it become more active when the drinker thinks he or
she is enjoying the more expensive vintage?
Again, not just that they said that the wine was better, but just the brain region that
is activated when they have pleasure, actually more active.
And in fact, they found that it was.
Not only did people say that the wine was better, just because they thought they were
supposed to, they actually tasted that wine as better.
Even though the actual wine was the same, the mere price difference in that wine made
their brain region go off like it was actually a more pleasurable experience.
These biases certainly affect wine purchase, but can they even affect medical treatment?
There's an interesting idea in the medical literature called the placebo effect.
And the idea is that a drug may work not only because of its medicinal effectiveness, but
also about how your mind works.
Imagine for example you go to the doctor complaining of a severe headache.
The doctor gives you some pills, and soon you feel better.
Now part of it might be from the pills themselves.
The doctor gave you something that had medicinal value, and the pills made you better.
But it turns out that your mind also plays an important role in how you feel.
Because even if those pills were made of sugar, for example, if the drug wasn't real, if you
thought it was real, the pills might have made you feel better.
Even though they're made of sugar, the mere fact that you thought they should work made
them actually effective.
Now the placebo happens when someone takes a medication that here perceives will help,
although it actually has no proven therapeutic value for his or her particular condition.
But you might wonder what about price?
Sure, a placebo effect can happen.
Sure, thinking a drug should work might affect whether or not we actually see it as effective.
But might that drug being more versus less expensive change our perception?
Might it discount a drug, for example, be seen to be less effective?
Researchers looked at this in a very interesting study.
They gave participants a light shock on their wrist to measure their subjective rating of
pain.
Nothing extremely strong, just a light fizzle on your wrist.
Then everyone received a placebo.
This pill didn't actually work, again it's essentially a sugar pill, so they shouldn't
have found any benefit from the pill.
But the question was, would they find the pill more beneficial if they thought it was
more effective?
Half the participants were given a brochure describing the pill as a newly approved painkiller,
which costs $250 a dose.
The other half were given a similar brochure, but described the pill as marked down to $0.10
without explaining why.
So imagine this, imagine you get a pill, the pill doesn't even work at all, but you're
either told it's full price or it's discounted to $0.10.
Now what the researchers found is that in the full price group, 85% of participants experience
a reduction in pain after taking the placebo.
Even though this was a sugar pill, even though it shouldn't have changed their feeling of
pain, 85% of people felt like that pill helped because they expected it would help.
They perceived that it was useful medication.
But what's interesting is to look also at that low price group.
What happens if that pill that was $250 is reduced to $0.10?
In that condition, only 61% of people said the pain was less.
About a 25% drop in the effectiveness perceived effectiveness of the pill.
And so I think this has a very interesting implication.
It suggests in some ways that people get what they pay for.
If you pay a high price or full price for something, you think it's pretty good.
And it ends up being pretty good because of the way your mind works.
But if you get something cheap or you get something in a discount, you might not think
it works as effectively even if it actually does.
It's also an effective interpretation.
It's not just information like price, also the mere sounds that we hear.
Take two words, for example.
The word tic-tac-tic and the word eval.
Try them out saying them by yourself for a second.
The word tic-tac-tic, tic-tac-tic, versus eval, eval.
Now if I told you each of these was a name of a face cream, which would you prefer?
Would you prefer a face cream named tic-tac-tic or a face cream named eval?
Most of you probably find this a pretty easy choice.
I wouldn't want to put anything called tic-tac-tic on my face.
It sounds rough.
I much prefer a brand named eval.
But it's not that eval is just a better word.
Because if I asked you what brand of tools you would prefer, would you prefer tools
called eval or tools called tic-tac-tic, you'd probably actually prefer tic-tac-tic as a
brand of tools.
Because when you hear the word eval, it sounds soft and easy and smooth based on the way
the sounds roll off your tongue.
But when you say there were tic-tac-tic, those sharp consonant sounds, it sounds much sharper
and edgier.
One of those, eval, sounds better or more suited for a face cream, while the other tic-tac-tic
sounds better or more suited for a brand of tools.
Even though the brand of tools or the face cream might not change.
Researchers looked at a similar question to this looking at a new line of cars.
They asked people which line of cars they preferred, the line brimley or the line of
cars called the bromley.
Half the people were told about the brimley line of cars and rated it on a number of
dimensions.
Other half were told about the bromley line of cars and rated it on a number of dimensions.
Now if you notice the word brimley and the word bromley are barely different.
Again, try saying them to yourself.
Brimley and bromley.
All that differs is one vowel sound, the I versus the O.
But the bromley was rated higher than the brimley on perceived legroom, trunk space and engine
power.
Why?
Well because when you say the word bromley, your mouth opens up widely and it makes it
feel like there's a larger amount of space.
When you say the word brimley, your mouth doesn't open as wide.
Try it yourself, brimley.
It's a little bit your lips purse a little bit and because of that the car didn't seem
as large.
Again, sounds can affect interpretation.
Research on perception might be surprising.
Usually we think we taste something first and then evaluate it.
But it turns out that subtle information can impact how we taste or perceive things even
beyond our actual sensory experience.
Because of this, companies spend a lot of time and money focusing on the perceptions
that they want to create.
What a store smells like, for example, can impact whether we buy something there.
What a political candidate looks like, how they happen to be dressed, can impact whether
we vote for them.
Perception plays a big role in whether people buy products and adopt ideas.
In order for ideas to spread though, we need to keep them in memory.
So next, we've talked about exposure and we've talked about perception.
Let's move to talk about human memory.
We've been exposed to something, some information in the environment, some idea.
That affects how we perceive that information or idea.
Now what affects whether or not we remember it.
I'm going to say a word and I want you to pay attention to the first thing that comes
to mind.
There are no right or wrong answer, just the first thing that comes to mind, the first
concept, word or idea you think of when I say that word.
Ready?
The word is dog.
When I say the word dog, what words or ideas came to mind?
Well, you might have thought about cats, you might have thought about leashes, you might
have thought about dog food, fur, pets, a number of different ideas.
Why do these things in particular come to mind?
Well, importantly, they're connected or associated with the idea of dog in our head.
Not everyone thinks exactly the same things, but many of us think of similar things.
This is based on the associative network model of memory.
There's a semantic network of ideas or nodes that are connected in our mind.
Related ideas are connected.
Again, dog is connected to cat because those two things are related.
There's a pathway or connection in our mind between those ideas.
And these links get formed through repeated association.
It's not that dog and cat are naturally linked, it's not that they have to come to mind together,
but when you were a kid, when you saw or heard one, you often learned about them together.
You learned about them both as pets, cats reigning, cats and dogs.
Would you like to get a cat or a dog?
And that repeated pairing between those two ideas linked them in our minds.
Even communications often do the same thing.
They try to create desired links in memory, which you might think of as brand equity.
For example, think what comes to mind when you think of the brand BMW, the car brand.
What sort of ideas or concepts come to mind?
Well, BMW has spent a lot of money putting ideas like performance and the ultimate driving
machine and well worth the money into our heads.
It seems like a professional, high-end, high-status car.
They've created that equity by linking to that semantic network in our mind, BMW with
those other ideas, just like cat is linked with dog.
Now links are important because they shape how we behave.
Think about the words or concepts that come to mind when you think of this retailer.
When you think of Walmart, for example, what comes to mind?
Well, when you think about Walmart, you might think about functional value, low price or
basic utilitarian goods.
But think about what word or concepts come to mind when you think about a different retailer.
If I said target, for example, what words or ideas come to mind when you think of target?
Well, you probably see that red bull's eye, but also you think of, well, lots of options,
some sophistication and not just value, but value plus.
These links, these cognitive connections in our mind or associations between multiple
concepts determine consideration sets, which retailer we consider when we have a particular
goal in mind.
When we want to buy cheap clothes, for example, we think of stores that are associated with
that idea.
But stores sell cheap clothes.
Well, you might think of Walmart, for example.
And you might think of Target as well, because both of them are relatively cheap.
But imagine you want to buy cool clothes.
Would you still think of both of those?
You'd probably think of Target, but you'd be less likely to think of Walmart.
And that's because of the associations in our mind, the cognitive connections between
those two nodes.
This idea also happens with political parties.
Think of what we think about when the idea of Democrat comes to mind.
When we think about Democrats, we think about liberal, socially progressive, supporting
social justice, environment, and then the minimum wage.
When we think about Republicans, we think more about free markets, conservative, pro-defense,
pro-life, and opposing same-sex marriage.
Now, if someone tells you which party they are, which party they support, one way or
the other, that will shape how you see them, because you'll connect those other ideas,
those associations, to who they are.
If a candidate tells you they're one or the other, a Democrat or a Republican, that shapes
whether you support them based on the equity or associations that they have.
And importantly, these associations, these cognitive links, or semantic network in our
mind, allows for shortcuts, because it would take a lot of time to learn everything.
So links in memory help.
And notice this doesn't happen by accident.
Target has spent a lot of time and effort to shift their perceptions.
They cleaned up their stores, they created wider aisles, and they worked with designers
to shift themselves from a low-cost retailer to being thought of as more of a cool or a
value-plus place to go.
In general, though, it's hard to change existing links.
You can think about these existing links as a heritage, or a nice thing that a brand
or idea has, but it can also be thought of as baggage, or things that weigh an idea down.
Take the Volkswagen, for example.
It's a good, historic brand, has lots of associations, but they had difficulty when
they released a very expensive car called the Fatan.
When they released this car, it struggled.
Why?
It was a good car, it was well-named, it was actually pretty good for its price point,
had a lot of good features.
Why didn't people want to buy this new car?
Well, part of it was about the associations they had with Volkswagen.
Think of what comes to mind when you think of Volkswagen.
What are the associations?
Well, many of you might think, ah, pretty cheap, the people's car after all, well-made,
but inexpensive.
Those are the expectations we have of the brand.
Because that was hard to sell a high-end car, for that reason, people didn't necessarily
want to buy an expensive Volkswagen because that wasn't what they associated with the
brand.
What can be done in these sorts of associations?
Well, in the brand area, brands often come out with new brands or sub-brands.
Take Toyota, for example.
Toyota is a very nice, well-made car, but it has certain associations that certain people
might not want.
For example, young people might not want to buy a Toyota because they see it as their
parents' car, or someone who wants to step up might not want to buy something from Toyota
because they want to see a more expensive car, a more high-status automobile.
To deal with that, Toyota came out with different brand extensions.
On the low end, they have Scion.
That's to appeal to the younger folks that want something that's a little hipper or
a little cooler.
And the high end, they have Lexus, also made by Toyota, but a brand that allows people
to graduate from the Toyota brand and move up if they want to.
Different brands allow them to have those different associations and those different
links in memory.
Semantic networks of associations also have interesting implications for new products.
Think about a new product that's released.
What do we think about it?
How do we know what it is or what it's supposed to be?
Is it better to use existing links or to generate new ones?
Well, think about a new cleaning product.
Imagine that it's similar to a mop in some ways, but different in some other ways.
What might you want to name that new cleaning product?
I actually worked for the company that named this product, and one name they thought about
was the name Mr. Mop.
Think about Mr. Mop for the moment as a name for a product.
What are the benefits and what are the downsides?
Well, one of the benefits is that you know what it's for.
It's a good mopping product, but it also has some downsides.
When you think about mopping, is it a good experience or a bad experience?
Most of us probably think of negative associations when we think of mopping.
It's difficult.
It's wet.
It's not a lot of fun.
There are a lot of negative associations, negative cognitive links to Mr. Mop that might
drag it down.
But they ended up, at the end of the day, choosing an alternate name.
And it wasn't one that had existing associations.
That alternate name is something you know today as the Swiffer.
Now many of us know the Swiffer, and this was the new product they were coming out with.
But they didn't want to call it Mr. Mop because they didn't want to weigh it down with all
those associations.
With a Swiffer, you don't know exactly what it does.
It doesn't have that heritage or that baggage in some other sense.
But what you do know is that it's fast.
Again, we talked about sounds and sound symbolism.
Swiffer sounds just quick and easy to use.
Regardless of what it is, it must be fast.
And so associations can help, but also hinder.
It can help in that people know what a product does, but it can hurt in that it can weigh
down things and give baggage that's not needed otherwise.
In summary, exposure encourages awareness and liking.
You're more aware of something you've seen before, and you like it more, even just if
you've happened to see it a few times.
Interpretation shapes perception.
The information around things, like its price or where it's from, might shape what we think
about it.
And knowledge structures or associations affect comprehension and memory.
These are going to be important building blocks for some of the concepts that we'll talk about
later.
Whether we expose to something, how we perceive it, and how we remember it has a big impact
on how we behave.
