I want to start this lecture by playing a version of the how tasty does this sound
gain we played in a previous lecture.
This time I'm going to say two things and I want you to think about which one of those
you think is tastier.
Ready?
The first thing is a delicious head of broccoli, a full green head of vegetable goodness, all
the vitamins and minerals that are in a delicious head of broccoli.
Got that in mind?
Now the second one is a juicy cheeseburger with all your favorite fixings.
You like bacon, put bacon on top.
You like cheese, put cheese on top, ketchup, mustard, whatever you like.
Got it in mind?
Now which is tastier?
A head of broccoli or a juicy cheeseburger?
Which one of those two things tastes better?
Now to be clear, I want you to be honest.
Not which one you know you should say is tastier or which one you wish was tastier, you wish
you had, but which one is actually tastier?
Which one you actually think tastes better, the broccoli or the cheeseburger?
Well, if you're like most people, you probably said the cheeseburger.
It probably wasn't even a tough question.
The cheeseburgers taste you're in a heartbeat.
It's an easy choice.
But now I want you to answer that same question for two messages.
Which of these two messages is tastier?
Not in the sense of edible, but in the sense of which message you think most people would
find easier to digest.
I recently worked with a major US health organization that was focused around women.
They were trying to get the right information about pregnancy out to women, what they're
supposed to do during pregnancy and how it relates to alcohol.
Given the mixed messages out there, it's hard for people to know whether I'm supposed
to drink alcohol or not during my pregnancy.
Well, given the medical research that this organization had reviewed and the cost and
benefits, they suggested that women should not drink alcohol during their pregnancy.
They felt the drinking, even a little, had some risk associated with it.
And so rather than taking those risks, it was better off to be safe.
It was better off to tell women not to drink.
Now compare that message with an alternate message.
An alternate message they were combating, they were fighting against.
This message suggests that women could do whatever they wanted during their pregnancy.
It was up to each person, each individual, and their own preferences to decide whether
or not they wanted to drink, and when during their pregnancy they wanted to drink.
Again, which message do you think most women would find tastier?
Not tastier in the sense of food, but tastier in the sense of which one they'd react more
positively.
Don't drink any alcohol during your pregnancy, or it's up to you.
It's your choice.
Which of those messages is like the broccoli, and which is like the cheeseburger?
Tastiness isn't always about what is correct or better for people.
Broccoli is clearly better for people than cheeseburger.
It's clearly healthier, it clearly makes us better off on the long run.
No one's ever gotten extremely overweight from eating too much broccoli.
No one's complained that they can't do anything this afternoon because they're so full of
broccoli.
Yet most of us, myself included, find the cheeseburger tastier.
And as we discussed earlier, false information is often more memorable, even though it may
make us worse, rather than better off.
Yet certain messages succeed because they are tastier in the same way that a cheeseburger
is tastier.
They fit with the way we're built, with our human psychology.
Just like we're built to find fatty, high calorie foods tasty, we're built to find certain
messages and information more compelling.
But what does that mean for good or correct messages?
Are messages that are like the broccoli just doomed to fail?
Important political ideas or pro-social messages doomed to get beaten out by celebrity gossip
and sports scores?
Or can any message, any message at all, be made more contagious, more likely to be shared
by understanding what makes messages tasty?
The first few lectures focused on individuals.
By understanding how basic psychological processes like awareness, perception, and memory work,
we understood how people react to information, why they remember it, and why memory is so
important.
And indeed, memory is important here as well.
Because for people to remember something, it helps them share it.
You can't share a story you heard yesterday if you've already forgotten it.
So memory is an important part of sharing.
But in this lecture, we're going to move from memory to why people pass things on.
We're going to talk about the power of word of mouth and how interpersonal communication
shapes everything from the products we buy to the ideas we support.
We'll talk about why word of mouth is more impactful than company-generated communications,
how word of mouth is different than traditional advertising, and the role that online technologies
like Facebook, Twitter, and other social media play in shaping communication.
There are many challenges to reaching an audience and getting messages to be heard.
There's so much information out there, and it's hard to get attention and cut through
the clutter.
People are often too busy or don't have the time for any one particular message.
That information is often complex and requires too much effort to process.
Sometimes they're competing messages, or even false messages, things that aren't true,
that while incorrect seem tastier to most listeners.
And people are often resistant to changing their behavior for fear or other beliefs that
interfere with believing that message.
But some messages do get through, and in this lecture, we'll talk about why.
Why some things get shared and why certain things are more impactful.
In the way we've talked about social influence so far, the transmitter is relatively passive.
Someone doing something or avoiding doing something because they observed others doing
it.
Conformity, we do the same as others because we saw them.
Divergence, we avoid doing someone else, doing something in particular.
Someone supporting a cause because others support it, or avoiding a particular brand
because others are wearing that brand.
But in these situations, the initial others, who we can think of as the transmitters of
information, weren't doing very much.
They just happened to be there, doing what they were doing, and their mere presence had
an effect on someone else's behavior.
The mere fact that they were there led other people to do or not do something.
As we move to talk about interpersonal communication, though, we'll talk about social influence
where the transmitter is taking a more active role.
When someone tells someone else about something, they are actively sharing in a way that might
influence others' behavior.
Interpersonal communication is not passive, interpersonal communication is active.
People love to share stories, news, and information with others around them.
We tell our neighbors about great vacation destinations, chat with our friends about
movies, and gossip with coworkers about potential layoffs.
We write online reviews and blog about restaurants.
We share news on social media and we tweet about things we just tried or liked.
People share about 15,000 words a day.
It's a huge number.
And every hour, there are hundreds of millions of conversations about brands going on around
the world.
But word of mouth is not just frequent, it's also important.
The things that others share with us, email us and text us, have an important impact on
what we think, read, buy, and do.
We vote for candidates that are friends indoors, try websites that our neighbors praise, and
read books that our relatives recommend.
Word of mouth is the primary factor behind 20 to 50 percent of all purchasing decisions.
Consequently, interpersonal communication has a huge impact on whether products, ideas,
and behaviors become popular.
A word of mouth conversation by a first-time customer leads to around a $200 increase in
sales for a restaurant.
For books on Amazon, the website, the retailer, a five rather than one star review leads to
around 20 more of that particular book being sold.
When considering a new drug, for example, doctors are more likely to use it if other
doctors they know have prescribed it previously.
People are more likely to quit smoking even, if their friends quit and faster to become
obese if their friends become obese.
And while being mentioned on shows like Oprah or other sorts of television things, mentioned
on the nightly news or big talk shows, have a huge impact on product success, in aggregate
online posts by regular people, just like you and me, have a much bigger impact.
In fact, while traditional advertising or company-generated communication is still useful
in some ways, word of mouth from everyday Joe's and Jane's is more than ten times
more effective.
Now word of mouth is more effective than traditional advertising for two key reasons.
First, people trust their friends more.
Who would you be more likely to listen to, for example, an advertisement or your friends?
People trust their friends more because they know their friends have their best interests
at heart.
A good example of this happened in an ad I saw just a couple years back.
It had famous quarterback Joe Montana in it.
And in case you're not familiar with football, Joe Montana was a famous quarterback for the
San Francisco 49ers.
Now Joe Montana was in this quarterback, was in this advertisement, advertising a product
called Skechers.
And Skechers are shoes, and in particular it was a certain type of shoes called Shape-Ups.
Now in case you don't know what Skechers or Shape-Ups are, Shape-Ups in particular
are a type of shoes that tone your rear end.
The idea is by magically walking around in these shoes called Shape-Ups, you'll get
a more toned behind.
Now imagine you saw an ad with Joe Montana in it, famous football quarterback, Hall of
Fame quarterback Joe Montana in an ad for shoes that tone your rear end.
What would you think?
I, like many consumers, reacted against that message.
When we see an ad, when we hear company-generated communications, we push back.
We say there's no way that it's good as good as the company might say.
Advertisements always talk about how great a product or an idea is, how 9 out of 10 dentists
recommend a particular toothpaste, or how some movie gets 5 stars and you should see
it again and again.
But because ads always say their product is the best, they're not really credible.
Have you ever seen a toothpaste ad, for example, that says only 1 out of 10 dentists prefer
that brand?
Or that 4 out of the other 9 think the brand will rot your gums?
Have you ever seen an ad for a movie or a restaurant that says, don't go, this thing
is terrible?
Don't go see this movie, it's not really a good plot and the actors are pretty much
the same as the last one?
The acting's not great, skip it?
Entirely?
No.
Right?
But because ads always say that the product is great, because companies always say their
thing is the newest, coolest and most exciting, we don't know whether to believe them or not.
Our friends, however, will tell it to a straight.
They'll tell us that the toothpaste was good or they'll tell us if it was disappointed
and it didn't work as well as they might have expected.
They'll say the movie they saw was fantastic, you really should see it, I really enjoyed
it.
Or that it was terrible, that it wasn't so good, that it was a waste of money.
Their objectivity, combined with their candidness, makes our friends much more likely to impact
our behavior and we're much more likely to trust them.
Now the second benefit of word of mouth is that it's more effective because it's more
targeted.
Not only do we trust word of mouth more, but it's more targeted to reach a desired end
consumer.
Companies try to advertise to reach the largest number of interested consumers.
Take a company that sells tennis rackets.
Television ads during the nightly news probably wouldn't be very efficient because many of
the viewers don't play tennis.
So the company might advertise in a tennis magazine or on the chairs at a popular tennis
match.
But while this would ensure that most people who see the ad like tennis, the ad would
still reach many people that don't really need a new racket, so the company or organization
would still end up wasting a decent amount of money.
Word of mouth on the other hand is naturally directed or targeted towards an interested
audience.
We don't share a news story or recommendation with just everyone we know, rather we select
or pick certain particular people that we think might find that given piece of information
or that given piece of news most relevant.
A nice example of this targeting benefit of word of mouth came to me in the mail just
a couple years ago.
Publishers often send academics books in the mail, and they send them to us for free.
It's a pretty good gig, but they're hoping to get something out of it.
Usually the books are related to whatever area we teach, and the publisher is hoping
that by sending us a free copy, we'll read it, we'll like it, and we'll assign the
books to our students.
And in the process, the publisher will make some money along the way.
But one publisher did something slightly different.
Even sending me one book, or two different books in their wide variety of catalog, they
sent me two copies of the exact same book.
Now unless I'm mistaken, reading a second copy of the book doesn't make it any better.
In fact, I flipped through that second copy and checked just to make sure whether it was
actually different.
Nope, same cover, same quotes on the back, same margins on the inside.
Everything was exactly the same.
So why that second copy?
Well, the publisher sent a note along with the book, saying they thought would be the
book would be good for my students.
But they also sent me a second copy so I could pass that copy along to a colleague who might
be interested.
And that right there, that second copy of the book, is the targeting benefit of word
of mouth.
Rather than sending books haphazardly to different people, and hoping that it might reach an
interested source at the end of the day, the publisher found one person they knew would
be interested, me, and they got me and others like me to do the targeting for them.
Just like a searchlight, I went through my social network to find the person or people
that find that book most interesting, and I passed it on to them.
I didn't just pass it on haphazardly to anyone, I passed it on to the other professor that
I thought would find it most relevant.
We're not going to tell any friend about a great new restaurant that serves spicy food
if we know that friend hates spicy stuff.
And we're not going to tell a friend who doesn't have kids about a great website for
baby clothes.
Instead, we selectively share that information to whomever we think would find it most interesting.
Consequently, word of mouth tends to reach people, and targets, who are more interested
in the thing being discussed.
No wonder then that customers, referred by their friends, shop faster, spend more, and
are more profitable overall.
They're better customers, because people tend to be friends with other people like them.
If you play golf, well, you tend to play golf with other people that play golf.
If you love the theater, you tend to go to the theater with other people that like the
theater.
In sociology, this idea is called homophily.
People tend to be friends with other people like them.
But what it means is that someone who likes a product or an idea is more likely to know
other people that also like that product or idea.
That said, when we think about traditional advertising, it also has some beneficial features.
Interpersonal communication tends to be a little slow.
Takes a while for a message to move from one person to the next and so on.
Advertising, because of its large scale, does a really good job of generating broad
awareness very quickly.
As we talked about in that lecture on exposure, sure, one person can expose one other person
that message, but broad advertising exposes many people to that message at the same time.
If you want millions of people to find out about something right now, a splashy, fancy
Super Bowl ad is going to be the best way to do it.
Sure those ads are more expensive, and sure people are less likely to trust it, but it's
still the best way to generate broad awareness, broad exposure very quickly.
Note that interpersonal communication is a different model of information transmission
than traditional advertising.
Advertising is all about attention, and it's heavily driven by the marketer and the media
channel.
Companies have a message they want to get out there, so they pay television or other
sorts of media channels to get the requisite number of eyeballs.
There's one message that goes out to everyone from a central source, and they assume, okay,
if I get a lot of people to see it, if I get a lot of people to expose to this message,
it's going to be effective.
Interpersonal communication, on the other hand, is consumer-driven, and it's all about participation
and advocacy.
Rather than merely being a conduit for marketer-determined message, people participate in that construction
and editing of the narrative.
If a person disagrees with what they hear in an ad, well, they'll go and share their
own opinion and thoughts rather than the ad and what it said specifically.
Interpersonal communication is a dialogue rather than a monologue.
Rather than everyone sharing the same message and sharing it identically to everybody else,
people pass along their own opinions and their own ideas.
Beyond just effectiveness, traditional marketing and interpersonal communication differ in some
important ways.
First, while advertising tends to be more of a broadcast medium, interpersonal communication
involves narrow casting.
What I mean by broadcasting is the same message to everybody at the same time.
In most cases, communication that comes from companies or organizations is the same message
broadcast to many people.
The same radio or same TV ad or the same email sent out to everyone on the company's mailing
list.
Interpersonal communication, person-to-person interaction, however, tends to be more tailored
to the recipient.
People may tell one friend one thing, but another friend something completely different, based
on the differing interests of those two friends.
In fact, as we discuss, this audience tuning increases receiver's receptiveness to the
message.
Second, traditional marketing is usually disruptive.
Most advertising is interruption marketing.
Rather than getting to watch the entire show you like on television or read all the content
you like online, every once in a while you have to sit through an ad so you can enjoy
that content for free.
Ads essentially get between you and your content that you want to watch, interrupting
you with a message, that you are usually less interested in.
No wonder that click-through rates on online ads are so low.
Nobody wants to click on one of those ads, they want to see what they're looking for.
No wonder we skip or we TVO television shows.
We don't want to watch the ads in between them, we want to skip those ads.
Now person-to-person communication is integrated into everyday life.
No one stops the conversation they're having to say, hey, hold on, just to note this conversation
we're having has been brought to you by Tommy's Tacos, great local Mexican food, any time of
day.
Many mentions of brands, ideas or behavior are actually part of the conversation.
They're not separate, they're not an interruption, they're part of what people are talking about.
People might mention that they are at a restaurant or remark about how good that restaurant is,
but it's not an interruption, it is the conversation itself.
And as a result, the mention gets much more attention.
Third, traditional marketing is much more self-interested.
It's B to C, it's business to consumer.
The business wants to sell something, and they want to sell that thing to an end user
or consumer, so they try to convince that consumer to buy.
Even cause marketing, we think of more pro-social things, but even that is pretty self-interested.
Greenpeace, for example, wants to convince you that their issues are important and they
deserve your time, attention and money, and they're competing with other causes that want
the same thing.
When we think about person-to-person communication, though, it's much more you-focused, much more
recipient-focused.
Your friends and your co-workers, they're not trying to sell you anything, well, unless
they're trying to convince you to pick a particular place for lunch, they're just passing on information
that they think you might find relevant or might find interesting.
But because they seem less self-interested, you're much more likely to listen.
If we thought every time our friends were trying to sell us something every time they
mentioned it, we wouldn't really be likely to listen.
We'd be very wary of taking their recommendation if we thought that all they were trying to
do was sell us something.
Fourth, from a cost standpoint, traditional advertising is much more expensive.
Companies and organizations have to pay for television time, they have to pay for space
on the radio, and they have to pay for an ad in the back of the newspaper.
Costs are scaled or based on the number of people they want to reach.
More people, more expensive.
Larger campaign, higher cost.
When we think about person-to-person communication, though, it's relatively cheap.
Your accountant doesn't have to pay money every time you recommend that accountant to someone
else, and viral videos don't cost more than more people pass them on.
Sure, there might be an initial, upfront cost, to create a video or a campaign, but it doesn't
cost more the more that people share.
So as marketing strategies go, word of mouth can be very cost effective.
As long as people actually share the message, and that's very key, cost effective as long
as people share.
Because a failed word of mouth campaign costs pretty much the same as a really successful
word of mouth campaign.
This key is getting the people to talk, and that's what we'll talk about in the next
couple lectures.
With all its potential benefits, though, there's a lot of hype around interpersonal communication,
so it's important to set the record straight.
First, when people these days think about word of mouth, they tend to focus on online
tools, social media technologies, and online communication.
And indeed, online communication has made it faster and easier to share news and information
with a broad audience, faster than ever before.
But think for a moment.
If you had to guess, what percent of all word of mouth do you think happens online?
From 100% being all of it, all the way down to zero, none of it, what percent of word
of mouth happens on things like social media, on blogs, on email, and online reviews?
Do you have a number in mind?
Well, if you're like many people, you probably guess that number is a high one.
Maybe 40, 50, or even 60%.
Some of you might have guessed 70% of more.
In fact, if we took an average, it'd probably be around the neighborhood of 50% to 60%.
But when we think about it, while 50% makes sense, it's not actually right.
Sure, social media has certainly exploded, and sure, millions of people use these sites
every day, and billions of pieces of content get shared every month.
But 50% is wrong, and it's not 30%, and it's not even 20%.
The actual number is seven.
Seven percent of word of mouth is online.
Not 70, not 17, but 7%.
Now most people hear that number, and they're really surprised.
Seven percent?
But that's way too low, they say.
I mean, don't people spend a huge amount of time online?
And that is true.
People do spend a lot of time online.
Closed in some cases, three hours a day.
But we forget that we spend just as much, if not more, time offline.
In fact, when we count up the numbers, it's about seven times as much, which means there's
a lot more time for those offline conversations.
We have breakfast with our families, lunch with our friends at work, and grab drinks after
work with our colleagues.
In these and many other situations, we talk face to face.
In fact, face to face is the original social media.
Another objection is, well, but young people must talk more than that, right?
I mean, they always seem to be texting and tweeting on their phones.
Most young people talk more online.
I mean, wouldn't that make sense?
And they do.
That number is close to 12 or even 13 or 14%.
And it will get higher in the future.
But it's still nowhere as high as we might think.
In fact, person to person communication and word of mouth are not new.
It's not like the first time someone shared something was the advent of the Internet.
It wasn't like people have been waiting to type to be able to share things with others.
People have been sharing and talking since language was invented.
The first word of mouth incidents was probably one caveman, sort of nudging another and going,
don't eat that.
It's poisonous.
Or, let's go that way.
Things are slow and easy to catch.
So even though technology has changed how we communicate somewhat, person to person
communication has been around for a very long time.
Now, we tend to overestimate online of word of mouth as well because online gets more
media attention.
Just think about it.
Journalists have a much bigger incentive to write about things that are new.
The same thing is happening today as was happening yesterday, that's not really news.
It's news to say there's this new hot technology that people are using that's changing the
way we communicate.
It's not really exciting to write an article that says people are talking face to face,
just like they were 50, 100, or 1,000 years ago.
And so it's much more exciting to talk about technology rather than something people are
doing forever, even if that thing has stayed the same.
Further, while you might think that online word of mouth reaches a larger audience, it's
not always right.
We think, well, online word of mouth is around, it's easier to see, it reaches a larger set
of people, but that's not always the case.
Sure, online conversations could reach more people.
After all, while face to face tends to be one to one, or among a small handful of people,
among a small group, when we talk on social media, those status updates that we share
tend to be sent to over 100 or even 1,000 people.
Shouldn't those messages reach more people at the end of the day?
But as we'll talk about later in the section on Influentials, or the lecture on Influentials,
it's not that all potential recipients actually see every message.
There's way too much content posted for any person to read, or even for any person to
see in their feed.
A quick exercise my students, for example, found that less than 10% of their online connections
responded to a message they posted.
That said, while interpersonal communication didn't start with the internet, these new
technologies have changed things.
They have changed communication in some important ways.
Online does allow people to talk to larger audiences, and while offline communication
goes from one person to the next very slowly, online allows it to move much faster, through
larger groups of people very quickly.
It's also more public and involves weaker ties.
While offline we spend a lot of time talking to close others, or people we know very well,
online we share whatever we have to say with a larger group of people, often who are acquaintances.
Not necessarily close ties, but as we'll talk about, weaker ties as well.
So the first issue with the hype around online communication is that people tend to ignore
the importance of offline, even though online interactions are more prevalent and potentially
even more impactful.
The second issue is with all the excitement around the technology people have forgotten
about a much more important issue, the psychology.
Why do people talk and share in the first place?
Why do they pass along some content rather than others?
Sure people might post on social media or retweet something, but if we don't understand
why they share certain things more than others, it'll be really hard to understand why things
catch on, why some things become social epidemics while others don't.
Some news and information get shared while others don't.
Some public health officials tweet things and people respond and share it, and others
they don't.
And if no one passes those things along, the campaign, at the end of the day, will fail.
50% of YouTube videos have less than 500 views.
Only one third of 1% get more than a million.
So really understanding person-to-person communication requires understanding the underlying human
behavior, the psychology of sharing, the science of social transmission.
Next time you're at a party or hanging out with a group of friends, notice your own conversation,
what you end up talking about, a new book, this course, or gossip about a coworker.
You might trade stories about your kids, mention upcoming holiday, or complain about that unusually
cold weather we've been having.
Why?
You could have mentioned anything.
Friends are different stories, topics, and ideas that you could have discussed.
Why did you share those things in particular?
Why that specific information or story rather than a different one?
Certain ideas are more contagious and certain rumors are more infectious.
Some content goes viral while other stuff never gets more than 10 or 15 views.
Some products get lots of word of mouth while others are never mentioned.
Why?
What leads certain products, ideas, and behaviors to be talked about more?
This is what we'll talk about in the next lecture.
So to summarize this lecture on the impact of word of mouth, talk may seem cheap, but
it has very expensive consequences, because the things that people say have a big impact
on what others think and do.
And while online has changed communication some, it hasn't changed things as much as
we might think.
As Oscar Wilde once said, there's only one thing in the world that's worse than being
talked about.
What's that thing?
Well, it's not being talked about.
So next we'll talk about what people share and why.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
Thank you.
