Why do some things stick in memory?
Why do we remember some messages and ideas while we forget others?
The past two lectures have focused on individual psychology.
The science of exposure, perception, and memory, and how triggers in the environment
can help pull things out of memory once they've already gotten in.
Continuing that line of thinking, this lecture will focus on what makes things stick or stay
in memory.
Have you ever heard that you only use 10% of your brain, that wearing a seatbelt can
increase your risk of death, or that Kentucky Fried Chicken changed its name to KFC because
it isn't really chicken?
The argument is somehow that it serves mutant chicken breasts that can't really legally
be classified as chicken.
Well, most people remember having heard at least two of these things before.
Why?
Why did these things stick in memory?
These ideas, in fact, all have one thing in common.
Know what it is?
Think about it for a moment.
KFC isn't really chicken.
You only use 10% of your brain, and wearing a seatbelt increases your risk of death.
Well, if you know what it is, they're all completely false.
You don't only use 10% of your brain, you actually use almost all of it all the time,
as you can probably imagine, wearing a seatbelt actually decreases your risk of death.
And Kentucky Fried Chicken does, in fact, serve chicken.
They changed the name, in part, because they started serving a wider variety of offerings
and they didn't want to be pigeonholed as just a chicken restaurant.
If these ideas are all false, though, why do we remember them?
People sometimes argue that we remember things that make us better off, but here that's clearly
not the case.
In fact, these particular messages make us worse off.
They make people think that their brain is wasted space, that they shouldn't wear a seatbelt,
which actually makes them more likely to die in an accident, and it makes them stay away
from Kentucky Fried Chicken.
Well, okay, that one might make us better off in some ways, health-wise at least, but
personally I think KFC is delicious.
So if these messages aren't making us better off, why do we remember them?
If they aren't helping our lives, why do they stick so much?
As we discussed in the introduction, certain ideas succeed based on how they fit with how
we are built, human behavior, and underlying principles of the human mind.
In this case, how they fit with human memory.
Memory follows certain rules or principles, and ideas that fit with those principles tend
to be stickier or more memorable.
In this lecture, we'll talk about how memory works and how it shapes which messages stick.
I'll talk about four key principles that make information more memorable and lead us to
remember all sorts of products, ideas, and messages along the way.
The first principle we'll talk about is simple, and in fact it's a pretty simple one.
The idea here is that less is more.
The simpler and easier to understand an idea is, the more likely people are to remember
it.
To think about simple, imagine you travel a lot for business and you have to buy a new
laptop.
There are different ways that information can be presented for laptops.
If you've bought one before, you'll get a sense of what I'm saying.
One way is to provide a list of detailed features.
For example, a given laptop might allow you to choose either a Type 1 or Type 2 PC card.
The laptop might have different I.O. ports like a docking connector, a 3 USB VGA, and
headphones, speaker in and out.
Different optical options like a CDRW DVD, an 8x DVD, or a Plus or Minus RW.
Modular options, various ports, and the like.
Now, unless you're really into computers, you probably can't even remember anything
that I just said.
You can't remember any of the features I listed, let alone the different I.O. ports.
You have no idea.
There are way too many details to remember.
And often websites and product information are conveyed this way.
Let's contrast that with a different approach to convey information.
When Apple first released their MacBook Air laptop, this ultralight product was a new
and interesting innovation.
And the ads to market it were extremely simple.
A rectangular manila envelope, like one used for inner office mail to go back and forth
within a large business, is placed on a white background.
Then, as happy upbeat music and tones, the solitary hand unwinds that thin red string
that holds the envelope closed and slides out what turns out being a thin silver slab.
The hand definitely places the laptop on top of the envelope and with just a simple finger
lifts the top to reveal an impressive looking display.
All of this happens in a matter of 30 seconds.
And actually, no words are even uttered until the word MacBook Air appears on the screen
right before the end.
And the ad closes with the words, the world's thinnest notebook.
In fact, if you think about it, there's only one feature mentioned, the thinnest of the
laptop.
Viewers don't know how many ports it has, how light it is, or anything else, but they
know it is thin, amazingly thin.
And if you think about it, hearing that ad makes that attribute impossible to remember.
Which is an important feature for most business travelers who want to avoid bulk.
If you're a business traveler, you want a thin laptop because it's all so light and
it makes it easy to carry.
And by focusing on that single, solitary feature, the ad makes it impossible to forget.
By keeping the message simple, Apple ensured that people remember that the laptop was thin.
Now, how does this work?
Well, like most resources, attention and memory are scarce.
If you try to pay attention to five things at once, each thing essentially only gets
one-fifth of your attention.
Each of that piece of information is processed less in our mind, or sort of receives less
attentional resources.
And as a result, it's less likely to be remembered.
Imagine you have five people talking to you at once, for example.
Sure, everybody's saying something at the same time, but you can't process all that
information.
You can't give enough attention or expose yourself to each mention equally.
And so as a result, you end up not getting all that information at the same time.
But if you focus on just one thing, just one person who's talking to you, that one thing
will receive all your attention.
And as a result, it's more likely to be remembered.
If you tell people ten things, for example, they'll remember none of them.
But if you tell them just one, they'll remember that one.
Note that it's more about the number of ideas in the message, also, rather than its length.
Sure, the longer the message, the tougher it is or tends to be to remember because there
are more details along the way.
But just cutting words is not the answer.
It's all about finding the core, reducing the number of ideas that that message is trying
to communicate.
If listeners walked away with just one thing from hearing that message, what would that
one thing be?
For the Apple ad, for example, there are many features that they could have talked about,
but they focused on thinness, and they showed it in a number of ways.
Messages that focus on one or two key idea units are much more memorable than shorter
messages that try to convey more ideas.
The MacBook Air ad, for example, is all about a single, solitary idea.
This is a thin laptop, and the ad shows that in multiple ways.
Now, whenever I teach this ad of simple to students, I often get a lot of pushback.
Students say something like, well, hold on, our idea can't possibly be simplified.
It's too nuanced and complex.
And in some ways, they're exactly right.
Our idea is likely quite nuanced and quite complex.
But as I point out to them, if you can't find a way to communicate that complex idea in
a simple way, it will never catch on.
No one else will remember that idea, let alone understand it.
And so as a result, you need to think about how to simplify complex ideas.
When you know a lot about something, it's easy to get bogged down in all those details.
So many things seem important, and there's so many nuances.
How could you possibly pick just one thing to focus on?
But this curse of knowledge, and that's what it's called, the curse of knowledge, hurts
our ability to communicate effectively.
You have to think like someone who doesn't know everything and figure out how to focus
their attention.
As Einstein once nicely said, if you can't explain something simply, you don't understand
it well enough.
Another thing that the MacBook Air ad did very well was harness the power of analogies.
Think about it for a moment.
What is a pomelo?
Well if you've never heard about a pomelo before, you have no idea.
Let's say you have heard of it though, and some of you likely have.
Think for a moment.
How would you explain what a pomelo is to someone who's never heard of it, who doesn't
know what it was, someone who's never seen one before?
You probably say something like, well, it's sort of like a large grapefruit, but with
skin the color of a tennis ball.
Notice what you did?
You probably didn't even think about it.
But when you explain something to someone, you use what they already know and build on
top of that.
You took something that people know very little, if not nothing about, a pomelo, and you described
it in terms of things that were much more likely to be understood.
It's like a large grapefruit.
Its skin is the color of a tennis ball.
Things that are much easier to remember and to understand.
Everyone knows what a grapefruit is, well, almost everyone.
And everyone, most people, know what color a tennis ball looks like.
And so things are much easier to remember and understand when they're connected to
things that we already know a lot about.
By relating this unknown object, a pomelo, to things people already know about, a grapefruit
and a tennis ball, the listener gets a decent understanding of what this new thing is relatively
quickly.
Now, people don't know everything about the pomelo from that description, but they get
a decent sense.
They get 90% of that idea very quickly.
It's like a large grapefruit, it's probably a little sour, for example, rather than sweet.
They don't get a perfect sense, but they get a decent one.
And so when thinking about how to apply or communicate complicated ideas to someone
in a way that's understandable, build off the simple ideas that they already know and
understand.
Analogies help make things simple and memorable because they express new and complex ideas
in relations to things that people already understand.
When Facebook was being released, for example, people described it as an online yearbook.
Now, that's not exactly what Facebook is, but it gives someone who doesn't know anything
about it a decent sense or a decent idea pretty quickly.
Apple used the same idea in its MacBook Air ad by showing that the laptop could fit in
an interoffice envelope.
The ad shows just how thin that notebook really is.
By comparing it to something that people already know and understand, the comparison made the
information more memorable.
Simple also has some other benefits.
Not only are simpler things more memorable, but by not only giving people all that information
up front, it sets up what we'll call a curiosity gap, leave people wanting more.
So to talk about that idea of curiosity gaps a little bit further, next we're going to
talk about a different principle.
And this principle is unexpected.
More unexpected things are more likely to be remembered.
Things can be unexpected for a number of different reasons.
One is that they violate expectations by breaking an existing pattern.
Take the experience, for example, of flying jet-blue airlines.
One of the reasons that the experience is so memorable is that it violates the principles
or the pattern that people have come to expect from airline travel.
When you think about flying, for example, especially a low-cost airline, what do you
expect?
Usually it's dingy old seats, not enough leg room, and a rush to get on the plane is
everyone competes to have enough space for their stuff.
Food, if it can even be called that, usually consists of peanuts or maybe pretzels because
some people are allergic to peanuts.
And the entertainment, if there happens to be any, is usually some G-rated movie that
was barely out in theaters because it was so terrible.
And you have to crane your neck above the seats in front of you to see it on some overhead
monitor that's from some television that came out 10 or 15 years ago.
But flying jet-blue is memorable because the experience breaks that pattern.
There are reasonably new leather seats, a decent amount of leg room, and relatively
friendly staff.
For entertainment, there are televisions in the back of every single seat.
I remember the first time I flew jet-blue almost like it was yesterday.
I remember thinking that the TVs were just another way for everyone to have an easier
viewing experience for that same terrible movie.
In fact, it's much better.
At least I don't have to crane my neck to see that terrible movie.
I can watch it easier on a small screen in front of me.
But then I realized that each person actually got to choose what they watched.
From over a few dozen channels.
Sure, the food isn't the most amazing in the world.
After all, it is a low-cost airline, but they at least give you choice among a variety of
pretty decent options.
Delicious potato chips, biscotti, and the like.
And unlike other airlines, you can take more than one.
All in all, that jet-blue experience is a memorable one because it violates expectations
of what airline travel usually is.
Channel chain double-tree is memorable for a similar reason.
Think for a moment about what you expect from a mid-tier business hotel.
The lobby is usually nicer than the room, the bathroom has little soaps and shampoos,
and the television has a decent number of channels, but not all the ones you actually
would want to watch.
There might be a continental breakfast, but it's so lackluster that it makes you wonder
what continent it's actually from.
Serial and little boxes, sad-looking muffins, and maybe, if you're lucky, a griddle that
makes you, allows you to make a waffle.
But double-tree is different.
Double-tree is memorable because it breaks that pattern, that expectation.
When each guest checks in, they're offered a free cookie, and not some cookie that's
been sitting around in a package in the back room getting stale for two weeks, but a freshly
baked chocolate chip cookie.
The cookie is memorable because it breaks the pattern of what hotels other hotels offer.
Now, at this point, you might be thinking, okay, sure, I get it.
Anything crazy will work, right?
But while surprise gets people attention, to really stick, to really stick in memory,
you need to do something more than that.
Really sticky things hold people's attention.
And one reason they hold attention is because they open up something of what is called a
curiosity gap, or a mystery where people want to know the answer.
What is a curiosity gap?
Well, a great example of opening up one of these is a movie that came out a number of
years ago.
It's been a while since it came out, but released in the late 90s, this horror film called
The Blair Witch Project told the story of three student filmmakers who supposedly disappeared
while hiking in the hills of suburban Maryland.
They were supposedly off to film a documentary about a local legend known as The Blair Witch.
The film was unexpected because people couldn't tell whether it was real or not.
Everything was shot on a handheld camera, and rather than having interviews on the website
with the director or other sorts of promotional materials, the website featured things like
fake police reports and newsreel style interviews.
If you went, it looked like the film was actually real, like these filmmakers had actually gotten
lost in the woods and disappeared.
And as a result, some people, some consumers initially thought the film was an actual documentary
about these quote unquote missing teenagers.
And this curiosity gap, this gap in our knowledge made it extremely memorable because people
wanted to close that gap or figure out whether it was real or fake.
So they talked to other people to try to find out and answer the mystery.
Again, what a curiosity gap is knowledge when you know something but not everything.
That gap in your knowledge makes you want to fill it and learn more.
Another great example of a curiosity gap is a billboard that appeared on Bay Area 101,
the main highway running through Silicon Valley in California.
And that billboard read, the first ten digit prime found in consecutive digits of E dot
com.
Now, for those of you who are into math, the number E is something that makes sense, right?
You understand what is, is already.
But for those of us who don't, myself included, E is a constant that is the base of natural
logarithm and it's equal to approximately 2.71828 with many digits onward to follow.
Now, most people may not know what E is.
In fact, I didn't know what E was the first time I saw this ad.
But for those who tried to solve the problem, finding the first digit prime through consecutive
digits of E was actually an easy exercise.
Because people who know E and know math know how to do programming.
And so they did a little program exercise and they entered that number on the web.
And when they did that, it took them to another puzzle.
And once they solved that puzzle, another puzzle popped up.
Until eventually, for two or three more puzzles later, they arrived at a website that said,
nice work, well done, Mazel Tov.
You've made it to Google Labs and we're glad you're here.
One thing we learned while building Google is that it's easier to find what you're looking
for if it comes looking for you.
And what we're looking for are the best engineers in the world.
Here you are.
Now not everyone would find this puzzle to be a curiosity gap.
In fact, most of us probably would have driven right on by.
But if you're an engineer and you're an engineer interested in math and programming who likes
solving puzzles, this is the perfect puzzle.
And that's exactly who Google was looking for and who they found.
By providing them with an appetizer that pulled them in rather than push them away, they drew
in the exact right people for their message.
It's important to note, though, that when we think about this idea of surprise and unexpected,
that repetition does surprise.
Something may be unexpected the first time you see it, but see it again a second or a
third time and it becomes less so.
The makers of the Blair Witch Project, for example, that movie we just talked about, tried
to come out with a sequel called The Book of Shadows based on a very similar premise
to the first one, that the movie was real and that it was real life.
Well, while this was effective the first time around, sure, maybe the movie might have been
actually real.
The second time around it fell flat because it was no longer surprising.
People said, no way am I going to believe you the second time.
I fell for it the first time, but I'm not going to get fooled again.
And so because of that, the surprise didn't work.
Repetition does surprise and makes things no longer unexpected.
So far we've talked about simple and we've talked about unexpected.
But when you look at urban legends that are very successful or sticky rumors, you'll notice
they have another factor in common.
They often use very concrete language, kidneys, bathtubs full of ice, words written in lipstick
on a mirror.
And so concreteness is another factor that makes things memorable.
What is concreteness?
Well, concreteness is versus abstractness.
Some language is concrete and some language is more abstract.
And concrete language makes messages memorable because it helps the listener visualize what's
being talked about.
When someone says a bathtub full of ice, you can literally see it in your mind.
You can get a sense of what it might look like.
Same with lipstick written on a mirror.
You can almost see the red color if you close your eyes.
Even being concrete, though, most messages we hear in daily life are much more abstract.
Take for example the way a local construction firm might describe themselves to their clients
or on their website.
They may say something like, building is a series of conversations, interactions and
collaborations with a focus on creating the kind of synergy that produces extraordinary
results.
Think about that message for a moment.
It's a type of message that sounds great when you hear it, but goes in one ear and out
the other.
Why?
Because the details are so abstract that you can't get a mental picture of it.
You can't picture it in your mind.
What does synergy look like?
What color or interactions or collaborations?
This language is the opposite of concrete.
It's extremely abstract.
Contrast this, though, with a much more concrete way that an event planner could describe what
they do.
Take for example an event planner is trying to describe to a potential client.
They could say something like, well, who designs it, arranges it, brings it, loads it, drapes
it, pins it, hangs it, lights it, serves it, and then takes it all down so you don't have
to.
We do.
Well, right away you have a perfect sense of what this person does and why you might
want to hire them.
If you need someone to pin something, drape something, load something, hang something
and all this so you don't have to, you'd go after them.
And this concreteness makes the message much more memorable.
Now, concrete language also plays an important role in political debate.
Global warming, for example, is very concrete.
Close your eyes for a moment and think about what you think when you hear the phrase global
warming.
You probably see a picture.
You see temperature shooting up.
You might even see a polar bear on shrinking ice floes.
You feel bad for that polar bear.
But think for a moment at a different phrase, the phrase climate change.
Now it means the same thing, but that phrase is much more abstract.
If you close your eyes and listen to climate change, you don't really get a clear, concrete
picture.
You don't see very much.
What does change mean anyway?
Is that a good thing or a bad thing?
And this is one reason that skeptics actually prefer the term climate change.
It's less concrete and thus less likely to be memorable and drive people to action.
So so far we've talked about simple, we've talked about unexpected and we've talked
about concrete.
Next we'll talk about the fourth factor or the credibility of the message.
And the idea behind credibility is the more likely people are to believe something if
it's credible.
Something is credible, a message or idea.
People are more likely to remember it.
Sometimes we think about credibility as all about the communicator.
Is the person sharing the message credible?
If they're an expert, for example, we might be more likely to believe them than if they're
a novice.
But certain aspects of the message itself can make it much more credible, regardless
of who's sharing that message.
Say you want to convince people, for example, that California needs more tax dollars.
You want them to see that California is big, huge even.
So you tell them that California has 33 million people.
And now think about it for a moment, 33 million people.
Is that big?
Is that small?
The problem with 33 million is that it's just a number.
Most people don't know right away whether it's a big number or a small number.
Sure it's bigger than 30 million, sure it's less than 35 million, but what does that mean?
Is that big?
Is that small?
I'm not really sure.
But that message becomes much more memorable if you use a different way to frame it.
If you put that number into some surrounding context.
For example, instead of saying 33 million, you could say something like, well, California
has more people than Alaska, Arkansas, Delaware, Hawaii, Idaho, Iowa, Kansas, Maine, Mississippi,
Montana, Nebraska, Nevada, New Hampshire, New Mexico, North Dakota, Oregon, Rhode Island,
South Dakota, Utah, Vermont, West Virginia, and Wyoming combined.
Now how big is California?
Wow.
If California is as big as all those places combined, it's got to be pretty big.
By using a comparison, rather than just saying 33 million, the message gives the information
more context and immediately makes it more understandable.
The MacBook Air ad we talked about earlier did the same thing.
They drew that laptop out of the envelope and right away it gives some context for how thin
it is.
If they said we made a really thin laptop, we say it's less than three quarters of an
inch thick, is that big or is that small?
Less than an inch thick.
Big or that small?
I don't know.
I don't even know how small my existing laptop is.
How would I know whether this new one is thinner or not?
But we all know that an envelope, an inter-office mail envelope is quite thin.
And so by taking out of that envelope, it gives the message context and along the way
makes it more credible and more understandable.
One of my favorite examples of putting numbers in context comes from an ad for a health club.
We all have this problem.
The problem with exercise is it's hard to know exactly how much you need.
Fatty food is tasty, so we want to eat more, but it's often hard to know what it's costing
us in terms of the impact on our body.
Sure, too much fat is bad, but how do we know how much is too much?
How do we know when we need to stop?
How do we know what we should be eating?
Well this ad does a perfect job by putting information in context.
Because if I set a pastry, for example, had 10 grams of fat, would that be a lot or a
little?
Most people wouldn't really be sure.
What about 30 grams of fat?
Well I know that 30 is more than 10, but I'm not sure of my daily allowance.
Is 30 grams too much or not enough, I'm not sure.
Rather than showing the grams of fat, this ad does a great job putting the information
in context.
They want to convince people that they should go to their health club, so they do so by
putting rows and rows of pastries with little signs on the pastries for information.
But rather than showing calories, how many calories are in a pastry, or how many grams
of fat inside, the sign shows how many minutes of exercise you'd need to work off that pastry.
A jelly donut, for example, shows 53 minutes of circuit training, a bear claw shows 40
minutes of aerobics, and a tasty eclair shows 42 minutes on the treadmill.
The ad does a great job of taking that information and putting it in context.
Of showing rather than telling.
By putting numbers in a context, it shows people how fattening certain foods are for
them and encourages people to exercise more.
In addition to putting numbers in context, another way messages can evoke credibility
is through something called testable credentials.
Rather than trying to convince people of something, information is much more convincing if it's
presented in a way that encourages people to convince themselves.
Personal care brand Clinique, for example, wanted to convince consumers that their three-step
skincare system would help people exfoliate and get rid of dry skin.
But rather than just telling people that, hey, we've got this great product, it exfoliates
and will help you get rid of dry skin, they encouraged people to do the convincing themselves.
They devised something called a tape test where people are encouraged to press a strip
of clear tape on the back of their hand and then peel it off.
Now, if you peel this tape off, you'll notice a lot of white flakes, which are the dead skin
that theoretically should be exfoliated.
If you try the product, though, on your other hand and then use a piece of tape, put on
that moisturizer and then use the piece of tape, much less skin comes off.
And so this tape test generates credibility by encouraging people to try it themselves
and see the difference.
We often hear ads on television saying Coke is better than Pepsi, 9 out of 10 consumers
prefer one versus the other.
Now, it seems a little bit like word of mouth, and as we'll talk about later, word of mouth
is a powerful tool, but it's not exactly like what we're talking about here of testable
credentials, because testable credentials is really letting the consumer themselves
try the product and see the difference.
If Pepsi said hi, try some Pepsi and try some Coke and see if you notice the difference,
that would be a better example of testable credentials.
An old hair coloring ad makes a similar approach to sell their product.
The product was supposed to remedy gray hair and was designed to convince people that the
product was effective.
But rather than telling people how effective the product was, the ad tried to show them.
It showed a picture of a man's face, but one half of the face was gray and the other half
of the face was black.
The hair was black on one side and gray on the other half.
The ad then encouraged people to put their hand over one of the halves, over the gray
half, and see how much younger the man looked with the gray hair gone versus the black hair
gone.
I often show this ad in my class, and the response is amazingly effective.
When people look at the gray half, they think the guy is 55 or 65, but when they look at
the half with black hair, they think the man is more like 40 or 45.
Though they didn't actually try the product by helping them simulate trial, the ad helped
convince people, those end consumers, that the product actually works.
All then, certain ideas stick.
While some messages come and go, sticky ideas stay in memory long after we've heard them.
But as we discussed, it's not luck or random which messages succeed.
Which ideas stick in memory?
As we talked about in this lecture, there are four key principles that lead messages
to stick.
Simple, for example.
Messages that communicate one clear idea rather than ten different ideas.
Lists of information are sometimes difficult to remember, but one key, clear, communicated
idea is more likely to stick.
The second principle, unexpected.
Things that break a pattern or go against existing intuition are more likely to be memorable.
Things that open up a curiosity gap are going to leave us wanting more.
The third principle, concrete.
Things that are concrete rather than abstract are easier to visualize and more likely to
stick in memory.
And finally, credibility.
Not just the communicator being credible, but the message itself being credible.
Rather than trying to convince us again and again, messages encourage us to do the cognitive
work and we convince ourselves.
All these types of messages and ideas are more likely to stick because they fit with
the way our memory and our minds are designed.
