I want to start this last lecture by talking about my grandma.
Now, I wish I could say that I'm talking about her just for fun, or to show her how
much I love her, and I do, but there's actually a different reason I'm bringing her up.
As for most of her adult life, my grandmother's job was to find people for focus groups.
If you've never heard of a focus group before, it's a situation where brands bring people
in to test their new products, or politicians bring people in to get feedback on their new
message.
Companies would want to see how people feel about their new advertising campaign, so they'd
call it my grandma, or rather they'd call a company that would hire my grandma to find
the participants for the group.
A vodka company, for example, might be targeting a new brand towards our group of young people,
so they'd ask her to find 15 to 20 people that fit a certain demographic range.
Maybe they're looking for males 25 to 35 who lived in New York City, had upscale tastes,
and made more than $70,000 a year, so they would call her and ask her to find those people.
Another organization might have a different idea in mind.
They might be looking for women, 36 to 45 who had bought a Cadillac in the past two years,
but hadn't driven one recently.
Maybe they wanted them to test their new car campaign.
Or someone might be looking for registered Republicans who lived in a certain county
and had voted Democrat in the last election.
You get the idea.
People who fit certain demographic ranges to give their opinions or try new products
and ideas.
Now, my grandmother would find these people.
This was before the internet, so she'd pull out her big Rolodex and start making phone
calls.
She'd pull out that big thing with all the little cards, start pulling ones out and
calling different people.
She'd talk to people she'd used for groups in the past, friends of friends, whomever
she thought would fit that desired criteria.
She'd call and call and call until she found enough people to fill the group.
This used to be how companies collected data.
Focus groups at the time were the gold standard of consumer research.
Companies and organizations would pay people to come to some office building or research
park to share their opinions, and then they'd use that information to make decisions internally.
But then something changed.
Rather than relying on focus groups for insights into consumer responses to products and messages,
companies and organizations started doing something else.
Part of this was due to problems with the old method.
As you can guess, paying 15 people a couple hundred bucks to sit in a room for a few hours
and give you their opinions is neither the most efficient nor accurate way to do research.
First, you tend to end up with a little bit of a skewed sample.
Not everyone is willing to drive 30 to 60 minutes and sit in a room for two hours, even
if you pay them a couple hundred bucks.
So you end up getting answers from people who have more time on their hands or more
motivated by money.
The situation also skews the answers people provide.
As we talked about in a lecture on conformity, people often change the opinions they express
in a public setting.
So there's a bunch of people sitting around you saying one thing, you might say the same
thing.
You might be more likely to go along with the group or say things that you think the company
running the group might want to hear, even if that's not how you actually felt.
But the biggest reason companies stopped using focus groups is what else became available.
Data.
Huge amounts of data.
While you used to have to ask people for their opinions, technology has changed all that.
Huge amounts of data are now recorded regarding everything people think and do.
This lecture will talk about big data and little data, how we can track the types of
things that are catching on in our own lives and the world more broadly, how we can see
the spread of ideas throughout the world and how companies and organizations are tracking
the spread of ideas to make themselves more successful.
We'll discuss how Google can predict the outbreak of the flu, why clothing brands monitor social
media chatter, and whether or not our own addiction to analytics might be leading us
astray in our own personal lives.
2008 was important for a number of reasons.
The United States elected its first African American president, China hosted the Olympics,
and one more thing happened that you might not be as aware of.
It was the innaugurable celebration of International Baby Wearing Week.
People have carried their babies around for a long time, around in a sling or a similar
carrier for centuries, and some research suggests that those types of interactions at close
baby close to your body might increase the parental bond.
But as strollers and other gadgets came along, most parents moved away from this practice.
So in 2008, an organization got people together to rally attention and encourage people around
the world to consider the benefits of carrying their babies in a sling, essentially worldwide
baby week, wearing week.
Now McNeil Consumer Healthcare, the maker of painkiller Motrin, wanted to capitalize
on this interest.
Motrin's motto at the time was, we feel your pain.
So in an attempt to show their support, they created an ad centered around the aches and
pains that mothers often deal with, from doing things like carrying their babies in a sling.
The ad suggested that while baby wearing could be good for the baby, it puts a lot of strain
on moms back and neck and shoulders, and so it's difficult.
They wanted to show that they were supportive, that they cared about moms.
They wanted to show that Motrin understood moms' pain and was there to help.
But the so-called mommy bloggers saw things differently.
Because the ad suggested that baby wearing totally makes me look like an official mom,
and if I look tired and crazy, people will understand why.
Well, they were deeply offended by that suggestion, by the suggestion they were wearing their
babies as fashion statements, and that they looked crazy.
Mothers took to their social media accounts and blogs, and the anger soon spread.
Soon thousands of people had gotten involved.
They were upset, and they were sharing information about how wrong it was, how outrageous is
that thinking they cried, post-multiply.
People said they would boycott the company.
The movement even got picked up by the New York Times and the topic started trending
on Twitter.
Soon seven out of the ten top searches for Motrin and headache on Google referred to
the marketing debacle.
Sales suffered, and finally after a long delay, Motrin took the advertisement down.
They took it off the website and they issued a lengthy apology.
Now if Motrin had known that the groundswell was going on, they could have reacted sooner.
If they'd known, moms were upset, it wouldn't have taken them so long to apologize, and
they could have nipped that anger in the bud.
So today, many companies collect data by engaging as what is called social media monitoring,
or listening.
They track what the population of consumers is saying about their brand on social media
sites and use that in many different ways.
This listening is a powerful tool, a new way to collect consumer information.
When Taylor, for example, noticed that lots of its consumers were complaining about one
of their ads, that the models they used were too thin, and they set up unrealistic expectations
about how women should look.
The comments started to build, but because the company was listening, was paying attention
to what was being said on social media, they were able to react before it became a full
blown boycott.
Ann Taylor took the photo of actual employees wearing actual Ann Taylor clothes and quickly
posted them with a lengthy apology online.
Crisis averted.
Because as we talked about, social media is not just a marketing platform, it's also
a listening platform.
And in thinking about the web more generally, all sorts of things can be measured.
So let's start thinking about what can be measured and how that measurement can be used.
One major dimension of consumer response that companies can listen to and measure is volume.
How many consumers or people are talking about a particular thing?
In Ann Taylor's case, how many people are complaining about that ad?
People did something very similar to Ann Taylor when they used search data to predict
incidents of the flu.
Well, the flu may not seem like a huge deal to you, unless you have it.
Between 5 to 20% of the US population gets the flu every year, and the flu is responsible
for over 30,000 deaths on average.
As a result, health officials are keen to know when and where outbreaks occur.
The faster health officials know, the earlier they can put out control and prevention measures
in place.
But how can they quickly figure out whether this year will be a big one, or whether the
outbreak will be bigger in Washington D.C. or Washington State?
Well, usually, officials rely on reports from the Center for Disease Control.
These reports are compiled from data collected from thousands of health care providers and
other sources.
But there's one problem with these reports.
It's often very slow to arrive.
Why?
Well, people don't go to their doctor right away when they get the flu, and even when
they go, it takes a while from that data to migrate from the doctor all the way back to
the CDC.
Further, many people may go to the doctor at all.
They may underestimate the actual strength of the outbreak.
If people aren't accurately reporting how many cases are going on, some of us stay home
and never make it to the doctor.
It'll underestimate the number of people that have that problem.
And so by the time the CDC realizes a big outbreak is happening, it's often too late.
The people who have the flu have already spread it to more people.
They've already come into the office, and the epidemic has taken off.
That disease, rather than idea, has actually spread.
So how can they get data on the flu outbreak faster?
Well, Google found that search data might be able to help.
People with the flu often type in related search queries online.
They ask Google, what are common flu symptoms?
How can I get rid of the flu?
How long should I wait before I go to the doctor?
Is this really the flu, or is it a cold?
But all this information is entered in a way before people go to the doctor.
As a result, a spike in search queries can be a great early warning detection system.
In some cases, search terms show up a spike in activity weeks before the CDC could pick
it up.
That's less health officials act faster and prevent more people from getting the flu,
and at the end of the day, save lives.
Again, all that data that we're entering online might just be one of us entering it,
but if lots of people enter similar things, it gives a good sense of what the collective
mind is thinking about.
One of the big benefits of search data is its scale.
It's not just data from a few people in a few different regions.
It's millions of people across the United States entering everything from flu cures
to the best doctor in Topeka to how to get rid of stains and does he really like me.
And while some of these search queries may seem funny or silly, the data is broad in
its scale and it's timely.
It shows what people are thinking about and looking for right then.
So as a predictive tool, this data can be quite powerful.
Some of the patterns that you might see are pretty intuitive.
Like the flu we talked about before, it makes sense if people are looking for flu cures,
that they probably have the flu.
But if you look up search volume for other things, you notice some neat patterns and
you can try this tool yourself at home.
Look up the search volume for chicken, for example, and compare it with the search volume
for turkey.
Well, you'll notice that more people seem to be searching for chicken, chicken recipes
and other sorts of things related to chicken.
That said, turkey gets a big spike in attention.
When might that be?
As we talked about triggers, once a year, there's a big spike in attention for turkey.
Any idea when?
That's right, around Thanksgiving.
All those people looking for how to best cook, brine, or deep fry turkey show up in the data.
You might have searched for it, but so did thousands of others.
You also see interesting patterns for searches among things like weight loss, gym memberships
or quitting smoking.
Huge interest in January when people are thinking about New Year's resolutions.
And then they slowly tail off again for the next 11 or 12 months until they pick up the
following January.
And while this seasonality is neat, note that you can actually play around with this data
yourself online.
It's through a free Google interface.
It's a lot of fun.
It's also quite useful because research shows that search data can be almost real-time predictor
of retail sales, home sales, and car purchases.
Combined with other data, for example, people searching for housing information provides
a much better indicator of how many houses will be sold over that period.
Search data is even useful in understanding how popular different vacation destinations
are over time.
Consider predicting whether France or Britain will be more popular in the summer or what
cities people are looking for and most likely to visit at different times of the year.
So the first key dimension is volume.
But beyond volume, another dimension is useful and powerful.
Beyond the amount of interest people have in a topic, online data can also be useful
for tracking sentiment or how people feel about a given topic or idea.
In 2012, for example, the Twitter political index tracked people's attitudes towards
Barack Obama and Mitt Romney.
How did they track those attitudes?
Well, they looked at what people typed in Twitter when they mentioned the word Barack
or Obama and the word Mitt or Romney together.
For example, if they saw people saying, I love Barack, that seemed like a positive thing
or a negative thing like this is a disappointing four years, they knew that it was positive
or negative sentiment.
And so by coding all that through textual analysis, the index provided a decent sense
of how the population felt towards the candidates.
Sure, you may have an opinion and that may or may not be the opinion everyone else has,
but by merely expressing that opinion online, companies and organization can get a sense
of how everyone feels.
Brands often do similar sorts of analyses.
By examining the different words people use, for example, to talk about Pepsi, PepsiCo
can get a good sense of whether their ad campaign is working.
If the campaign is associated with more people saying positive things like Pepsi is great
or I'm drinking a Pepsi, then the brand can infer that the campaign helped.
If it's associated with more people saying I'd never buy Pepsi or Pepsi is boring or
terrible, then the brand might infer the opposite.
That said, sentiment analysis is not without its challenges.
It's one thing to measure how frequently people search for a given vacation destination.
Sure, you have to account for misspellings of the word Paris and deal with the problems
that sometimes people will search for the word Paris or looking for the city, while
other times they're looking for other things like Paris Hilton.
But these are relatively easy problems to crack compared to the issues with sentiment.
Because with sentiment, you're not just looking for the incidents of certain words like the
mention of the word Paris, you need to pick up the tools or understanding of how people
feel in that context.
Sentiment tools need to understand something about the context in which people are using
a particular word.
The word good, for example, is positive, but when used in the phrase not good, it actually
indicates that people dislike something rather than like something.
So you can't just take the word good and assume it means a positive thing.
Words like small, for example, also have similar issues.
It can have positive or negative connotations depending on the situation.
A digital camera, for example, being small is a pretty good thing.
But if a hotel room is small, it's the opposite.
Most people would like a hotel room not to be tiny, so many might complain about the
small size.
And with other products like phones, the direction is even less clear.
Sometimes small phones make people happy, sometimes a small phone can be too small and
people might get upset.
And so it's hard to know exactly what these words mean.
If you think about it, slang and sarcasm are even harder to parse.
How do you know if people actually have a certain feeling or they're saying something
they don't really mean?
If people are saying Ford is great, do they mean it or are they being facetious?
When someone says the new Ford car is hot, can the algorithm understand that a person
likes the car rather than the person thinks the air conditioning is weak or doesn't work?
Compared to the volume mentioned, sentiment is a much tougher nut to crack.
Online data can also be used for market research more generally.
Say you like a pair of running shoes, for example, but the company you like stops making
them.
How can you figure out whether other shoes are round that are similar?
Or say you're Honda and you want to get a sense of what other cars people are thinking
about buying when they're thinking about buying the Honda Accord.
Well one way to solve this problem is to look at the coincidence of different products in
online forums.
Do different products or brands show up frequently with other products or brands?
What shoes, for example, do people tend to mention in posts that talks about your discontinued
pair?
What other cars do consumers mention in posts when they talk about the Accord?
By looking at how frequently different terms appear together, it's possible to get a good
sense of consideration sets.
The Honda Accord probably shows up with many different cars overall, but which one does
it appear with more frequently?
More frequently than the rest.
Which other makes and models repeatedly show up with the Accord in post?
That provides some sense of what other models people are considering.
But technology hasn't only brought big data.
It's also allowed us to measure our own lives in ways we never thought possible.
A few weeks ago, late in one evening, an exercise monitor made me hit my dog in the face.
Now before the ASPA starts calling, it was a complete mistake.
The dog snuck up behind me while I was furiously swinging my arms around in circles.
But the mere fact I was doing that at all sheds light on the recent quest for personal
quantification and how it's changed our lives for the better and for the worse.
Just like big data allows us to see what everyone's doing, our own lives have been monitored
more.
From target mining shopper data to figure out who is getting pregnant to Google using online
search to do things like predicting the flu, companies and organizations are using troves
of information as spot trends, combat crime and prevent disease.
Online and offline actions are being tracked, aggregated and analyzed at dizzying rates.
But innovative technologies have also enabled little data to flourish.
And what I mean by little data is personal quantification.
The measurement, tracking and analysis of the minutiae of our everyday lives.
How many calories we consume for breakfast, how many we burned on our last run, and how
long we spend using various applications on our computer.
In some ways, little data is a boon.
We can lose weight by realizing we tend to splurge on Thursdays.
We can be more efficient at work by realizing we dilly-dally more than we thought in the
afternoons compared to the morning.
And with data firmly in hand, we can work to optimize every aspect of our behavior.
But this measurement also has some insidious aspects that we often ignore.
Data is helpful, but we forget that what we track determines where we focus and what we're
motivated to improve.
Why do people obsess over LinkedIn connections, Twitter followers or SAT scores?
Self-handicaps or if you have a hybrid, even the mileage on your car?
Well they obsess about these metrics because they are observable.
They're easy to compare.
Someone who has more connections online, for example, we assume that they must have more
expertise.
Someone with more followers, we assume they must be more influential.
So people use these easy accessible metrics as a yardstick, an easy way to assess whether
they're doing well or badly.
But because a metric is easy to measure, because it's easy to capture, doesn't mean
it's the right metric to use.
More followers doesn't actually equal more influence, as we talked about in the last
lecture.
More connections doesn't necessarily mean more expertise.
They may just mean someone spends a lot of time online.
And it's like the old adage about the drunk searching for his keys.
You've probably heard this one before, but one night a policeman saw a drunk scouring
the ground around a street light, trying to figure out where he lost his keys.
So the policeman asked the drunk what he's looking for, and the drunk says, I lost my
keys.
And the policeman, being a nice guy, and wanting to be helpful, joins in the search.
They look around, back and forth, all around the area, and after a few fruitless minutes
combing everything they can find, the policeman asks the drunk, are you sure you dropped your
keys right here?
Not sure the drunk says, I actually have no idea why I dropped them.
Well, the policeman asked them, why are we searching under the street light?
And the drunk says simply, well, because that's where the light is.
And this brings us back to the exercise monitor, my dog, and swinging my arms in circle, like
a windmill.
Fitness trackers help people track how much exercise they get on a daily basis.
They record things like how many steps you take, calories you burn, and even points,
or some measure of overall exertion.
All on a handy tracker you wear on your wrist, you get a daily goal, and if you get there,
your wristband gives you a mini celebration with all sorts of good news.
Now, fitness trackers are meant to encourage exercise, but like many examples of little
data, they focus attention on a particular aspect of our behavior, shining a light like
that street light, and determining where people devote their effort.
Just like the drunk searched under the street light, what we measure determines our attention.
As a result, hitting one goal becomes an end rather than a means.
I was brushing my teeth, about to go to bed, when I noticed I had 3,900 points for the
day.
Now, if my goal was 3,500 points, or 3,900 points, that would have been fine.
But my goal for the day was 4,000 points, and I had 3,900.
I was just a little bit short.
I couldn't go to bed without reaching my goal.
But it was about 10.30 at night.
Too late for a run, or any exercise really, so I started doing a couple of half-hearted
jumping jacks.
Then I realized that arm movement burned more fuel than leg movement, so I started swinging
my arm around slowly but surely in larger and larger circles.
Just when the dog decided to walk up and take a closer look at what in the world I was doing
with my arm.
Now, is the goal of these measurement systems, these fitness devices, to get people to swing
their arms in circles, unlikely?
But by tracking a measure that values such behavior, that's exactly what fitness bands
encourage, searching under a streetlight.
Measurement is great.
As a whole, without measurement, we don't know where we are, how we're doing, or how
to improve.
But we need to be careful what we measure, because without realizing it, measurement
determines a lot of rewards of motivation, determines what people care about, what they
work to achieve, and whether they cheat to get there.
If you motivate call center employees, for example, based on the speed of their call,
their work as quickly as they can to get off the phone.
That may incentivize them to move faster, but that doesn't necessarily incentivize
good service.
Tracking student test scores helps measure achievement, but also encourages teachers to
teach to the test.
Now that may be a good thing.
If it helps students do better and learn more at the end of the day, that may be good.
But if it encourages teachers just to teach to the test, the written memorization that
will lead students to get good scores, that might not be the actual end goal.
So before you obsess over a particular metric, make sure it's the right metric to obsess
over.
Think about what you're measuring and how it's shaping behavior.
If it's an organization, how do you measure and give people bonuses?
Well, that dimension that you give them bonuses on is what they'll optimize.
They'll do everything they can to hit that goal.
But that might lead them to cut some corners here and there, and might lead them to do
things that are not good for the organization overall.
Same with your own behavior.
Is your goal to figure out which hour of the day you work best in?
Well, then a tracker that lets you know how efficient you are at different times of day
is useful.
But if that leads you to stay up late at night and be unhappy overall, then that's not the
best metric to measure.
These devices are important and useful.
Without tracking things, we don't have information.
But by tracking things, we determine our future behavior.
It can be useful to track the spread of ideas and also track our own behavior, but it might
not always be the right thing to track.
In some cases, it might just be time to find a new streetlight.
Given that this is the last lecture of the course, I just wanted to provide some concluding
thoughts.
Because as we've talked about here, technologies change.
Things come and go.
Twitter and Facebook are popular one year.
They may not be popular in their future.
MySpace used to be the newest and coolest thing that was replaced by the next thing and the
next thing and the next thing.
Things come and go.
What is one day's big thing soon becomes the current small thing, which eventually becomes
the way that things used to be.
But rather than think about a specific technology people are using, it's more important to
think about the psychology.
Not what are people using to communicate.
Not how we're spreading things, but the underlying human behavior.
What are people doing and why are they doing it?
What makes us adopt one thing and not another?
What makes us share one piece of content online or offline rather than something else?
Technologies are definitely the channels that people share things through.
As we talked about, only about 7% of word of mouth is online, but that number is growing.
And every year there are new technologies that encourage us to share online and deep
and online interaction.
New ways to connect with others through these social technologies.
Facebook, for example, allows us to have undirected communication.
It used to be that we had to pick a person we talked to.
We had to walk up to someone and pick that particular person.
But Facebook allows us to send messages to broad groups of people without picking who
we talked to.
And while that might not seem like it matters, it allows us a helpful outlet when we're feeling
bad inside.
One reason people post Facebook status updates is because they feel blue or sad.
And posting those updates encourages the chance that people will respond to them and make
them feel better.
They feel a little bit shy or unwilling to post something directly to another person
that requires feeling good, but they're very willing to put something out there which
increases the chance of getting a response and increases the chance they feel better.
The technology has made them better off.
But what's important under that technology is psychology.
If we don't understand how it affects people, we won't understand what's going on.
Because while technologies come and go, human nature has remained remarkably similar.
Sure people have changed the channel through which people share, but we've been sharing
for thousands if not tens of thousands of years.
And our basic cognitive, motivational, and social processes have remained essentially
intact.
We still get news and information from our social connections.
And basic principles like emotion and identity still drive behavior.
Sure, technologies may shift how we express these underlying psychological and sociological
processes.
Sure social media has allowed us to connect with more people faster and easier than ever
before, but the underlying processes, that underlying human behavior, has remained remarkably
similar.
The behavioral processes that drive ideas to spread have remained mostly constant.
Because if we have ideas we want to spread, products we want to sell, or causes we want
to move forward, we need to know more than just the latest technology, the latest hippest
coolest thing.
We need to know and understand the underlying human psychology.
What brought that technology into being?
And what will cause people to use it?
Because technology is just out there, but we use that technology to serve our own more
human needs.
Thank you.
