Imagine it's a hot day outside.
Really hot.
So sweltering that the birds won't even sing, close to even 100 degrees in the shade.
You're parched so you drop into a local convenience store to grab a cold drink.
All the beverages are behind the counter, so the owner asks what you want.
You gotta figure out what you'd like.
Well, what generic term would you use if you wanted a sweetened, carbonated beverage?
What would you say to the clerk?
If you had to fill in the blank, I'd like a blank, please.
And that blank is a sweetened, carbonated beverage.
How would you fill it in?
How would you do it?
Well, it turns out the answer you say says a lot about who you are and where you're from.
If you're from New York, Philadelphia, or much of the northeastern United States, you'd
ask for a soda.
Or if you're from Seattle, Minneapolis, or much of the Midwest, you'd actually ask
for a pop.
And if you're from the south, like Atlanta or New Orleans, or much of the southern part
of the United States, you'd ask for a Coke, even if you actually wanted a Sprite.
For fun, actually try ordering a Coke next time you're in the south.
The clerk will ask you what kind, and then you can tell them a Sprite, Dr. Pepper, root
beer, or even a regular old Coke.
Yes, I'd like a Coke Coke, please.
For imagine rather than ordering a soft drink, you're at the office chatting with some co-workers.
You're about to go out and get some lunch, but the rest of the office mates are on a
deadline and can't go with you.
Being the nice, polite person you are, you ask the group whether you can get them something,
whether you can pick them up something while you're out.
How would you address the group?
That is, what word or words would you use to address that group of people that are two
or more?
Fill in the blank.
Would blank like me to get you anything?
How would you use that particular word in that sentence?
The answer seems even easier, yet again it says a lot about where you're from.
People from the west or the northeast would say you guys.
Would you guys like me to get you anything?
People from the south?
Well, they'd actually say something different.
They'd say y'all.
Would y'all like me to get you anything?
And people from Kentucky say you all.
Some people in Philadelphia or Boston might even say use, as in use guys want something
from the store.
A lot of people from different regions say different things.
I mean, if it's the same thing we're ordering, why don't we all say exactly the same thing?
And how does it end up that everyone in the same region says the same thing, but different
regions say different ones?
This lecture will kick off the part of the course related to social influence.
So far we've talked about what sticks and why certain ideas and messages stick in memory.
And we've talked about individual psychology, how information gets in through exposure,
perception, and memory.
Now it's time to begin to think about what spreads.
How social influence work and why some things spread from person to person while others
don't.
In this lecture, we'll start with conformity.
You'll learn why bartenders see the tip jar, why people prefer waiting in line sometimes,
and why MBAs often end up pursuing the same careers right before they graduate, even though
they started out with quite different aspirations in mind.
You'll also learn why conformity sometimes leads us to follow others, even when we know
those others are wrong, and how imitation leads people to take kidneys that they shouldn't
in a kidney transplant list, or turn down kidneys that they should even when accepting
them would have saved their lives.
When do we follow others and why?
Well people tend to follow the behaviors of others around them.
We listen to the same music as our friends, buy similar cars to our neighbors, and follow
the same religion as our parents.
Not always, but often.
Whether making simple decisions like which dog food to buy at the store, or more consequential
ones like who to vote for, or where to send our children to school, we tend to do the
same things as others around us.
This is why bartenders, for example, in baristas, they see the tip jar at the beginning of their
shift.
They drop off a handful of ones, or maybe a five, a few coins, because they know that
if the tip jar is empty, customers might assume that other people aren't tipping.
And if other people aren't tipping, they're not going to tip themselves.
But if the tip jar already has some money in it, if it looked like a couple of other
customers have already contributed a few of their hard-earned dollars, then people will
assume that others must be tipping, and thus they should tip as well.
As we'll talk about, conformity happens for two key reasons.
And the first reason is about information.
Consider for a moment one of your organs you don't think very much about.
Your kidneys.
In fact, you have two of them, but imagine that one of them fails.
Your body relies on your kidneys to filter waste products and toxins from your blood.
So when a kidney stops working, your whole body suffers.
Your bones weaken, sodium builds up, and you're more likely to develop anemia or heart disease.
If not treated soon, you will die.
Kidney failure is a big, big deal.
And in fact, it affects many people every year.
Every year, more than 40,000 people in America come down with end-stage renal disease.
One of their kidneys fails for one reason or another, and they don't have many options
except for two.
To go through very time-intensive visits back and forth to a treatment center, three times
a week for five hours of dialysis, or to get a kidney transplant.
Going back and forth isn't ideal, right?
Five hours of dialysis, three times a week, extremely painful, or to get a kidney transplant.
So most people would prefer the transplant, but here's the problem.
Unfortunately, there are not enough kidneys available to be transplanted.
Over 100,000 patients are on the wait list, and thousands more are at it each month.
People having the wait list are not surprisingly very eager to get a kidney.
If they don't, they may not live much longer.
So imagine for a second you're on that wait list for the kidney.
Imagine you know that you need a kidney transplant, and you're just waiting to find one of the
available kidneys on the list.
It's used on a first-cerm, first-serve basis.
The people on the top of the list, well, they get the first shot at the available kidneys.
And they're assigned sequentially to people down the list.
So if the first person says no, the second person gets it, and so on.
And the people on the top of the list, they've usually been waiting the longest.
Now imagine you for a moment, imagine you need that kidney, and imagine you're sitting
there waiting for months on end.
You're low down on a list, but finally, with a stroke of luck, one day you're offered
a potential match.
Would you take it?
You've been waiting on that list for months on end.
Would you take the kidney?
Well, clearly, people in need of a kidney to save their lives should take one when offered.
One should take the kidney.
But surprisingly, around 97% of kidney offers are refused.
Now, just for a moment, that's not all for superfluous reasons.
Some of the refusals have a very good reason, and they're based on the kidney not being
a very good fit in some sense.
If you think about it, a kidney is a little bit like a car part.
An organ transplant is a little bit like getting something replaced in your existing automobile.
It's tough to put a Toyota carburetor in a Mercedes and vice versa.
It's actually pretty much the same with a kidney.
The blood or the tissue type doesn't match.
The organ won't work.
So some of the people turning down those kidneys are turning them down for a good reason.
It doesn't match with them and their blood type.
But when researchers looked deeper and they looked at hundreds of kidneys that were donated
over time, they found that social influence led people to turn down available kidneys
even when they should have accepted them.
Say you're the 200th person on the list.
A kidney would have originally been offered to the first person on the list, and then
the second, and then the third, and then the fourth, and so on.
If you're 200th on the list and you just got offered a kidney, that means that it must
have been turned down by 199 other people first.
199 other people already said no to this kidney.
And this is where social influence starts to have a little bit of effect.
If so many other people have refused this kidney first, people are going to start to
assume that something must be wrong.
Well, if everyone else said no, what am I missing?
They infer that the kidney must be of low quality and are more likely to turn it down
themselves.
In fact, such entrances lead to one out of every ten kidney refusers to do so in error.
Some people refuse it for good reasons, but one out of ten ends up turning one down that
they should have accepted.
Thousands of people end up rejecting kidneys that they should have accepted because of social
influence.
Researchers call this phenomenon the sound of silence.
It's silence in the sense that people didn't hear other people turning it down.
They didn't hear other people say, this is a bad kidney, but merely being aware that
someone else turned it down affected their behavior.
People aren't communicating directly with others on the list, but they make their decisions
based on those others' behavior.
And those decisions have a big impact.
So one reason people can form then is because they're trying to figure out the right thing
to do in a given situation.
Should I take this kidney or not?
And how can I use others' information about the right thing to do?
Say it's spring and there's a small chance that it might rain.
Maybe it will, maybe it won't.
But it's hard to be sure.
How do you know whether you're supposed to bring an umbrella?
Well, one time-tested trick is to see what others are doing.
If other people are carrying umbrellas, you probably should bring yours.
If no one's carrying an umbrella, you can probably skip it.
People imitate others then, in part because others' choices provide useful information.
It's called informational influence.
Many decisions we make on a daily basis are like the decision to carry an umbrella.
Where should we go on vacation this year?
Which preschool will give our kids the best education, the best shot at that college we're
hoping they get into one day?
Is this new policy initiative worth supporting?
We don't really know the right answer.
And in some cases, there is no right answer at all.
And even if we have some sense of what we should be doing, we're definitely not entirely
sure.
So to help resolve our uncertainty, to help figure out what we should do in that situation,
we look to others.
We look to others and what they're doing and we follow that.
We assume that if other people are doing something, well, it must be a pretty decent
idea.
It must be pretty good for us to do it as well.
Because there's safety in numbers.
And those people may know something that we might not.
If a destination to go on vacation seems pretty popular, well, we assume that it must be worth
checking out.
If everyone in the neighborhood sends their kids to a particular school, we assume that
it must be pretty good.
And if we see lots of signs on other neighbors' yards supporting a particular candidate or
a particular policy initiative, we assume it must be good for the community.
Another great example of this involves lines.
In New York City, Halal Chicken and Gyro offers delicious platters of lamb and chicken, lightly
seasoned rice and pita bread.
It's been ranked as one of the top 20 food carts in the city.
And people wait up to an hour to get one of these delicious but tasty and inexpensive
meals.
I've gone myself.
Let me tell you, it's worth the wait.
And visit during peak hours, the line is terrible.
It will stretch around the block and around the corner.
People sit there for almost an hour, an hour more sometimes, to get this food.
And I know what you're thinking.
Well, if that many people are in line, if people are willing to wait an hour, it must
be pretty good.
Right?
The food's got to be worth the wait.
People must be waiting that long because the food is so amazing.
And you are partially right.
The food is pretty good.
But here's the interesting fact.
The owners actually operate an identical food cart across the street.
It's not perfectly identical, but it's essentially the same thing.
Same food, same packaging, basically an identical product.
Except one difference.
There's no line.
In fact, the second truck has never developed the same devote following as its sibling.
Even though the food is exactly the same.
Same food, same packaging, same price, no line.
Why not?
Well, notice that idea of informational influence.
People assume that the longer the line is, the better the food must be.
Because we use others as information or a shortcut to judgment.
Collecting all the information ourselves would be hard.
We don't have time to figure out exactly which food cart is better, so we use that long
line as a signal of what we should do ourselves.
Say you're new in town and you're trying to find a mechanic in the area who does good
work and won't overcharge.
How would you find this mechanic?
Well, beyond following others, it would take a lot of time and effort.
I'm sure you could do trial and error.
You could walk on each door, knock on the different mechanic's doors, and ask them
how much they cost and whether they do good work, but you couldn't really trust them.
And imagine finding an honest mechanic and taking your car to different places all over
town.
If you got worked on at each, it would be exhausting and expensive.
Alternatively, sure we could try direct observation, but it's also difficult.
You'd have to make friends with all the mechanics in all the different shops and get them to
let you watch what they do and how much they charge.
And then you have to follow up with each of the clients to see whether those clients
were happy.
It's really time-intensive and costly to collect all that information ourselves.
Guess how easily that would work?
Not very.
In advertisements, as we'll talk later in the section on word of mouth, those also
don't work so well.
Sure they make people aware or exposed to information, but people generally don't trust
them and are generally skeptical of persuasion attempts.
Sure mechanics will say that they have great service or their prices are fantastic, but
without really checking it's hard to know for sure.
So following others saves us time and energy.
It allows us a quick shortcut that saves us the time of going place to place or checking
in with each mechanic.
Now conformity also leads to behaviors like the herding we saw in language at the beginning
of this lecture.
People in the Midwest say pop, for example, because that's what other people in the Midwest
say.
If you move from the Midwest to the East Coast, you'd probably think it was weird at first
and you'd keep saying the thing you were saying before.
But soon, eventually, if you live in a place long enough, you'll find yourself tempted
to say the same thing as that area.
After all, if everyone else is saying it, it just starts to sound right, even while
it might not have been right before.
Something similar happened to me when I moved from the East Coast to California for college.
Washington, D.C. is a reasonably conservative town, not so much in terms of politics necessarily,
but definitely in terms of dress code.
People in D.C. tend to be a little on the formal side, more suits than jeans, and a lot
of people wear ties to the office or to formal events.
So I did as well.
Growing up to a formal event, I would wear a tie.
But when I moved to California, I took my ties with me.
I wore them to the first few formal type events that I had, but then I noticed something that
struck me as weird at first.
No one was wearing a tie.
In fact, where were all those people that I was used to who were wearing ties?
The norm was different.
I was wearing a tie, but a few other people were doing the same.
And eventually, after a while, in that laid-back environment, I started to change too.
I started to ditch the tie because it didn't look right, even though it did just a couple
years before.
Now let's fast-forward to eight or so years later, when I moved back to the East Coast.
I moved back to teach at the Wharton School, and by then, most of my ties had either disappeared
or been sent to Goodwill.
I had a couple I had been given by friends that had sentimental value, but I pretty much
never wore them.
But when I walked up the stairs to my first dean's reception at this new job, it was
an evening get-together with all the various faculty members, I noticed something I had
not seen in a long time, ties.
It was the weirdest sight.
I walked in and everyone was wearing a tie.
It set me.
I couldn't fathom why people were wearing them.
I mean, it just seemed so formal and out of place and weird.
Even though eight years ago, it would have been exactly what I would have expected, exactly
what I would have worn ahead of time.
And now it seemed out of place.
I hadn't necessarily changed, but my environment had.
And that brings me to the second reason people can form, to fit in.
If we think about it for a moment, what could be easier than matching the length of two
lines?
Imagine, for example, you were asked to participate in a very simple vision test.
In front of you are a pair of cards.
On the left card is a simple line.
Imagine a line on a piece of paper.
And on the right card are three comparison lines labeled A, B, and C.
Your job is pretty easy.
Pick the line on the right card that's the same length as the target line on the left
card.
Decide whether line A, B, or C is the same length as the target line.
Should be easy, right?
All you have to do is line those two lines up.
Look with your vision and see which makes sense.
But now let's add one more wrinkle.
Rather than doing the experiment alone, you participate with a larger group of your peers.
You show up at a nondescript building on a university campus, and you walk up a flight
of stairs into some room labeled B7.
When you arrive, you see that there are six other people seated in a semicircle around
three sides of a square table.
So you grab the last seat remaining, the second from the end.
The experimenter is just starting to explain the instructions, and he reiterates that your
job is pretty simple, to pick the line on the right that matches in length the one on
the left.
Again, seems like the easiest experiment ever.
The group will do a number of trials just like that one, and as the group is pretty small,
the number of trials is few.
He'll call in one person, and then the next, and the next, and so on, to make their choice.
Each person will announce their choices to the group, and he'll record it on a special
form.
The experimenter points to the leftmost participant, and asks that person to start.
Which line matches?
Now the first participant is red hair, he's wearing a gray collared shirt, and he seems
to be around 25 years old.
He looks at the lines for a second, he glances one way, and then he looks another, and without
missing a B, he reports his judgment.
Line B, he says.
The next participant seems a little older, maybe around 27, and is dressed more casually.
But he reports the same answer.
Line B.
The third person also says B, as does the fourth and the fifth.
And then it gets to you.
What's your answer?
Ask the experimenter.
Which line would you pick?
Would you pick the line that you knew was right, actually line A, or would you pick
the line that everyone else had said, line B?
And might line B start to seem more right just because other people had said it?
Well, when psychologist Salman Ash designed this limelight study, he was looking to do
more than just test people's vision.
He was hoping to prove someone else wrong.
Because a few years earlier, another psychologist, by the name of Sharif, had conducted a similar
study and found some pretty surprising results.
Sharif was interested in how norms form, how groups of people come to agree on common ways
of seeing the world.
And to study this question, he put people in a pretty unusual situation.
And it's called something like the autoconetic effect.
Basically, imagine walking into a dark room, no light at all, and a pinpoint of light is
on the wall.
Well, Sharif asked people to stare at this point of light, not move their eyes for as
long as possible.
Then he asked them to report how far that point of light had moved.
Now, in reality, that point of light was immobile.
He was sort of playing a trick on people.
The line, the light hadn't moved at all.
But for individuals in the room, the light seemed like it had moved.
Staring at a small dot of light in an otherwise dark room is tougher than it sounds.
After a while of staring in the darkness, people's eyes eventually fatigue and start
to move involuntarily.
This causes them to perceive that the light is moving, even if it's been stationary the
whole time.
Now, Sharif studied the autoconetic effect because he wanted to see how people rely on
others when they were uncertain.
First he put them in a dark room by themselves, alone without anyone else present, just them
alone in the room.
And he found that each person converged on their own norm of judgment.
The first time in the room, someone might guess that the light moved maybe eight inches.
The next time through, that person might guess that the light moved four inches.
Now, in both cases, it didn't move, but one time they guessed eight, and another time
they guessed four.
But through a number of trials, repeatedly, they settled on a particular number, say six
inches, and they stuck with it for the rest of the trials, guessing a similar number again
and again and again.
But next, Sharif put groups of people in the room at the same time, two or three participants,
at once, and each would be asked to call out their judgments to the rest of the room.
While different participants often started with different answers, their own personal
norm, eventually they came to a common estimate.
They all came to agree on the same thing.
One participant might have said six inches when they were by themselves, and another
one might have said two inches when they were by themselves, but put those two folks together
and their judgments started to converge.
The person who said six inches might start to make smaller judgments, maybe four inches,
and the person who said two inches might start to make larger judgments, four inches as well.
It seems like people's estimates conform to those around them.
In fact, this influence was so strong that it persisted even when participants returned
to making those individual judgments.
Even if their partners left the room, people came back to the task alone and they continued
to give the same answer they had with the group.
That group information changed their opinion even when those others weren't around.
These findings generate a good bit of controversy.
Do people just do what everyone else is doing?
Are we mindless automatons that simply follow the actions of others without any thought
to what we should be doing ourselves?
The very notions of independence and free thought that much of American culture is based
on seemed at stake.
But this person, Ash, this other scientist, wasn't so convinced.
Other than people being mindless followers, he thought that the results demonstrated
something else, that people use multiple inputs when making decisions.
When people are uncertain about what to do, relying on others makes sense.
Not sure how much a point of light moved?
Not sure there's really a right answer?
Well, listening to what others think makes good sense.
And shifting your other judgment in that direction makes good sense as well, because others might
have information that you don't.
Just like that kidney example, or just like carrying an umbrella, other people might have
useful information that you should take into account.
So to test whether people only conform because that answer was uncertain, Ash devised a different
task.
Rather than putting people in a situation where the answer was unclear or uncertain,
he wanted to put them in a situation where the answer was obvious, so clear that everyone
could tell it right away without a second thought, where people could tell the correct
answer and thus would have no need to rely on others around them.
Well, when he tried to figure out a perfect task for that, the line length seemed like
an ideal choice.
Even someone with poor eyesight could easily tell the correct answer.
Those lines are so obviously different from one another, it's easy to know which one
is the right one and which one is the wrong one.
Sure, maybe you have to squint a little bit, but if it's right there in front of you,
there's no way you can get a mistake.
No need to rely on anyone else.
He assumed that when the answer was clear, conformity would be reduced.
It's only when the answer is unclear that people conform.
So to provide an even stronger test, Ash, that experimenter, rigged the group's responses.
There was always one real participant, you in the case of the example that I gave, but
rather than use multiple real participants, the rest of the people around that table were
actors.
They weren't real participants, they were actually friends with the experimenter.
In each of the eight people that sat around the room, only one was a real participant
and the rest were fakes.
Sure they looked like real participants, they were the same age, the same gender, etc.,
but rather than choosing what answer to give based on their own opinions, they gave a predetermined
response.
Sometimes they gave the right answer, picking the line on the left, that was the same as
the one on the right, and sometimes they picked the wrong answer, something that was obviously
wrong.
On these preselected trials, they all said line B for example when the answer was clearly
A or line C, and they used this task because they wanted to assume, they wanted to test
whether it reduced conformity.
The real participants could clearly see the right answer, so even though others gave the
wrong response, it shouldn't really matter.
You could see it with your own eyes, would you rely on others or not?
Ash expected that people would stick to their guns and remain independent.
Sure maybe a couple participants would waver once in a while, but for the most part they
should give the right answer.
They didn't.
In fact, it wasn't even close.
Instead conformity was rampant.
Almost 75% of participants conformed to the group at least once.
And while most people didn't conform on every single trial, on average people conformed
over a third of the time.
And the most striking part of this finding is the way in which they conformed.
Even those people's eyes told them the right answer, even though it told them what was
correct, people went along with the group.
Even when they could clearly tell that that answer was correct, Ash was wrong.
Even when the answer is clear, people still conform.
Now why do people conform in that particular situation?
Well the reason they conform in this type of situation is not informational influence,
it's something called normative influence.
In general, people like being liked.
We want people to think positively us and avoid being ostracized.
So sometimes we go along with the group to fit in.
Take the types of careers that people consider.
Each year I do a short exercise in my second year MBA class.
I ask the students what they thought they wanted to do with their career, right before
they started the MBA program.
Half the students get the question, what did you want to do before you got here?
And the other half, I ask them a slightly different question.
For them I ask, what do you want to do now?
Now neither group gets to see what the other got, half are asked what they want to do before
they got here, and half are asked what they wanted to do now.
The responses are completely anonymous, so there's no reason for people to shift them
based on the group or those around them.
But the results are amazing, amazingly powerful.
Before students started the MBA program, they have a broad range of ambitions.
They want to do all sorts of things.
One person wanted to reform the healthcare system, another wanted to run for political
office, someone wanted to start a new online gaming startup, and someone else wanted to
get involved in the entertainment industry.
A handful say they want to go into investment banking or consulting, but overall they have
a diverse set of interests, goals and career paths.
Bunch of people want to do a bunch of different things.
But when I ask that second group a different question, now that you're a second MBA, what
do you want to do now?
There's much more concentration, much more homogeneity.
More than two thirds say they wanted to get into consulting or investment banking with
a small sprinkling of other careers here and there.
The convergence is remarkable.
Students started wanting to do different things, but at the end of the program, they all end
up wanting to do the same thing.
Why?
Well, sure we could blame it on information, that there are different opportunities that
are available during the MBA program, and so people learn about their preferences and
they decide to do something based on that.
But much of this hurting is actually driven by social influence.
It's not just about information, they look to see what other people are doing.
Part of the reason people can form and actually change what they want to do for their careers
is to fit in.
They want to be a good member of the group, and they want to do what other people in this
group value.
They want to be held in high esteem and not ostracized for pursuing something that is
quote unquote weird or different.
So they take the mainstream route and they do the same thing as everyone else.
And slowly, but surely, it snowballs.
While 20% of the people might have been interested in investment banking or consulting going
into the program, that number is larger than any other career.
So throughout, social influence is initially small, and through that process though, that
initial advantage, that small advantage, gets magnified.
Social influence led students who originally prefer different paths to all end up pursuing
the same thing.
If most of your friends are talking about one career, you start to think that's better.
If most of your colleagues are suggesting they're going to do one thing in particular,
you think maybe you should do the same.
And more generally, this idea of normative influence helps understand why people go along
even when the answer seems obviously wrong.
It's really hard opposing the group.
It's really hard going against all your peers, particularly when other people can observe
our behavior.
We don't want to be the only person that just goes against the majority.
You see this a lot in meetings.
People may have opposing viewpoints, for example.
But if it seems like everyone is against them, they often keep their views to themselves.
And while imitating others can sometimes be helpful, can sometimes save us time and effort,
in other cases it can lead us astray.
The space shuttle challenger disaster, for example, is often blamed on groupthink, a
situation of conformity where everyone took the same perspective because they were exposed
to others' opinions.
It's good to have cohesive groups, it's good to have multiple opinions, but it's also
important to make sure different opinions are heard.
The idea of the wisdom of crowds depends on these different opinions baking it out there.
If everyone's just relying on everyone else's opinion, then it's not the crowd's opinion
that you're getting.
It's one opinion, everyone saying the same thing.
And so if everyone says the same thing, there's little benefit to the group at the end of
the day.
Most workplaces that want to encourage dissent need to try to reduce social influence, need
to reduce the effect on opinions that people share.
How can you do that?
Well, there are many simple ways.
Even things as simple as letting people cast their votes ahead of time, or privately rather
than publicly, can drastically reduce the conformity.
Because private opinion expression allows people to be free to share whatever they think or
feel.
In fact, anything that makes people feel like their opinion is similar to others or they're
not alone can actually have similar effects.
Going back to that study with the line length, for example, you might think that, well, for
people to go out on their own, they have to have other people that think the same thing.
To have other people to say the same as them will only thing to free them up to say the
right answer.
But think about it.
Even having one dissenter frees people to speak their mind.
Only one other person saying the same thing as you makes you feel more comfortable saying
that thing.
In fact, that other person, that other minority vote, doesn't even have to have the exact
same opinion as you.
They can even have a different opinion, as long as it's different from the majority.
Having at least one other person that disagrees with everybody else, even if they have different
opinions from you, frees everybody up to share their own true opinion.
It makes people think it's not a consensus that there's some debate and so different
opinions are valued.
It's important to note that conformity often happens also below our awareness.
Most of us aren't sitting there going, oh, other people are doing something, so I should
too.
Instead, the mere fact that others are doing something can subtly make that seem more
correct or more normative than it did before.
We don't consciously say, well, I want to fit in, but the mere fact that other people
are doing something makes us more likely to do that thing because that motivation happens
below our awareness.
Now, given all the types of domains and choices on which people conform, it's also interesting
to note the one place we don't see conformity, ourselves.
While it's easy to see others conforming and doing the same thing as those around them,
we tend not to see evidence of conformity in our own behavior.
We tend to think that other people bought their BMW to fit in, but we bought ours because
it drives well.
Other people picked those particular clothes because they're trendy.
We picked our clothes because we happen to like the color or the style.
Now, why does this happen?
Well, part of it's because of the social value of being unique in American culture.
If conformity was valued more, we might be more willing to admit that we do it.
But in American culture, conformity is not seen so highly, so we say not us.
But part of it is also more complicated than that.
Part of it's driven by the effect that conformity happens below our awareness.
We don't think we conform because when we analyze our behavior, we don't find any evidence
of trying to fit in.
We don't see ourselves as trying to be like others, and so, non-consciously, it's affecting
our behavior beyond our awareness.
We see other people doing the same thing, though, so we assume they must be imitating
one another.
When we look to our own thoughts and feelings, we often find no evidence of trying to imitate
others, so we assume conformity doesn't happen, even though it does.
In summary, social influence has a big effect on behavior.
And in many cases, people conform or imitate those around them, even in cases where they
know the answer is wrong or even when it requires more effort than staying away from the crowd.
In the next section, we'll talk about when social influence has the opposite effect and
leads us to do different things than others.
