You
You
Your lecture is Dr. Jonah Berger. Dr. Berger is an associate professor of marketing at the Wharton
School of the University of Pennsylvania. He received his BA from Stanford University and his PhD
from Stanford Graduate School of Business. Dr. Berger has received numerous awards for research
and teaching including Wharton's Iron Prof Designation for Outstanding Research and the MBA
Teaching Commitment and Curriculum Innovation Award. Dr. Berger studies social dynamics,
why products, ideas and behaviors become popular. He is the author of the bestseller Contagious
Why Things Catch On and his research is frequently published in top tier academic journals.
In addition, his work is often covered in such popular media outlets as the New York Times
and Harvard Business Review.
Many of you may be familiar with Yellow Livestrong wristbands. These items were introduced in 2004
as a fundraising item to raise attention and awareness for cancer research. Originally sold
by Nike, retail stores and online for around a dollar, demand soon way outstripped supply.
Presidential candidates and famous musicians were wearing the bands, celebrities wore the bands,
Olympic athletes were even wearing the wristbands while they competed. Nike quickly blew through
the first five million they produced and sent orders to the factory for more. People were paying
15 times the retail price for wristbands if they could find them on eBay. When the dust finally
settled over 80 million wristbands had been sold. Livestrong wristbands had become popular.
Livestrong wristbands are an example of what we'll call social epidemics or cases where products,
ideas and behaviors catch on and become popular. But while you may be familiar with the Livestrong
bands themselves, you might not be as familiar with the story of how they came about. A year
earlier, Nike employee Scott McEachern was faced with a tough decision. Nike isn't just one of the
world's largest sportswear and apparel brands. It's one of the world's most popular brands.
Through its products and through its ads, Nike has deepened people's emotional connection with
sport and the possibilities that sport brings. And at the time, Nike had an unusual athlete on its
hands. Cycling is not an extremely popular sport. Sure, some people might bike on the weekend and
some people might bike to work, but cycling has nowhere close to the following of sports
like football, baseball or basketball. Even things like hockey and tennis and other small
sports dwarf cycling in terms of interest. And yet Scott and Nike were seeing a lot of
attention and interest in one of the cyclists they sponsored. And his name was Lance Armstrong.
Now today, many of you may associate Lance with the doping scandals and other negative attention
around competitive cycling. But back then, Lance Armstrong was a hot commodity. Because at the
time, Lance had a powerful story. Diagnosed with life-threatening testicular cancer eight years
earlier, at best he had been given a 40% chance of survival. He wasn't supposed to live. Maybe he
would make it back to life if he was lucky. Yet Lance surprised everyone. He not only returned to
cycling, he came back stronger than ever. It took him a little while, but since returning, he won the
Tour de France, an astonishing five times in a row. And along the way, he inspired millions of
people. From 13-year-olds wrestling with their own cancer diagnoses and trying to figure out how to deal
with this disease as a young person, to 40-year-olds exercising for the first time in their lives,
Lance's story made people believe. Believe that they could do it and believe that anything was
possible. If he could come back from cancer, they could overcome the challenges that they faced in
their own lives. Now, as Lance's sponsor at Nike, Scott was trying to capture some of the interest
that was going on. How could he capitalize on all this enthusiasm? Lance at the time had transcended
sports. He'd become a hero and a cultural icon. It was in a sense the perfect storm. Nike had all that
brand equity and excitement, and Lance Armstrong had all that equity and excitement. McKeacher had
wanted to acknowledge Lance's achievements and celebrate his attempt at a record six Tour de France
victory. Scott wanted to use the outpouring of support and interest to raise awareness and funds
for cancer research. So what could he do? How could he build all this enthusiasm or cultural
dynamite and take advantage of it? Well, he developed two potential ideas to get people to rally
behind the cause. The first idea was a cross-country bike ride. Similar to team and training, people would
set a goal and get family members and friends to sponsor their ride. Whether they rode five miles,
ten miles, or five hundred miles, they'd get people to chip in a couple bucks and support them to
reach their goal. The trip would encourage exercise, boost interest in cycling, and raise money for
cancer research along the way. Lance might even cycle with people for a portion of the way. It seemed
like an exciting event that would get a lot of people interested. The multi-week event would
generate significant national media coverage and might even generate some local attention in
areas of the ride. So that was the first idea, bike across America with Lance. The second idea
was a wristband. Nike had recently begun selling these silicon bands with inspirational messages
like team or respect inside. Mostly they had been used by basketball players. They weren't allowed to
wear metal jewelry when playing basketball, so they wore things like rubber bands or other
sorts of non-metallic jewelry. And these bands were useful for motivation. People would snap the wrist
bands to remind them to keep their head in the game, and they used these inspirational messages like
team or respect on the bands to do the same. Nike already had these wristbands. They thought,
why not make a wristband focused on Armstrong? Nike could make them yellow, like the Tour de France's
major jersey, and they could make five million of the bands, sell each for a dollar, and all the
proceeds would go to the Cancer Foundation. Now, it's easy to look back on a situation like this,
because hindsight is always 2020. It's easy to sit there today and say it was obvious that the wristbands
would work, that it was obvious that the wristbands would be a better thing to do than that bike
across America with Lance. But at the time, Lance's advisors weren't so convinced. Armstrong
agent called the wristbands a stupid idea, and the Cancer Foundation thought that the wristbands
would be a dud. Even Armstrong himself wasn't sure. He said, what are we going to do with the 4.9
million of these things that we don't sell? Well, certain things catch on or become popular,
and others don't. Just like the wristbands, we can think about urban legends or rumors. One
widely distributed urban legend, for example, suggests that you only use 10% of your brain.
This myth frequently appears in advertisements and popular culture, and often he's in shows
up on television shows. A number of movies have even been based on it, and over time, the
legend has been attributed to all sorts of historical figures, from famous people to
regular people to even Albert Einstein. Or take behaviors like recycling. Americans recycle
over a third of what we produce, or over 90 million tons of material every year. It's a huge
amount. Over 3 fourths of newspaper are recycled, an increase of over 90% from 1990. In fact,
enough energy is saved by recycling steel to supply the city of Los Angeles with electricity
for almost 10 years. It's hard to find a major city or office building these days that doesn't
try to at least recycle some things once in a while. Other behaviors, however, like using
reusable grocery bags, haven't seen the same amount of traction. They haven't gotten the same
level of success. Most people have reusable grocery bags somewhere in their home. Somewhere
back in there, you have dozens from different retailers or giveaways. But when it comes to
using them, we often fall short. Most people have the bags, but that behavior doesn't seem to
have caught on. We seem to forget the bags right at the time when it comes to bring them to the
store. Well, across these three examples, one big question is, why? Why do some things catch on
and succeed while others fail? On the surface, these examples we've talked about so far might seem
quite different. One is a sports related item, one is an urban legend, and one is a pro-social act.
Livestrong wristbands are a product. You only use 10% of your brain as an idea, and recycling is a
behavior. While these things seem very different, though, they actually might have a lot in common
because all of these are instances of what we'll call social epidemics or cases where products,
ideas, and behaviors catch on and become popular. And again, a key question is why? Why do some of
these things catch on and succeed while others fail? Well, people have spent lots of time and money
trying to answer this question. The topic has caught the imagination of psychologists, philosophers,
economists, and sociologists. Businesses and organizations care about these ideas a lot as
well. If you can get people to get your idea to catch on, if you have something to sell or a cause you
believe on and you can get your message out there, it'll be much more effective. Everyone who wants to
sell something, has a cause they believe in or a message they want to spread is trying in some ways to
create a social epidemic, to get that word on the street, to get that buzz online and everywhere.
Well, first, let's start by defining what we mean when we talk about social epidemics. What is an
epidemic? What sort of things make it up? Well, a social epidemic is a situation where something
diffuses through a population. It starts with one or a small set of people and spreads to, in fact, a
broader set of people. Usually when we think of things spreading like this, we think of viruses
or diseases, things like swine flu or the common cold, bird flu and the like. But products and ideas
can spread from person to person, just like viruses might. Rather than spreading through the air or
by drinking from the same glass, social epidemics spread via something else, social influence.
One person's behavior impacting another's. If something spreads, we might say it's caught on. It's spread
from one person to another and become more popular. And if something becomes widely popular and spreads
widely, we might even say it's contagious. But what sort of things become contagious? What sort of
things can be contagious? If you think about it, almost anything, really, products like books,
movies or clothing brands, we can all think of examples of things like that that have become popular.
Food ingredients like kale, for example, or products like Greek yogurt have come out from nowhere
to become extremely popular. A few years ago, no one even knew what kale or Greek yogurt were
outside of the country of Greece, and now it's hard to go to a restaurant, a store, an airport kiosk
and not see that product being offered. But it's not just products. Also, things like political ideas,
like global warming or social movements like the Arab Spring. These are situations where an idea
started with a small group of people and then spread more widely. Behaviors, like quitting smoking,
tipping a certain amount or holding the door open when you walk outside, a building for someone else
when they're walking through, are also behaviors that catch on through social influence. Some of these
things become popular and some not so much. Decades ago, smoking was a much more popular behavior
than it is today. Many people have quit, in part because other people have quit. This behavior
has caught on. We can also think of fashion styles like skinny jeans or striped shirts. These styles
can be contagious. First names like Isabella or Eva can be contagious. Some names become extremely popular,
seemingly out of nowhere from one year to the next. It's the newest trend that everyone is doing.
And even diets like Atkins or exercise trends like CrossFit can be contagious. Even the words
and language we use can be contagious. All of these things are examples of cultural items that can
spread from person to person and might potentially catch on. But the next important question, now that
we understand what social epidemics are, is to think about why they happen. Why do some things
succeed while others fail? Some catchphrases propagate and others languish. Some rumors circulate
extensively while others die quickly. Some blockbusters and thumb things tank. Some books are
hits while others are failures. Some Mondays you come into the office and everyone is talking about
the same ad. Other ads never get the same amount of attention. Some ideas propagate so effectively
that they end up invading entire populations. Not just your whole office, but the whole neck of
the woods is talking about a certain thing. Why? What separates contagious ideas from those that
are less contagious? Why are certain ideas talked about and shared more than others? Well, one possibility
is that quality drives success. That things that win out are just plain better than ones that don't.
We prefer products that are easier to use, drugs that are more effective, and scientific theories
that are true rather than false. So when something better comes along, people should switch, right?
When we think about quality, we think that the best things should win. Take televisions, for example.
Remember maybe a decade ago how bulky televisions used to be? They were so cumbersome and heavy
that you had to get a whole group of friends or risk a strain back to carry one upstairs.
Well, one reason that flat screen TVs took off was because they were simply better.
Not only did they offer larger screens, but they weighed less. No wonder they became popular.
We can say the same thing about certain political ideas. If certain tax plans are more efficient,
they make better use of the money that's available, well, maybe it's a higher quality thing.
That's why it wins out. Or a certain product may just taste better than another.
It has a higher quality. We often think that quality is why things become popular.
Advertising is another common explanation beyond quality. People think that for somebody to succeed,
you need a huge advertising budget. For a movie to become a hit or reusable grocery bags to take off,
lots of people need to take the desired action. So the thinking goes that advertising would help.
If we can just get that message in front of thousands of eyeballs, behavior will change.
But although quality and advertising, and even price matter some, they don't explain the whole story.
Take, for example, the first names Olivia and Avery. Both of these names are great names for girls.
Both are about the same length, they end in vowels, and they have cute, candy nicknames.
Indeed, a number of babies are born every year named Olivia or Avery.
But think for a moment. How many people do you know with each of these names?
How many people do you know or have you met named Olivia? And how many people do you know or you've met named Avery?
Think about it for a second. How many Olivia's do you know, and how many Avery's do you know?
Well, I'll bet you know at least one Olivia, and you may never have met anybody named Avery.
In fact, if you know an Avery, I'll bet you know several Olivia's. How did I know that?
Well, Olivia is just a much more popular name. More babies, on average, are given it every year.
In 2010, for example, there were almost 17,000 Olivia's born in the United States to less than 1,000 Avery's.
And in fact, while Avery was somewhat popular in the 1920s, it never reached the stratospheric popularity that Olivia recently reached.
Now, when trying to explain why Olivia became more popular than Avery, explanations like quality, price, and advertising get stuck.
Think about quality for a second. Is one name better or higher quality than another?
Is Olivia somehow higher quality than Avery? Not really.
There's none of them are functionally better. None of them make our lives easier, and none of them are less heavy to carry.
They're functionally the same, so there's no real difference in quality.
Well, what about price? Actually, both names are free, so there's no difference in price.
You don't get charged more for naming your child a name with more letters, or using more vowels, or something along those lines.
So there's no difference in price. And there's also no advertising campaign out there to try to get everyone to name their kid Olivia,
or a company determined to make that name the hottest thing for the pogo stick.
In fact, there's no advertising for either name. There's no ad campaign for Olivia, and there's no ad campaign for Avery.
So if it's not about price, and it's not about quality, and it's not about advertising, what explains why one name succeeds and another one fails?
You could ask the same question about YouTube videos.
If you think about different videos online, neither of the videos really get much advertising.
They're all on the site, but it's not like anyone's really pushing money behind them to make them successful.
Most videos to watch online on YouTube are free, so there's not really any difference in price.
And there's no real relationship between quality and success.
Sure, some of the videos are viewed more than others, but often the highest viewed videos are one shot by an amateur on their cell phone or something else.
So if it's not quality, and it's not price, and it's not advertising, why do certain things become popular than others?
If quality, price, and advertising don't explain why one first name becomes popular and another one not so much,
or why one YouTube videos gets more views, what does?
What explains why some things succeed and fail when price, quality, and advertising are the same?
Well, think about the last book you read.
Maybe it was the last novel you checked out, or the last nonfiction work you enjoyed.
The last restaurant you tried, in your town or some area in the country.
The last movie you went to, or the last babysitter you found.
Think about the last time you needed to buy a new car.
Think about the last time you were trying to decide, well, what things should I get from the grocery store?
What recipes should I make?
In many of these cases, it's likely that someone else told you about it.
Sure, price, quality, and advertising matter, but often we hear about things from other people, from our social ties.
Social influences have a big impact on behavior.
So yes, while price, quality, and advertising are important, there's something more than that.
There are psychological and sociological mechanisms that lead products, ideas, and behaviors to catch on.
One example of a psychological mechanism and a social mechanism is something called trialability,
or how easy it is to try something.
Any time there's something new, for example, we ask, is it worth doing?
Is it worth trying out that new product, checking out that new website, or signing up for the new service?
As you go to a grocery store, for example, and you see a new food product, is it worth me trying this thing or not?
A friend tells you about a new website, is it worth me going online and checking it out?
Or there's a new product that's being pushed a lot through ads, should I actually try it or not?
Well, how easy it is to try these things has a big impact on whether or not they catch on.
Some things, like a new website, for example, may be relatively easy to try, while others may be more difficult.
Satellite radio, for example, is a great example of a product that was originally pretty difficult to try.
The service let people listen to almost any kind of music, talk, or news, anywhere in the country.
It was a great service. You could listen to hundreds, if not thousands, of channels, any time you wanted.
Maybe you're in an area where country's popular, but you don't like country. You want to listen to classical?
Well, if you had satellite radio, you could find it.
Maybe you're driving through a big Democratic area, and you're a Republican, and you don't want to hear Democrats talking.
You could switch that channel and find a Republican talk station.
People who tried the service loved it. They swore by it. They thought it was the best thing ever.
But if you looked at its progression, how quickly it caught on, it didn't catch on very quickly.
And it was slow to catch on, in part, because of those high initial barriers to trial.
It wasn't easy. You couldn't just go online to check it out.
You had to sign a long contract, have receiver installed in your car, and pay hundreds of dollars up front to get access to the service.
In many cases, you had to pay hundreds, if not thousands of dollars, before you even knew whether you liked this thing, before you even knew if it's any good.
Well, imagine you've never used the service before. Would you do all that for something if you weren't even sure you'd like it?
So how could satellite radio catch on?
What could the companies do to make it easier?
Well, to get people to try the service, the companies had to lower that bar to entry, lower the barrier, in some sense, to trial.
The barrier's not just cost, it's a psychological barrier as well. So what did they do?
Well, they did various things. They installed the service in rental cars and gave it away free for six months in some new cars.
All to make it easier for people to check it out.
They tried to get rid of contracts. Anything they knew could make it easier to get past that barrier to entry.
And by making it easier to try, satellite radio caught on much more quickly.
Now, many phones, apps, or games have taken a similar approach.
Want to play Sudoku, for example? Want to play an online Sudoku game?
It often costs no money up front, entirely free, to download that app.
Which is great. We're looking for something to do. We're about to jump on a long plane ride.
Well, we download that Sudoku app, so we'll have a few games to play.
Entirely free, that's great. I'll pick that one.
But once you've played some of the easy levels, you've gotten through some of the few that take you just a couple minutes.
You're ready to try something more difficult. Easy ones are done. Now I want to move on to the more difficult ones.
Well, only when you click on the more difficult ones does the app inform you that you've run out of levels.
To get the rest of the levels, you have to upgrade to the paid version.
It's not $20, it'll be around $0.99.
Now, would most people have paid $0.99 originally to play the game?
Probably not. $0.99 isn't a lot of money. It's still pretty cheap, but there are hundreds of games out there.
Why should I pick this particular one? Particularly if I'm not sure whether I'll like it or not.
Well, by lowering that barrier to trial, by giving people a free trial up front,
the game maker got more people to try the game and eventually pay for it.
In some ways, this idea of trialability is almost like a free sample at the grocery store.
There are thousands of products there clamoring for your attention and hundreds that you've never tried.
Many of them may be delicious, but without trying them, you're never going to know.
So to encourage people to pick up a new type of chip or try different types of smoked sausage,
companies will give away samples in the store.
You walk through that produce section and there it is smelling delicious, free samples of the chip or of the smoked sausage.
A few chips to snack on while you do the rest of your chopping.
A small toothpick with a bit of small smoked sausage on it to taste while you browse.
Not only will the norm of reciprocity make you feel a little compelled to buy,
I mean they did give you a sample for free after all, how could you not return the favor,
but the sample also lowers that barrier or risk of trial.
Now you know what it tastes like.
You don't know what the whole package will be like, but you've got a sense of what it will be like,
and so it gives you a better likelihood of actually purchasing the product.
It doesn't guarantee people will buy the product, but it increases the chances.
And as a result, it increases the chance that that product or that idea will spread.
Now, the idea of trialability illustrates one of the main takeaways we'll return to again and again in the study of social epidemics.
It's not random and it's not luck why some things succeed and some things fail.
There's a science behind it, a set of key principles that explain why some things succeed while others fail.
And at a high level, these principles all center around one thing, around us,
around the way we're built and a way the human mind works.
Human nature has a great deal to do with how ideas spread.
A good way to think about this idea of how the human mind shapes what catches on and what becomes popular
is the idea of natural selection.
Now, if you ever heard of natural selection, you're probably familiar with the ideas of variation, selection, and retention.
In the natural realm, for example, whether things succeed or fail depend on their fit with the surrounding environments.
Let's take, for example, the idea of giraffes. Why do giraffes have such long necks?
Well, one common explanation is natural selection.
First, there's variation.
Some giraffes naturally have longer necks and other giraffes naturally have shorter ones.
But then what happens to that variation?
Well, often there's selection on the variation by the environment.
In some cases, there are trees that are short and some that are tall, and so all giraffes have a lot of food.
But in other times of year, that might not be the case.
In some times of year, there may be not enough food to go around for all those poor giraffes.
So some of the short-necked giraffes have lots of competition.
They have to compete with other giraffes and other animals to get food.
But the long-necked giraffes don't have so much competition.
They can reach that long neck up and grab the most tasty leaves that are available at the top of the trees.
And so sometimes in those situations, the long-necked giraffes have a better advantage.
Their long necks let them reach higher branches that allow them to get food that other giraffes can't eat,
that other animals don't have access to.
And because of that, because they have more food, they're able to have a better likelihood of success.
And they're more likely to mate.
And then in the future, more little giraffes are born that have longer necks.
That's the idea of selection and retention.
There's variation in giraffe length of their neck.
Some have longer necks and some have shorter necks.
There's selection on the length of those necks.
The environment, based on where food is available, selects on their neck length.
And then there's retention.
Based on them being more successful, they persist and their genes go on and longer neck giraffes survive.
Well, we can think about the same idea when we think about culture.
When we think about which products, ideas, and behaviors succeed and which ones fail.
They depend on a very similar process.
Think, for example, about stories.
How do stories vary?
Do stories vary on different dimensions?
Well, one-dimension stories can vary on as their length.
Some ideas may be longer and some ideas might be shorter.
Some things are easier to explain and some things are more complex to explain.
We can also think about stories differing in emotion.
Some ideas evoke lots of emotion, lots of anger, lots of sadness, lots of happiness.
Other ideas, not so much.
There is variation on these dimensions, like length, like concreteness, and like emotion.
But there's also selection.
Ideas don't need food in the same way that animals do,
but they are subject to similar selection pressures that at the end of the day determine their success.
Whether an idea succeeds or fails also depends on the fit with the surrounding environment.
But rather than access to food or to mates,
the success of ideas depends on their fit with a different sort of thing, with us.
Because human memory and the way we're built is just like the leaves on higher trees in some ways.
Ideas fit, they succeed or fail based with their fit with the way human mind works.
The way they're designed fits with the way our mind is built.
Same with interpersonal communication.
Our tendencies, drives, and motivations make us more likely to share some things rather than others.
And so stories, ideas, and products that fit with these tendencies, the way we're built, are more likely to be shared.
And because of that, they're more likely to be successful.
They spread, those ideas become popular, while other things fail.
Now, to understand why some things succeed and fail, we'll need to understand three key aspects.
Individual psychology, social influence, and social networks.
Individual psychology to help us understand how people process information
and why we remember some things and not others, why some ideas stick and others don't.
Social influence to help understand how things spread between people,
why we pass along certain types of news and information,
and when and why we imitate or deviate from those around us.
And finally, social networks to understand how the pattern of social ties
can impact the spread of information and influence,
and whether certain individuals within those networks are more influential than others.
In some ways, you can think about social networks as the tracks that connects different cities or people.
And the products or ideas or behaviors are the trains that go back and forth through these different cities.
Again, people are the cities, the network are the tracks,
and the ideas or products are the trains that spread back and forth.
And so to understand why some things become popular, why some ideas spread,
we need to understand all parts of this process, the trains, the cities, and the tracks.
Regarding people, for example, regarding individual psychology,
we need to understand exposure, perception, and memory.
And these ideas give us some insight into some interesting and important phenomenon.
Did you know that merely seeing something more frequently, for example, makes you like it more?
And that negative publicity can actually increase sales, not all the time, but in some cases.
It's even true that the same prescription drug may be less effective when you get it at a discount.
What we call triggers and subtle cues in the environment can influence what we think about and how we behave.
Voting in a church, for example, or a school can change how you vote.
And playing French music at the grocery store might end up making people more like it a buy, French wine.
Characters of individual psychology also help us understand the science of stickiness, what makes ideas stick.
We remember some ads we heard ten years ago, but often we can't seem to remember where we put our keys, even yesterday.
Why? Some things stick in memory while others go in one ear and out another.
And if we understand individual psychology, we can understand why.
Thinking about stickiness, how it explains why jokes often come in threes,
and why analogies are so useful in expressing ideas.
But beyond individual psychology, the spread of ideas also depends on some important social aspects.
We need to move beyond just the individual to the dyad and think about how things spread between people.
Think about imitation and conformity, for example.
People often follow the behavior of others.
Bartender see the tip jar because they know later patrons will follow suit.
But why? Why do we follow others?
Why do we imitate the behavior of those around us, even in cases when we know that they're wrong?
And does social influence always lead us to behave the same way as others?
If you look closer, you'll notice that sometimes we actually avoid what others are doing.
Like a magnet, rather than being attracted and doing the same thing, we repel and do the opposite.
Once you understand the science behind social influence, you'll understand when we conform and when we diverge.
And also, even beyond these two ideas, lots of imitation and lots of influence happens through interpersonal communication.
People recommending products or ideas or passing information on to others.
We share all sorts of things with others, as we've talked about.
But you might not realize how impactful word of mouth is.
Over ten times more impactful than advertising.
A dollar spent on word of mouth goes ten times as far. Why?
And why do people talk about and share some things rather than others?
Why do coworkers tell some stories and not others?
And why do friends spread certain rumors?
Well, the science of social transmission has made some amazing discoveries.
They explain why anti-drug ads might have actually increased drug use.
Why 25% off $20 is worth more than $5 to a customer, even though economically they're the same.
And why the emotion of anger might actually have a lot in common with a completely different emotion.
That of humor.
Anger seems negative, humor seems positive, but they actually have a lot in common.
And finally, all communication is situated within a broader social network.
Ideas may spread from person to person, but how far they go depends on the pattern of connections between people.
What we know about social networks helps explain why Kevin Bacon seems like a really connected actor,
where the phrase six degrees of separation came from, and whether friends or acquaintances are more helpful in getting us jobs.
Understanding social networks also helps explain puzzles like why companies play celebrities over $10,000 to tweet about their products,
and whether some people are really more influential than others.
We've all heard these ideas that certain people are influencers or they might have a bigger impact on whether things become popular.
But is this actually true? Are certain people more influential than others?
Well, the science of social networks has the answer.
And finally, we need to think about how we track the spread of ideas through things like big data and even other things like little data.
There's an amazing array of information out there.
Google searches when aggregated together across people can predict things like flu outbreaks or housing sales.
And you can get a sense of what a political candidate will do or how likely they'll be to win by merely analyzing chatter on social network.
But like anything, there's so much data out there.
The key is sorting through the noise because data can be helpful, but only if you know how to use it.
Importantly, social media and social influence are not the same thing.
We often think about social media, and it's an online communication tool or channel through which communication goes through.
Facebook, Twitter, and LinkedIn are all technologies that allow people to communicate with others.
And there's no question that these technologies have had an important impact on human interaction.
They allow people to communicate faster and more easily with a broad set of people than ever before.
Something can go from local to national to international in a matter of hours.
But social transmission is different than social media.
It is the sharing of information and influence through social ties, whether online, like social media, or offline, like face-to-face.
And social transmission is not new. It's been around for thousands of years.
Technology is useful, but it's much more important to understand the underlying psychology.
Because technology comes and goes. We use online tools, but we also share a lot offline as well.
We need to understand that underlying science that drives people to share.
The goal of the science of how ideas spread is simple.
To understand what leads products, ideas, and behaviors to diffuse and become popular.
And what leads them to die out and become abandoned.
