Think about the last anti-drug ad you might have seen on television or listened to on
the radio.
Well, the Just Say No campaign was one of the most famous anti-drug campaigns of all
time.
Created by Nancy Reagan during her husband's first presidency, this campaign was part of
the U.S.'s effort to discourage teens from using drugs in the 1980s and 1990s.
The logic of these sort of campaigns was simple.
One way or another, someone's going to ask kids if they want to try drugs.
By their friends, by a stranger, someone's going to ask them.
And kids need to know how to say no.
If they're ready, they'll be much more likely to say no.
So the government spent millions of dollars on anti-drug public service announcements.
The idea was simple, again, that they would teach kids how to react in these situations
and as a result, decrease the drug use.
If kids just knew how to say no, they would say no.
Now, recent campaigns have relied on essentially the same idea.
Between 1998 and 2004, for example, Congress spent almost a billion dollars on an anti-drug
media campaign.
The goal was to educate kids 12 to 18 and help them reject drugs.
Did the campaign work?
Was it actually successful?
Well, when a researcher crunched the data, they found something interesting.
They wanted to see whether anti-drug ads were actually effective.
So they collected all sorts of data they could on drug use by thousands of teens over the
period that some of these anti-drug ads ran.
And researchers asked teens if they had seen the ads and whether they ever smoked marijuana.
Then they looked at the data.
They looked at the relationship between the campaign and drug use.
Did this campaign actually decrease drug use?
Then you would expect that it might, or worse case, it wouldn't have any effect.
But when they looked at the data, they found something much more unexpected.
It didn't decrease drug use.
In fact, the message actually seemed to increase drug use.
Kids over a certain age range who saw the ads were actually more likely to do drugs
than kids who hadn't seen the ads in the first place.
Why?
Why are the ads having the reverse effect that they were supposed to?
Why did just say no or campaigns like it make kids actually more likely to take drugs?
In the last section, we talked about the first three steps that drive people to talk
and share.
We're in the area of talking about word of mouth, and these lectures are about word
of mouth, how it works, and why people pass some things rather than others on.
Last lecture, we talked about social currency, we talked about triggers, and we talked about
emotion.
And what we'll do in this lecture is we'll talk about the next three ideas in that steps
framework.
Public, practical value, and stories.
So let's start by talking about public.
Now a number of years ago, Apple co-founder Steve Jobs had a conundrum.
Jobs wanted the best possible user experience for all his products at Apple.
He almost always put the customer first.
The customer shelled out a bunch of money, they should be treated nicely.
So Apple carried this mantra through all aspects of product design, from when you first open
the box to when you call tech support.
Ever noticed, for example, what it feels like when you take the box off a phone?
It feels like a pretty exciting and deluxe experience.
It takes a long time to pull off, almost has a little suction to it.
Well, that's because Apple has been hard at work designing that experience to provide
the best possible feeling of luxury and heft.
And this particular conundrum Jobs was dealing with was around the design of one of their
new laptops.
It was supposed to be an amazing marvel of technology and design.
It was going to have a titanium body that was supposed to be revolutionary, stronger
than steel yet lighter than aluminum.
And at less than an inch thick, it would be one of the thinnest laptops ever.
But Jobs wasn't concerned about the strength of the laptop or how much it weighs.
He was worried about something else entirely, the direction of the logo.
On their cover, laptops had always had a small apple on it with a bite taken out of the side.
Apple wanted the logo to make sense to the owner of the product, and so they used it
almost like a North Star or like a compass.
People would take their laptops out of the bag and they needed to figure out, well, what
way should it face?
How do I know which side I should open up, which side has the latch on it?
And which side should face outward when I set that laptop on the desk or on a table when
I get to, for example, a coffee shop?
Well, Jobs wanted this process to be as easy and fluid as possible.
So he built the laptop with a simple design of the logo.
The logo would be used as a compass.
Like a North Star.
If you set that laptop down on the table and the logo faced you, it was ready to go.
When the laptop was closed, users could easily orient it to figure out which way to use when
they set it down.
But the issue was a simple one.
When people closed the laptop, they were fine.
But once that user opened the laptop, it was something different entirely.
When the user sat down at the coffee shop with their latte or with their macchiato,
they would open up their laptop and start typing away.
And when they opened the laptop, the logo would flip from right side up to them to upside
down for everyone else.
Now, most people know what laptop they bought.
They spent thousands of dollars and weeks at their time trying to figure out what to buy.
But most other people don't.
And most laptop users don't care about that, right?
You know what you bought.
You could care less if other people know what you bought.
But companies care a lot about these simple things.
Because Jobs was a big believer in branding, and seeing all those upside down logos wasn't
a great feeling.
So he wondered what's more important, to have the logo look right to the consumer, the
customer, before they opened up their laptop or right to the rest of the world when the
laptop wasn't used.
Because there's a very simple principle we'll talk about in this idea of public.
We've all heard the phrase monkey see, monkey do, and we think we understand it.
We think it's pretty basic.
Well, monkeys often do what other monkeys do.
I got it.
That's simple enough.
But the see part of that phrase is actually quite important.
Because if monkeys or people can't see what others are doing, it's going to be really
hard for us to imitate them.
And if you look around today, I think you can see the answer in how Jobs solved his laptop
dilemma.
He flipped the logo, making it upside down to the user, but right side up for everyone
else.
And he realized if something is built to show, it's built to grow.
This idea of public, if something is easier to see, it's easier to imitate.
You might, for example, see someone's shirt and like that shirt and go buy something similar.
But it's going to be much harder to imitate their socks.
Why?
Because you can't see them.
This idea of public is based on a simple idea in psychology called social proof.
And I think a good way to describe social proof is the following.
Imagine you're in a foreign city and you're going out to dinner.
You don't really know much about the area.
You don't know much about the restaurants.
You're just going to walk around and find a place.
You don't have time to ask the concierge.
You're not going to go online.
You're just going to walk around the streets and find a place that looks good.
Well, how would you pick a place?
How would you know which restaurant to go to when you've never been there before?
Most people would probably rely on a very simple rule.
Go to the place that's full.
They assume, well, if the restaurant's full, it must be pretty good.
If lots of other people are doing it, it must be a good idea for me to do the same.
We do this all the time.
We use others' behavior as a signal of information.
Trying to figure out what we should do, what product to buy, or idea to use, well, let's
look to others as a signal of what we should do ourselves.
A few years ago, this happened to me.
I was in San Francisco to teach a course to a group of executives, and if you've ever
been to the Bay Area, you know that on any day, the climate can be extremely variable.
You never know what it's going to be, whether it's going to be hot or it's going to be
cold.
The summers tend not to be that hot.
Winters aren't terribly cold, but on any particular day, it's hard to know what in
particular you're going to get.
San Francisco can easily be 70 degrees in November and 50 degrees in July.
Indeed, a famous quote about the city, often attributed to Mark Twain, is that the coldest
winter he ever spent was a summer in San Francisco.
Now, whether that's true or not, coming back to my issue, I had a trip that had taken
place in November.
And since I was traveling from the East Coast, I brought my big, huge, heavy, park-a-like
jacket with me.
But as I got ready to leave the hotel room on that first day to go to work to talk to
these executives, I faced a problem.
Should I wear my coat or not?
Is it going to be too cold that I need a coat, or is it going to be so hot that it'd be ridiculous
to bring this overheating, heavy coat?
And I checked the weather report, which might be helpful, but wasn't in this case.
It suggests the temperature would be somewhere in the high 50s, maybe middle to high 50s.
But it still wasn't so sure, and neither was I.
Man, it sounds right on the margin of needing a jacket versus not, between warm and cold.
So how do I decide?
How do I know what jacket to wear, whether to wear one at all?
Well, again, I used that simple rule.
I looked out the window at the street below to see what other people were wearing.
I looked to see what other people were doing, and I used that as information for my own
decision.
Again, we do this all the time.
What fork should I use at a fancy dinner?
What fork are other people using?
Can I park here on this street during a festival?
I don't know, or are other cars parking there?
If they are, we assume we can do the same thing.
But notice if you can't see what others are doing, it's much harder to imitate it.
If you can't see their behavior, you can't decide whether I should go to that restaurant
or not.
If I can't see whether it's full, how do I know whether other people like it as well?
We often see this happen, for example, with the dynamics of a standing ovation.
You've ever been to a play at a theater or a football game or a basketball game?
Ever seen one of those standing ovations or the wave?
It starts with someone in the front, right?
They stand up and they start clapping or they start doing the wave, and everyone else follows
suit.
But notice what happens if someone in the way back actually starts the wave, or someone
in the way back starts a standing ovation.
Does everyone else stand up and applaud, or does everyone else do the wave?
Probably not, because they would have to crane their necks behind them to see the people
all the way in the back row.
It's not that they don't like those people in the back row or those people aren't influential.
It's because they can't see them.
Harder to see, harder to imitate.
Now, we've tested how observability affects sales, using data from over a million car
purchases across the United States.
And when we think about cars and why people buy them, the biggest thing that comes to
mind is functional concerns.
Why do I buy a car?
Well, I got to repair that old one.
It just doesn't work anymore.
It's too expensive to keep swapping out this part or that part.
I got to get something new.
Or maybe I think we need a new car because we just had kids.
We have more in the family.
We need some safety in the back.
We got to get a minivan or something along those lines.
And spiraling gas prices make people think more about hybrids or other cars that have
high gas mileage.
Usually these functional sorts of concerns.
And as we talked about in an earlier lecture, advertising sometimes matters as well.
Do I need a new car?
Well, if they're advertising a really good deal or I see something on television, that
might convince me a little bit as well.
But we wondered about a different factor.
We wondered whether social proof might also play a role.
Would people be more likely to buy a car, for example, if people that live nearby had
bought one recently?
If your neighbor buys a new car, for example, or that man or woman down the street, might
you be more likely to buy one as well?
People are usually pretty uncertain about whether they need a new car.
Sure, my existing ride could use a little bit of a tune-up, and sure, the paint on the
existing vehicle is a little chipped here and there, and the brakes squeak, okay, maybe
I need a new one.
But is it really worth trading up?
Is it really worth spending all that extra money to get something new?
Our question was whether seeing other people driving a new car might push me over that
boundary, might push people to act.
Seeing a fancy new hybrid at the stoplight, for example, might encourage people to buy
one themselves, or seeing someone drive by in a brand new Ford might make you decide,
well, maybe it is time to buy something new.
So we crunched the data.
We looked at how car purchases were affected by all sorts of different factors, including
whether people around you had bought one recently.
And what did we find?
Well, sure enough, we found a pretty impressive effect.
People were more likely to buy a car if those around them had bought one recently.
In fact, one out of every seven to ten purchases seemed to be driven by social influence.
Social influence led a huge number of people to buy cars that might not have bought one
otherwise.
But even more impressive, beyond the effect of social influence, was the role of public
or observability in these effects.
So it's not just easy to see what someone drives across all cities equally.
Cities vary in how public other people's car purchases are.
In some cities, for example, like Los Angeles, people drive all the time.
They spend a huge number of hours a day in their car, so they're probably pretty likely
to see what other people are driving and see lots of other cars.
More than New Yorkers, for example, who might commute by subway or walk to work.
In sunny places like Miami or the like, you can more easily see what the person next to
you is driving than in rainy cities like Seattle.
And so, by influencing observability, we wondered whether these factors would also
influence the effect of social influence.
And it did.
Purchases of new cars by others had an effect everywhere, but it had a much bigger effect
in cities like Los Angeles or Miami, where it was easier to see, again, more public,
more observable what others were driving.
Social influence was stronger when behavior was more public.
So how can we think about applying this idea?
How do companies and organizations get public to help them to get their ideas to catch on?
One key is to make the private public.
Car purchases, sure, those are very easy to see, but many other purchases are not.
What type of toothpaste we buy, for example, whether or not we voted, or what particular
initiative we support, what particular nonprofit we donate to.
All these things are pretty private, which is fine for us, but it makes it harder for
these things to catch on.
If you're a nonprofit, for example, how do you make it easier for people to see what
others are doing and encourage that to get things to become more popular?
Well, one way many brands use is large logos.
So if you take a look at car brands, for example, or the Polo, the famous guy riding
a horse on a Polo shirt, logos have gotten larger recently.
In fact, in some cases, over 18 times larger than they used to be.
The Lacoste alligator, for example, that famous icon that sits on a Lacoste Polo almost now
looks like it's going to bite off the arm of someone who wears a large crock t-shirt.
But it's not just large logos.
There are other ways to make the private public.
Think, for example, about the portable CD player.
Remember that old device?
Used to have to almost run in place like you were carrying a pizza every time you wanted
to use one.
You had to make that big decision, do I want to listen to music or do I want to exercise?
But you couldn't really do both at once.
It was a dark, dark time in the history of music.
You had to go to places like Tower Records and pay $18 for this whole CD from one artist.
It was terrible.
And then they came out with this new product called the Digital Music Player.
And it seemed promising.
It seemed pretty good.
But that thing, the Digital Music Player, was very expensive.
It was $300 or $400.
And so at the time, people had a quandary.
Well, I've got this old thing that I'm using, that portable CD player.
I don't really like having to run in place like I'm carrying a pizza, but I'm not sure
I want to switch to this new thing.
It costs a lot of money.
What if it isn't any good?
And if you think about it, that's the decision many of us face all the time.
We're using a particular product, we voted for a particular candidate, we're watching
a certain television show, and there's something new that comes on that might be interesting.
But we don't know whether it's worth switching.
How do we decide whether we should stick with the old thing or go with the new?
And if we think about it, sticking with the old is pretty safe.
That's why we tend to do it.
Defaults are pretty effective because we know this thing works.
Might not be perfect, but it's safer than trying something new.
That's the old adage, no one got fired for buying IBM.
IBM was the safe choice, people stuck with it.
But in this case, companies get people to switch from the old product to the new.
How could they get them to move to the digital player from the portable CD player?
At the time, all the headphones were black, so no one knew whether someone was using a
Sony product or a Kobe product or any other of the dozens of brands.
And no one knew whether someone was using a CD player or a tape deck or even an older
product than that.
How could people see what others were doing?
Well, Apple did something quite simple.
Rather than use black headphones, they used white headphones.
And now if you're riding the train and you see a couple people with white headphones,
you're on the plane and you see a couple more, suddenly you say, wow, that device seems
pretty good, lots of other people are using it.
I might want to try it as well.
Encouraging that product to catch on by making the private more public.
But it's not just physical products that catch on by being made more public.
Britain's version of the IRS, Her Majesty's Revenue and Customs had a problem, a big problem.
People were paying their taxes late.
Many people were putting delays or weren't even paying them for six months after they
should.
They tried things like interest charges, late fees and the like, but none of them were really
working.
How could they get people to pay their taxes on time?
So they worked with some psychologists and they sent a bunch of letters to get people
to change their behavior.
But it turned out that one key sentence was enough to change behavior.
One key sentence was enough to raise almost 30% more money and raise about 300 million
more dollars, a huge amount of money.
What was that sentence?
Well, very simply, it was 9 out of 10 people in Britain pay their taxes on time.
By telling people what others are doing, it got people to do the same thing and got that
behavior of paying taxes to catch on.
Social proof and this idea of public also explains the backfiring effect of anti-drug
campaigns.
Think about it, why did that campaign that told people not to use drugs actually increase
drug use?
Well, simply enough, while it was telling kids don't use drugs, it was simultaneously
saying, wow, lots of other kids are using drugs.
You shouldn't use it, but other kids are doing it.
In fact, the coolest kids in school.
Imagine you're sitting there, a 10-year-old who never thought about using drugs or a 14-year-old
never thought about using drugs and this ad comes on and says, hey, kids are trying drugs,
but you shouldn't do it.
After sitting there going, wow, in terms of exposure, I didn't even realize this drug
thing existed and the coolest kids in school are doing it, I had no idea.
That combination of exposure and public encouraged a backfiring effect of these anti-drug campaigns.
But it's not just those sorts of campaigns.
Scientists, for example, wanted to decrease the number of people that stole petrified
wood from Arizona's petrified forest natural park.
People would go to the park mainly to see the petrified wood, but if everyone steals
the wood, there's none left for everyone else.
So how could scientists get people to leave the wood behind?
Well, they tried a number of things.
They tried posting signs, for example, around the park that tried different strategies.
One sign asked people not to take the wood because many past visitors had.
Many past visitors had removed petrified wood from the park, changing natural state of the
forest.
Would this message be effective?
Well, you might think it would.
It told people not to take the petrified wood, but simultaneously it did something else.
It also told people that other people were taking the wood, that other people were stealing.
And so this message actually had a perverse effect, almost doubling the number of people
that were taking the wood.
This happens all the time.
Right?
A number of years ago, the recording industry of America wanted people to stop illegally
downloading music.
So they thought, well, maybe if we tell people how big a problem illegally downloaded music
is, people will stop.
So on their website, they put up a message that said only 37 percent of music acquired
by U.S. consumers was paid for, and it said that many billions of songs were legally downloaded,
but that you shouldn't.
Well, now imagine you're sitting there reading this message.
Think about whether the message would have the desired effect.
If anything, it almost has the opposite effect.
Wow, less than half the people are paying for their music?
I had no idea.
Seems like you'd have to be an idiot to pay for your music then, right?
I mean, if they're not paying for it, why would I?
And so highlighting what other people should do was much more effective.
For example, in that petrified wood example, over a different set of trails, they tried
a different sign that stated, please don't remove the petrified wood from the forest
in order to preserve the natural state of what we have here right now.
By focusing on the negative effects of the message, of taking the wood, rather than what
others are doing, the park service was finally able to reduce theft.
That's public.
Now let's talk about the idea of practical value.
And to do this, I want to introduce you to a guy named Ken Craig.
Now if you had to pick someone to make a viral video, Ken Craig probably would not be your
man.
When we think about most viral videos, we think about young people, teenagers, young 20s,
hip cool kids doing crazy tricks, jumping off their car or bike, landing their motorcycle
into something amazing or cartoon characters saying weird things over dancing to different
hip hop songs.
All things that adolescents love.
But Ken Craig is 86 years old.
And the video that he made that went viral, that got over 10 million views, that video
is about shucking corn.
Now who would share a video about shucking corn?
If you've ever eaten corn though, you'll notice that there are two key problems.
In addition to the kernels getting stuck in your teeth, there are those pesky thread-like
strands, and in fact they're called silks, that always seem to get stuck to the corn.
A couple of strong pulls, you can easily get the husks off, that's the easy part.
But the silks, they never seem to go away.
They seem to cling on to dear life.
You can rub the corn, carefully picket it with tweezers, you can do whatever you like,
it's not going to come off.
There's always a few key silks that are left over.
Well, this is where Ken comes in.
Ken took some ears of unshucked corn, tossed them in a microwave, four minutes an ear,
and once they were done he took a kitchen knife and cut off the bottom half inch or
so of the corn.
Then he grabbed the husk and out chopped the ear.
Clean ears every time, no silks.
Now is this video the most amazing ever?
No, it doesn't have a lot of social currency.
Is it extremely emotional?
Not so emotional either, but what it is is a pure practical value, pure useful information.
In the context of hidden bars like please don't tell, practical value might not seem
like the sexiest or the most exciting concept.
Some people might even say it's obvious or intuitive.
But that doesn't mean it's not important, that doesn't mean it's not consequential.
When writer and editor William F. Buckley, for example, was asked what book he would
take with him if he had to be marooned on a desert island, he replied very simply, a
book on shipbuilding.
I mean sure, a book on shipbuilding isn't the most interesting book in the world, but
if you're stuck on a desert island, it's pretty important.
Useful things matter.
And so people share practically useful information or valuable information to help others.
Whether it's saving people time, whether it's saving the money or helping a colleague
do something faster than they might do otherwise.
Ten tips for using your phone more effectively.
Five clues or secrets to managing your time.
One thing you should never ask in an interview.
These things are almost like a modern day barn raising.
Back in the day we used to help one another when we moved to a new place or needed to
build a new barn, people got together and collectively helped.
It's hard to do that in today's day and age.
We live far away from our friends and often far away from our families.
How could we help them in a way like we did before?
Well, sharing is a way to help.
If you think about it, we don't need to be there, we can share content with them online
or share things otherwise, useful information that makes them better off.
So what sorts of things do people share?
Well, one thing people share a lot of is deals.
10% off this, $5 off that.
And retailers offer deals with a simple notion that if we offer a deal, people will be more
likely to take action.
If we offer 10% off or five bucks off, people will be more likely to purchase and talk about
the product.
But why do some deals cut through the clutter while others fail?
Why do people talk about and share some deals while they don't share others?
Well, let me give you a simple example.
Imagine you're selling a product that's $20 and you could either discount it $5 or 25%
off.
Those two are economically the same, right?
$5 off $20 is exactly the same as 25% off.
Yet people are more likely to take that deal if it's 25% off.
One way of framing that numerical information makes it more impactful, even though a product
costs the same at the end of the day, $15 whether you've got 25% off or $5 off.
And you might think to yourself, well, hold on, a percentage discount's always better.
It's actually not the case.
So a product costs $2,000, for example.
The retailer might offer $500 off or 25% off again.
And again, those two are the same.
End product costs $1,500 whether you've got 500 bucks off or whether you've got 25%.
But 500 bucks makes it seem like a bigger number and is more likely to drive people to take
action.
It's not just about the actual number itself, it's about how big that seems.
25%, 25 is a bigger number than 5, so it drives people to action.
And 500 is a bigger number than 25, so it seems larger.
Something I call the rule of 100.
If it's below 100, percentage is more likely to drive people to take action.
If it's above 100, the numerical information is more likely to drive people to take action.
How numbers are framed makes a big difference, just like we talked about in the lecture on
perception.
That's practical value, and last but not least, I want to talk about stories.
And to do this, I want to talk about a particular type of story.
So imagine you're at a party where you're at a get-together with some friends and someone
you don't know walks up to you, and they say something along the lines of the following.
Did you know, my newfound friend, that Subway has five subs under five grams of fat?
What would you do if someone walked up to you at a party and said, did you know that
Subway has five subs under five grams of fat?
You'd probably say something like, wow, that's really interesting.
Hey, I left my drink right over there.
I'll be back in just a couple seconds.
You hang on.
And then that person would never see you again, because no one wants to be friends with someone
that sounds like a walking advertisement.
Someone just reiterates product information.
No one wants to be friends with that guy or gal.
But people are happy to share stories.
You've ever heard the Jared story?
Jared was a guy that was way overweight in college, over 300 pounds.
He picked his courses based on which one had big seats rather than which ones were actually
useful for his education.
His roommate at the time said, Jared, you're morbidly obese.
You've got to do something about it.
So he went on a Subway diet, Subway for lunch, Subway for dinner, every day for months on
end.
Six and Sub for lunch, Footlong for dinner, Cole Catrillo, Veggie Sub, Tuna Sub, and
the like.
Eventually he lost over 180 pounds by eating Subway sandwiches.
He went from something like a pants in like the 50 range to something more reasonable in
the mid 30s.
Now, that's an amazing story.
I just gave you a short bit of detail of what it's like.
But notice what you learned while I was telling you what just seemed like an idle narrative.
What did you learn about the Subway brand, for example?
Think about it.
From that story, what did you learn about Subway?
Well, you might have learned that Subway has some low fat subs.
In fact, not just one, so many that you could eat there for weeks on end and not get tired
of it.
In fact, if you think about it, everything that first information had, that idea that
Subway has five subs under five grams of fat, is actually hidden inside that story.
It's not just a story, it's a vessel or carrier of information.
It's something I'll call a Trojan horse story.
If we think back to the old Greeks versus Trojans, that famous battle that no one could
seem to win, eventually they won by building the wooden horse and hiding their men inside.
Well, good stories are exactly like that.
Good stories have something on the outside, but also carry messages or information along
for the ride.
If you have kids, for example, and you tell your kids, don't lie, they'll say, OK, mom
and dad, I won't lie.
Then a week later, they'll cheerfully go back to doing whatever they were doing previously.
But if you tell them the story of the boy who cried wolf, they will tune in to that last
detail because they want to figure out what happened to the boy.
I want to figure out what happened.
Is he OK?
What happened to this kid?
And at the end of the day, though, while they're listening to what seems like a story, they're
learning a very important message, that lying is a bad idea.
You didn't tell them that directly, but they heard it from the story.
Let me give you one more example of a Trojan horse story that I really like.
There's a bar in Philadelphia called Franklin Mortgage and Investment Company.
It has high-end cocktails, no vodka, no Red Bull, just things like chrysanthemum this
and elderflower that and shaved cinnamon and the like.
Has high-end cocktail glasses and everything you might expect from a pretty impressive
cocktail.
But when you talk to people that have been to Franklin Mortgage and Investment Company,
most people don't talk about the drinks.
They share a very simple fact.
That Franklin Mortgage and Investment Company has three types of ice.
Three types of ice.
Huh.
I don't know about you, but the first time that I heard that a bar had three types of
ice, I thought to myself, there are types of ice?
The types of ice in my freezer look pretty much like the types of ice in everyone else's
freezer.
What do you mean there are types of ice?
Well, if you ask the person, what do you mean, types of ice, they'll say, well, actually,
different types of ice melt at different rates.
Some ice cut in big blocks and it melts more slowly.
Other ice is chopped up into little swizzle pieces to melt more quickly.
And you don't care about different types of ice unless you care about really good drinks.
Because some drinks need ice that melts faster to give it more water, and other drinks need
ice to melt more slowly to give it less water.
And in fact, by listening to that story, you realize the key attribute that Franklin
Morgan Investment Company has.
It's not just a good place, it's a great bar that makes good drinks.
If they told people, hey, we're a great bar that makes good drinks, would people share
that?
Probably not.
But by sharing that story of three types of ice, it carries that message along for the
ride.
It opens up a curiosity gap, like we talked about in one of the earlier lectures.
People want to tune in to find out more.
And when they do tune in to find out more, it acts as a Trojan Horse story that carries
that message along for the ride.
Making people realize what good drinks that Franklin Morgan Investment Company has.
So in this lecture, to wrap up, we've talked about the six key drivers of social transmission,
or steps.
The last lecture we talked about social currency, triggers, and emotion.
And in this lecture, we've talked about public, the idea that it's easier to see something,
the easier it is to imitate.
Practical value, or useful information, the more useful something is, the more likely
people are to share.
And finally, stories, the idea that information travels under the guise of idle chatter.
If it's built in a Trojan Horse, or narrative, information will come along for the ride.
This wraps up the section on social influence, and in the next lecture we'll begin to understand
how social influence spreads, by beginning to think about the power of social networks.
