Kim Kardashian is a great example of a celebrity who became famous for being famous.
Born Kimberly Noel Kardashian, Kim was never a movie star, didn't have a music career and
never really played a sport.
She dated a minor celebrity, starred in a small reality TV show, and worked her way
up the list of celebrities that are known for nothing more than being known.
She married a non-star basketball player in a widely publicized ceremony, and then she
divorced him 72 days later.
She used that as a stepping stone for a kid with a major music star and eventually parlayed
that into the cover of Vogue magazine.
She's one of those people whose Wikipedia page reads television personality, fashion
designer, model, and actress, though it's not really clear that any of those careers
have been particularly memorable.
And yet, through all this, Kim has been the master of collecting public attention.
She's one of the highest paid reality TV stars, regularly makes the cover of celebrity
and gossip magazines, and has figured out how to build a career of doing essentially nothing
but gaining attention.
Not surprisingly, she's built a huge social media presence, a huge following.
Her photos of her celebrity friends, musings about life, and tips on fashion and skin care
go out to over 21 million followers on Twitter.
And as a result, her posts regularly get thousands of likes.
But here's the kicker.
Based in part on her media savvy and her sizable following, Kardashian supposedly gets $10,000
per tweet to advertise products.
Let me say that again, $10,000.
She's reportedly paid her five figures to talk about their fragrances, hair care products,
and fashion lines.
She's one of the highest earners of anyone on the roster of celebrity clients and the
roster of celebrity tweeters.
Now you might be astonished by this number, even annoyed.
Why should she deserve all this money?
Why does she get all this money just for tweeting about a particular product?
The reason that companies pay her this much, though, is simple.
They believe that Kim tweeting about their product will boost their sales.
That given her sizable following, a mention about their item, again their fragrance or
their hair care product, or a positive word about their offering will boost their business.
That because she has so many followers, her posts will incite thousands of people to buy.
Well, I'd like to ask an equally simple question.
Is she worth it?
Are Kim Kardashian's tweets worth $10,000?
Because there's a notion out there that certain people are more influential than others.
That if some special people do something, it will be much more likely to catch on.
Is that notion right?
This lecture is all about this notion, the idea of influentials.
We've talked about social networks, and how information spreads through social networks.
But the idea is that in a sea of influence, some fish, some fish in that sea, have a bigger
impact.
Some people might be more influential or impactful than others.
We'll examine the intuition behind this idea, the science behind how it does, or doesn't
work, and how likely it is to be true.
In the end, you'll learn a little more about Kim, some about influence, and a lot about
how big a role different individuals play in social epidemics.
To start, let's talk about what this whole idea of influentials is all about.
There's a notion out there that not all influence is created equal.
That some people are special or have a bigger impact than others.
You can call them influencers, opinion leaders, or vanguards.
Some social media researchers, for example, published a book arguing that one American
in ten tells the other nine how to vote, where to eat, and what to buy.
In the book The Tipping Point, for example, they argued that three types of people, people
called mavens, others called connectors, and some called salesmen, have a disproportionate
impact on whether things become popular.
Without them, the idea goes, without these special, influential people, things don't
catch on.
In fact, in one of the most famous parts of The Tipping Point, it recounts a story of
how some shoes, called hush puppies, rose to prominence.
This small shoe brand started being worn by hipsters in the east village of New York City,
and eventually the shoes became quite popular.
And drawing on this link between the shoes and the popular people who wore them early
on, Malcolm Gladwell argued that these fashion forward hipsters were the reason the product
caught fire.
Hush puppies became popular because certain, influential people started wearing them.
Without the hipsters, the hush puppy trend would never have happened.
The notion that certain people are more influential than others fits our mental model of the world.
Almost from the first day of kindergarten, we're aware that every time there's a group,
there's a hierarchy.
Some people are higher up, and others are lower down.
Some kids are cooler than others.
Some people are high status, while other people, not so much.
This starts with who's the teacher's favorite, or if we have siblings, who gets more parental
attention, and continues to the high school version, replete with jocks and geeks.
Now some people might just seem like they're cut above.
Everybody looks up to them, they have more friends, or the first to get invited to prom.
They seem like they're on top of the world.
In the movies, they're the head cheerleader, the captain of the football team, the class
president, the president of the company, the leader of the office, the person that everyone
looks up to.
And we also know that there are also people called experts, or early adopters.
We all have friends that seem to know about the newest tech gadget, or the hottest restaurant
opening in town.
They're always the first to know about the latest big trade in sports, and seem to wear
this year's style or color three months before it happens.
They're on this year's color last year, before everybody else.
We see it again and again.
The cool people do something, and later, everyone else does it.
Our friend has or wears something, and soon, everyone else is doing it.
And again, we see some people that are ahead of the curve.
So they must have more influence than everyone else, right?
If they start doing something, shouldn't it be more likely to become a hit?
Well, a lot of academic work has also looked at this question.
Early work on interpersonal communication, for example, recognized that the media didn't
play as large a role as people once thought.
This work argued that rather than the media just directly sharing a message with everyone,
there was a two-step flow of communication.
This theory suggested that certain opinion leaders played a big role in the diffusion
of information.
These people sat between the media and everyone else, helping to diffuse things on.
Certain people shaped how entire communities thought about the news, current events, and
politics.
More than the media, these opinion leaders determined what people think.
There's even some data consistent with this notion of influence.
In the Small World study we talked about in the last lecture, for example, certain individuals
in the network seemed particularly important.
People could send packages to whomever they wanted to try to get them between the Midwest
to the end target in Boston, but around half the successful chains flowed through just
three individuals.
Again, through all the packages that eventually reached their destination, half of these chains
involved just three special people.
Now, these three seem quite influential.
After all, it's easy to imagine that if not for them, the chains never would have been
completed.
If they happened to be sick or decided not to help the effort, how would the packets
have reached their destination?
From the six degrees of separation, it seems as though not all degrees are equal.
Similar patterns are observed in online forums, blogs, or social networks on Facebook, things
like Twitter.
Though not exactly right in every instance, in general, researchers often observe what
looks like a 10% rule.
10% of the people on a website, forum, or blog engage in most of the activity.
10% contribute content while the 90% the rest don't.
10% are posting while the other 90% are just reading or lurking in the background.
In fact, even among those top 10%, the top of the pyramid, there sometimes appears to
be another 10% rule.
The 10% of that top 10%, overall, 1% of contributors are heavy contributors, while the rest only
contribute intermittently.
That means that only 1% of the members or people on the site are driving most of the
contribution.
Well, if only 1% drive almost everything, they seem really important, don't they?
I mean, without them, wouldn't the site fall apart?
Those 1% left went elsewhere or decided not to post.
Who would fill their shoes?
A small group of people seems quite influential.
This idea of influencers has also had a big impact on marketing practice.
Marketers spend huge sums of money trying to find these so-called opinion leaders and
get them to endorse their products.
Political campaigns look for the influentials to support their candidate or their point of
view.
The reasoning here is clear.
If certain people have more influence than others, then these special people should be
particularly impactful in getting things to catch on, in getting ideas to spread.
If companies' campaigns can find them and get them to support their side, then the product
initiative should succeed, right?
I mean, anything these special people touch will turn to gold.
If they adopt a product, if they adopt an idea, it will become popular.
If Kim Kardashian tweets about it, it's going to be a hit.
But I'd like to examine this idea a little more critically.
Is this idea right?
Do certain special people determine whether or not things catch on?
Are certain special individuals more impactful in the spread of ideas?
Well, let's unpack the assumptions behind this notion, the assumptions underlying this
idea, and see whether or not they're true.
Let's begin to understand how the notion of influencers work to build a case for whether
or not it's right.
The notion of influencers relies on four key assumptions.
Impact, identification, influenceable, and cost effective.
And I'll go through each of these four in turn.
First, that certain people have a bigger impact or influence than others.
Second, that companies or organizations can identify them.
Third, that those companies and organizations can influence their behavior.
And fourth, that all of this can be done in a cost effective way.
Let's examine those assumptions one by one.
The first is impact, that some people have a bigger impact on others' behavior.
One key question regarding impact is the dimension being considered.
Some people have more friends than others, and some people are more persuasive than others.
This is clear, not debatable.
Some people definitely have more friends.
But are these things the same as impact?
Are having more friends or being more persuasive?
Does that actually mean more influence?
There are a number of reasons to question this idea.
You might think, for example, that having more friends means more influence.
That compared to someone that has only 20 friends, for example, someone that has a hundred
friends should have more impact.
That because there are more people they can share something with, they should have a bigger
impact overall.
But just because someone has more friends, just because they're more popular, doesn't
mean they'll tell all those friends about a product or idea.
Offline communication takes a long time.
Takes a while to tell each person about something one by one by one.
And as a result, people don't share a particular story or piece of information with everyone
they know.
We don't tell all of our social ties about a recent vacation or a new movie we loved.
Even if we liked it a lot, we get bored with sharing that same story again and again.
And new, more exciting things happen that we share instead.
New things become more top of mind and more tip of tongue.
And so what that means is that not all of our offline friends hear about everything
we like.
This is even true online as well.
Now, online, you might say, well, it's much easier to share with all of our social ties
at once.
Isn't that the benefit of online communication?
While offline takes effort to talk to person to person, online, you can push a message
to everyone you know right away.
So you might expect that people with a larger online network can diffuse information more
broadly.
That someone who has five times the number of friends or five times the number of followers
should have five times the reach.
But that's actually not the case.
I do a little exercise in my class where I ask my students to post a message on Facebook,
asking anyone who sees that message to click like.
Then I ask them to record how many friends they have and how many likes they get, how
many friends or social connections they have on the site, and how many of those social
connections actually clicked on their message.
Overall, about 7% of one's social ties clicked on the message.
Given how much content is posted on the site, most people don't get a chance to see most
of the content their friends post.
It doesn't reach a person's full network.
But more importantly, audience size and impact are not as closely related as you might expect.
If the notion of influencers were true, you would expect that the number of likes would
increase with audience size.
That people that have five times more Facebook friends would get five times more likes.
But they don't.
Not even close.
If you look at the most popular students, for example, the ones with the most friends,
they get essentially the same number of likes as the least popular students, or the ones
with the smallest network.
People with the most friends get a few more likes, but not by much.
Because even though they have more connections, most people don't see everything that their
friends post.
Further, people with lots of connections tend to be connected to one another, that idea
of homophily that we talked about in the social network lecture.
Which means that people with lots of friends have audiences that are seeing even more information
and even less likely to pay attention to any one piece.
Part of this is also about tie strength.
People can have lots of Facebook friends, but as we talked about in the social network
lecture, only so many strong ties.
It takes time and energy to keep up with those strong ties.
And strong ties have more influence.
People say they're much more likely to listen to their regular everyday friends, or people
like them, for example, than quote-unquote influential bloggers or acquaintances.
But as we think about it, it's not just about exposure.
As we discussed previously, communication is not the same as influence.
Even if people who had more ties reached a larger audience, it often requires multiple
doses of influence to change behavior.
If we talked about an idea of simple versus complex contagions, it's often not enough
to hear about something once.
You have to hear about it multiple times from multiple people.
If it's a complex contagion, you need multiple doses of influence before you adopt.
Before people adopt new technology, for example, they usually need to hear about it from multiple
others.
And as a result, while certain people might have a bigger dose of influence, because they
are expert or more persuasive, or for some other reason, for something to catch on, for
something to spread, it needs multiple people in one's network to be talking about it or
adopting it.
As one sociologist noted in a useful analogy, the size of a forest fire has little to do
with the spark that started it, and a lot to do with the state of the forest.
Sure certain forest fires are bigger, and others are smaller, but it doesn't depend
on the size of that initial spark.
And the same thing is true when we think about influence and we think about social epidemics.
Sure, certain people might have more friends, or seem like they have a bigger spark.
But for a product or idea to really take off, a chunk of the local network has to support
it.
Rather than certain special people getting involved, success depends on the characteristics
of the thing and the network.
Is the product or idea contagious, and is it likely to be talked about?
Will there be enough conversations to keep interest and enthusiasm spreading?
How dense is the network?
Is there a community of people that are supporting it?
And finally, at this first point, to wrap it up, just because someone was an early adopter
or adopted something before everyone else, that doesn't mean that they're influenced
the later adopter's behavior.
Let me use an example.
There's a restaurant around the corner from my house that opened up a few years ago.
And would you know it, but I was one of the first people there.
I was one of the first people that ate at this new restaurant.
And since then, that restaurant has caught on.
Today it's one of the hottest places in town.
Now, given that I was one of the first people that ate there, I must be the reason, right?
I mean, I ate there first, and now it's popular, so it must have been popular because I'm influential.
Well, clearly not.
As this example shows, people often confuse correlation with causation.
Just because someone adopted first, and that thing later became popular, doesn't mean they
were the reason it became popular.
Every product or idea has early adopters.
For every wave, there has to be someone that caught it first, someone that was on it before
everyone else.
But the question here is, did they cause the wave, or were they merely the first to catch
it?
Many times people may be the first adopter, but that doesn't mean they cause later people
to adopt.
Taken together then, while it's clear that influence happens, it's less clear that
some people have more an impact at a macro or aggregate level.
But impact is only one of the four key assumptions underlying the idea of influencers.
Next, let's talk about identification.
Another assumption underlying the notion of influencers is that if such people existed,
we could identify them.
But like the first assumption, there are a number of problems with this one.
First, what does it mean to be an influencer?
When people talk about influence, a lot of different dimensions are thrown around.
Sometimes, influencers are described as popular.
People have lots of connections and can put you in touch with the right person.
Other times, influencers are described as mavens, experts that know a lot of information.
Sometimes influencers are described as salesmen, or persuasive people that can convince anyone
of anything.
Other times, influencers are described as opinion leaders, people that others look up
to, or early adopters, the first people to try something.
In fact, if you think about it, the list goes on and on.
But if you look carefully, you notice that people seem to adopt whatever definition
suits the situation.
Whatever situation they happen to talk about, that's what an influencer is.
Sometimes it's about knowledge, sometimes it's about popularity, and sometimes it's
about something else.
But do the same people have all three qualities, all these different things?
Probably not.
People who know a lot of something are often introverts, who don't have a lot of friends.
People who are very persuasive tend to oversell, rather than actually have knowledge.
And most times, people who are high on one dimension, they are low on the others.
Given this, it's tough to know whether what dimension to actually measure to figure out
who would be an influencer.
Further, these aspects are usually just proxies for the things people really care about.
Influence.
But because influence is tough to measure, we often rely on these other, often noisy
signals.
Further, even if people agree on what dimension to measure, there is something else.
A self-report problem.
Imagine I asked you to rate how influential you are.
Compared to your friends and colleagues, what percentile would you fall in terms of influence?
What percent of your friends and colleagues would be above versus below you, from one
to a hundred, say?
There's certainly some variation, but most people would say they fall above the mean.
Sure, I'm not the most influential person out there, but I'm at least more influential
than most people.
Than most people I know.
Maybe the fifty-fifth, the sixty-fifth percentile, I mean, actually I'm pretty influential.
Maybe the seventy-fifth, or the eightieth percentile.
Few people would say that at the bottom of the influence hierarchy.
Not influential at all.
No one listens to me or cares about my opinion.
I'm like the one or the two or the three percentile in terms of influence.
But as a result, because no one would say something like that, asking people how influential
they are doesn't really result in very accurate data.
Because if everyone says they're above average, that measure isn't very helpful.
People might think they're influential when really they're not.
If everybody's sixty-fifth percentile, sixty-fifth percentile doesn't mean very much.
There's also what's called a cross-situation problem.
Many people were influential in one situation, will they still be across others?
We all have friends that know a lot about politics, culture, or art.
But does that knowledge extend across domains?
Do those people know a lot about cars?
And do car experts know a lot about makeup?
And do makeup experts know a lot about, well, politics and art?
Probably not.
Influence is not monolithic.
It depends on the topic and can change over time.
This makes it even harder to identify people who can potentially have more influence.
So far, we've talked about whether certain people have more influence than others.
And if so, whether it's possible to identify them.
But even beyond those ideas of impact and influencibleness is the next idea.
Can we actually influence people if we could find them and if we knew which dimension to
measure?
The main benefit of influencers from a marketing perspective is that they can be used to help
things catch on.
They can be used to help ideas spread.
That by finding these special people and getting them to talk about a product or idea, that
thing will catch on.
But even if these people existed and could be found, could they be co-opted to help spread
any product or any idea?
What if I told you that I would pay you $2 to tell all your friends that you love my
Jonah Burgers Be a Millionaire in a Day podcast?
Two whole dollars.
I'm talking about literally two whole dollars in your hand.
Would you help Jonah Burgers want to be a millionaire in a day podcast?
Okay, I don't really have a podcast like that, but imagine I did.
And imagine I would pay you $2 to tell everyone you liked, everyone you knew that you liked
this.
Would you?
Well, what if I would pay you to say you love my new brand of sneakers called Four Toes?
Because after all, who really needs room for their pinky toe?
Would you talk about my sneaker brand for $2?
Okay, maybe I'd have to pay you a little more.
How about $3?
Still not interested?
But they're great shoes.
Four toes.
I mean, they've got to catch on.
As you can realize, most people won't talk about just anything.
Sure, people are happy to spread the word about products or ideas they like.
In fact, they're happy to do that for free.
But they're not just going to talk about any product, even if you pay them $2 or $3
or $10.
Word of mouth works because it's mostly organic.
People say they like what they actually like, and they say they hate what they hate as well.
Sure, if I paid them on a million dollars, I could probably get them to pretend they
like my new Four Toes sneaker brand, but that's just not going to happen.
The reason that people trust word of mouth is because it's credible.
People know their friends aren't being paid.
If a friend says they like something, that friend actually likes it.
But throw money into the system and all bets are off.
People might listen to Kim Kardashian's fashion advice, but if they found out she gets paid
to tweet about it, they'll start not to trust what she has to say.
And as soon as they stop trusting her, her ability to influence others goes way down.
She becomes just like any other paid endorser or paid advertisement.
So most people who are seen as experts or having influence won't take money to talk
about things.
They don't offer their word of mouth to the highest bidder because they know it's worth
more than that.
If people can't trust what they have to say, any influence they had would be gone.
Even if an influencer's existed and we could identify them, it would be very hard to influence
their behavior.
The last assumption is about cost.
And this is mostly a practical question, but it's an important one.
Say that companies have to pay to find people that have more followers, and they have to
pay those people to get them to talk about products and ideas.
Is it worth it?
Is it more cost effective, say, than asking a random set of people to spread the word?
Or better yet, spending the money to give out free samples of the product or some other
initiative?
The answer appears to be no.
Assuming the cost to get someone to tweet about something is about a penny for every
follower they have, and that's about the ongoing rate at the time, researchers found
that it was worth only targeting people with more followers if the acquisition costs were
extremely high, over around $1,000 per person.
Unless that astronomical threshold is met, which rarely happens, it's probably better
off targeting regular, everyday people.
So let's take all this together, all that we've talked about in this lecture.
What does this mean for the idea of influencers?
Well influence certainly exists.
As we've talked about throughout the course, it's clear that people's behavior is affected
by those around them, and there may even be certain people in our own lives that affect
our behavior more than others.
I have a friend, for example, who knows everything about music.
If they recommend a new act, I'll be much more likely to listen.
But that doesn't guarantee I'll change my behavior.
And while each of us may have people in our personal network that have more influence
on us in a certain domain, it's not clear they have more influence over many people
more broadly.
And it's tough, if not impossible, for an outside organization to identify them.
Put simply, I know which of my friends knows a lot about music, but could you figure that
out?
Probably not without a lot of effort.
Could you figure that out for a thousand people?
Not without significant expense.
So does influence exist?
Certainly.
Some people you know are more influential to you in certain domains than others, probably.
Are those people more influential across situations?
Unlikely.
Can marketers identify them?
Not easily.
Is there a cost-effective way to get them to talk about any product or idea?
Very unlikely.
So what does that mean?
Does that mean that the idea of influencers, as we know it, is overstated?
Certainly.
And at the very least, it's important to think about the dynamics of the specific context.
Whether, for example, one dose of influence is needed, or whether multiple are needed.
And further, there are some simple tricks for identifying people that are more likely
to share a message or lead things to catch on.
One thing is roles, for example.
Certain people may not be extremely popular or persuasive, but they talk to a lot of people
every day.
A health organization in Chicago, for example, was trying to raise awareness about prostate
cancer among the African-American community.
They didn't have the resources for a costly advertising campaign, and besides, they were
worried that men would reject the ads and not be willing to listen.
So instead, they enlisted an interesting group, barbers.
They went around to various African-American barbershops throughout the city and asked
barbers to talk to their clients about prostate cancer, and the importance of getting one's
prostate checked out every so often.
The campaign was a great idea, for two reasons.
First, barbers talk to a lot of people throughout the course of the day.
Dozens of customers may be more, so they're helpful in spreading the word about an idea
through the sheer number of people they talk to.
Second, because people are sitting there for a while, it provides a great opportunity
for a nuanced, back-and-forth conversation, which is exactly the type of conversation
that a topic like this needs.
The audience is sitting there for at least 10 minutes, maybe even 30, so it's the perfect
time to spread information.
People are looking for something to chat about anyway, so this provides an excuse.
Sure ads can scream a message, but it's the same message to everyone, and there's no
way for people to respond.
There's no way to create a dialogue.
This campaign let people ask questions, find out more, and if they had additional queries,
the barber could direct them to a handy pamphlet.
Do barbers influence their clients?
Did barbers influence their clients to change their behavior?
Well, at least they made them more aware.
And notice the campaign didn't target more influential barbers, it just picked barbers
in general based on their role.
We can think about the same thing with doctors.
Doctors touch a lot of people throughout the course of the day.
People trust doctors.
Do we need to go after the doctors with the most friends or the most influence in the
community?
Probably not.
Even that role is going to be very useful in diffusing information.
In summary, influence, certainly, without a question.
Influencers?
Not so much.
Ashton Kutcher, for example, has over 16 million followers on Twitter.
That's around half the size of California.
But how many people do you know that have bought a product because Ashton Kutcher suggested
it was pretty good?
How many people have adopted an idea, people that you know because he recommended it?
I'm sure he's a nice guy, but not one person I know has bought something because of him.
What about those 16 million people that follow him?
Well, as we talked about with Kim at the beginning, followers don't equal influence.
And as we'll talk about later, while followers are an easy metric to track, they're not
necessarily the best metric to pay attention to.
So should companies continue to pay Kim all that money?
Not unless they enjoy throwing their money down the drain.
The message is more important than the messenger.
Thank you.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
Bye.
