First of all, thank you very much to Chris and Mermush for inviting me to this talk.
I'm very notorious because I've been giving this talk many times and it would never be less than three hours.
I really hope to actually make up for it and go under time this time.
I have very few slides and it will be a very general overview of what is there.
The framework is very much, I'm very happy that you didn't erase this part.
The framework I'm talking about has very much to do with the setting of discrete dualities and canonical extensions.
Although, let's say, not exactly technically in the sense that I don't use the very definition of canonical extensions
but embeddings will play a crucial role.
The idea, so the result I want to talk about a little bit, is a stone type duality on objects
and basically is a generalization of the result of Pedro Rezende,
which is a duality on objects connecting a certain kind of quantals,
that he calls inverse quantal frames and locale et al group points.
The key word here is et al and the idea of my generalization,
oh by the way this is joint work with Riccardo Rea, I want to say it's also written here.
So it's about a non et al generalization involving still classes of quantals on one side
and classes of group points or generalizations of those on the other side.
Okay, so the idea, so actually I mean these generalizations come in two flavors,
a special one and a point free one.
I don't think there will be enough time and I'm not going to give axiomatizations here,
I will just speak in very general terms of what I'm going to do.
So the idea is that these quantals that I assume in their general definitions,
to the axiomatization of quantal, another axiomatization is added,
consisting of three axioms that define this SGF umbrella, plus two specializations.
And on the other side, I mean in the non et al case, I don't have group points,
but I have tubals consisting of group points plus something that I call a base,
which is not a topological base, but I keep the name base because in the et al setting
would be a topological base in that case indeed.
So this is why the name is stuck.
Just imagine group points plus certain designated arrows of the G1 of each group point.
Okay, so the SGF consists of an axiomatization of three axioms,
maybe if there's time right at the end I will try and tell you what these are about.
And given, okay, so let me tell you just a little bit about the easy part.
I mean, so given a group point and its base,
so if you know a little bit about what Resende does basically,
you can just state the topology.
So on this side you have local group points,
so I mean you have group points that consist of two locates on both domains.
So you take G1, you take the topology of G1 and you come on this side.
So you have a frame on this side and this frame is naturally equipped with a quantal structure.
Okay, so something like this happens on this side except that, let's say,
what you get on this side in this case has to be necessarily parameterized
by the choice of this base that you have over here.
I'm really sorry, the story is a little bit technical
and I probably won't have enough time to go into details, but it's just to give you an overview.
And if you come from model logic, let's say this move from group points to quantals,
in fact amounts to kind of taking the complex algebra of your frame.
So that's, let's say, the underlying link with logic and with the story of duality that might hold.
Okay, so let's say from frames to algebras it's always easy.
I mean this is the easy direction.
Let's say the other side more or less amounts to working on with some kind of an ultra-filter frame of a Boolean algebra.
So if you come from a logic, think of this kind of story.
So this framework right now is special, so you really want points.
What happens is that given the SGF axiomatization,
this axiomatization is already enough for you to define a group point out of your quantal.
But the thing is that of course for a duality object you really want to come back
and get a concrete structure that is isomorphic to what you have there.
This is why you have the two horrible speciality axioms over there.
So they are meant to guarantee that you have enough points so that you can come back on this side.
Okay, so I mean provided you have these two speciality axioms you in fact get the isomorphism.
So this would be let's say the general picture and the general overview of the special version of the non-etal generalization that we have.
One last thing I would like to tell you here is about, let's say,
a little bit more on the connection between my setting of canonical extensions and this setting over here.
So the idea is that on the group point side you have a natural forgetful functor
which basically takes a group point possibly equipped with some topological structure.
I mean there's some topological structure over there but I'm not going to go about it in detail.
But given such a structure of base plus additional topology you can certainly forget it
and get the pure discrete group point on this side.
Now given this discrete group point there's a very natural way to equip the power set of the G1 of this group point with a structure of quanta.
Now this thing is a perfect lattice as Mai explained and it plays the role of the canonical extension.
In fact, let's say one way of looking at this isomorphism is really studying the properties of this stone embedding.
So this stone embedding will not be a canonical extension embedding but it's going to have very strong and well-behaved properties of an arrow in the category of quantals.
The properties of this embedding really guarantee the possibility of finding the good isomorphism here in this picture.
It depends on how much time I will have in the end but right now this is all I want to say about the speciality picture.
A natural question of course to ask at this point is whether it is possible to have a point free generalization of this story
and in particular whether it is possible to get rid of the two horrible speciality axioms.
The thing there is really that the three SGS axioms are as nice as they get but the two speciality axioms are really nightmarish.
I mean like the first thing you want to do after having gotten your result is really how to get rid of this stuff.
So this is what basically we are doing now and we are basically almost finished with it.
So what's the idea? We can do this back and forth duality on objects.
On this side we have really the nice axiomatization of SGS quantals which is very nice because this is precisely what we wanted.
In particular if you know about Pedro Rezende's inverse quantal frames, these SGS quantals are exactly the SGS quantals
that are also frames where the frame distributivity property holds.
So I mean like this is a very natural and very elegant generalization of that class.
Moreover I mean it has a completely independent axiomatization that is purely in the language of quantals.
I mean you will probably know if you know about Pedro's work that he has this notion of supported quantal.
And it's a little bit awkward because basically the supported quantals have this extra map which is in fact the property
because I mean it is completely, it is unique when it exists and it is automatically preserved under quantal homomorphism.
So I mean it's really a property rather than extra structure.
But I mean somehow in Pedro's axiomatization these things are there and it looks like you cannot really tell them in another way.
Because I mean in this independent axiomatization you just have, I mean the language that you are using is just the pure language of unital involutive quantals.
So I mean this is very nice.
Now what's the price to pay?
The price to pay is the fact that on this side the groupoid disappears.
And what is left of them is let's say the locale that is the space of units.
Right?
So I mean like the groupoid has the space of units and the space of arrows.
So they are both locales.
So here on this side what is left of the groupoid is the space of units.
Plus the base that let's say in the etal case is already enough to generate the whole etal groupoid.
But in the non-etal case is really not enough.
So I mean let's say in a sense, so I mean like in fact I mean and this is something that I find in a sense quite nice is that in fact the etal correspondence is very useful at this level here.
Because I mean given this information you cannot go to a non-etal groupoid.
So I mean if you really want groupoids you really need to jump and go to the etal ones.
And so I mean like right now the picture is really very much like in the zone duality type of situation where you have here general Boolean algebras and here you have stone spaces.
And on top of this here you have your complete atomic Boolean algebra embedding.
So here you have the canonical extensions.
And on this side you have your forgetful factor to set.
So you have the duality here on this side.
And this duality is really I mean like the in a sense the nicer one, the one that doesn't need topology.
That one goes in the other direction, right?
The inclusion of Caba and Boolean algebra.
No, no, no.
I mean here I mean that's like I mean here I'm thinking that every Boolean algebra goes.
So I mean this one is actually the factor, well delta, sorry, I mean sorry, sorry, sorry, he let it.
This is the delta factor, right?
I mean like the canonical extension factor.
Okay, so I mean like so in this case basically we know that this duality is how much?
Two minutes.
Oh that's really great in fact.
I mean never, never managed to get over time.
But so I mean like the idea is that exactly like here we have a discrete duality in a sense, let's say mirroring the topological one.
On this side we, I mean in this situation the role of discrete duality is kind of played by Resende's correspondence between inverse quantum frame and local group points.
And here what we have is again in a sense a canonical embedding this time from an SGF quantal into its kind of inverse quantal frame completion which plays the role of the canonical extension.
So thank you very much.
I hope you will be interested enough to check the literature on this.
Thank you.
For the next two minutes for questions actually.
So because you have in these quantals you already have infinite joins, right?
Yeah.
So in a way you already have to set why?
Yes.
What if you in the Galois connection between filters and ideals, if you take something trivial for the ideals and then take the filters, can you do something like that?
This is not how you do it.
No, not at all.
But is this possible?
Well I would say, I mean exactly like you say, I mean what I want here is that I mean my quantal is a sub-quantal, right?
So I mean I really want my infinite joins to be preserved.
Yeah.
So I mean like, yes exactly, I mean like if you use a trivial family then you would have it.
But I mean this is, there's much more to it in fact because I mean like this, I mean I didn't say absolutely anything about this family, yes.
But so the idea is that the building blocks of these quantals are not completely joined irreducibles but I mean something that, I mean like the partial units.
So I mean the idea would be that if you think of these quantals as quantals of relations, so the generators would be the graphs of partial functions.
And so I mean like they have different properties and different behavior.
This is why I mean it's not, but morally it is I think.
No more questions?
Then we thank the speaker again.
Thank you.
