Hey guys, welcome back to my channel. My name is Kay and today I'm going to be talking
to you about the 7 reasons why I would recommend Salamanca, Spain as your study abroad destination.
So I studied abroad in Salamanca the summer of 2018 and I went with ISA, otherwise known
as International Studies Abroad and through them I took a 5 week summer intensive course
in which I was able to study at the University of Salamanca. I took 4 courses and was able
to transfer the credit that I earned from there back to my home university towards
my degree. And overall my study abroad experience highly exceeded my expectations. If you're
thinking about studying abroad anywhere in the world I would just highly recommend it
because it's just a positive experience where you learn a lot, you have fun, you meet new
people and it's just an entirely different experience that's outside of your comfort
zone and that if you give it a chance that you can learn a lot from and grow a lot from.
So I'm going to get into the reasons why I would recommend Salamanca as your destination.
Salamanca is an ideal place to practice speaking Spanish and Salamanca is often referred to
as La Ciudad del Español which is the city for learning Spanish and a lot of international
students come to Salamanca to learn Spanish and along with their other studies and from
what I gather, El Castellano, Castilian Spanish is the kind of standard Spanish that's most
widely spoken and that has spread around the world. So the Spanish that you hear in other
countries most resembles Castilian Spanish is what I gathered from that. And during my
time there I tried to speak as much Spanish as possible with my host family, with my university
professors and just when you're out in the street in your daily life. And in my experience
the majority of people are really helpful and encouraging when you want to practice speaking
Spanish for them. I haven't had any instances where someone will speak English to me when
I'm trying to speak Spanish to them which I know can happen a lot in different places
around the world. But yeah usually people are really patient and if you try to speak
whatever you know then they'll usually just be really understanding and respond back to
you nicely. And I think what's most important is that you try and be sincere about it and
people will generally respond positively. And you don't have to be a completely fluent
Spanish speaker to come study in Salamanca because there are different universities that
offer various levels of courses from beginning to superior. So whether you know a little bit
of Spanish or you know a lot of Spanish or if you're fluent then you can come and just continue
your studies here. The second reason is that Universidad de Salamanca, the University of Salamanca
is one of the top universities in the world. It is the oldest in Spain and one of the most
prestigious in the world. And overall I'd say the education that I got there was really good.
For my Spanish language and culture curriculum I took four courses so I took Spanish language,
Spanish history, Spanish literature, and Spanish art. I found that all my professors were just very
interested and passionate about what they were teaching. I feel like my Spanish language course
was the one that I learned the most in because we were taught practical information that you
could use like outside in the real world. So our professor taught us stuff like how to order a
pinto at a bar or to ask how much something costs to the grocery store or ask like where the bus
station is and just like stuff like that. I would say overall that the courses aren't extremely
difficult. I feel like as long as you put effort in you participate and you listen then you're
going to pass with a high grade. And the third reason why I would recommend Salamanca is because
it's beautiful there. It has so many incredibly picturesque places. So many of the major sites
are really beautiful but there are also some I feel like lesser known hidden places that are
also equally as beautiful. Whenever I would go out and explore the city whether it was alone or
with my friends we just found these really beautiful places and a lot of them were free to go to and
just visit and living there for a time just really made me inspired and appreciative of the scenery
that I was able to see every day. And the fourth reason why I would recommend Salamanca to study
abroad in is because it's a student-friendly city. Because of the Universidad de Salamanca and other
universities in the city there's a lot of young people there. There's a lot of people studying
abroad as well. So you find a lot of young people. The city has a really young vibe. There's lots of
bars, cafes like just lots of places to hang out and where you see a lot of people just
hanging out together. And one thing you'll always hear about Salamanca from your advisors or
your professors is that the city is completely walkable and it is. Also the city is student
budget friendly. It's really cheap to go out for a pincho or a tapa or get a drink either in between
your classes or like during the afternoon when you want to hang out with some friends or grab a snack
or anything. Usually for like a small plate of food or like a pastry or something it's usually
less than five euros. And if you get a drink that's usually like three or four. In between my morning
classes I had a 30 minute break so I would always stop at the same cafe and get a fresh squeezed
orange juice. And a little pastry just for a little something before the rest of my classes
during the day. And it was always cheap too. And another good reason to study abroad in Salamanca
is because Salamanca is safe. I was constantly reassured by my professors and my ISA directors
that it's a very safe city especially for young people to be in. You always see people walking
out in the streets. The main areas are always well lit. Like you see a lot of people like
going out either to eat or like going out to the club or the bar. And like people are generally like
just friendly or if you like mind your own business then you know you're not bothered.
Whenever I went out to explore the city I was usually out during the daytime or I was with a
group of friends and if I went out at night then I wasn't alone. And there are taxis that are always
available to take you home if you feel like you need it. And in my experience I never had any
encounters where I felt unsafe. But with that being said it's always a smart idea to be aware
of your surroundings. To be with your friends or other people when you can. Trust your gut feeling
if something doesn't feel right. And if you can just have a backup plan so just in case you're
in a situation you don't want to be in then you're taken care of.
Salamanca has lots of activities, things to do and events that are usually really inexpensive
or they are free. When I was there there were a couple of different events that were being held
like the fiste of San Juan de Sao, which is Salamanca's patron saint. And they have a fireworks
show that's over the Rio Tormes, the Tormes River. Yeah just a really special occasion to go out and
celebrate something local. And another really cool exhibition was the Festival de Luz y Van
Guadalhas, which was an art festival featuring lights, projections, and installations that were
exhibited on some of Salamanca's most famous buildings. It was just really cool. There are
plenty of places to sightsee. There's lots of historical buildings, museums, cultural places,
places of religious significance, and lots of places to learn about Salamanca's history and
culture. I will leave a link in the description below to my blog post that has a list of recommendations
for free things to do, things to go see that you can go to for like a small fee. And these places
usually have student discounts so that's even cheaper. Yeah just a list of recommendations
I would suggest to people going to go visit. And the last reason I would recommend Salamanca as
your study abroad destination is because it's a great place to make friends and meet new people.
The city has a very young vibe and there are lots of events and activities and opportunities to
meet new people and to find others to share your study abroad experience with. If you're going
with a study abroad program like ISA, then you already have a group of people that you can
connect with even before you get to the city. Obviously you'll meet people through your classes,
there are organized events that the university will hold or your study abroad program will hold
to either meet with locals or just like cultural classes that you can take together. And I think
like experiences like these are really important to just put yourself out there and to like
just participate in because it'll make your experience that much more enjoyable and language
exchange programs are fantastic because you get the opportunity to practice speaking Spanish
usually with locals. You can meet people that are from the city or from Spain or from like
even like different places around the world and just practice speaking your Spanish together.
And you'll also get to know each other and make friends and that's also a good thing too.
And most of the people I met usually is just really nice and just fun to be around and always
up for an adventure or chilling or just spending some time together. And those are my top reasons
why I would recommend Salamanca Spain as your study abroad destination. Let me know in the
comments below if you've been to Salamanca whether it's for study abroad or not and if there are any
recommendations that you would leave for places to go around the city, things to do, stuff like that.
Also let me know if you've studied abroad and where you went and if you would recommend it or not.
Also if you have any questions or want me to go into detail and to something specific about my
study abroad experience then please let me know. And if you want more Salamanca travel inspiration
then check out my other YouTube videos of my study abroad experience and that's it for today.
I hope you enjoyed this video and found it useful and I will see you next time. Bye!
