Hey, everyone. Welcome to another episode of Deep Talks, Exploring Theology and Meaning Making.
Today, I'm joined by Brendan Graham Dempsey, who I have to confess, for those of you that have gone
through my lecture series on Meta-modernism, I'm indebted to. I referenced Brendan's work quite
a bit. He's got a great series of YouTube videos out there, but not just YouTube videos. He's also
a writer and author, and he has written a seven-volume series called Meta-modern Spirituality
series, and most recently Meta-modernism, or the cultural logic of cultural logics.
Brendan, I really do consider to be, maybe he wouldn't think of himself this way,
but I will heap some praise on him. I consider Brendan to be one of the leading voices addressing
what's happening in our cultural moment right now with the Meta-modern shift. Many of you have
been really fascinated by this topic and subject matter, so I thought I want to bring on an expert.
I don't claim to be an expert, but I'm going to bring on an expert here to discuss
what's happening. Many of you are feeling like as you're engaging with storytelling and the arts,
and you're seeing these spiritual shifts happening, these religious shifts happening,
you're going, what is going on? Brendan is here today to help maybe try to put a name to some of
that, help us understand where we've come from, where he maybe predicts this is all headed.
Brendan, thanks for being here today. Thank you so much for having me. This is great.
I'm excited. I've been watching your videos, really enjoyed the conversations you're having with
people like John Breveke and Paul Vander Clay. Yeah, just think you're putting out some excellent
content. Yeah, I'm excited to see what we dig into. Yeah. Okay, so for me, Brendan, I don't think I
had a name for this right away, and it took me a while to give a name to what I felt I was picking
up on in particular in pop culture, noticing like aesthetic shifts, shifts in storytelling.
I have, I think, first found myself intrigued by what seems like a shift from Charles Taylor's
secular age into what I consider to be like a kind of a new epoch, where like on the bleeding
edge of it, what I've called the post secular age, we're also emerging out of the, what I think is
probably the death of the new atheist movement into this new era in the West. And then I started
noticing this shift in storytelling, aesthetics, the arts. And I found philosophers and people
like yourself describing this after postmodernism shift as metamodernism. When and where did you
first become aware that something was shifting in the philosophical landscape, the worldview
landscape, the religious, the cultural stories that we're telling? When did you first become aware of
it? And maybe what were some of the things that first tipped you off to, oh, something different
than postmodernism is happening here? Yeah. So for me personally, I would say I discovered
metamodernism, which is this term that people are talking about to give a name to some of these shifts.
I discovered that back in 2013. And to be honest, for me, it was in the context of really seeing
still a lot of very much kind of the postmodern zeitgeist all around me in the arts. I was raised
on very postmodern films and television and whatnot, as well as, you know, there's kind of an
interesting dance between that stuff coming in, but also I was raised in a very Christian family
growing up rather conservative Christian family. So those things kind of mixed in an interesting way.
But it was out of my sort of dissatisfaction and kind of a disaffectedness with a lot of
the contemporary zeitgeist that I went looking in the first place to see what people were talking
about that might be out there that was beginning to emerge. I mean, I was, you know, from a young age,
actually really interested in the films of, say, Wes Anderson and some other interesting
stuff that was starting to emerge that had a slightly different kind of vibe to it. But I
certainly didn't have any kind of a name or rubric to use. So it was around 2013 when I was
traveling, I was living in Europe at the time, and was trying to just make sense around the
aesthetic shifts that we would really now call postmodernism, like the shift that had become
just permeated society in terms of the aesthetic register that was operating with that so-called
cultural logic. And seeing, you know, is this where this ends? Is this where this all culminates?
Or is there something past the postmodern? And that's how I discovered the work of these Dutch
cultural theorists who are talking about metamodernism. And what's been partly fascinating about
tracking this is that it's been over the past, gosh, what, 10 years, right? That seeing what was
sort of initially kind of hinted at or beginning to be described at that point has really kind of
flowered and come to fruition in a big way in the last decade. So yeah, for me, it wasn't so much
looking around seeing big changes and then being like, what's this called? It's more like
getting intimations of some shifts and changes and myself being kind of an evidence of sort of like a
an exhaustedness with postmodernism and a looking beyond it and then finding this thing and then
seeing it really kind of, you know, increasingly accurately described the kinds of shifts
since then. So yeah, that was my experience with the term.
You mentioned already here, a couple of times, I think you just used the word exhaustion about
the way that the postmodern frame was impacting you. And I think as, you know, I'm 40,
much of my formative teenage years, like you growing up in a very conservative, evangelical
context, I was still engaging with the broader, I mean, we had our evangelical subculture with
all its DC talk and tooth and nail record bands and things like that. And I'm sure you probably
got into as well. Oh, yeah. But within that subculture, of course, we're plugged into a larger
culture, the culture, the the the the the meta culture over the over top of that. And of course,
much of what was going on in my formative heyday, where movies like Fight Club, even, you know,
in many ways, like Seinfeld was a shift away from modernist forms of comedy into something that was
self aware was, you know, I think Larry David famously had a line on the set that,
you know, we're going to make sure that there's no hugging, and nobody learns anything in each
episode, right? Which, which was such a like a critique, maybe a comedic sort of nihilism,
but a critique of the sitcom genre. So I very much can identify with that. But when you talk
about it, leaving you feeling exhausted, can you put your finger maybe on what was producing
that sense of exhaustion or dissatisfaction with that worldview, the worldview that was
supposed to be the critique really of all worldviews? Yeah, I mean, at the aesthetic level,
there's just a sense of, you know, it becomes a tired trick after a while, right? It's just
you've seen it so many times. And once you start to have some language for it, you're like, Oh,
yeah, there that is again. So that's largely what I mean by exhaustion, just the sense of like,
you know, Oh, this again. And by this, I mean things like, you know, you walk into an art gallery,
and there's like, I don't know, glitter and paint smeared on the ground. And then there's like a
little artist statement that's like, you know, untitled number 18, you know, and the little
artist statement says something like, this piece seeks to problematize our relationship with that
that that that. And, you know, when that stuff first starts to show up, you might be like, Oh,
this is kind of interesting, right? But like the opposite of interesting is boring. And so what I
think happened with a lot of postmodern art was it just reached this point of saturation in the
culture that it wasn't interesting anymore, which is sort of its claim to fame. And instead, I was
just increasingly boring. And so that's that's mostly what I mean by exhaustion. So there's
there's that though there is a worldview component to that as well. In the sense of to the degree
to which those sorts of aesthetic strategies are connected to the sort of broader, you know,
worldview of sort of the nihilism, cynicism, skepticism, right? There is a there is a point
in which that is itself kind of a tiredness. You know, a lot of the things that characterize the
postmodern period are its sense of an end. I think Jameson described that as right, everyone was
talking about the end of art and the end of this and the end of the end of the death of the author
and the end of history and everything was ending. And so everyone was sort of exhausted about
everything. It was sort of a cultural logic of exhaustion. And a lot of the kind of aesthetic
strategies I think reflected that. So you get exhausted by exhaustion. And that's a kind of
meta move, I suppose, that sort of starts to gesture towards, you know, what's beyond that,
what's what happens when you start becoming skeptical of skepticism in a bit cynical towards
the cynics, right? It's sort of inevitable that you're probably going to lead towards something a
bit more affirmational, positive, exuberant, idealistic, etc. So yeah. How do you understand,
and I've talked about this in my series, but I think it'd be helpful to hear another vantage
point on this. How do you understand the shift from modernism into an appetite for that sort of
aesthetic art and storytelling? What do you think the primary factors were that led from that modern
shift to the postmodern shift to make it probably something at some point, which had some some value?
I know, I want to be clear, because there's a lot of conversation, particularly in the sorts of
internet spaces that might be adjacent to your work and our work, where there's a lot of kind
of postmodern boogeyman stuff out there, right, which is like this was the worst thing to have
ever come about. And it was all because of this weird cultural Marxism, whatever, whatever that
means. Was there any validity to the initial shift from modernism? What were the postmodern
storytellers, artists, and thinkers? What were they trying to grasp at? And do you see there
being any continuing value for any of what postmodernism was grasping at that you see?
This needs to continue. And in the metamodern shift, it seems to be continuing to be held
on to as something valuable. I think it's a great question. It's an essential question. And I feel
like you won't really get metamodernism if you don't get that that's an important thing to be
asking. So I think you're exactly right. There's a lot of easy boogeymanning and strawmanning of
postmodernism. And to be fair, these are big terms that are supposed to encapsulate a whole
bunch of different things, right? So a lot of the time, I think we're often just talking past each
other. And so we should be aware up front that like, these are big categories, they're fuzzy,
people will be using these terms slightly differently. But I think that, yeah, if as I'm
sure we'll get into in a minute, if metamodernism, which is what comes after postmodernism, is doing
so by means still of postmodernism, then we have to take seriously the notion that something from
this reaction carries forward. And as for what that is, there's so many angles you can take on
this. And I think they're all relevant, they're all valid. And I don't want to get too much into
the weeds or too much over people's heads and try to deal with too much here. But I'll just name a
few components of it, right? There's at least, let's say, a historical cultural moment, which I
think really pushes us in this direction. And it largely comes after the World War II.
So let's step back a little bit, right? You know, the modern, of course, is in itself
kind of responding to the traditional worldview and a religious worldview. And a lot of what had come
as sort of the emergence of modernity and modernism, it was about sort of trying to
you could call this sort of the modern project, right? Like create something after the dissolution
and the rejection of maybe more traditional religious narratives, right? So you get new kinds
of grand narratives about reality, that it's about progress, that there's this evolutionary
direction that's sort of leaning cultures towards new heights. You see this and then this glorification
of technology gets wrapped up with this. So the modern is about the new and the novel and the
technological utopia that we're sort of all gloriously heading towards and, you know, and sort
of providing a new grand narrative of history that is not the sort of kind of classic Christian
narrative that had been, you know, the one to prevail throughout the entire, you know, medieval
period, essentially. Now it's a different narrative and it's rooted in this world and all those things
I just said. And I think that once you see what happens with World War II and how it just sort
of just cuts the legs out from under that, I think that's really important for understanding
the rise of postmodernism. Because a number of things happen there. Basically, this, this utopian
aspirational dream vision of history, you know, doesn't lead to utopia, it leads to the gulag
and to, you know, to Auschwitz, essentially. And so, you know, and technology starts being very
much clearly seen for the ways that it destroys, as well as creates the way that it alienates,
as well as, you know, brings people together. And so, yeah, really just the whole period from
World War I to World War II, which is really sort of a big colossal one war with sort of,
you know, interim period. Half time. Yeah, basically. And it's just this utter destruction
of the old world. And I think that that creates a sense of disenchantment with the entire
modern project and forces people to reevaluate, you know, the ideals of liberalism and enlightenment
values and supposedly this emancipatory project that modernity was, it seemed to lead to this
iron cage. So you get after World War II, people who are critical of these sorts of things,
critical of the ideals and all that. And yeah, that leads to an attitude of skepticism. It leads
to an attitude of cynicism, right? It's sort of like, oh, whose big narrative are you pushing at
me today, right? You know, it's like, we've been here before. There's this, yeah, there's this
profound distrust or, you know, hermeneutics of suspicion, right? So it makes sense that people
like Freud and Nietzsche and Marx come in to try to, you know, but even, of course, and this is
where part of this issue around like the cultural Marxism bit becomes really problematic is that
like, even Marx had a grand narrative, right? So what's so interesting about this postmodern
moment is like, no, even the Marxists are out the window because they're pushing some story.
And so, you know, once you've eschewed, great progress to exactly. Yeah, it's just, you know,
right, it's taking that Hegelian dialectic and moving it into a materialist frame.
Yeah. And certainly, a lot of those ideas had a direct link to what you see happen in World
War II. And then, of course, the aftermath of the Cold War. So you get, I think, a profound
disenchantment, disillusionment with this whole way of looking at the world. And there's a kind
of self-protective element that goes with that as well. It's sort of like, all right, I won't
believe anything, you know? And so nihilism, of course, is sort of a natural product of that.
So anyway, there's a, there's kind of cultural historical moment that sort of makes sense for
why those ideas would start to be on the rise. There's also, you know, technological things
that happen. There's, you could say, sort of evolutionary complexification, developmental
angles that can be brought to this narrative. I could go on and on. So there's really a whole
set of things that kind of explain why all of a sudden you start seeing this emergence of these
ideas. But maybe more importantly, though, to get to the heart of your question, which is like,
what sort of carries forward from that, that is a value? And I will say this, that like,
a big thing that these critiques did was they forced us to be more sort of,
you know, demanding of what we took as true, right? It's sort of like, you know, there's this,
there's this critique of authority and this, these appeals to, you know, oh, well, this is the story,
this is the narrative, or this is the, you know, the political, you know, message or what have you.
There is sort of this sort of standing back and being like, well, no, we're not going to just,
you know, buy whatever bill of goods you're selling, we're going to really interrogate them,
ideally, right? And so one of the positive things that does come from that is a critique of certain
modern presumptions that had been taken for granted, which are now start to be sort of
exploded, right? Because once you start asking, well, for who is this story, you know, serving or
what, you know, to whose benefit does this particular message work, then you're starting to
become more aware of, you know, the exclusionary dynamics that go into selling stories and
grand narratives and sort of like who's being left out, who's being oppressed, who's being
used and exploited. So these issues become very salient to postmodern critiques of,
of things. And basically, in the absence of this is the true story of history,
all you've kind of got then is critiques of power and privilege to be able to fill in that gap.
And so some of that, some of that is legitimately very valuable. I mean, we need to be doing asking
those kinds of questions. And I think that the things like the civil rights movement movements
that come in the 60s, you know, are a big product of, you know, those cultural forces
shifting really much of the kind of cultural and sexual liberation and revolution kind of
is a product of some of these, you know, presumed axioms of sort of modern thought being sort of
exploded and having new opportunities to be critiqued and whatnot. So anyway, I could say a
lot more about that. But I guess I would just say that I think we should be asking more about
systems, right? What are the contexts that we're operating in? Let's see the things that we
were using to make sense of reality and examine those, right? So there's this moving back and
stepping back from the ideologies or the frameworks that you're using to make sense of reality and
interrogating those. And all of that I find to be very useful. And so when you start getting into
metamodernism, there's certain aspects in which we can't just throw that stuff out, we shouldn't.
There's profound insights to be gained from appreciating that we are in social contexts,
that humans do a lot to construct those contexts, and that we shouldn't just take a sort of natural
givens, things that we are enculturated into, and we should interrogate them. And that really
starts to set you up into a new place where you're able to see cultural objects as, you know,
objects of analysis and not just things that you see the world through. And then that can really,
you know, start to put you in a position where you're, where you have a cultural logic of cultural
logics, which is kind of what the book is about. The core of cores, right? I don't know if you
saw this or have seen this trend on YouTube and TikTok called core core. No, I haven't.
Okay, so this is really fascinating. And I think this has connection to the aesthetic
interests of metamodernism. So side tangent here, and I want to come back to some of the
stuff you said about postmodernism and connect it here too. But the core core movement is this,
again, like a really a vibe, as my kids would say, it's a it's a aesthetic vibe that gets at
so you might have genres on TikTok and YouTube, like YouTube reels, for example, or YouTube shorts
of these different cores, you know, I'm going to butcher some of the other ones like
home core or these different cores. And so the core core, yes, exactly, right. And of course,
in music, you've had hardcore music, metal core, you know, what's at the core. And so core core
is trying to get at like, what is at the core of cores. And these are really fascinating vignettes
into I think, like the psyche of Gen Z right now, which tends to, from my vantage point,
address the meeting crisis differently than millennials and Gen Xers did, many of much
of which I think has been marked by a sort of like comedic nihilism, where Gen Z is much more.
This is when I saw I noticed a shift happening, Brendan, it was probably my last few years of
teaching in a classroom. The biggest thing I started to notice was how differently Gen Z
was engaging the subject of September 11th from old millennials like me.
When I noticed that they were comfortable, not only comfortable, but like they loved sharing
like 9 11 memes, you know, and getting humor out of them. It was like a strange form of gallows
humor. Yeah, you know, whereas that would be almost like a sacred untouchable subject to
millennials and Gen Xers in particular, like that was so devastating. And I noticed boys in
particular, 17, 18 years old, like passed along 9 11 memes, which I like found offensive, but it
was kind of their way of processing the the anguish of living in this particular moment.
But core core, these videos are often set to like, just a really, they seem to be not coherent
scenes spliced together. But there's a general aesthetic or vibe of melancholy,
very, very depressing underneath that. And you might see spliced together scenes from kind of
these like, sigma male, anti hero figures that you see in like the literally me videos out there,
like a Patrick Bateman and scenes from those sorts of movies. But it's set to it's fascinating
because you're talking about the cultural logics of cultural logic, like what's at the core of
cores. And to me, I see that connecting to what seems to be happening for those of us who post
modernism maybe was our native tongue. And so all we knew was primarily irony, cynicism, I mean,
this at a folk level, as you mentioned already, postmodernism is far too complex, but folk
postmodernism, you know, the fight club postmodernism, the maybe the Rick and Morty postmodernism,
the that that genre, seeing at the end of that people feeling that they have, in some sense,
taken the sledgehammer of deconstruction to their overarching stories to their guiding stories,
deconstruct them all for many people. And, you know, I don't know much of your personal story,
but I'm sure there are, there's a sense in which we can both identify with the disillusionment
that many people are age experienced with traditional religion, and feeling as if there has
been a use of those stories to continue to victimize people. And when you combine that
postmodern critique, that overarching stories, mask a play for power to continue to oppress
and victimize, and then you've actually seen firsthand improper moral immoral behavior,
you've seen scandals, it seems to only strengthen that case. But I think, from my vantage point,
that that exhaustion that we feel at the end of that still leads us to this deep desire to
actually live in some sort of story. How is the metamodern shift attempting to address that desire,
that exhaustion, and that need to live in some sort of story that provides positive reconstruction,
that provides you a way of actually speaking sincerely, without throwing out all of what
have been really valid critiques of postmodernism. How does it use the language and aesthetic of
postmodernism to attempt to inhabit a meaningful story, to say things that are true, good and
beautiful once again? How do you see that working from your vantage point? Yeah, well, I think that
what you're naming is like a really significant dynamic of metamodern thought. And I think once
you see that that kind of thing is going on, that I think is sort of the answer to the question,
but it's sort of like it happens in different ways. So if broadly speaking, this postmodern
move is to deconstruct and to subject to interrogation and hermeneutics of suspicion,
and it can do that in multiple ways, including, well, we'll leave it there. So that's one thing
that it's doing, but it does differently. I think the metamodern move is sort of an attempt to say,
okay, yes, okay, now what? Let's reconstruct and let's try to, as you say, maybe live in a story
while owning it's a story or what have you, and recognizing that that happens in different ways.
So one way that I see that happening is in, well, okay, so there are different instances.
I'll use one as an example. One is everything everywhere all at once, which is a kind of
explicitly metamodern work of art. The directors, Daniel's said as much, they're like, yep,
we're aiming for like a metamodern thing here. And if you watch the movie, it's all about meaning,
it's about nihilism. It's about how do we make sense and purpose of our lives in the context of
this infinite multiverse in which anything could be anything. And one sort of the kernel of the
response there comes at the end of the movie, which is something like, nothing matters, be given
that. Therefore, everything can matter. And some people might find that rather unsatisfying. I
wouldn't entirely blame them if they did so. But that is one thing that you see. And there are
elements actually speaking of Rick and Morty in which that shows up. It's sort of like, hey, no
one's supposed to be here on purpose. There's no plan, just come and sit and hang out with your
family sort of a thing, right? So there's this move towards what you see also at the end of
everything everywhere at all at once, which is like, I, the main character chooses to be
with this particular family at this particular laundromat in this vast galaxy of universes,
because you know, this is her world essentially. So there's a, I think a move towards sort of
reaffirming the value of sort of local meaning making and sort of recognizing that things could
be an infinite number of other ways, that there's no sort of foundational ground. And yet we can
affirm the value of our lived context. You could say we can choose the story and then put a lot of
weight onto that story. Very existentialist move. It is, it is, it's, it's a, I think there, it even
goes a bit further than the existentialist to the degree that I don't know, I get the impression
from a lot of existentialist thought that there's a sense that there's still something inherently
of value in making meaning that somehow like the meaning making thing is the thing. But in this,
it's sort of like, nope, even that is just sort of, you know, you can deconstruct that, but we
still need to do these things. So there's an element to that. I see that narrative crop up in
Meta modern spaces. I see kind of similarly this sort of approach around owning the social
constructiveness of things, but again, sort of affirming that, well, this is the condition
of all knowledge. So this is just kind of how all knowledge works. And so, you know,
I grew up in this story and you grew up in this story. I think I've seen you mentioned some of
these kinds of frameworks here in some stuff you've said. And there's some recognition that
that's how things work and then just sort of owning and accepting it and then kind of living
into that story. That's another approach. I'm very interested in trying to find sort of
places where meaning actually does have some kind of a, how would I put this?
It kind of grounds out in some significant way still. So it's not just to choose your own
adventure. It's like, Oh, no, like this is this is kind of how this works, even though it admits
of a lot of variability. So like, for example, very kind of simplistically, if you want to say
that like older forms of meaning where like meaning just has objective existence, it just is,
right, like things mean, maybe that has a very kind of naive, traditional religious kind of
flavor to it. And then sort of modernity comes around and it's sort of like, well, wait a second,
we look for meaning in the world and we don't find it there. Therefore, meaning isn't objective,
it's actually just purely subjective, right? Which is an idea that I think postmodernism
takes even further in some of the ways that we're talking about, just like, yeah, we all just live
on our own story. There's a third answer to that, which is that meaning actually is real,
but it's neither purely objective or subjective. It arises in this sort of dynamic,
transjective relationship between, you know, in entity and its environment.
Yeah, more about that, Brendan, because I find that fascinating because part of my
vantage point on this would be to say that, you know, part of the modern shift was
critiquing traditional metaphysics. And then as we move further away in the
epistemological problem of how do I know anything at all, metaphysics seems to play less and less
of a role in philosophy and practically in people's lives where it's like, we can ground this in
phenomenology or other places. But whether that's sort of an agnosticism about metaphysical claims
where it's like, how could we ever know any of this at all to a more postmodern distrust of
metaphysical claims? So help me understand a little bit more when you're saying like,
you're not satisfied from your vantage point, you're not satisfied with a sort of like
Sisyphusian approach to just say, all right, I got to push this boulder up the mountain once again,
but I can choose to make it valuable by just simply deciding in this internal state that
gods can't control my internal state. So therefore I can decide that this is valuable.
Are you saying you don't, you're not satisfied with that? And you'd like,
you feel there needs to be some other grounding beyond the self? And are you saying there's a
search for that? Do you feel like both for you individually, but also within maybe the broader
metamodern shift, are people kind of going back to metaphysics for that? Are they turning,
what are they turning to to find that, that maybe that grounding outside of the self?
Yeah, yeah. No, and this I think is, this is the thing that so many people are grappling with
right now in a million different ways, right? And so, all right, yeah. So the danger as I see it
would be that we do just sort of like become aware of all these dynamics around the modern
turn and the postmodern turn and then say, ah, but we still need stories or something like that.
And then just sort of kind of, we don't carry the ideas forward. We kind of just then conclude
we have to sort of fall back on something, you know, more kind of existentially primitive to how
we were, you know, enculturated or something like that, right? So I find that unsatisfactory.
I also find sort of other approaches that do something very similar to be missing something
really crucial. And so I guess I'll just say the way I look at it, and this is informed by folks,
I just mentioned, like John Vervakey, and, you know, there's some great conversations between John
and Greg Enriquez, who has a wonderful sort of meta theory, unifying theory of knowledge.
People like Bobby Azarian, who are all operating in this metamodern space, I think that it there's a
shared solution space to these sorts of issues. And this is how I see it. It's something like
there's an entity in a context and in order for it to continue to exist, certain conditions need
to be met, you could say. And those are real, right? Like, I can't, I mean, unless you want to be
totally solipsistic or skeptical to some extreme degree and just deny the existence of, I don't
know, anything, any kind of world or something, right? You'd have to admit that like, yeah, no
one even the most ardent sort of relativistic postmodernist anti-realist is going to step outside
while it's raining and just say, it's not raining, you know what I mean? Like that doesn't fly.
So if it is raining, then you have to consider the fact of like, okay, well, this is going to make
me cold and miserable and, you know, probably I might get a cold or whatever. So you have to like
do things in relationship to reality in order to continue to successfully be an entity in the
world, right? So you're talking like emergence and emanation in some sense, right? Yeah, well,
certainly there's an emergent component to this and the emergence emanation bit, maybe I can come
back to that and see if we could plug it into that kind of a framework. But the basic idea that I
find really helpful can actually ground out in some things like as fundamentals like information
theory, thermodynamics, where you've got, okay, I am an informational entity in order to continue to
exist successfully, I need to be processing information about my environment. And I need to
do that accurately. And if that information actually is helping me maintain my viability,
then that information is meaningful to me, like full stop, like that's just, you know,
someone can't be like, I'm just going to go walk off a cliff, you know, and deny that that it's
like, nope, you won't be around anymore, right? So the knowledge of if I walk off this cliff,
I will no longer be around, that's meaningful. And at a certain point, you just can't kind of
deconstruct that anymore, you can't kind of, you know, interpretively, hermeneutically work your
way around, but it could mean this or it could mean that, right? Like, there's a to the degree that
information about the environment affects the viability of the continued persistence of a
thermodynamic entity in context. That's now, you know, now, what becomes really interesting
about that, though, is that that's a very crude, simplistic notion of meaning. I mean, you know,
the kinds of meaning that we really mean when we talk about meaning or things about like, what's
the meaning of my life and relationships and all this stuff, right? So there's, you've got to get
from this sort of very simplistic notion of meaning that you get from thermodynamics and
information theory, to the kinds of existential, philosophical, spiritual, religious meanings
that we're talking about. And so then you have to appreciate that there's a complexification
process between the two. And, and that's where things really start to get interesting when you
can situate yourself as the long end product of billions of years of complexification, where
information and entities sort of have been in this continual dance, leading to increasing
information, increasing complexity of organisms, increasing complexity of the relationship between
the two, so that meaning itself evolves and complexifies. And that's kind of the stuff I'm
exploring at the moment, which again, dovetails very much with a certain kind of strand of meta
modern thought. But it's, to ground this all back, this is, this is the same, we're trying to resolve
the same issue here, right? Which is like, how do we make meaning in this world that we supposedly
have come to realize is fully deconstructible and totally constructed and whatnot.
And are we simply making it or are we discovering it? I think that's an important question too,
right? Yeah, I think that a lot of what is coming out of the meta modern discourse space is
taking these seeming binaries and then realizing the way that it's not either or,
that there's always sort of this both and component to this. And so I think that once you have that
in mind, you can look back and see how a lot of our going astray on a lot of these issues has come
about because we absolutized a particular way of thinking about something, right? So like,
you go back and, and it's like, oh, something is true. And that's just, it's just true from the
beginning of time, it has a priori, you know, reality to it. And, you know, there's some
Platonic ideal that exists in this other world, right? And it's like, and then over time, that
all gets sort of critiqued and deconstructed. And then you get the sort of Kantian thing of like,
ah, no, it's just the mind, right? And the and reality conforms to the mind. And then you get
this radical relativism and the sort of like, total, you know, the potential for total social
constructivism, it's just sort of whatever the mind thinks is real. And both of these are very
extreme positions, right? It's sort of like, well, maybe both of these are going on simultaneously,
like maybe there are real things, but the mind needs to construct its ability to be able to
understand and relate to them. And, you know, there are frameworks for thinking in these terms,
like Piaget's constructivism, and the whole tradition of developmental psychology is like
this continual equilibration between entity and field coming to learn each other more and
more so that it's both there's a reality and the mind constructs or participates in constructing
its relationship to that reality. Both of those are true. We don't have to choose between them.
So I think a lot of the meta modern conversation is like really trying to find those points of
synthesis, which is often a synthesis between modern and postmodern extremes.
I see what you're talking about here, Brendan, is also having a point of connection to what
maybe both modernism and postmodernism were doing, especially in American culture with the
elevation of the atomized individual, right? So if in modernism, the individual, well, you know,
we could take this all the way back to the Protestant Reformation, where Luther trusts
his gut over and against the hierarchical institutions of the past, which were the place
in which you did have access to the truth. That was the narrative, right? So the rejection of
locating it through the hierarchical institutions and in the individual gets us, obviously, to
Descartes. But then the postmodern impulse has been to not only critique, you know, we're not
just doing like Descartes, I think, therefore I am, but there's also the sense in which because
all narratives are a play for power that maybe, especially as this takes shape in American culture,
that I can author my own narrative. I can radically self-author in a way that
there is no necessarily external reality to which I have to conform to. The only thing I'm trying
to conform to and maybe even conform the world outside of me to actually match what I believe
my internal state is. Yeah, yeah. No, and you see this all the time with the way that language has
become so important. We have to police language now because there's this thought that, you know,
oh, well, if we just change the words, we'll change reality. Like if someone doesn't have a
word for something and we just obliterate that from our conceptions, then this will lead in, you
know, some miraculously better world. And so there is very much like that kind of, you know,
the way that we are tone policing and word policing and cancelling each other and sort of
not engaging with these ideas and sort of just cutting off conversation at that level is a direct
outgrowth of a certain worldview which says that we create reality. And so if we can change people's
minds, then we'll change reality. And so obviously that is misguided and not entirely true, right?
But there's a kernel of truth to it. Like we can change the way we speak about things and maybe
that would have a moderately better impact on society. So again, it's just this escape from
either or thinking of like we have to choose one side of this polarity when in fact what I can,
I see is very emblematic of all metamodern thought as sort of this continual moving between
these different polarities. And this is a sense of what the word meta means actually, meta can
mean between. And one of the ways that the original Dutch theorists use the term related directly
to that is that the metamodern mind is always oscillating is the word that they use between
sort of these postmodern views of things and these modern views of things. And for the record too,
I think also it's important for the context of this conversation, not just the modern. I mean,
like, let's say other cultural logics, it's oscillating between on the one hand, it can kind of
take that social constructivist angle. But then, you know, when that starts getting too extreme and
just sort of ridiculous in terms of where it falls apart with reality, then it can kind of
reaffirm that, well, no, there is something here, right? But there's this back and forth that's
sort of continually setting those different lenses in relationship to each other so that
you're getting some dynamic third thing rather than just, you know, one of these two extremes.
So I think, yeah, you see that, you see that in all areas of sort of, you know, this metamodern shift.
Do you think maybe I'm just kind of spitballing here at the top of my head as we're talking,
do you think there's any possibility that maybe what we have learned is, as we look at the kind
of Hegelian, here's the synthesis, here's the antithesis, and we've seen as we've gone back that
how strongly people have said the antithesis is the truth, you know, up against the synthesis that
maybe what metamodernism is trying to do is trying to like predict in advance where the
new synthesis is going to land, maybe by doing that oscillation between the thesis and the
antithesis. In this case, it would be the primary thesis and antithesis of modernism and
postmodernism, right? So modernism, and maybe even going before that, the traditional storytelling,
traditional worldview, that you have that sort of thesis, postmodernism being the antithesis
and metamodernism, obviously seeking to find that the synthesis in advance, instead of just
letting this collision maybe devolve into a total state of war and anarchy and complete
disillusionment, do you think there's any merit to that possibility?
Yeah, I mean, I think it's a very helpful way of thinking about it, that it's becoming aware of
the dialectical nature of this is at least the crucial part, right? If you are only able to
conceive of opposite binaries, you're in a different position. If you're able to cognize, oh,
I'm between a rock and hard place, I'm between two opposite poles, and they might actually
relate to one another, and they might actually maybe even sort of complement each other or have a
opponent processing factor that maybe, and once you're in that mindset, I think you've already
made that move, and I think you're right. I mean, there's an anticipation factor of like, okay, well,
then what does it look like to sort of bring together these seemingly opposite things?
So anyway, that's a very helpful framing. There are all sorts of ways of framing it,
and I don't want to reify any particular one as though this is the right metamodern, because
there's these dynamics that are very deep, and we can represent them in different ways.
Modern or thesis into this, a synthesis is one way of doing that, but we can also do more traditional
Hegelian dialectics. We can talk about basically things going meta on themselves, or I talk about
eternal recursion, the sort of continual standing back and self-reflecting on what was before,
but I think what they all gesture to is that it's aware of the fact that we are presented with
these contraries and building that into the perspective itself, that like perspectives
are often mediating what came before in terms of seeming opposites, and they need to ideally
bring these together and find where they can productively relate to one another.
Okay, can we circle back around, because when you're talking about I think the desire to
find meaning outside of the self in something, I don't want to go as far as to say objective
truth, but to ground it in a, let's say using other philosophical language, the recognition that
I am not necessary, but I am contingent, and I'm dependent on some other necessary necessity
beyond myself. I think that is part of the awareness that there are forces at play,
and this is where for me I wanted to circle back around to what you're talking about, because it
seems like this dance that Viveki has been talking about for quite some time between
emergence and emanation, so emanation being kind of like the top down, the thing outside of ourselves
that provides the constraints, the playground, if you will, for which we can conform and have
that bottom-up causality, but the bottom-up causality isn't that, and I think this is really,
I know this is going to sound for some of my listeners like we're getting too far into the
philosophical weeds here, but I do think there are practical existential daily life stuff connected
to this, that if we see ourselves as having nothing outside of ourselves to conform to,
like there's no reality, there's no playground, there's no fence to inhabit, there's no space,
there's no container to be poured into that it creates what again like Viveki has called
combinatorial explosion, which is part of our problem, like we feel like we can, I don't know
if you follow any of like, what's his name, Byung Chul Han, any of his work at all,
golly, I'm drawing a blank on his book titles, but he's talked about this shift into
an achievement society, an achievement society in which we feel the constant need
to optimize ourselves, but the problem is that we have endless, seemingly endless options for
optimization. So there aren't constraints. And we feel like as part of our narrative,
we can make ourselves whatever we want, but we don't know what good thing to make ourselves to.
So there's like a, there is the recognition of some sort of top down constraint, top down
thing to adhere to. Is that a fair way of maybe assessing what some of what the metamodern impulse
is to find some proper container while still recognizing the critiques of postmodernism that
I recognize and I tell this to people, Brendan, like I'm a pastor, I recognize that if I was born
in Somalia, I would the statistical likelihood of me being a Christian pastor is infinitesimally
small. I recognize I was born into the story. I'm self aware of the story, but I am also trying to
be honest about, okay, given that I can't live without a story, I have to adhere to some structure
and I'm earnestly searching to allow myself to adhere to some structure that I see is true.
I'm not trying to be blind to it. It seems like what I've noticed in our generation is like the
tiredness, the exhaustion of nothing but cynicism, nothing but irony, irony that isn't like leading
to sincerity. And we have this new impulse that goes, all right, I'm still going to use my ironic
language, but I am trying to find a container, like I'm trying to find the top down force that I
should adhere to. Right. Yeah. So, okay, this will get a little trippy maybe and maybe a little weird.
Let's do it. Let's get trippy. So I remember this episode of Boy Meets World where-
Let's go there. Well, one of my favorites. Yeah, yeah, speaking of, yeah. And all right,
so in this episode, it's the older brother. I want to say his name is Will, but maybe that's
the name of the actor. I forget the name of the older brother. Eric? Eric, yes, Eric. Cory's older
brother goes off to Hollywood because he's gotten into acting and while he's there, he stars in a
television sitcom pilot called Kid Gets Acquainted with the Universe. And on the set, it's all the
same characters from Boy Meets World, but they're like, they have slightly different names and
he's playing a character, you know, named Derek or something, right? So it's this, it's, and sorry,
so this is what you would call going meta, okay? And on some way, right? Now, when you watch this,
you're like, this is a spoof. It's a joke. It's sort of like a, there's no way to,
they're being cheekily self-aware, right? And they're breaking the fourth wall and all this stuff.
And all these things have characteristic elements of postmodern art. You see this a lot in postmodern
art of just being very hyper self-conscious, where the, where a book becomes about reading the book,
right? That sort of a thing or like, you know, the author is telling you that he's writing the
current sentence that he's writing, right? These are all meta moves that you find in kind of classic,
postmodern works of art. And a lot of the kind of immediate takeaway from some of that stuff,
right, is, oh, okay, yeah, all this stuff is kind of just silly. And it makes me very aware of this
thing. It's sort of, I don't even have the illusion of like, you know, suspension of disbelief. I'm
just like, it's putting it all in my face. It's a construct. It's not real, all that. And that can be
sort of disenchanting and disillusioning and sort of, yeah, then you're kind of being ironic, okay?
But now here's where I want to kind of get a little trippy with this. Then you kind of really
go with it. And then you work with that move, because you do see it is a move. Like that's
what postmodern art is doing all the time in all sorts of things. The Simpsons have other
television shows on that like dinosaurs or family guy that they have send ups of because they're
like, hey, wow, these guys are so much like us, right? It's sort of like, okay, we're going to do
this meta move, right? So this is a move. But once you see that it's a move, you have a new
enduring container, right? You have a new thing that exists. And so then you can say, oh, well,
what is the nature of that container? Well, it's this recursive move that has a deep kind of
structure to it. And it repeats itself and it reflects on itself. Now, once you have that,
you're like, this is a real thing, right? I'm not just like, we've deconstructed something,
but we've deconstructed it using a thing that is not deconstructed. You know, it's a real
mental move that you make that that is, it's the container for deconstruction. You see what I'm
saying? So it's like, you've gotten beyond deconstruction, meta deconstruction, because
you're actually seeing the very container that deconstruction needs to even be able to do what
it's doing. And once you're there, you can start to say, Hey, there are things that exist outside
the context of just infinite, you know, sort of cultural constructivist deconstruction, there are
the containers in which these things happen. And that provides a new kind of solid ground to work
with. But you have to go through it to get there, you have to deconstruct in order to get outside
of the container. So what I posit is that this postmodern moment is very much where we're still
stuck in the deconstructing move, we haven't kept going, we haven't gotten beyond it. And so we're
stuck with the disenchantment and the disillusionment and the cynicism and the irony. But if you keep
going, then that is that very stuff is what allows you to find a new kind of meta level container.
So that would be a way of beginning to think about the sorts of moves that go into
these sorts of things. And I can say more about meaning as sort of a, you know, a similar move,
but that would just be one way of framing it. Okay, so then, if Meta Modernism is trying to find
the container that holds the deconstruction, yeah, is that a fair way of summarizing that?
I mean, as I say, right, all Meta Modernisms or the Meta Modern quintessentially is about going
beyond postmodernism by means of postmodernism. So whatever you're going to find on the other
side is going to be somehow a meaningful product of postmodernism, but it's going to also transcend
it as well. And so this is a classic example of how that would work, because you have to go
through the deconstruction process to then find the new stable structure. I wouldn't go so far
as to say that all forms of Meta Modernism are somehow about trying to do this. I think that
this is a, this is, this is, and I do, I mean, this is the case I'm making in my book because
to talk about a cultural logic of cultural logics is kind of where you get on, you know, get to on
the other side of this stuff is that you see that, oh, there's a structure to how cultural
logics themselves evolve, right? So Meta Modernism is also about this move in the sense that it's
aware of how this process unfolds. So it's able to see that, oh, postmodernism is actually a
necessary step in this process because it's, it's key to how this whole thing operates. But then
you're able to contextualize that and you're able to relativize relativism, you know, you're able
to be skeptical of skepticism and you're able to deconstruct deconstruction because you put it in a
wider frame. So that to me seems to be like a really necessary, you know, way of thinking about
all this. And when I synthesized all the different ways people were talking about Meta Modernism,
that is sort of the underlying structure to all these different kinds of discourse seems to be
this basic move. So that, that is the, the basic idea. And I think what I would say though,
so I want to tie this into the meaning issue, which I think would be valuable, but I also
recognize that there's a lot, there's a lot to all this. So I don't know if we want to,
you know, get a little bit sure first. Yeah, no, no, I'd like to talk about that. The only
other pressing question I have, Brennan, you can pick which one you'd like to address first is
thinking about what sorts of implications that this getting at the core of cores, the container
of containers, what, what this, what this shift, this impulse, what kind of impact it has on like
traditional religion in America. Because I've wondered how much of the, the shift towards
little autobiographical, and then you can choose which way you want to take this, you know, so I
think back to my parents, my parents who were, my dad was raised kind of nominally Catholic,
my mom was raised devoutly Catholic. They saw that in some sense as the thesis
with all of the flaws that they perceived in that thesis. And then when they got into their
early adult years, they, they chose this kind of new thing at the time, which was this born-again
Billy Graham evangelical experience, very personal. So we're going to move away from,
you know, at the time there already shifts happening because it's post Vatican II from
Latin mass, but they want to hear the Bible in their native tongue. And they want to read
Bible translations that sound like their cultural context and the music that's going to happen in
church isn't organs. And from the medieval times, there's not doing the smells and bells, we're
not doing that stuff. We actually want to communicate with the cultural vocabulary of our day. And so
they very much grew up in that. I'm a product of that, but I see a lot of people that their parents
went through that sort of change. And then they grow up and then they go to like Eastern Orthodoxy
or Catholicism or, you know, the more high church liturgical expressions. There's a lot of
different ways we could frame that, but I'm really wondering how much of that, you know,
is that simply kind of, you can kind of see these recurring patterns throughout time of people going,
Hey, you know, I came from this and I want to go back to something before that.
Is that metamodern? What what sorts of impacts do you see as these stories disseminate in through
popular culture as the aesthetic changes and those aesthetic changes begin to impact, not just
guys like you and me who are reading this stuff and not to pat ourselves on the back, but we're
not normal when it comes to when it comes to like picking up on these trends. I would like to think
that I'll speak of you that you're very much on the front end of this, this, this bleeding edge and
this, I don't think if you asked your average person on the streets, like what metamodernism is,
they'd be like, yeah, I have no, I have no idea. So as that moves more into the mainstream and moves
into broader culture, what sorts of impacts do you see it having on traditional religion? And,
you know, feel free if you feel like that connects to what you want to say about the pursuit of
meaning. Sure, there is something there. Yeah. No, I'll tackle that one. And it's so interesting
too, because you described that whole thing you described, I have a direct experience with that
as well. You know, my, my previous, well, my family, my parents basically had that experience,
grew up in, you know, mainline churches, found the evangelical thing, because it was the antithesis
to the thesis. And I was that next generation that was very fascinated by Eastern Orthodox
Christianity. I mean, one thing I'll say is, you know, they say that every
problem looks like a nail to a hammer, right? So I'm a metamodernist thinker. So there's a danger
of trying to interpret all these sorts of patterns and culture as somehow, you know, whatever. And
I don't want to, I don't want to. Hammer away. Hammer away, Brendan. This is what I called you
here for. But so, yeah, I want to avoid the trap of, you know, of doing that. I will say, though,
there's an interesting way, right, about how, like the attraction, say, to Eastern Orthodoxy
after coming from an evangelical context is different than if you made the reverse move.
Do you see what I'm saying? It's because, right, like, I do think that there's this metamodern
aspect here in which there's a deep pragmatism as well that I think informs a lot of metamodern
thought, which stems from the same insight, right, of like, well, we got to live with some story,
right? You know, so it's sort of like a pragmatic realization that you're
are between a rock and a hard place, and you just got to choose because you got to get on with your
life and you have to have some meaning in it. So there is a pragmatism there. And I think that
there is a kind of attraction to certain kinds of religiosity from the standpoint of, damn it,
I want to be religious, you know, and I, it's almost like, you know, I don't want to say it's
as flippant as, you know, flip a coin, literally, but there's some sense of like, I need this element
in my life, and I want to choose this, and I'm attracted to these aesthetics, right? And so I
will engage with this thing as it gives me this value. But that's a very reflective stance to,
like, adopt a religious tradition for. It's very different if you were to grow up in the
tradition itself and just like, get the experience of this is the truth, and this is the way that
reality is, you'd have to deconstruct that before you'd even be able to get in the position where
you could authentically, agentially, volitionally choose the thing that you're in. And oftentimes,
to be fair, a lot of the places that we're coming from, we're often trying so hard to distance
ourselves from that it's going to be very unlikely that we're going to end back in the place once
we've done all that work that we have done so much to get away from, though some people do.
And I could very well conceive of, you know, a situation where people leave, or let's say that
people find a form of the religiosity that I left and affirm it from a metamodern standpoint for
all the reasons that we're talking about. But you have to see, and the point I'm making is that
they're different then, right? That it's different. And a lot of it has to do with the degree of
reflection, which is, again, the sort of recursive reflection and this reflective move that we're
always doing with things. It's sort of we're learning from them. We're able to take them as
an objective analysis. We're able to, you know, not just look through our glasses, but look at
our glasses and then go from that vantage, right? So I think a lot of, you know, the move here is
when you grow up, when you're enculturated, and when you're learning things, like your whole
formative period of life for the first, say, 20 years, a lot of it is just being taught how to
see through a certain pair of glasses, right? And then in time, you might very well come to
realize that that way of seeing isn't complete, that it is a pair of glasses that you can take
off and analyze. And then you do that for a while. And maybe that occupies a lot of your, you know,
I don't know, early 20s and whatever. But then eventually you're like, okay, yep, that's how
this whole thing works. And, you know, you know, now it's like, which pair of glasses am I going
to wear? And why? That's right. You can't go without that lens. There's always the interpretive lens.
So the awareness of that to me seems like a differentiating factor between just like,
I'm leaving this thing because I'm upset or I'm hurt for valid reasons or non valid reasons,
whatever the case may be. And I'm running away from this thing. That seems very different than
going, Oh, I've taken off my glasses, I realize I have an interpretive lens. And then you go and
you take that one set off, and then you put on another pair. And then you realize, Oh, shoot.
Wait, this is also has these filters. Yes. Right. Yes. Now, this is where things start
to become very interesting as well, though, because all right, a couple things here, let's say I have
some rose colored glasses on, right? And I'm like, Oh, yes, the world is so rosy. Now, of course,
I wouldn't say that because everything is rosy. So it's all contextually viewed through that lens,
right? But then someone comes around and they tell me, Hey, actually, you're just viewing through a
pair of rose colored glasses. And to the degree that I don't just immediately shoot them away,
because they're challenging my sense of reality and get very defensive about that and actually
take it seriously. Then I might go through the whole thing of like learning to take them off,
look at them, find another pair over here. And this has a green lens and then try those on,
right? And I think that I guess one of the things I want to say is one, that movement I think is
the movement from sort of naive traditionalism or naive religiosity into a sort of modern critical
stance where we're able to take religion itself as a subject as an object of criticism and study.
And so that would be starting to do this, right? And then the postmoderns come along and they're
like, Oh, okay, yeah. But here's all these other glasses you could choose from. And so
so it's all relative, right? It's all totally random, right? Now, here's where the thing really
starts to click, I think, is that then once you take that serious, you're like, Wow, there are
all these different kinds of glasses I could be wearing. And then you say, I can put them all
on and I can compare them, I can put them all on and adjudicate between them. Some of them are
showing aspects better than others, maybe, maybe some prescriptions closer to my eyes or whatever.
There are certain aspects in which I'm getting new elements of what is there through different
kinds of glasses. But even bigger than that, one becomes aware of this whole meta move that it's
the case that we're all wearing glasses, we can all become aware of it, we can all take them off,
study them, and then see the ways in which we're wearing various forms of glasses. And that that
then becomes, you could say, a new set of glasses that seems like it's absolute that you're now
you're looking through the world through the lens of lenses, right? You're you've got a cultural
logic of cultural logics because that's what that's what this is. It's sort of like, what are these
different lenses? Well, they're different religions, they're different ideologies. But more than that,
they're different sort of degrees of of of perspectival awareness, you could even say.
And so you start to see that what all of these things have in common is that it's better to
have more knowledge of more glasses and to be able to go through the process itself of adjudicating
that. And that there's something that feels closer to like truth about that whole meta process,
right? And so you're able to allow you to have some sort of comparison. If you say,
as I've tried on 12 different sets of glasses, I notice some similar features shared,
maybe that's pointing to some, you know, core of cores here that that actually is revealing
something that is true across these perspectives, right? There's there's not only the fact that
you can then compare perspectives and see what they have in common and then be in a better position
to say, you know, well, that's real. And I think to some degree, modernism has already kind of
engaged in projects like that. But I think what's even the bigger move is seeing that there's this
meta pattern of lens analysis, you know what I mean? That that that that the whole thing itself
provides a way to adjudicate between perspectives. And because, right, when you put on a pair of
glasses, and you can't see that people are wearing glasses, those glasses aren't telling you as much
about reality as a pair of glasses where you put them on and you do see that, right? This is where
the analogy falls apart a little bit because glasses can't do all this. But you understand what I'm
saying, right? That there's something intrinsically valuable about the art of deconstructing a
worldview in a perspective in order to then see beyond it. And then to get to the meta perspective
of seeing the process of worldview construction and deconstruction itself, which then provides you
some some solid thing that you can compare all worlds to, if that makes sense. So that gives you
this meta pattern that's sort of a new rubric or a new measure or universal scale or something,
right? And this is what I mean when I talk about meaning and the complexification of meaning and
all this stuff, because this is this is something quite different than, you know, oh, we all just
live in a story, so we might as well choose one, which is still very inflected by postmodern
relativism to, well, we've gone through postmodern relativism, and now we're able to
relativize it within a broader process that is sort of a still actually universal process.
Now, hopefully, one, people are with me on any of this, and it's making sense to
I want to qualify that as well, because I don't immediately once you see that this is this process,
you see that it keeps going, right? There's no clear end to this process. It has a kind of
self-transcending quality to it. And so there should be some epistemic humility that we have
here, that even though we have this sort of universal scale, like, well, how many perspectives
can we can we see and that that's real and that that's not just, oh, you know, whatever you want to
believe. We also shouldn't say that even this whole perspective won't be transcended in some
other meta, meta level where we put on a new set of glasses. And I can understand how that might
make people uncomfortable, because it seems like the solid ground that we just got from this sort
of thing is now immediately then torn out from under us. But I also want to invite people to
think about this as a mystery, as the mystery of reality that I think personally I see as a sacred
process. And when I start marrying this idea of how the development of knowledge works and the
connection with reality to certain forms of apophatic mysticism, there's fascinating connections
there to be made in terms of like an eternally disclosing world, a reality that is becoming more
and more clearly known by people, even as it's also always receding away in this ultimate mystery,
which I think is, you know, if you're a believing person, shouldn't be any great discomfort either.
There's just, there is sort of this. And so this is, this is what I want to tie back into
the emanation bit, you know, so what I'm talking about is emergence. Every time you take off the
glass and come to this whole new conception of reality, you've like gone through an emergent
phase shift, and you're seeing things in like a totally different way, things have new, your
knowledge has been restructured and reorganized, and you've got a new, you know, that's emergence,
that's bottom up kind of self transcendence. But there is this thing that sort of on the other
end of this whole process that we're moving towards in doing that. And that's the emanation
bit. And that's a lot harder to speak about, right? And that's where I want to locate that
emanation aspect. And you can call that God, you can use, you know, the imagery of the Bible to
talk about it. And you can, and I think I think we should draw on the experience of the mystics and
the mystical literature, especially in the Christian tradition to think about this.
But I think that that's, that's the, that's the mystery of it to me. And I think we're,
where this stops being a purely sort of cultural analysis, or kind of epistemological speculation
and starts to become a kind of devotional relationship to the ground of being in the
infinitely self emanating abundance of the fullness of the one or something like that.
Yeah. So with that mystery, there's maybe a couple of different existential responses
to that, to the confession of the ultimate transcendence of the ground of being, right,
that there is in the Eastern Orthodox tradition, you're more apt to use the apophatic language
of what God is not, than what he is, so that you don't constrain the possibilities of the
transcendent. And yet, there's a real problem there with combinatorial explosion, with decision
fatigue and a sense of decision paralysis, where you can get to the point where the mystery becomes
so grand, you don't know where to take a first step. And I think that's, that would be a concerning
feature of, okay, so the metamodernism, metamodern shift, if you accept some of these
presuppositions, if you accept where, what's the word I'm looking for, if you accept where the,
because it's not even just, I don't want to reduce this to like, here are, here are propositional,
here's propositional knowledge about the world, you know, because it's very much connected to,
when you watch these core core videos, for example, it's not propositional, it's aesthetic,
it's a vibe. So where's the vibe? Where's the vibe leading you? I'm very optimistic about the
possibility that in this moment, people are very open to positive reconstruction. That for me is
like a win. But I'm also confessing my conviction of location on this as somewhat of a Kierkegaardian
Christian, and that I'm like, yes, there is something, there's something at the edge of this
doc, you know, and this is maybe to use another metaphor or picture that we can, let's say, take
the reasons for believing that there is something positive to reconstruct into, that there is a
core of cores, that there's a container of containers. No, I think I know where you're
getting at. So, well, I don't want to interrupt you, though, so please finish your thought. But I
think, okay, so let me just throw this out there then to you, Brendan, then you can please provide
your feedback and comments on it. But for me, the way I picture it is this sense that
there is enough general revelation to use my Christian theological language to lead me to,
as like what Paul would argue in Romans one, that God's invisible attributes are
your on display within the material world that's been created. And there's enough reason to believe
that there is a core of cores, there's a container of containers, there is, and you could go through
all the Aristotelian, you know, the five reasons of Augustine or not Augustine of Aquinas, for
an Aristotle, for believing in all of that stuff. But it still leads you to this point
of which irrationality is not enough that you have to enter into the suprarational. And this,
for me, is again kind of a Kierkegaard disciple. This is where that leap of faith from the edge
of the dock into the ocean that stands in front of you is the only way that you can know whether
or not you will swim is when you actually move from here, the propositions that I've been built
upon. And now I have to actually like give of myself. And so for like Kierkegaard, this is the
only way that one actually truly comes to know Christ, to know God is in that decisive leap
of faith, the actual movement. So I think you're probably tracking with me on this, Brendan. The
question then for some that come out of this, they go, I want to reconstruct, I want to positively
reconstruct. Where do I take the leap? Is there a leap? You know, with that leap also comes the
risk, I don't want to leap into the wrong thing. You know, I still have to hold to the what we've
learned from postmodernism that maybe that story I'm leaping into is just simply masking a play
for power. I think the one for me, Brendan, I have no problem talking about this. This is me
confessing that I know I'm situated in a story is like, you know, the Nietzschean critique that
this is nothing more than slave morality. It's a it's a poignant critique, you know, that this
story is a great story if you want to remain on the underside and the bottom side of history all
the time. And so to encourage people in my vocation to take that leap, I take it very, very seriously,
you know. So mystery, the searching for the core of cores, the meta beyond the meta.
How do we move beyond the sense of paralysis and decision fatigue into actually stepping into
something that we could positively reconstruct name that we're positively constructing, or are we
just kind of stuck with our same old epistemology problems? I think there's a couple of related
questions in there. And I'll tackle one first, and it might answer all of them, I'm not sure. But
I actually love this image of the core of cores. So we'll take that in a very sincerely ironic way
and like really run with it. Okay, so like imagine a mandala, right? It's sort of a series of
concentric circles, right? And when you think about that structure, you can see that it's sort of
like a, you know, you can also think of it in sort of a Venn diagram way that like, you know,
what's at the center is sort of in all of the things, right? Now, if you think about this
complexification thing I've been talking about, and which relates directly, by the way, to being
able to see more and more perspectives and more and more lenses, that you see that the
complexification of meaning gets us to these places. And so we're taking in more and more
perspectives. But then the question is, what's the core of cores? If there were a core of cores,
then we would have good cause to, let's say, always be able to rest in something. I want to
come back and qualify this in a second. But what I want to suggest is love. It's not, I don't think
of this so much as a leap of faith, which for me still rings with all this propositional logic and
maybe even some kind of relational interpersonal logic or something. But love is the vibe. Okay,
you know, love is the vibe. And, and what I mean by that is that it's true at all levels,
right? That there's no point where you can get to the complexification of something or you get
to a new perspective. And all of a sudden, you're totally justified to be an asshole, you know,
doesn't work that way. There's like, you can go down to the most, you know, simple, or pure,
or whatever kind of, you know, language you want to use for this kind of, even very naive faiths.
And you'll find agape and eros and other kinds of love, phyllo. But you'll find the sense of
connection, of harmony, of moving, of wanting to bring together and to unite. And, you know,
then you can start getting into theologies of love and everything, which Kierkegaard did too.
But, but that, but you can also then zoom out, right? And you can also see that there's this,
this operates to at like, you know, these levels that we're talking about of metamodern,
self reflexive recursivity and all this stuff. But it's like, we're still engaged in a connection
that is not lost or torn asunder by the complexification of it all. And that actually,
as you're able to see more and more of reality and see more and more perspectives and more and more
of the truth, and as that reality discloses itself to you, and you have more pieces and parts to
work with, the love is what is binding all those pieces together, so that you're seeing just more
and more of the way that love, you know, as Dante would say, you know,
causes the planets to dance around the stars. So that would be my initial answer is that the vibe
is love and the core of cores is love. And, and that you can think about that as being the thing
that binds those together. Now, fascinating, or maybe bizarre as it may sound, this was something
I've got from synthesizing metamodernisms, at least, you know, what I would, a pattern I was
picking up in a lot of people talking about this, you've got Alexander Dumitrescu talking about,
you know, this sort of kindness and Jacob's Ladder, you've got Vermeulen and von Daneker
talking about Eros and sort of the Metaxi binding the different finite and infinite.
You've got, you know, the Hansi-Frinach stuff and the whole complexity aspect of this really
kind of filling in this neo-Aristotelian leveled ontology, and connecting that to psychology
in the ways that this sort of complexification leads to increasing degrees of embrace, I guess,
is what Susan Cook-Groeter would call it, but the increasing levels of intimacy and connection
with other people, and that that becomes sort of the telos, you could say, that like whatever that
is is simultaneously the core of cores, but it's also that that emanating reality that's sort of
unfolding more and more of itself, and that somehow in the great, you know, paradoxical
vision of the mystics, the center is also their circumference, you know, and the origin is also
the destination. So that would be kind of a meta-modern mystical response to that question,
which I think begins more immediately from like a practical concern of like, how then, you know,
how then shall we live our lives? Sort of a thing. So the first answer I think is just sort of like,
well, you know, and this is the end of one of the great takeaways of that meta-modern film I
mentioned everywhere, everything everywhere at once, which is be kind. Be kind, especially when
you don't know what's going on, and we don't know what's going on, and we can expect that we should
always have our lenses ripped from our faces, and we see a whole new level of reality, and that our
senses of ego and worldview get deconstructed, and we've got to rebuild. There's always so
much that we don't know, and this profound uncertainty in the chaos that's beyond our
minimal complexity to be able to make sense of. So that's always going to be the case, but there's
always this enduring sense of be kind. And if you can start there, then you're probably doing
the most important thing. And then we can, you know, talk about whether any of the other stuff
makes any sense. Yeah, that's beautifully stated. That does remind me of what Aquinas argued that
Caritas was the highest virtue, that there was some superlative virtue up above all of them. And I
do think, at the end, you know, maybe this is kind of still kind of like an existentialist wager
here that I've always looked at that Brendan and gone, all right, what would be the worst,
and maybe this is some sort of like Pascal's wager sort of deal here, but what would be the
worst that would come of my life if I actually gave myself in love to seeking the good of the
other when I encounter them. And if I made that, and if I actually trusted that at the core of
cores, you know, that that was the thing that brought everything to be was a desire to connect,
it's a desire for communion. And at the very center of it was loving communion. I mean,
there's certainly, I'm not saying Christianity is the only story that has that, but I do look at
that and go, these are the sorts of things that for me, Brendan, I go, all right, I'm very aware
that I'm in a story. But this one, at least on those levels, it matches up for me, right? And
if at the end, I end up being wrong, I think I still don't think I would have as many regrets
as if I rejected that premise, I rejected the way of love, I rejected seeking the good of the
other. If I rejected that and pursued my own selfish ends, I think I've been bedside for people
who, pardon me, in those dying moments of life. And it bends bedside with people that have given
themselves to that. And if in the end, it's just all, you just head into the void. And that,
what was it in everything everywhere? Once the, the everything bagel of, yeah, everything bagel
of nothingness, if that just consumes us all in the end, I know there's a point in which,
you know, the possible argued, you know, if there is no resurrection, then, you know, we are to be
pitied among all people. And I'm pretty much an idiot for giving my life to this. But I still
think there's probably something of a Pascalian wager that not, not, not the way it's often
used in cliches, but the sense that what you're talking about, I don't know. But I know the
difference in my life when I've given myself to my ego versus giving myself to truly seeking the
good of my neighbor, those around me of loving God and loving other people. And then believing
that at the very core, of course, that there is, you know, Stanley Grence's book, Theology for
the Community of God, this is his argument that, you know, one of the distinctions for the Christian
story is the story of, at the very core of cores, you have a communion within a Godhead. And I'm
not asking, you know, you do agree with that or listeners to agree with that sentiment. But for
me, I find that picture compelling, that there is loving communion at the center in which we are
being enveloped into. If in the end, I'm wrong. I don't know. What's, what's the worst that come
with me, I suppose? Yeah, I mean, you know, yes, I, for me, the Kierkegaardian leap was really
a crucial transition moment in my life for getting out of nihilism, let's say. And I think that that
leap, you know, Kierkegaard had a stage model, right, of faith, basically, of the other religious
life. And it begins in aestheticism and, you know, goes into the ethical realm and into religious
religiosity. So he was using a stage model. And I think, I mean, I think that there's something
about what he's talking about that actually does fit into like a certain stage approach to
the religious life. I think for me, where it resonates most though, is it's what you do when
you're at the, in the bottom of the abyss of nihilism, that to me is where you make the Kierkegaardian
move. And one of the things that I find interesting about that, though, is part of what happens with
those stage transitions is that by the time they've sort of played themselves out and gotten,
they've sort of, there's like a seed there that then grows into something and the thing it grows
into is very different than the thing it was, if that makes any sense. And so I think that
while that leap of faith move is crucial, I think that at least in my experience, it was doing that
in that moment that then got me in a place where I could sort of climb out of the abyss
and then look back and be like, Oh, man, I used to be down in that abyss. Right. But I would never
have been able to do that had I not made that leap of faith. And so in that new leap of faith,
it was a, it was a genuine moment of, of actual nihilism, really, because, and this is another
interesting way in which, you know, logics in a kind of Hegelian way, negate their own negation
and then turn into different things, right? Because nihilism itself gets you to a point where you
can then affirm anything, including faith, you can become so meaningless in your life that you can
then just choose meaning. And it's fascinating that if you actually do that and play that out,
you can get out of that abyss, look down and be like, Oh, yeah, I used to believe in no meaning.
That's wild. But you got there because you, you made a ladder for yourself and you climbed on
top of yourself to get out. Or, you know, someone could say you were climbing on top of more than
that. So yeah, I guess the point I want to make is that I think that what you're describing is very
real and important. But I think I want to encourage people to that. I think that there's also something
beyond the leap of faith that it's like you're leaping. You do, you can, let's say, land somewhere
that might not be an eternal landing place, because again, in the sort of endlessly
shifting sands, right, that they do keep changing. But, but you do land somewhere and that the leap
in retrospect becomes something different from that vantage than what it was when it was initiated.
And so, yeah, I guess I wanted to make that point.
Yes, that's great. I'm glad you bring that up, Brendan, because there would be some confusion
there for some that might think, and maybe this is part of what we're processing in the Meta-Modern
Age is like, is the answer simply to go back, right, to go back like re-enchantment, is re-enchantment
simply going back? Do we just need to somehow get back to the medieval worldview and mindset?
No, there's a reason why we had to come out of that, right? And this isn't to fall for the trap
of the inevitability of progress. I'm not suggesting that, but there is even within,
for me, the Kierkegaardian model, and for me, within the Christian story, there has to be a
recognition of the perpetual transcendent nature of God. And so, you have these signposts and you
can't settle for the signpost unless they become the idol, right? So, you move beyond that, and
there's a constant moving beyond, but it's not a moving beyond that should lead you to feel like
I could never take a first step. And I think that's the thing I'm trying to work through and help
people work through is like the first step out of the pit, out of the abyss. And I think that's
where John has been really, really helpful. I haven't been... I'm going to word this carefully.
I have my disagreements with kind of Peterson's maybe post-daily wire kind of turn, but I think
Peterson's greatest strength was at least helping people go take the first step out of the abyss.
There's an abyss there. Make a movement. That is a kind of... That's Camus. That is kind of the
existentialist impulse, like radically rebel against the abyss in some way. Yeah. And I think,
I mean, this might be, hopefully, I've somewhat ingratiated myself, but here's where maybe I've
become very challenging as well, because part of me sees the process itself as destroying our idols,
which means sometimes... No, I'm not going to say sometimes. It means destroying various forms of
Christianity, maybe very, very precious forms, those earlier enculturated forms that we grew
up with that was our place where we had a firm foundation. For me, the spiritual life and spiritual
development is about being able to grapple with having your whole religious worldview crumble
and then get out of that abyss onto a new place, but then also accept that it's not like, okay,
now I'm safe. It's that if we really accept the eternally kind of self-transcending aspect of the
divine, then we have to take seriously that every solid ground is going to be liable for
deconstruction, basically. And I guess I'd want to invite people to see that process, not as an
inhibition towards growth or faith or any of that. It's just that's the faith journey. It's like,
you get closer to God, I think, by continually killing God, if I can be so violent about it.
But I mean, the whole death of God notion that Nietzsche presents us is, in a postmodern moment,
lands as this abyss of nihilism. But when you see that it's actually the recursive movement of the
killing of God, that actually is what teaches you that there is a God beyond God, there is a God
beyond every single idol that you set up. And I highly recommend the work of Jean-Luc Marion,
who is very helpful for me on this bit, of God without being, which again, puts us into a new
area of sort of apophatic mysticism. He draws a lot on pseudo-dionysius. But the whole notion is
that we have these conceptual idols, and that we need to really take seriously the idea that every
single notion, do I want to say that? I think so. I'll be absolutely autistic for a second.
Every single notion that we have of God is wrong, and that we should be okay with that,
that this is the upside of deconstruction. And I want to obviously qualify that with some of the
things I was saying about the core, of course, and you know that there's love. And so I'm not
trying to say that like we can all find out that God's is evil monster or something, right?
That's not my point. My point is that if we are using images and symbols and myths and stories
and worldviews as our story that we are affirming, great. But then we know that we're using the story
and then also be open to when the cracks show up in that story, that we can push that story over
and transcend to some new thing. And that's going to be a storyless moment for a while,
it's going to be falling through a vertiginous space of nihilism, potentially, or confusion,
disorientation. But that is part of the recursive process of reflection, and that in the process
we're getting closer to that emanating truth of reality, not farther away from it. So I would
throw that out there, and it's a very, it might seem, I don't know, bleak or something, and maybe
it is, but I mean, there's an element to which if we really take seriously the sublimity and the
grandeur of ultimate divinity, then we should be epistemically humble to see that pretty much
everything that we're using to kind of gesture towards that is the crudest of representations,
and ultimately they are representations, and therefore they're ultimately idols. So
there's a metamodern notion from, I'll just say the last thing, so Hansi Freinacht is a
metamodern thinker, he talks about the image of the headless God as sort of his icon for the
divine, because it's that God that can continually have his head chopped off, so to speak, that can
keep coming back, that is really what deserves our awe and reverence. So yeah, I hope people get
a sense of how what seems like the end of faith and religion and just this total
consummation of a nihilistic postmodernism can be worked through in a way that recursively
reaffirms itself to a point that you can see that there's a deep structure of meaning under all of
this. Yeah, I think maybe I'll throw out a couple, maybe different words, and maybe we're in agreement,
maybe we're in disagreement on that, and that's totally fine to be in disagreement on it as well.
You're saying there are different perspectives? What are you talking about?
I would maybe frame it as like our pictures are incomplete instead of all idolatrous.
I think for me would be at the core of idolatry is settling for the image as the final,
and so where it becomes idolatry is not in the announcement of it being true, good, or beautiful,
but in the finality of that particular picture, which is I do think at the core of the Hebrew
tradition, which is really fascinating, why the prohibition of making images of God is so fascinating
given the cultural context. Now you could say, well, they still made the Ark of the Covenant and
things like that, but still there were very, very strong prohibitions on trying to come up with a
particular idol that would represent God in the same way that you might see across other cultures,
and I think there's something to that, and yet I think my, I don't know if I'd say pushback,
or maybe it's a qualification or a point of seeing if we're on the same page in this or not,
is to say, okay, but I also don't want to do the move where I have to be the,
all of history begins afresh with me, and so I'm starting without any received
tradition, without any sense in which, yes, affirming the transcendence of God, but also
affirming the imminence of God. So God has wanted to make himself, at the nature of love,
would be some desire of intelligibility. To me, this grounds all of our scientific endeavors,
right, is that the world is, to some degree, another intelligible because it's given to
us as a gift. And with that, there are images that may still need to be corrected. But I think,
bring this up because I think I've, as a practical point, I know a lot of people
have personally found some sense of transformation and actually revisiting old practices from their
past that they maybe thought there was no value to. I think of even something simple
is the practice of someone revisiting an old song. So quick story, and I don't want to respect
your time too, Brendan, so we won't take too much longer here. But there was a guy at our church
who several weeks ago, maybe a couple months ago, came up to me and he's like,
you know, I really appreciate the songs that we sung together because they brought me back
to this moment. And he was a guy that was a Vietnam vet and he showed up at a Billy Graham
crusade one time just to, because the girl that he was interested in was going to the Billy Graham
crusade. And he spent the whole time at the Billy Graham crusade mocking it until finally the,
you know, the infamous Billy Graham altar call happened. And for some reason he tells the story,
he's like, I was making fun of the whole experience, the whole time, all it was there was just try to
get with this girl. At the very end, I found myself compelled for something beyond me to run to the
altar. And my entire life changed in that moment. And when I hear these songs, they bring me back
to that moment of transformation. I would be reluctant to say that the journey of perpetual
transformation would require that we have to disassemble all of those experiences down to the
studs. And I don't, it doesn't seem like that that'd be what you're saying is instead maybe
like maintaining a posture of epistemic humility to there being limitations to them.
Because otherwise, I think I don't know how we would get beyond the point of
there would, how do we, yeah, and then there's this dance here to get to a journey
requires a belief that there is someplace to go to. But it also requires the knowledge
that you have accumulated for how to use particular skills and resources to even make
a movement in a particular direction. And so I think that's the tension like I experienced
in this, because I do see a lot of people that, especially in our generation younger,
who might say, okay, I recognize that all of these stories and all these images of God are
always going to be broken. So one of my choices here is I will, I will never plug into any sort
of traditional religious community because everything that came from the past is ultimately
going to lead me. And what I often see just as a practical point is a lot of people get involved
into the kind of like DIY spiritualities in which they're continually functioning as like,
I'm the self author. And then we're kind of like back at that same sort of point of the
atomized individual who now most can come and then they get involved in some sort of weird
cult where you think the, you know, you think the sex scandals that go through churches are bad,
wait till you get involved in some of these like guru sex cults. So yeah, that's just kind of like
the back and forth I'm experiencing the tension about the images of God and the idolatry that
can come with them, but also recognizing like, I don't have to start from scratch. There's received
an inherited wisdom that we're actually referring to these people who we say they've got some glimpse
of it. And that gives us a vantage point to stand on and gives us some sort of, yeah,
gives us a house to live in as opposed to possibly feeling like we're always remodeling,
you know, all the time. Gosh, I mean, you know, this could be, I mean, there's, you just outlined
such important things. And I feel like this could be the beginning of a whole new conversation
or not a new one, but there's like, there's at least an hour and a half to talk about this. But
briefly, I mean, to tackle some of that. Yes, I get that. I think that
I probably do skew a bit towards the, how do I put it? I mean, yes, you're identifying something
in what I'm saying, which is true, which is this, you know, there's this recursive deconstruction
process. And when I think what you're saying is like, yeah, but like, we have to live somewhere
and like, can't we eventually kind of, you know, like be okay with where we're at and all that.
And I want to honor that beyond that, beyond that, Brandon, I'll just throw this one other
point is like, especially when we think about raising children, grandchildren, yeah, yeah,
then what do we pass on not just individually, but how do we help our kids enter into a story
that we actually think leads to their good and they're flourishing. Yeah. And I don't want to
see my kids go through like perpetual deconstruction. I don't like I want them to come face to face
with idols that are unhealthy, that are leading to disorder, to ruin in their lives and the lives
of other people. But I wouldn't, you know, the things that I've gone through, I wouldn't wish
on my children. Yeah, I know, but it's also like, you're a great guy. So like, maybe you had to go
through some of that, you know what I mean? Like, honestly, though, it's like, I've had this conversation
a number, well, broach this conversation a couple of times with people in terms of like,
this is this is partly the issue of suffering, right? I mean, you know, I, I, yeah, the idea
that experiencing your kids experiencing suffering is, is suffering. But at the same time, like,
puberty sucks, man, you know what I mean? And like, growing up is hard. And so there has got
to be some allowance for like, you know, but I think what you're also naming there was something
really important, which is that our, our whatever, let's say you use the word images, I guess,
because idols can be very loaded. And I do want to collapse a little bit some of this
hard distinction between idol and image, right? Because it's like, I think we should also be
okay with with the fact that we're not getting the absolute, right? We might be, we might be selling,
you know, it's like, we're, you know, the perfect shouldn't be the enemy of the good sort of a thing,
right? It doesn't mean that like, just because we can't continually bask before the eternal face
of God in the Imperium doesn't mean that like, we, you know, should just give up on the whole
religion thing. So, but what I was going to say was that I think you're naming a really important
dynamic, which is the notion of development, that what role development plays in all of this. And
by development, I mean, psychological development, I mean, the journey that we make from being an
infant to a young child to an adolescent to an adult and then to an mature adult, etc. Like,
that is an arc. And that faith is going to look different. Religion is going to look different.
Our God concepts are going to look different along that journey. And for this, I mean, you know,
James Fowler has done great work. There's excellent work on this topic that I think people should
be taking very seriously. And all this ties directly in actually to what I was talking earlier about
successively de centering and acknowledging perspectives, because it's the same mechanism
that allows our God concept to evolve and change and grow. So I want to name all that.
And I also want to name that different people are going to sort of, you know,
settle in a particular spot on their developmental journey in different places than others, right?
And, and not everyone's going to be called to a life of mysticism, you know, not everyone wants
to be a desert hermit, you know, whether or not desert hermitage is even, you know, an ideal is
a different topic. But like, let's just say the religion, religion has always appreciated the
fact that like, different people are on that journey and doing different aspects of it and
following it to different degrees. There's esoteric and esoteric elements to this and all that.
People have even challenged me like, is apophatic mysticism a legitimate basis for
religiosity? Like, how do you cohere a bunch of people around an absent center? I mean,
I think you make a compelling connection to the idea of, you know, an iconism in the Hebrew
tradition that literally did just that. So I think there are models for it. So I want to say all
that. I also want to say that, that I do think that there can be very healthy expressions of DIY
religion. And I have a whole way of thinking about this, which, you know, might, yeah, again,
goes into different terrains. But I see God as continuing to evolve. And that might be maybe a
kind of strange or even heretical idea to some folks. But if you really do take everything
that we've been saying seriously about this, you know, unfolding disclosure, you could even call
it unfolding revelation, then of course, our concept of God keeps changing and evolving. And
indeed, when you look back in history, you see that the notions of God do change and evolve,
and that they do move from, you know, more kind of mythological versions to more kind
of moral philosophical visions to transcendent and then into, you know, so, and interestingly,
those pair very, very fascinatingly with the kinds of developmental trajectories that we
see at the individual level too. So but again, different story. So what I'm saying is that it
might be very serious that some people feel like they are called to sort of push into new terrain
and in almost prophetic calling, try to speak new elements and new aspects of the divine into the
world. And that there are interesting and important ways that that kind of work can be done seriously
and not just sort of a new age DIY buffet style pick and choose approach, right? So I'm just hitting
a bunch of points here. But to get back to the main thing, I guess I just I do maybe because I've
gone through multiple deconstruction experiences tend to be okay with the hard
reality of owning and even valorizing, even sanctifying the inherent iconoclasm that goes
into a life of faith, because God is always calling you to, you know, break down those images. And
I've had to reimagine and re understand divine experiences in my life and things that have
happened. And, you know, these sorts of things that were very meaningful to me that set me on a
whole new path and gave me a whole new sense of my life, meaning and purpose and direction to have
those five years later be like, Oh, no, sorry, that that wasn't the thing, you know, and then
like to have that happen multiple times, right? It's sort of like, so I guess I'm just naming
all that. And I'm saying that, yes, not everyone needs to feel like that that the answer to all
this is somehow like to just give up on this on any notion of stability or anything like that.
But that there are ways of framing a lot of what I've said in social containers around development,
education, building developmentally informed approaches to teaching, you know,
catechism and faith and that's that really is appropriate to where people are at in life.
And to also I guess this is the maybe this is the point that I'm really getting at is
I think most people will be okay with that. People do I think eventually get not okay with
challenging received images, symbols, rituals, paradigms, stories, myths. And that's most of
what I've had to bump up against in my own deconstructions and in, you know, what's happening
with people around me and the people I care about and how I relate to them and all that. And I guess
I just always want to plug the idea that like, when people are deconstructing when they are going
through something radical in a worldview shift, like, there's a default assumption in religious
communities that this is a falling away. It's a it's a it's a regression. It's a, it's a, yeah,
the fallback. I forget there's kind of hostacy. Yeah, well, certainly. Yeah. Right. So there's
that's just, I think, I think we religious communities are misoriented around those
sorts of life events. And I think if we were to take them much more seriously and be able to
appreciate that they are the dynamic living moments in the evolution of faith, not just
for individuals, but for society and what can come out of those experiences, we would be better
off. And the last thing I'll say, because I'm rambling, is that I totally agree that we have
this rich tradition to draw from. And we shouldn't, you know, Gerta said he who can't draw on 2000
years of history is living from hand to mouth. So I'm not saying that like, oh, down with all the
idols of the past either. But we should also take seriously that part of what we now have available
to us is all the other religious traditions, right? You know, the Vedanta and neoplatonism and Zen,
and, you know, all these different traditions that again, I think people maybe are a bit uncomfortable
thinking about was like, well, yeah, we have tradition, but not those traditions, right?
And so, you know, I think that there is profound wisdom out there in a lot of different traditions
that we might want to consider folding that in as well. So yes, how do we, how do we navigate the
tension and the, and, you know, between moving beyond the limitations of the past, but not,
you know, throwing out the baby with the bathwater? That's a perennial issue. And how do we, how do
we find a sense of stability in a continually, you know, dynamic world upending potentially,
you know, situation of flux, perennial tension? But these are the questions that we should like
sort of be inviting the wrestling with, I think, as I've heard you talk about things and not just
sort of, you know, immediately precluding them from the religious life. Yeah. And I'm really
thankful for you sharing your perspective, Brendan, on this. And I'm glad, you know, even, you know,
as the opponent processing happens, that's where a lot of this growth takes place. If we are serious
about confessing our own limitations, our finitude, and even, you know, from a Christian,
you know, historically Christian perspective, we are confessing not just our finitude as an
inherent feature of being human, but some sense of like the depravity of our own condition to
sometimes bend things towards our own will to bend things towards our own selfish output.
Then we have to be open to having these sorts of dialogues where people aren't like necessarily
eye to eye, but there's a there's an openness to actually going, Hey, I think there's growth
happening. And I want to affirm that just I'm thankful for this dialogue, Brendan. And I'm
thankful, hopefully listeners experience it from wherever context they sit, they find themselves
situated in as a positive thing that produces growth in their life, and allows them to say,
Hey, let me take my lenses off for a second, try some others on. And without doing that,
I do think the sort of like naivete that leads to the kinds of stories that are used in oppressive,
abusive ways, ways that don't have adherence to reality. If we're not checking up against this
stuff, then we can we can be blindly participating in that. I just came to my head, maybe sometime,
I don't want to throw this out there and impose upon them. But I was just thinking, boy, this
really gets that I think it'd be really fun. And maybe I can invite them into it be fun to bring
like john vervecky on and someone else like Paul van der clay to talk about, like the merits of
kind of staying within a traditional religious tradition versus kind of like vervecky's project
and what it seems like is in keeping with some of your project is to say, all right, can we
take some of these and move them outside of the walls of traditional religious institutions?
Which methodologies are better? Are there pitfalls or things we can learn from both strategies? And
I think that might be fun if john and paul are listening, open invitation, and I don't know if
you'd be open to doing something with that. But I think it'd be an interesting dialogue. Of course,
I've been, I mean, that is the conversation with one of the major conversation that needs
conversations that needs to be had. I've started to get into elements of that with my own conversations
with with john vervecky. I'm actually, yeah, I have a open correspondence, meaning I reached out,
haven't heard back yet, from Paul van der clay. So we might, we were thinking of talking anyway,
but this would be a topic that I think would be perfect to to dive into. And so, yes, I'd
definitely be open to that. One last thing I want to say, too, though, is, is, is just that
the images that we use of great value that come from our traditions, also, we're always
deepening our understanding and our interpretations of them, right? I certainly, you know, a,
a minister of say 70 years old is going to have a very different conception of Jesus,
even then, you know, a five or seven year old, right? So like, and that we can take to take
those changes seriously. And yet, they still continue to persist and give that sort of continuity
and stability, even as there is evolving shifting notions. And then one of the challenges is how
do we, how do we make sure that we're in harmony when someone's using this word in this way or
this concept? And yet, this is a, again, a perennial issue in any religious context as people
continue to work with the ideas and deepen in their understanding of them. But that seems to be,
personally, for me, the hardest thing to do myself with some traditional material is,
is how to work with it from a new perspective or a new vantage that I can still affirm,
you know, are we ever in a position to be like, no, that's totally, we can't do anything with
that one, you know, or, or what have you, because it's, you know, people speak very eloquently
often, including yourself about drawing on this tradition and interpreting some of its ideas
in a way that I find, yes, you know, like I'm there with you, but then maybe enter a congregation
and you're expected to affirm a certain notion, theological notion or, or, or, you know, a creedle
or a dogmatic notion that's like, well, wait a second, that's not quite what I meant by
God or salvation or, or love even so. But yeah, so yeah, yeah.
You've nailed it. You've nailed it right there. I think deepening is a really good word. I think
that might be, that might be a word that you could find harmony between people within the
traditional religious communities still and those that might be kind of trying to work outside of
the bounds of that because deepening is I think a helpful picture that combats I think something
lots of traditionally religious people are, are suspicious of and I'm not saying it's accurate
and good for them to be suspicious, but I'm confessing even my own suspicion of the,
the kind of narrative that progress is any movement in any direction as long as we're
moving away from the past. Yeah, right. And so that, that notion seems to be not helpful in
many regards. So maybe there's a deepening and like you're saying, the deeper we get in some
subjects and some pictures, the more we realize, yeah, there might not be any goodness, truth,
or beauty in this image to hold on to anymore. And, but we only get that through these sorts
of dialogues, Brendan. And I think what the dynamic you just named also is, is to bring this back to
the meta modern conversation. I think that that's informing a lot of people's perspective in the
sense of it was a very modernist notion of, you know, anything moving ahead and away from the past
is good. And of course, you get that deconstructed. But I think people in a meta modern position are
certainly skeptical of that. They're skeptical of the skepticism of tradition as well. And so
I think you're seeing a lot of openness and interest in traditional forms of religiosity
for that reason. People don't feel like it has to be, again, that kind of false binary. So
yeah, this has been really wonderful. I really appreciate you having me on and getting to talk
about this stuff. It's been a pleasure. Thanks for your generosity with your time too, as well.
You know, before we recorded, you were asking how long this goes, hour to hour and a half,
but if we're really cooking close to two hours, I guess we must be really cooking because we're
close to two hours. So thanks. And I'm serious, I would love to maybe find some other time to
have continued dialogues, bring some other partners in that can can help enhance and expand
our framework here. This has been a blast, Brendan. Thank you so much. That sounds great. At the very
least, you're welcome on the Meta Modern Spirituality podcast, and we can continue this conversation.
But yeah, keep me posted. I'd be happy to talk with Paul and John for sure.
Great. Thank you, Brendan. Thank you, man.
