Thank you.
Welcome to the Integral Stage, and to another episode of Meta Models, our series on all
things Meta. Meta theory, Meta psychology, Meta studies. Today we're joined by Greg
Henriquez, a professor at James Madison University, who has been working on a
problem close to all integralists' hearts, unifying the field of psychology both
within itself and with the broader human domains of science and spirituality or
the wisdom traditions. He has presented details of his unified theory of
knowledge and tree of knowledge systems on integral stage before, but today we'd
like to take time to dive a little bit deeper into his work. Lehmann, would you
like to offer any introductory remarks before we get started? I'd like to say
that I admire Greg's conciseness. I think his ability to be very comprehensive
and inclusive with a very compact set of principles and statements is wonderful. I
think maybe the reason I admire that is because it sort of duplicates and
exemplifies the process of conciliance and convergence itself. And then often
imagine if I extrapolate that into the future and see a telos-like condition of
superintegration hovering over the horizon of reality. That's something you
see too, Greg, or is that a step too far? No, that's exactly what I say. In fact,
that's the... If we do that well, the dream is to do that well, to unite the
wisdom traditions, the emerging digital age, reverse the Meta crises and figure
out a way to be sustainable with both soul and Mother Earth and science and all
of that. So absolutely. So how did you get started working in the area of
Meta theory and Meta psychology? And were there any indicators early on in your
life of a talent for big picture thinking and model building or anything like
that? No, not really. Skip school, hung out, went to James Madison, where I'm
actually a professor now. So certainly not early. I actually had a little
trouble reading. My oldest brother's valedictorian and I was sort of kind of
in the shadow of that a little bit and was not seen in... My talent, and
actually it is a core talent, is that I could talk to people and very quickly
empathize with where people are. And that's good to be a psychologist. And
I like talking about human nature. I like talking about people's problems. I
like what was humanistically real. What the hell really mattered to people? So
I was always concerned about that. I also thought that my high school training
was basically BS. So I was in retrospect, I just wasn't engaged. But I did
well enough to go to undergrad and it was there. I actually met two still a
deep friend of mine, my first mentor, Joe McCulsky, a sociologist. He got me
interested in feminism and sociology. I was always oriented towards
psychology. But then I appreciated what would become sort of the top down
version of the social context. I was aware that our household was far more
biased and masculine thinking and values and the echoes or presence of
sexism. I could be woken to that from a feminist perspective started a process
of shift, a transformation in my emerging adulthood. That transformation took
off when I got into my graduate program, master's degree program in clinical
community psychology at the University of North Carolina, Charlotte. And by
that time, what was happening in retrospect, I didn't know this, but my
into which I learned to read well, so going from a slow reader to now a
decent reader. And that was syncing up with my capacity for empathy. And then
I brought myself into the graduate training program was super fortunate
to have excellent mentors and fellow classmates. I think it was a real
excellent three year period of training. And I got interested in psychotherapy.
Of course, I was a clinical psychologist. And that's how I'm trained. But
when I got into the room and could empathize with sort of what I call
the best of the best, I was really struck by how different the paradigms
were, how valuable they were when they were carried to with integrity and
skill. And then why wasn't it the case that we just didn't have a way of
making sense out of the paradigms in the classic metaphor, the blind men and
the elephant. So my my intuition, the second sort of real skill that I have
empathy is one, it is coherent conciliants, like I'm very in kind towards
zooming out and seeing from the noise music. And I'm very driven towards
that way. And I want to see an organismic worldview that is in harmony. And
what I then found in psychotherapy was a lot of good, but paradigmatic mid
level insights that do not have. And so in retrospect, I didn't call it at
times the problem of psychotherapy. And I was like, Hey, why do I have to choose
one of these? Or is it just an eclectic blend? There's a movement called
psychotherapy integration that I got interested in. And that's where the
sparks started to happen in my own transformation. I was 1994. So then I
did something that no one else had done, which really is quite interesting. It
was basically like, Well, why aren't all of these unified on the science of
psychology? You think about modern medicine. So you have modern biological
therapy as physicians. And modern Western medicine certainly is like, Well,
okay, there's human biology and that. And if we look at all the organ systems
and all of that, that provides a basic relatively coherent frame for that. So
then I turned afresh, look back to my home discipline and said, Well, why
don't we organize around that? And with that new lens, I was like, Oh, my God,
psychology is a shit show at the science level. And I fell into that. I was very
interested then in evolutionary psychology for a little while. And then I
realized that was a nightmare. And that set the stage then for some key insights
that I had late 1996 into 1997. And that point on my frame and fascination and
life purpose has all been pretty clear.
I've got two related questions. And one is, yes, we can build these artifacts,
these models that unify things in a nice way. And we can export those to other
people. And perhaps they can be implemented by systems. Same time, it
seems like that has to be backed up by individuals who have a skill set similar
to the one you're describing in yourself, like a capacity for empathy, for
shifting perspectives for moving into paradigms, making sense of them and
zooming out and trying to take that all together. So to what degree are the
models really useful apart from that skill? And when we look at that skill, in
you, like how much is temperament and how much could be taught? How much could
be cultivated in other people who don't have that temperament?
Sure. Okay, so I'll break those up into the two questions. So one of the real
dangers for metasystemic thinkers, okay, is that you fall in love with your
model, you find your home to conciliants. And if you're sort of obsessed with
that and its precision, you then basically you have this ideal fantasy
that this is your perfect true knowledge and you see it as it. And then if
you're not grounded, you'll become a broadcaster, okay? And you're like,
this is true, this is true, this is true. Okay. Well, good luck then getting a
bunch of broadcasts that have their own particular truth angle, and then just
broadcast them together, but you can actually synthesize or connect or drop
into the empathy of this. So I absolutely am a integrative pluralist. And
what I mean by that is I think there are lots of different ways to see the
elephant. I think we broke the damn elephant up, but there are a lot of
angles to see the elephant. And there are many. So if Ken Wilber climbs up one
side of a mountain here, and while I disagree with him, so he's seeing parts
of the same elephant I'm seeing. And I'm climbing up in a different way. In
fact, I'm seeing lots of seers, we're seeing aspects of it, and you will
always see aspects of it from different places. Okay. And what I worry about is
a lot of people get metastasemic, people get obsessed with their version of
reality. And then the question is how well does that connect and sync up with
others? And when it doesn't, then you have sort of a totalitarian infancy that
this is the truth rather than that's a theory of reality. I think in reality.
Okay. So that's a big, big deal. The second question you asked is a great
one in terms of my own. You definitely need a particular talent to do what I
did. There's no doubt about that. I have particular talents. And if you
aren't dispositionally inclined, both at a temperamental level and at an
ability level, there just be no way. Okay. And that's why why do you think it's
never really been addressed? I mean, other people tried to solve the problem
with psychology in particular ways. But, and every one of them that does a
decent job as particular talents that the normal person, and I mean that
pejoratively, I just mean in relationship to time. Now, the question, the
second question, though, is, is the system that I constructed a translatable? Okay.
So that other people can then internalize it and then will it be
generalized? And then does it then have enough coherence, integrity and
arrangement so that the language system holds as it grows and then
distributes itself? And that's all to be determined. That's definitely to be
determined. I'm feeling like, you know, a lot of different things need to line up.
Although it feels more than I would have said six years ago. It feels like those
things are actually starting to line up in a particular way. Certainly one thing
that clearly needs to happen is that the zeitgeist, the culture around me, okay,
needs to be at a particular place, right? So I was inside the blue church of the
Academy of Psychology, and that's where I've been my whole life. And that damn
culture was never interested at a zeitgeist level to actually try to task
of absorbing what it is that I'm offering. So they, at an individual level, I
could always talk to people and everyone would say, Oh my gosh, and I got
hired for my, because I got very lucky in my position. There was this unique
program at James Madison. And I give, but I got, I got super lucky. I got
synced up with that. And then I got hired for my theory. That was very
unusual. But we were unusual. And I was unusual. The system itself had no
interest really at an institutional level. In fact, it was institutionally
defined against a lot of what I was saying. So five years ago, I was just
sort of like, huh, you know, getting a little frustrated. I can speak more
about that. And we're just really thinking this is not going to go. I was
also getting more alienated from where the institution was. And then a whole
interesting set of things happened. I think maybe happened to a lot of people
in the space that actually does yoke into Jordan Peterson and his impact on the
culture. I got sucked into the intellectual dark web and the deep web.
And then I bolt, you know, I basically launched my place outside of the academy.
I mean, I'm still a full professor. I'm keeping my job. Thank you. But thank
you. I'm now a full president. I do what I want. And so now I'm out here into the
integral meta modern space, right? That has a zeitgeist of a number of people
thinking, yeah, this modernist system of thinking, it's on its last legs. We need
an upgraded new operating system that's necessary. When you're in that zeitgeist,
that's one of the key things that if this thing's going to be successful. And then
we'll see how people digest it. And, you know, my ability to share it and all of
that. And it's feeling exciting these days, but a lot of, you know, I'll let you
know in a decade.
We just talked recently with Mark Edwards. I'm not sure if you know him, but
professor in Sweden right now and one of the best known meta theorists in the
integral community besides getting over. And one of the things he talks about is
the problem of methodology and meta theory. That meta theory, more often than
not, is the idiosyncratic product of an individual thinker drawing from their
creativity, predispositions, insights. And it then gets disseminated. But if
there is no methodology behind it, it's hard to generate a global community of
inquiry without it becoming basically just the application of a received system. So
he's looking at and wanting to explore what is the methodology that can support
basically the generation of meta theory. Is there a method behind the madness or
after the madness spell can method be generated that can be reflexively applied
to help refine and support and test the meta theory so that it can become a
thriving community of inquiry.
Brilliant. Yeah. Yeah. The issue of method is huge. Method of across multiple
levels. The institution needs a method to replicate itself. You have to have to
And this has always been one of the real challenges that I've encountered at
multiple levels. So I appreciate a Mark Edwards point here. And so here's what
happened to me. I'm not a huge fan of method per se. So that's just a
dispositional kind of thing. So I want the method really to be in the life
world, life quest of individuals. And I'm certainly actually, I have a love,
hate relationship between them with empirical methodology. I'm trained as a
behavioral empirical scientist. Actually, basically, it was like, Oh, shit, I bought
all into this. Like, I'm a, you know, this is my fundamentalism. And now I'm
actually on the other side of that in a particular way. So my own unique history
is going to have a weird relationship with method. But here's what happened to
me, which I think makes it makes my system a little different than what Mark's
talking about, or at least it's an interesting odd outlier. And you hear me
all the time talk about the problem of psychology. So one of the things I'll
tell you right away is that there is an established and crystal clear academic
problem that I am dealing with. Okay, so this is not like, Oh, we're just
confused. And here I have a wonderful system. And as long as you follow it,
this is great. Okay, that's not as this is, this is no, there's a specific, I
can hone you into a language conceptual problem, which I've now expanded into
what I call the enlightenment gap. Okay, I've talked about because I'm writing a
book now called the problem of psychology and solution. And then I frame the
enlightenment gap as the modernist system of understanding. Okay, that at least at
the level of philosophy and science, if we say from Hume to Kant and philosophy
and Galileo into Newton, that thing gets solidified. Okay, now other things that
are of course happening to modernity, but if that gets solidified as sort of,
okay, this is the beginning of modern physics and philosophy with Kant. All
right, that system, the way it evolves has no good capacity to solve two
foundational problems, one of which is matter and mind. That's why we get the
mind body problem. And the other is the clear relationship between society and
social knowledge and scientific knowledge. And that's why we get modernism and
postmodernism. So the enlightenment gap and the absence of that understanding
conceptually, the problem of psychology then is a natural consequence of the
enlightenment gap. That is, if you're going to try to give up a science of mind,
whatever the hell you would mean by that, which is then the problem, you would
have social knowledge, science, knowledge, mind, knowledge, matter, knowledge. It's
a shit show. Sorry, it's a trouble. And then, boom, now you get my discipline.
So now what I am saying is that, and that's why actually, rather than go to
method, I actually go to metaphysics. And then I go to what I call descriptive
metaphysics, whereby descriptive metaphysics means that you have to be
anchored to scientific and pure system at one level. In other words, I'm not
going to go pure metaphysics. I'm going to go descriptive metaphysics that's an
anchor to the naturalist worldview, show that the metaphysical understanding of
naturalism is completely inadequate, and show my metaphysical understanding is
10 times better. And now I'm saying, I'm inviting people to play, play my language
game. And then we'll see how it works in relationship to life and living and all
of that. But it then becomes an interesting, that that's where I'm at in
relationship to inviting folks to apply the method, learn the language game,
and just hone in at least on the problem it solves. And then the process really is,
I'm a clinician. So I'm really interested in people's life, world life quest.
And certainly we need societal institutional things. I go to the level of the
individual heart, its head, the life that you lead. I also talk about start with your
garden, a lot of garden metaphors I'll use. And then the method of building a
life, world life quest that's satisfying. Of course, to answer that question,
is really complicated. And I appreciate Mark's view, but that Mark's view is
absolutely justified in the context of the academy, like the academy needs that,
and social systems need that. And I hope to find that my frame is metaphysics and
the individual and the worldview. So that's where I am and time will tell whether that generalizes.
Okay, metaphysical question. You got this elephant, you got all these different angles on it.
There's two ways to look at that. One is, say, holographically, where there is a whole real
elephant, we're only seeing parts of it. Another way is constructively, where we have all these
visions, there isn't really an elephant, but we couldn't make one by putting them together.
What's your take on that, on whether the, you know, the greater whole is given or is the
greater whole constructed? Well, that's a great question. I certainly basically answer
the former more than the latter. Okay, now I think there's a really complicated,
so I like John Verbecky's inventio kind of notion, you know, there is a, or realize
the tension between what I would call the ontological side of the belief,
relative to the ontic reality of what you discover, and the interrelationship between
your ontological claims and the ontic reality is a very complicated relation.
But the Tree of Knowledge basically says, we could understand the elephant of the
knowledge that science has given us 10 times more effectively than we currently do.
And then if we all saw that, and it basically, I pull out first chaos of like, what is science
now? Well, there is no scientific world, but who the hell knows? And then exhibit A and B can be
Edward Wilson's conciliants and big history. Okay, so these are, and big, big history and
conciliants give you sort of, hey, there is sort of an edge here. If you go from big bang to present,
and from quantum to sociology, we actually can box in that elephant a little bit. Okay,
then I come along and say, yeah, but you guys are still screwed because you can't figure out
mind in relationship to that. And then I say, well, okay, I can do that. I can now pick up
that ball with the Tree of Knowledge arrangement. And then basically say, oh, if you have the four
dimensions of complexity of matter, life, mind and culture, which people have surprisingly been
confused about, then you align the frequencies of behavior across those different dimensions,
then everything comes in line and that elephant pops for you. So it's mostly the former, although
I absolutely appreciate there are a lot of complicated reasons why it's got a little bit
of a ladder in it. Yeah, Bruno Latour uses the word, which I think he means something similar
to John Vervecchi with his inventio. And Bruno talks about instoration. And for him,
instoration means something that is simultaneously a discovery and an invention or a creation.
And I think it's always a mix like that. Yeah, it depends on the nature of the problem. I mean,
sometimes there are some discoveries you can make. You say, I think this thing's out here and then
you go and you take it up from the earth and say, see, I told you, that's a discovery. But
absolutely, theoretical abstract concepts absolutely going to have an onto epistemological from the
view of the knower that then interfaces with them in particular lensing ways that then do have this
invention discovery complexity. In fact, this is one of the great problems of psychology itself,
in my argument, the science of it. If you don't appreciate, if you're just going to say, we're
going to discover the way you are, I'm going to discover the way you are, Bruce. And then I'm
going to tell you the way you are, as if that then doesn't change what you are. And then all of a
sudden, as you invent, you discover or John's concept of realization. Realization both means
I'm going to realize something, and I'm going to make something. Well, that interface feedback loop
is unbelievably tricky. Okay, and you better recognize that it often where it's present,
and when it's often very, very present. So it's definitely both and. But the Tree of Knowledge
just allow you to see the scientific natural elephant in a just a clearer and different way.
What will it look like if you are successful in your project?
Great. Yeah, so here's the vision that I have right now is as follows. And this is what is so
this is the 30 year plan. Get to get to the half mark of the century. You know, and this will sound
grandiose, but I feel like I'm part of a grandiose vision. I certainly believe with a lot of
futures thinkers that the current course is quite unsustainable. I like Steve Thinker's
enlightenment, you know, vision, but I also think that he fails to appreciate the accelerating press
that we were putting on many, many different things. And the enlightenment version of reality
to the extent that we simply follow it as many, many self terminating elements.
So I'm pretty terrified that the enlightenment is, you know, has given us in its current form
the Titanic. And there's an iceberg. Okay, and we're already bumping up against some early
indicators of that. And hopefully we're not locked into it in the next five years or else
we're in deep trouble. Okay. But the argument is, is that if there's a particular kind of
consciousness shift, that could happen over a 30 year period that we have time for, you can
definitely see that we transition from a scientific modernist obsession with certain forms of knowledge.
Okay, but are not an integrated pluralistic holistic understanding of wisdom that we will
then transition into clarity about scientific knowledge, what I often refer to as men's knowledge.
Okay, why that I mean modernist empirical natural science knowledge. Okay, which are the four key
elements that really justify its emergence. And of course, I call it men's to show the postmodern
critique of what it represent white men fusing with dominance in a particular way and overextending
what the transcendent knowledge that they were communicating and failing to appreciate the
complicated issues of language of invention of bias of self serving all that shit that then
creates the space there for trouble. We need to consolidate that the Tree of Knowledge offers that
in a coherent way to give us rise to a picture of men's knowledge and then realize that that
just needs to ground that's not the end of the story knowledge that you know abstract knowledge
is not the end of the story abstract knowledge is embodied and we need to actually have a wisdom
orientation, a wisdom orientation men's knowledge then becomes women's knowledge.
And so ultimately the idea is that if we can sync up and realize that modernity is coming to
you know it's proper end and have some sort of renaissance renaissance enlightenment shift.
All right, that actually appreciates what we need to do is seek wisdom.
All right, and grounded incoherent knowledge. Then we have that awakening and then that
awakening happens amongst the seers the seers figure out a way to translate that into the community.
I often will say it's an archetypal masculine project to get there and then a feminine
project to get it to the community I say that was somebody who's got a foundationally feminine
heart I'm a therapist I can't see people suffering I makes me cry and I want to take care of them
that's my you know it's an archetypal feminine core but I have a scientific masculine seeking
and so that's what I mean by those things but then bring it into the core bring it into the
communitas in the commons have the system digest that and then get it to the children
and then to use Zach Stein's frame to have a resurgence of teacherly authority have a shift
in education at the fundamental meaning of socialization and then raise individuals to a
fundamental a different way of being so for example capitalist modernist structures turn
everybody at least in the commons to an instrumental agent of bottom line efficiency marked by money
which is corrosive to the soul okay the soul doesn't want to just be used as an instrument
it wants relational value it wants to be known and valued okay so we need to shift our capital
structures from instrumentality to core valuing of each other if we do something like that that's
not a huge shift but I mean it's got a lot of implications we actually figure out how to value
people's souls in the 20th century 21st century well make a big difference in the kinds of
transformations of the process amen one of the classical problems with philosophy spirituality
and wisdom teachings historically is that they've over anchored themselves in some current scientific
notion of the day which was then later overturned yeah so to what degree is your vision you know
really bound to our current knowledge of what the scientific domains are and to what degree would it
hold in place even if there was some radical disruption to one of our ways of knowing and
sets of assumptions about science that's a brilliant question um yeah so it's it is anchored to uh when
I I'm anchoring it to you know I'll tell you what it's anchored to okay so it is anchored to an
outline of the big bang cosmology okay so there is some sort of matter space time collapse it can be
a big bounce it can be all sorts of different things inside of that but it definitely uh if the
big bang if steady state theory is the actual thing then then there is a grounding of justification
that I'm slipping on immediately and I've told everybody from the beginning that I am trailing
that line of justification and if that justification goes okay I've been very specific about what I'm
really trailing and the depiction of the tree of knowledge captures that trail so if that goes um
well you know unlike Trump I'm not just gonna try to hold on and say no it really when it's like
okay I'm in trouble here you know this thing the dominoes of justification are gonna start to go um
you know I believe that cell theory uh natural selection and genetics are big pieces of the
puzzle that help understand what life is um if you get an astrobiological thing that blows that
out of the water that's really uh different um if there are genuine consciousness systems that
do not need to be mediated by the nervous system and what I mean by human and psychological
consciousness um you know there are noetic sciences um if you track those particular kinds of things
now lots of them could be oh there is an electromagnetic wave that you can sync up on
and then okay that's but if there's an entire another field okay that's you know that's
encompassing us that we don't know anything about that's actually generating and beaming into our
nervous system that allows for a collective consciousness that I don't know anything about
my system's in deep trouble that way um so there are yep it certainly anchors itself to
a particular version of naturalism at at its base now that said I'm also a clinician so the
left hand side of that tree is the is the pure reason side and as any pure reason system is going
to be anchored to particular types of truth claims um that can be qualified I mean I think
that natural selection is blowing up in some ways but I'm still the way I'm anchored to it is still
fine all right I think you could fill that in same with big banks getting I mean not the the
basic outline is still there but some really interesting things are happening um so there's
all there are a lot of specifics that it would be that could hold there are some big issues
that it couldn't the flip side however is the the right side of the tree which is the practical
reason side okay and so the eighth key idea the little black dot behind me um offers a frame for
site what I call psychological mindfulness um the term you know it's calm mo is is the frame and that
the mo is a metacognitive observer um also stands for modus operandi but it basically means you
got to train this part of your consciousness uh shift into metacognitive observer uh then you
want calms body calm mind calm spirit and by that I mean the your orientation toward the ultimate
concern okay uh and then it says hey there's an attitude that we're trying to cultivate through
the calm and that is curiosity acceptance loving compassion and motivated toward valued states of
being um and to the extent that we can do that it says hey you'll be able to metabolize what happens
so much in psych psychological neurosis as people get bumped they get defensive their body goes into
polyvagal defense theory they fight they fawn they freeze they flee okay and then they justify why
all that's happening all right in a mindless reactivity that tries to prevent uh the whatever
the threat is from activating so um calm and mo says oh okay we are that way we're primates
we tend to do that when no and bad shit happens okay and then also you bring that in it's a bomb
for that it reverses that it allows that so so that's a that's a embodied practice a psychological
mindful psychotechnology used shown for a big use thing um I don't think that we ever it'd be hard
for me to understand why that would go that's a basically a conceptualization of wisdom traditions
and ways of being um so I think there'll be fruit to eat off the tree even if some of it gets blown up
but yeah it's got some it does have some truth commitments about so
in psychology there's some tension or disagreement uh around whether psychology should be considered
a science and I'm thinking for instance of I haven't heard that right exactly like Bradford
Keeney who worked so long in in family systems theory um and eventually he decided to move in
the direction of regarding psychology as the the youngest of the folk healing arts and to really
go back to try to root himself in the knowledge of indigenous cultures on how they process trauma
how they uh basically you know communally support the transformation of the individual
and this is kind of an off the cuff question doesn't directly relate to stuff I've heard you
talk about but how do you how do you navigate that kind of uh territory from from within
you talk or or actually that's a that's an unbelievably central question to me when I
talk about defining psychology this is so it's right at that core so um for me uh you I've turned
to my language game uh there is the meta psychology or what I used to call my scientific humanistic
philosophy but now in talking of exact sign um over the last year year and a half I'm like
actually I'll just call that a meta psychology okay that's the space in connection between
psychology and philosophy basically um uh and I find it helpful to make to now whether or not
the one big question is well is that part of philosophy or psychology so let's at least say
there's that position and that position can simply be called well this is the interface
that happens when humans become self-aware to go what are we and what are the implications we are
for what we ought to do which is pretty close to philosophy too right just centered on philosophy
of mind ethics a little bit uh it's got some other areas that is you know philosophy concerns
itself with but that's so there you go okay so if that is philosophy psychology for you well
all right that's one big way of thinking about it what happens also that you have to contend with
is what we mean by psychology in the modernist sense I mean psychology gets its character
precisely because it tracks the emergence of physics all right uh at least modern psychology
and then it says we're going to play the language game of science and try to apply that to the world
okay so if you then discount in my estimation if you're going to disconnect and you're just going
to be I'm going to be an indigenous healer and I don't care too much about empiricism because
I think that that ruins people great you know it probably does but you're not a psychologist
anymore in my field at least in a modern scientific sense so you know the psychology should not be
applied to that any more than it should be applied to the shaman doing his thing right now he's not
a psychologist okay so it has a particular character it's a unique into you know discipline
some people say it's young I don't buy that I don't think that I think it's pretty old okay
I mean in terms of modern science how old is that and there are a hell of a lot of really young
disciplines molecular biology a lot younger than science than psychology doing very well as a science
I don't think it's our youth I think you were just confused so here's how I define in fact this was
central to the tree of knowledge is that you then have to then there are three great branches of the
field through my meta psychology so as my meta psychology positions me I then pull the tree of
knowledge up and then say okay there are three great branches of psychology from the tree of
knowledge meta psychology all right those three great branches are as follows at a scientific
level the first thing that it teaches you is psychology is profoundly confused by what it
means by mental process the science of mental process and there are two radically different
meanings one exists at the animal mental dimension like do we mean mental process the way in which
the corresponds to the fish in my tank okay or do we mean human mental process the way you and I
are talking about stuff right now is that what what is my subject matter the fish in the tank
and classical conditioning and operating conditioning and all of that okay or this
conversation and how I feel about my wife I mean and the answer from my vantage point is there's
basic psychology which is comparative animal psychology all right and that's what it should
be it's basically the science of mind brain be animal behavior which is a pure natural science
okay and the foundation and then you get human psychology and then human psychology is the base
of the human social sciences which is a totally different discipline from the tree of knowledge
vantage point okay and psychology and do this at all it doesn't break basic into human all right
but both of those are concerned the language game they're playing is to describe and explain
what you see it's a science that's what science tries to do it creates the the thing that you're
looking at as an it it moves and then you try to explain it that's what scientists try to do okay
I'm a clinician that's not what I do when somebody comes into my thing okay I'm a healer right as
in my practice so you come to me and you're like oh my god I just had a fight with my wife I want
to join with you I care about your idiosyncratic world and my whole goal isn't to describe and
explain why you're an it my goal is to connect to your soul and and and move you toward valued
states of being and adaptation okay that's I'm in there to affect change in accordance with some
humanistic value structure that's what I define as psychological doctors and and the profession
of psychology okay which is now for health service psychology and these are the individuals that get
trained to become licensed practitioners and that's a totally other field in the way I define it
and that's clinical counseling school licensed doc psychological doctors so now you have the
my meta psychology basic animal human personality developmental cognitive social okay you have an
applied stream here like educational sport all that stuff and then you have the psychological
healer doctors enter into the real and do value based change which is not a basic science game
it's a healer game and that's a totally different feel there's a there's a kind of subtle tension
in integral meta theory between co-present dimensions of reality and emergent layers
of reality because there's some kinds of overlap between the categories so we think on the one
hand about you know energy matter biology the noosphere with that kind of thing there's also
the sense that for vakies kinds of knowing or wilbur's quadrants where something like
interiority and something like participatory relations and something like objects are always
present at every level so how do you relate emergent layers to co-present dimensions in
your own thinking brilliant yeah so I do that through what I call the quadrant quadratic
okay so I love wilbur's quadrants but I identify them as epistemological human epistemological
quadrants okay meaning that these are frames upon which we achieve knowledge and justification
so upper interior upper exterior phenomenology and behavior those are great epistemological
frames of the inside now okay and then we can drop down and we have cultural justifications
hey I often say from inside the garden this is the world okay if you tell me I'm insane that's
great most of you are standing outside of it I would say I was insane if I was on the other side
of this equation too okay so yeah so the inside the culture from the outside of the system I love
those quadrants I find Wilbur's framing I haven't talked with Bruce a little bit about this I'd love
to Bruce and I will have some more conversation down the road here about I find some of Wilbur's
ontological framing and and commitments to be raised some significant questions I particularly
don't like his upper right okay which I think he conflates a physicalist ontology meaning he
describes this oh it's the brain okay with an exterior object level epistemology okay I think
he conflates that the Tree of Knowledge says yeah don't conflate that the Tree of Knowledge says an
object exteriority is the lens of behavior okay but you need to take behavior on its own terms
okay so that right now this conversation that we are having is operant at at a culture person
plane of existence and we can record our behavior and my justifications for why I'm doing it and
anyone can watch that from an upper I'm talking right now and you can you don't watch my brain
you watch me behave as an as a unit okay so what do I do the quadrant is the epistemology
then the quadratic refers to I am a physical object right I've got a press on the chair
at about 185 pounds right I'm surrounded by and then we jump up I'm a collection of cells
so this is my cell life okay into my nervous system that then creates a collective experience
somehow we can talk about that that gives rise to my phenomenological first person view
and then I'm translating that feeding back connecting with you through justification
so that's the culture person plane and that just also lines with the perennial philosophy minus the
great chain of being I mean this is Aristotle at least on the outline form so I have an ontology
of the matter life mind culture that's that's happening in the human level we have these
epistemological frames that we can shift back and forth and you know I wonder about spirituality
spiritual ontology on basically saying is a more conservative claim is I can align the naturalistic
view between these epistemological frames and these ontological layers a lot clearer than we've been
and that's what I'm offering since I mentioned Mark Edwards before I'll bring him up here
he also complains about the upper right quadrant as overcrowded overpacked with too many phenomena
and for him one of the things that he suggests is adding another axis between energy and form
and he yeah he develops that in his own ways but I was looking to talk to you also about some
uh similarities and differences between uh you talk and and aqua for instance and in aqua you know
or integral psychology they're considered to be at least you know six fundamental elements
the quadrants levels line states types and the the self system right and I looking at your system
I really see most of those things present some of them are part of the constitutive structure
of your meta theory and others are maybe phenomena that are just included in there and so in integral
theory two elements that play a very strong role uh constructively constitutively are uh levels
and also states yes and thinking about your concerns about the you know the spiritual ontology
I think that would probably relate to some reservations about the deployment of states
in integral theory however there are possibly naturalistic and metaphysical ways to understand
states that could be I think that could fly within you talk so we might talk about that a little bit
but what's your take on the especially the place of levels and states um within your system
absolutely um so yeah I haven't done the deep dive and you know I'm really lining up all of what
uh Wilbur is doing with the six primaries okay and I actually do have some concerns about the
whole type thing types are really tricky okay and I and so I know you didn't ask about that but I'll
say you know I've been on my to-do list is to delineate this and in fact I'm working with
a Andre Marquis an expert integral scholar and we've debating whether we're both debating whether
we want to do a dive into a joint book on integral unified you know frames that we then
really delineate this in some great detail um so let's just talk about let's let's go into
sort of the uh the evolution of consciousness and culture uh that Wilbur identifies okay which I
think is actually brilliant I really do I know um the there is a serious concern and I think this
has to be held but it also has to be acknowledged and how we hold an analogous really train so the
evolution of what we mean whenever we're going to create a hierarchy okay that's going to create
tension ego tension it's like oh I want to be higher you know boom okay now we're going to
issues um but so what I what I'm doing right now is I'm working with lean Rachel Anderson
who I think has a really nice meta-modernity model okay so she's in the meta-modern community
but basically this is what she says and then we can talk about sort of the Wilbur Coombs
lattice and those kinds of elements and and see where they would line up but let's start with
some of the basics so I think it's very very sensible to talk about the evolution of human
cultural consciousness um and across four different phases um that's going to line up
in the Wilbur system I think fairly clearly okay I think Wilbur's pre-trans modeling so you're
pre and then you're in the system and then you transcend that across many developmental lines
that's brilliant okay it's a wonderful general thing so I really like that um I appreciate the
domains he applies that to if we talk about just the basic cultural consciousness I like the idea
that originally we're an oral indigenous way of being okay that's going to have some animism some
tribalism obviously going to get spiral dynamics kind of rolled in here in a particular way um
and just the idea of the emerge from the you talked or tree of knowledge more specifically
idea is that what happens is humans once they tip into propositional knowing okay we open up a line
of communication that's radically different and develop these systems of justification okay so now
we're hunter-gatherers wandering around able to ask why the hell is things happening you know good
luck figuring that out okay um at the level of real abstraction so you're going to build a tribal
analytic and animistic way of understanding the world or at least that's what tends to happen
and for my vantage point it makes sense I'm also going to say there's an powerful powerful wisdom
to be cultivated okay in this level of consciousness and indeed I think that one of the great
truck we're seeing sand talk I'm going to blank on his name real fast but the sand talk is now as
an indigenous wisdom kind of return I completely agree that there's a huge amount of wisdom we're
losing from the oral indigenous perspectives um and one of the things that we need for the 21st
century consciousness and infusion of this and this is of course going to be a nod also to
wilbur's insights that we're talking about evolution of include and then transcend
right so then what you go from oral indigenous you go into traditional so the traditional what
happens to people as they start building civilizations there's no way to maintain oral indigenous
relations with people okay the systems are too big um and you have to have then you get
experts you get differentiation of skill sets and you get the priests beginning to cultivate
expert knowledge and you get the kings that have to do things like hamarabi's code okay and now you
have law and justification and what I would call the traditional formal cultural code of knowing
okay and then then that happens first through the bronze age and then the bronze age collapse
that's the first wave of it then you get axial age emergence of the great wisdom traditions
that we're still with us today Confucianism and Hinduism then you get the evolution from the
traditional pre-modern formal way of thinking into the modern scientific now we're clearly into
orange here and you get the modern scientific individual rational a train we can transcend
cultural things because we now have the scientific objective reason and you green and you critique
it I know for the last 50 years all of that to me makes very very good sense it's a wonderful
heuristic I think that you know we can then get into states you know and why people shift across
states and of course I'm a clinician if you're a clinician you attend to states immediately
you know that's you don't see people ever as one thing okay you you have an observer yourself
and be like oh my god when my students I was great I came home and my kids I was shitty
I was like I had problems you know I'm not the same lots of different things will create massive
fluctuations so we can get into the ideographic in fact that's what Andre Marquis found is that
when integral theorists actually did psychotherapists they were really totally focused on states
as a major but anyway at the stage kind of thing then you have that idea oral indigenous you know
all the way to green I'm blending I know around that and then the position of and I don't like the
term second tier I will say that although I empathetic to it I don't like second tier I find
second tier is basically poking the first year people in the eye on their ego in a very very
strategically you know erroneous place you gotta hold the ego don't we know that you know to say
actually we broke the ego and I know that I might got broken but now I'm free you and you're gonna
react against me because you're not paradigmatically you know frozen and lesser okay that's it's just
is a very very dangerous way so in my because it's even though there's a lot of things that
when I get around integral people I'm going yeah after that but you know it's like how it's free
so include transcend across the evolution of cultural consciousness uh seed macintosh you
know he does that with developmental politics he he doesn't include the oral indigenous but he
includes the traditional the modern the postmodern recognized strengths weaknesses of each demonstrate
a cultural consciousness that actually weaves that together creates a collective that does that
I think we all will for a whole bunch on that and I think that there's a huge amount of truth
in that yeah I've tended to lean toward models in which the integrative or meta dimension or
the second tier is is more orthogonal to each of the stages rather than I'll leap beyond them
I think we've got a big rule for something like a new shamanism in that in terms of a wisdom
tradition that's ecologically focused and bodyman focused left right balanced and oriented towards
people taking more responsibility for state change brilliant and I've tended to argue that
states might have a basic onto epistemological basis and I think that's one way of unpacking the
upper right quadrant right because we get this over association with physical material and objects
but if you add in different potential ontologies then you say well the objects aren't all physical
this is a zone of looking at things or returning it like phenomenon but it's not the same as 17th
century empirical materialism totally totally and and I'll say at the at the and I'm not a
meditator I'm intensely psychologically mindful I do minor meditation so I Wilbur has access to
everybody that does this has access to the witnessing conscious function of the upper left
in ways that you know I'm very elaborate on my logos but as the Dow says you know the Dow ain't
the Dow you know it's you know and the presencing of what I believe that we need to recapture what
I believe that many oral indigenous you know wisdom shaman traditions will capture is the
cultivation of that witnessing function and the centering of it and mastery of it and and the
opening of it and and all of that of course you know psychology practice people are discovering
that with mindfulness and it has its value although it can become mic mindfulness and you know it's a
dangerous thing to you know just oh okay now just you know help us but if we can actually do that
with authenticity the modernist you know empirical natural science system killed our what I would
call our pathic essence of being meaning underneath our first person experience and of course all the
wisdom teachers said hey actually being with that being is pretty pretty important for us you know
and be sane and get along along the line of states I'm I'm intrigued by the spiritual or
contemplative dimension of meta theory building and I wonder what your felt relationship is to the
moments of conciliance and mega inclusion when you behold them or when you birth them
what's that like that state that's it's um it's wisdom energy man it is you know it is my calling
and when it happens you know as people know that around me it's like I get cell activation
so it's a cellular activation um you know I'm raised in the new atheist tradition my father
who was more present in philosophy of our family was originally an evangelical
for a while and then actually had a conversion in the young adulthood and then over an eight-year
period the light you almost is ordained as a minute or the light goes out it becomes a history
professor and then we grow up with oh my god it's actually science it's not it's not christ it's
science okay and sort of a Dawkins-esque view of christianity and so I'm modern empirical
natural science guy in terms of what you know and thus thus I'm spiritually impoverished essentially
is another way of saying that and and it's through ultimately the tree of knowledge discoveries
that I rediscover what it means to be connected to the universe in a particular way and what that
means at the level of every fiber of your being and so the times in which I go through my phases of
my wife sometimes calls me a knowledge archaeologist when I discover a new gem
and I see what it brings the the it's a oneness experience in fact I have a thing called an
iQuad coin that has one on one side of it and there's a oneness there that connects to the
self to the universe and it is very powerful and it's so powerful even you know I I've had
empirical experiences both you know and I don't mean anecdotal there's a singularity
you know you may have heard of singularity's term around but there's a russian psycho a russian
mathematician a big history this is in the world a big history is the singularity's idea that there's
another threshold they have eight thresholds threshold number nine some people talk about it
as a singularity I talked about it as a singularity so I call the fifth joint point which is what comes
after culture as the digital world emerges okay well there is a russian mathematician who looked
at the evolution of complexity okay on a quantifiable measure and he found westerners were
doing it one way like raker as well and then there's this whole russian tradition of tracking the
evolution of complexity as a totally different data set all right um and you see these lines and
they cross one of them crosses with a correlation he is a super simple formula crosses with correlation
like 0.994 in 2027 and another crosses in Hickam's vertical at 2029 all right this is my this is my
now like I see god you know this is sort of like in math and in the evolution of complexity it's like
oh how is that possible here I'm sitting you know 2028 there's a singularity emerging I'm feeling
it this is like a mathematical phenomenon of the universe you know so uh so for me absolutely I
I still consider that a pure metaphysical claim meaning I don't know what it means at all in fact
the critique of it is like oh it's metaphysical historicity and I was like I'll take that that's
exactly what it is let's make the future history and have fun with it you know and and allow you
I've stopped some faith and well I've also be grounded um so I've grown enormously and consider
myself a you know a naturalist and a spiritualist I'm very clear about I consider to be the horizon
of metaphysics grounding but the idea that there's a calling there I feel that at many levels and
the idea there's an ultimate concern uh all of that stuff lines up with me profoundly
and you know at a core energy level it's certainly I feel it
I think we're all in good company here I think we all have that that feeling of that that glimpse
of the mandalic vision that that just yeah brings all things together at least for that moment in
a right that's a super important point anybody listen it's a state phenomenon yes okay if it
comes to trade phenomena you're going insane you're going to blow all the circuits exactly
we'll have to lock you up sorry
I mentioned this to you in email I think but I I think it connects to what you're talking about
now with the anticipation possibly of singularity and Jeremy Rifkin has this idea in his book
empathic civilization about the leaps that civilizations have made historically
and I relate them I relate what he's talking about as a subset of your basic idea of joint points
that at each major level of the unfolding of of life of actually the you know the universe
there's a joint point which is a point at which new capacities become available that
allow for the emergence of a new form of being and for him within the human historical frame
what needs to happen is the convergence of new forms of communication and new forms of energy
production and sharing yes and when those come together that basically provides the
scaffolding for the next level of a civilizational order and he feels we're at the edge of that
now especially we've got the communication system with the internet and you know we're waiting in
a sense for the the next emergent energy regime that will help provide you know some foundation
for that next shift and so yeah I just wanted to check in with you on on how you feel about that
and maybe I want to ask you two things but I'll come back to the other one later but for this
first one between the joint point and and uh Rifkin's civilizational um stage account totally
so yes I think that we're uh I love Zach Stein's time between worlds okay so that's another angle
on this um that we're gonna some sort of phase change shift um another john identify john
breakey the axial age kind of transformation is needed um if we ground this in the basic logic
of the Tree of Knowledge as I've told many people on our various um six to weeks I don't remember
exactly six weeks to six months which was in 1997 after I generated the Tree of Knowledge I had the
insight that the 21st century was going to be huge okay and the reason is clear if you follow
the language of the joint points okay especially for matter to life life to mind and life and
mind to culture once you get what are those cones and why do different planes of complex adaptive
existence emerge and what do we mean by them and what manifests them and the short answer is is that
they are complex arrangements of energy information flow better than held together
by new forms of information processing and communication okay that provides the fundamental
structure that allows the energy to flow through the system to fend off the second law of thermodynamics
and gather the free energy to then get metabolized and you need the information to check that and
suck it up and then move it through that's what cells do and then nervous system does that
for the animal okay so it's like the DNA nucleus of the animal the brain then all of a sudden we
figured out how to talk okay so now you have a talking new information processing communication
system so then you get culture person now you looked out at the end of the 20th century where I
was at the time and you just asked well is there an emerging information processing communication
network system as I typed to people on the internet yeah okay right so now you get so now
we're laying down the information processing communication system which allows think about
what it does like in space time energy information communication like this you know all of a sudden
we're in all these different places now we all come together in the virtual space and the adjacent
possibilities that this opens isn't just you know unspeakably enormous it opens up a whole
another world the energy thing is now we have to actually transform the work energy into the system
so you get this information processing communication system we have that we're still polluting the crap
out of the planet in a horrifying way so we have to figure out how to do to pull the free energy
right without all the externalities that kill the planet if we could you know people are obviously
we're working on that and then the last piece for me is well then there's what is wisdom
basically okay so then the the wisdom is the theory and practice of valued states of being
that allows us to make sense and be in relation and if we get our information processing communication
systems the energy flow systems and the wisdom together you then would actually enable the upgrade
and the distribution and the system the titanic towards the iceberg transitions
and sails off into a sustainable way of being that addresses we awaken from the
meaning crisis we address the mental health crisis we address the environmental crisis
and we realize that man if we just you know we love wisdom energy together we will be
we'll be a lot better off than we currently are now
two things first I want to thank you for mentioning Lenny Rachel Anderson who I
correspond with regularly she's contributing to the meta-modern anthology that I'm co-editing
but I didn't even think of including her on this series so I want to say this Bruce we
absolutely should try to get her on definitely second thing is where does your model building
and meta theorizing go next what would you you know are there outstanding problems are the things
you want to integrate to make it a more adequate theory what's its next iteration right um
the next iteration then is that is to me is the pragmatic translation that's what I'm in the
process of and actually over the last two weeks I mentioned a couple times with my mind is still
I'm a little hypomanic okay because over the last two weeks I cooked on to this concept called
wisdom energy all right I never put those concepts together in the exact way that I've done recently
and the process by which I did that has unfolded some really exciting things for me and when that
when I find that that's me in my little state of oh I caught another one you know that's great
at least I have to metabolize it and see if it really works you know that will take a month or
so so I'm about halfway through that um but the reason partly that I'm really excited about is
because um it's I see the pathway of the kind of change that it needs that I've always needed to make
okay so my system if you know it's like so you know 1997 I've fallen to a rabbit hole
of analysis it's a definitely it's it's heavy on logos I mean it really is concerned it's playing
the not modern empirical natural science language game in its own terms I mean it doesn't do anything
other than okay I want to analyze this I want to understand this I want to pull this stuff together
and I made a couple really foundational lateral shifts first with the justification and then
into the tree of knowledge and then by myself built this whole thing that is very it creates a whole
language game that's very difficult for people to follow okay especially when I still was attached to
my ego um and was still in the process of being like so I here I was just basically saying here's
this justification system is like a metastasemic theorist tends to be in my little autistic world
of like oh god this is true as long as everybody plays this language game and of course people
screw you I like my language game but yeah I'm telling you you'll see the light okay um
I mean I'm a clinician thankfully so I get to avoid that off you know I'm I know how to step
outside of that so I'm holding both of those in my head but I never really even my doc students
and everything else the ability to translate this language to them so that they speak it fluently
they could speak it with me but then the idea of speaking it with other people and speaking
with other people when critiques emerge in relationship to it so you understand what the
critique is it's like only I can do that okay um it's just super frustrating because now you're
like sitting on this thing and you don't know how to spread it and that's always been um and I got
called in 2015-16 to turn it into this garden thing okay which in retrospect it's a meta modern
artwork of sincere irony I didn't know that at the time it's so fascinating to be called into
something you know my dad you know as a modernist academic Greg there's already weird called the
tree of knowledge now you've turned it into a tree in a garden you know I mean he's a
talking to us new atheist he's not very pleased with that narrative you know I was like what are
you doing it's like I don't know but I'm called to it and actually I do know dad but one day I'll
be able to tell you maybe so but the whole point of it was it's like it has to be there has to
be a journey to figure out how to get to the other side and share it with people so that it then
seeded in others and then grows from within all right that's so that's where my face is that's
what I'm after right now what's hot is for me is this idea of can we cultivate we okay can we
cultivate wisdom energy um I like that notice that's a question okay uh Forrest Landry uh you
know operates in these circles was on still a little while ago he's connected to like Zach's sign
and um he developed this ephemeral group process he he's grounded in imminent metaphysics he's
got a really fascinating system of still a process of learning um but ephemeral group process is
fundamentally oriented first and foremost around question generating which I totally respect I
of all people know that it's justification relative to question justification makes a claim
which then positions the opposite okay and so justifications which I couldn't find any other
way other than just well here it is and then deal with it or not it's not like and I get to the
backside of that and be like can we cultivate wisdom energy that hits people's intuition in the right
way draws them forth okay and then invites them that the appropriate zone of proximal development to
start you know metabolizing that doesn't create a dominance ego insistence learn the system all of
that so my hope is that if the system can find its way to be oriented that way
then the translation can happen so that's that's where I am and that's what my hope is and that's
what the questions we will see it may only be a convergence of vocabulary but I feel like there
could be something further there when I'm thinking about uh Macintosh's notion of value energy
and the metabolizing process of orienting towards fundamental value
so I think that could be a kind of technology for generating a wisdom energy
well actually so I defined historically defined wisdom as theory and practice toward valued
states of being that's essentially I got hooked in because there was an aeon article on the science
of wisdom like just this past week John was part of the John Berbeke was part of the Toronto
work and basically they're like it's met a cognition anchored to some fundamental appreciation
for value that's flexibly applied I was like oh that that is what I mean when I talk about
wisdom so that was a really nice syncing that was part of the intersection of the hook and so yeah
that's the and I talked to uh Nick Jankle just yesterday or the day before you know and his
wisdom leadership and he was like oh my god you had wisdom energy leadership and boom there was
just popping there um so that's that's the kind of thing where lots of people can contribute and
bring stuff alive and then it's but it's not specified so it calls to grow but it's constrained
enough so it's in the right direction and I love to hear the connection Steve Macintosh actually
had a great book I thought about that but you're absolutely right 100 excellent brilliant connection
there was I had mentioned I wanted to connect to one of the things I'll make that thread
connection before we go too far along um just thinking about the Tree of Knowledge system
and the the joint points and the cones and then I was talking about uh Rifkin and his
civilizational stages which is also basically founded on this notion of these joint points and
in cones um and Wilbur actually with his fulcrum model of psychology uh does that for the different
stages with his ladder climber view model and the different fulcrum development um so it's like a
macro mezzo and micro um nice patterning of the same kind of movement and I wondered if
you had maybe some insight into the dynamics of the joint points of the Tree of Knowledge
that relate or translate to that movement within the micro level that Wilbur is tracking
of the unfolding from you know the the uroberic and then you know pre-operational and all of
those different stages totally um so let's say with the so there's there's within there's there's
emergence within a joint point okay so you got to get to the from the bottom of mine to the top
of mine okay so there's within dimension emergence and then there's the big dimensional shifts
between the dimensions okay so if we want to first hone in on what the big dimensional
differences are between and why actually I believe we're at the big dimensional difference here on
the fifth joint point so and then what are those features okay so and then we can talk about also
what are the leveling ups that take place within and then we can think about them you know in
different from different angles so I just want to make a distinction between like the big shift
and a within shift um so what are the elements that go into the big shifts as far as I'm concerned
well I already hit on some information processing and communication okay but those things need to
also be channeled into a complexity building feedback loop all right that's that's appropriately
constrained but structured to generate um what uh Stuart Kaufman calls the adjacent possible
okay in other words an entirely new landscape that then has enough constraints on it but then
enough feedback so that it grows okay so you get an information processing cell that can communicate
it's not going to go anywhere just dies unless it replicates okay and then there's a selection
process so that it then generates okay uh so you get a feedback loop variation selection and
retention is the constrained complexity building feedback loop all right that then causes the
level up the argument and one of the things that I saw is that the mind the life to mind shift
bf skinners operant theory okay operant selection reinforcement on the outside allows for an
environmental selection process really an animal agent environmental selection process
which actually bf skinner called commerce okay uh initially meaning the animal spends its energy
the environment either gives you return on the energy in a particular way and so select it
and then you retain a memory although he wouldn't use this term but basically you retain
it's how does it select skinner never really asked that and the cognitive neuroscientist
can answer that it says oh it stores memory and process it right uh so you have an information
processing and environmental selection feedback loop okay then you go up and the argument is that
language then gets captured and constrained into the systems of justification in other words the
constraints then are what's legitimate what's not in the various is ought propositional dynamics
that then agrar for a constraining system of paradigms to be built that justify
so you get information processing communication but they're actually have to be constrained in
the particular ways okay so now we get into this process about well where are we
and what kind of constraints that we need and I'm arguing that the four core is the energy flow
so you have to pull free energy rate density off the flow all life mind culture has to do that
we'll have to continue to do that okay the emergence information processing system in
communication is the digital but what's dangerous is as digital arises it's going to cause the lower
levels to go crazy because there's not enough constraints that allow the proper jump into the
holding okay and what are those constraints well for me the answer basically is wisdom
okay so so wisdom and this is the whole idea is like well you have digital okay we built knowledge
system and really scientific knowledge but scientific knowledge undercuts wisdom
wisdom fundamentally is a medic cognitive value grounded state
it's trans culture really it's the process by which people become sages in versus conventional
thinking and then the question is if you can sync up the sages all right that's value grounded and
cultivate energy information through there you then create a medic cultural consciousness
okay that's the way that term I use which by the way lines up nicely because we want to channel
energy to mc square just capital medic cultural consciousness
okay so and then that's so the art idea is is that what are the theory and practices of valued
states of being that we can bring together and I offer exhibit a of our political system as how not
to do it okay so look at look at the United States look at the current political system
and just you want people to regress into teams that are unbelievably competitive and narcissistic
and manipulative and completely defined as I am good and you're bad and we're going to compete
against you and lie and manipulate all anti-wisdom I mean you know this is my what I reckon to
political but I look at Trump relatively concept of wisdom so we're flipping and then
if the wisdom systems can sync then you create through the ecologies okay I talk about gardens at
at the Bronfenbrenner ecological scale so gardens in my soul gardens with my family okay gardens in
my community gardens in the state gardens in the nation gardens transnationally into globally
and and if you have wisdom anchor through those elements then you have the proper constraints
that can shape the ever emergence of energy information and to a sustainable complex adaptive
point I would also be interested to see how the notion of wisdom energy unpacks itself relative
to Macintosh's value energy what I talked to Macintosh last about value energy I ended up writing
an article which was a Nietzschean recapitulation of his notion you have it anchored in the will
to power in a post-metaphysical universe and get the same pattern he was describing he's
half open to that argument but I'd love to see how that applies to whatever argument you might
come up with that links those two together I'm intrigued now my question is totally unrelated
to that more to long times of what Bruce was just saying the way that Wilbur tried to unify
psychology involved these fulcrums and the idea that distinct schools of psychology evolve to
address imbalances and pathologies arising at these transition points at these joints
what do you think is the common element of pathology at all the joints which is also a way
of asking what do you think health means in its most general sense great yeah so this is
again so you're touching me right at the psychological doctor level
so the seventh branch of the tree the one with a red circle on it it's called the nested model of
well-being and it tackles essentially the descriptive problem of what do we mean by well-being
okay because people use that in wide variety different domains so so there's one angle is
yeah there's a we have to get clear on what well-being in general is and then what are the
biological psychological social dimensions of that well-being um and so there's that okay so and
and I life mind and culture will actually give you a frame and then it says yes there are ways to
think about well-being in the biological psychological and social let's then hone in on human psychology
now because you're also then reference Wilbur's point and about well what goes wrong and the
first thing I want to do is I want to note that what often goes wrong is at the level of psychology
not at the level of biology people okay the only reason that everything has to be biological is
because psychiatry is the big institutional dog and that's one of the medical disciplines and
they have to fix broken biology and I love psychiatrists I don't like psychiatry all that
much okay and so they're committed institutionally to fixing broken biology or they then try to
become a the dominant health discipline and adopt biopsychosocial medicine like George Engel did
but then actually you're now just a health profession writ large in fact the best profession
for that is actually nursing by the way nurses should be the actual leaders of world health
organization not positions but anyway I've got women's knowledge um at the human psychological
level what you basically get are you get duke which is entrapped maladaptive patterns of ways
of being and thinking okay that then suck people in to channels of investment that have short-term
benefits in their context okay because they're trying to manage energy flow in a particular way
and then you get long-term consequence but you're stuck with them and then you double down
now the fifth branch on the tree is called character adaptation systems theory
okay it is the bridge it's the fifth branch so now we're going to start to move into psychotherapy
and the world of that what it says is um is that at the center of human psychology are these systems
of adaptation okay in other words what you're trying to do is you're trying to adjust the person
environment human environment relation okay um and the systems of adaptation go from base
to increasingly complicated the base systems your habit system okay so the habit system
it just basically builds procedural memories after experience it has particular ingrained
reflexes that it lines up and then builds procedural memories on classical and operant
conditioning and then you just program them and then they'll get triggered by certain things and
then it will orient you to do something if you're used to doing it and if you can't do it it will
give it craving and it will irritate you if you don't for example if you're a drinker okay so if
you get used to five o'clock coming home right and every day you come home and you're and part of
the release of getting home is going over to the cabinet and popping the vodka ah as soon as you
start to do that you're saying thank you right i'm ready and then if you decide no i'm not going to
do it today uh then by 5 30 you're like you're system you got to release that habit and then
you got to get the drill because we're dependent on it okay and then what it does is that it moves
you up a system into your experiential system which is the base of your phenomenology okay
which organizes and integrates your perceptions your motives and your emotions it's mostly organized
by perceptions and motives and emotions and that creates basically what you're trying to this is
um john's perspectival and participatory knowing okay so this then is your experiential system
and this is the core it's affectively organized so that when you do like psychotherapy from an
emotion-focused neo-humanistic perspective you're really tracking the foundational organization of
that phenomenological center and how it's an organismic valuing process okay from a humanistic
level that if it's cultivated right in a non-judgmental sort of way with proper constraints
that the humanist didn't always put on it but if you give them that then you can cultivate that
that's the center of that valuing process is going to be actually the root of much help
okay then you move up so now this is the experiential system then you move up to what's
called the relationship system i'm going to be talking with john for breaky today about this
okay the relationship system then goes from a one animal psychology into a two animal psychology
where you're then tracking self-other relation it is evolutionary grounded in attachment meaning
mother offspring is where it starts that's where you really actually have to empathize and relate
and then the social animals get competition and cooperation and then track their place in social
influence and hierarchies relational value and we have this whole machinery to determine where we
are in social space okay what we're hoping to get is we're hoping to have the alignment of good
social influence and be known in value but i call high relational value social influence high rv si
and that means the others know you authentically and they value you and you can influence them
and you're yoked together the reverse is low value low social state okay and that's a threat state
and you want to attend to that so so these three habit experiential relational and these are things
that we would share with other primates there are two others i'll jump to the last the last is your
system of justification your justification system this is the talking system that comes online when
you're about two and then builds your narrative so that you become socialized so that people ask
you well why'd you do what you do and who are you okay and it's your propositional knowing system
and then the final system which is really four in the name that's called the defensive system
the defensive system is the relationship between your self-conscious system and your animalistic
systems okay and then that system is trying to regulate your your equilibrium between what your
animal wants what your private narrator wants and what the social world wants okay
so what happens to people is they get trapped into entrenched maladaptive patterns across these
systems of adaptation and then and then as they get trapped they feel enormous frustration fatigue
discouragement anxiety they do that interpsychically and interpersonally okay and then you get to me
you guys come and see me as a clinician i'm like okay i'm going to ask you all sorts of questions
and i'm tracking your habit system your experiential system your relationship system your defense and
identity across your history in the current context and what you want to do okay um and then
then i'll get into oh this is the ways in which you've been trapped um and the ideal optimal
functioning is a developmental trajectory that allows that heart and habits to keep yourself
healthy okay and allow power to procedurally enact in the world and then your heart as an
organismic valuing process through your true relational self into a narrator that says yes
this is aligned into a relational world that knows and values for what you are okay you show me people
like that and you hang in my office yeah thank you i think that's a great overview and i have a
question which might cover some of the territory again but hopefully from a little bit different
angle and that is the integral model of psychology not only kind of maps out the field
it actually in practice will lead to different manifestations in actually how you sit
with a client they're the externals where you use the quadrants and other things like
andrey marquis where you can use you know for the intake and all of that but there are also
i think insights from the model that that impact how you are together with the client
and and what you're looking for what you're doing working with states in order to help
individuals step outside of their embedment in a particular problematic you know constellation
of associations or or things or using perspectives to be able to track where the cognitive and
emotional fixations are in terms of how they're organizing their meaning making and so there are
just different ways that it will bleed into that context even though you're not talking
you know theory wonkish language to them and all of that but it's a perfume and it and it actually
maybe also unfolds in the forms of certain techniques or modes of intervention so have you
found in developing this that it's impacted your way of being with clients and are there any maybe
unique clinical manifestations yeah i mean so this is what i do in terms of so i'm hired and
directed than a combined integrated doctoral program trained psychological doctors since 2003
um so so i trained people to be psychological doctors and uh so the unified theory then is the
backdrop for that um so the short answer yet to sort of weaves through basically everything
the you know what i do then i so i translate that there are four major psychotherapy traditions
at the individual level okay you have behaviorism you have the humanistic tradition you have the
psychodynamic okay and versus psychoanalytic and we can talk about my relation i have a i have a
love-hate relationship with the psychoanalytic people i'm hanging up i'm syncing up with a
cadillast who is a psychoanalytic philosopher and and i love it it's great but as a psychological
scientist me and Freud at certain places go but anyway psycho dynamic is brilliant uh that's
that my term for um and i love psychoanalytic in its place uh but as a in the science world and
there's definitely you have to know what the language game it's playing is so i offer that caveat
and then there's the cognitive and and also lesser but important narrative and existential versions
okay the argument basically is is that the these different paradigms have key insights on patterns
of maladapt adaptation behaviors okay basically track the procedural habit system in the way the
environment selects these kinds of issues and then develops ways to control the contingencies
and cultivate new skills can be done brilliantly or can be done all of these then can be done
brilliantly or poorly the neo-humanistic place that focuses on the experiential systems like
Les Greenberg and his emotion focus therapy um modern psycho dynamic theories like Paul Wachtell
i was trained for four years at the University of Pennsylvania i work with Aaron Beck he's one of
the fathers of cognitive psychotherapy um so basically what i would say to you in terms of
how does it um so you come into my and the first thing i want to know is this sort of you know
we're doing therapy right is i want a relational participatory dance implicitly so that you feel
like i care which i will because i haven't been burned out that much i care about you and your
unique pathic way of being your unique subjective organismic valuing process okay and there will
be then there's a relational field between us where you're tracking that and i'm tracking that in
dance all right and so then as a professional psychologist it's key for me to send you the
signals that you are valued okay and that you're known sort of initially developmentally in the
way you want to be known okay which can vary right and like you don't want to be fully known right away
um so then our relational dance is essentially finding how do we do that
and this is the therapeutic relation and then i just start to listen to your justification
narrative when i say hey what brings you in today okay that's your justification narrative of self
a world my past my feared future my angst etc and as i hear that i'm hearing then the
narrator who's willing to share with me then through the private into the public so it's
filtered who's this goddamn psychological doctor guy right that's who is this guy
and what the hell do i really want to tell him okay so that's the filter uh and then i then hear
the themes uh of the the practices and your habits and your lifestyle making it really simple
your emotions and emotion functioning your interpersonal style which i'm tracking here in
your relational world would you tell me well my dad my mom this is where the family i was born
in these are the friends that i had this is my first wife and we blew up this way whatever
um whatever the story's person is and then i'm getting their relational field and then i'm asking
questions to see how that narrator justifies all of that um and where is it stuck you know what's
the stuckness in relation um and then how do we create the proper relational participatory element
at the level so that the the harmony is is there in the dance and then we have to build
the conceptualization the story of you your problem your history and your potential that's
the conceptualization okay and it's building that shared conceptualization that puts the framing
the constraints and the hopes on the growth processes and then that evolves into the actual
tasks of psychotherapy which people almost always get wrong by the way oh what do i need to do well
sit there usually okay i mean the wisdom tree doesn't sort of get this like you know awareness
and acceptance of the two thirds of it there's like well there are four things you need to do
yeah but we're that simple you wouldn't be here right so so that's the that's you know and then
the tasks and so the tasks then are are then you create feedback loops of outcome and then
you track all that um comm mo by the way that you know uh is the fifth uh the eighth branch uh that
about i mentioned it briefly in terms of curiosity that is the principles and processes that i'm
guiding that guide my attention to the predominant socio-emotional maladaptive patterns that people
get trapped into and that is that is an overarching set of principles and processes for reversing
those patterns
so we've got these maladaptive patterns which i think to some degree resemble primitive patterns
in the way that a maladaptive modernity starts to look like a theocratic authoritarian medievalism
right there's a kind of a regressive element to maladaptive patterns i love it really but there's
also this element where you mentioned this a lot of maladaptive patterns are characterized by
short-term investments with problematic long-term consequences and that leads me to the question
of time and how we relate to time right and you know what's your ontology of time how do you think
time operates in your theory building and psychologically you know what's the basis of
us all having a better relationship with time all right easy question right time question
yeah okay um so so for me uh we're on the cusp of the past turning into the present turning into
the future there we're on a wave of probability okay um so that's that's and in the that probability
is when the probable uh you know future as i ride the crest of the wave of probability i look out
onto the sea of the way possibility and back onto the sea of effect okay so the sea of effect is
where that wave of probability is happening to become the past okay and so we're on this causal
wave so that's and then the angle in relationship to you looking at that you look at as a psychological
person okay that has a sphere of what the present is from our vantage point that's one angle that's
very different than a quantum mechanical view of time okay subatomic particle the differentiation
of quantum mechanical time and that frame of reference is well qualitatively quantitatively
different okay um it's also the case that the sense of time at each level and dimension of the
tree of knowledge uh that this there's different space time dimensions basically okay so you know
plonk time means something at the first at the floor of the system that means you know at least
within some sort of scale a plonk time at the level of psychology even worse at the level
sociology means nothing okay um so things are happening in different in different frames at
different you know places and we have to be absolutely uh you know keen about that and we
have to be i often say i'll say i hope we have the time okay for the developmental change and
often you hear me say the developmental change so um one of the first things you learn as a
psychotherapist is you do not go from zero to hundred you know you have to go 10 to 20 to 30
in what's called the zone of proximal development okay so um we need if we've if the icebergs five
years out we're doomed right there's no way that the collective wisdom awakening can happen and
because of the structure of the system and not only that is it's regressing okay so so five years
is not much in globalization time uh and one of the things that's crazy making for us is things
are changing so fast when we need paradigmatic evolution over time and things are happening
way too fast so the time scale relation of the concept of how it operates of what we're talking
about obviously people's things like geologic time you know those are all so that that's what
i would offer if you wanted to go and get into what i've gotten into quantum entanglement stuff
i've gotten into you know general relativity um i have things to say about those relationships with
sort of what the physical conceptions of time it time inside of a system versus hyper time and
global time on the outside of a system um those are fascinating questions i'm expert on the cutting
edge of sort of the metaphysics of time but i enjoyed a lot of conversations about that and
it's funky you know as i was also you know it's time and energy those are some of the deep deep
funds and uh i love those conversations so is that is that in the ballpark of if there are
any specifics that i'd be happy about yeah that's great um and the only thing maybe you can add
something in about is what's uh you know going forward what's a more optimal psychological
relationship with time because a lot of the wisdom traditions uh try to put us in an emotional state
where we can use our prefrontal cortex in certain ways to manage future outcomes better
than we might otherwise do and you know to have more foresight to try to have effects that
reach longer into time in effect to take the future at greater scales more seriously than we
habitually do beautiful i mean you know that's you know as you climb up sort of the expanse of
the ego confuges very explicit about this but others you then see you transcend and you extend
right across time and i wish that we would do that um and so i think that you know for me one
of the things i often tell people is that you have a primary process system uh that does work
in the immediacy and you have a secondary anybody that works in addiction will know this
or if you put in more common times they've ever dieted or tried to do anything self-disciplinary
right you're like when you're on that monday morning and you and your narrator that's out
here one week above or two months out it's so easy to be like well i'm going to do this
because the state system of the elephant or the horse or whatever the animalistic is like
fine i just i just ate last night i just drank last night i'm good i'm on board right and then
you know friday afternoon it's like i was on board but i'm now hungry and thirsty and want to have
my drink and then it quizzes you so you know your primary system as an animal system okay operates
in time in a radically different way okay than your secondary system and and this is one of
the things to get people really tripped up so you have to understand that you are
operating in time in different ways that's one thing the state vision will tell you that time
is cyclical okay remember i said you know i feel it in myself i learned a long time ago
that you feel that and if you try to stay there and especially as a clinician i get to see that
you're going to go from hypomania to mania and then you're going to short out and you're you're
doomed right so the idea that you can create some utopic euphoric consistent state that you
don't have appreciation for the sick cycle of time right i mean the seasons for love of god
indigenous people know this in ways that we lose track of um the i i wish that we could then
figure out the proper relation between past present and future okay i think that's a very
trauma of the past is really key that's a get into trauma and what my orientation about it is
calm mo one of the things about to you spoke mentioned the so calm mo the second word is
acceptance all right and i really then do then fall into issues of detachment uh distress
tolerance the you know those are sort of western psychological then bridges into the authentic
wisdom traditions of you know zen buddhism and whatever but whatever would then orient you
towards your capacity for presence in being okay um but i'm also a westerner so i do also
think then in terms of well i want to be better uh m is motivated toward valued states of being
so for me what this does is it then positions you from being into becoming and to create that
and then i want to create it across socio-ecological scale with appropriate time meaning from individual
to dyad and small group to community etc okay and then so we're going to try to then create
a developmental transition appropriate to scale holding our animal and head okay around being and
becoming i'm a longtime practitioner of a tradition called tsk instead of to okay okay focusing on the
time space and knowledge as fundamental orientations and elements of the world orientations towards
and elements of the world and looking at how the constellation of the play of our experience
and conception of time our experience and conception of space and our relationship to
knowing and knowledge all work together in different ways to establish different patterns
of the self-system well that sounds fascinating yeah so it's it's a topic i i love and actually
maybe we can talk about it in the future i'd be super curious to learn about that
right now i have time bearing down on me i actually have to make the room available to someone else
so okay um but i'd like i'd love the conversation i want to ask if there's anything else you know
about the um you talk or the to okay that that you'd like to share and um add to our conversation
but before we bring it to a close um well i i mean first let me just say thank you i appreciate
you guys are great we should hang i really enjoyed it i mean wonderful just rich questions
just hitting in exactly the kinds of things that i've wrestled with for a long time so
it's so uh fun to have interlocutors that actually you know know the kind of angles to
take on these kinds of metastasemic perspectives and to be able to allow an opportunity to see
how it's flowered in various ways uh it's been a really really joy to to share it with you and i
love the space uh that you guys are creating here it's one of the exactly the the wisdom information
energy places uh that i hope we see flower more of and uh that's the kind of thing in my estimation
you know that is uh collects people together allow in an integrated pluralistic wise way of being
and uh let's let's hope to try to do that because uh i don't know how much time we have
and hopefully we have enough and if we do it the back out of this century could be a beautiful
thing that's what i believe i'm in this is terrific i i really appreciate your presence
and your work and uh i've got a real good vibe about this so thanks greg right man i've i've
appreciated listening to you both on various podcasts it's great to cause i meet you in person
at least the two-dimensional person that is our zoom zoom topia these days all right
oh thanks a lot take care fantastic we'll be in touch
you
