It is the requirement of locality. Notice, right? Not causality, which is the determinism part.
It is the requirement of locality. Bell couldn't be clearer than this.
Where does Copenhagen fall into this?
Copenhagen falls into this as not being a clear theory.
I see. They're just not clear enough about what they're doing.
Despite it being textbook quantum mechanics.
Welcome everyone to the Cartesian Cafe. I am your host Tim Wynn.
Today, we're very lucky to have Tim Modlin here with us.
Tim is a philosopher of science specializing in the foundations of physics, metaphysics,
and logic. He is a professor at New York University, a member of the Foundational Questions Institute,
and the founder and director of the John Bell Institute for the Foundations of Physics.
Welcome, Tim. How are you doing today?
I'm fine. I'm glad to see you again.
Likewise. I thought we could start out by you telling us a little bit about your career trajectory.
For myself, when I was growing up, I always knew I wanted to do some combination of mathematics,
physics, and philosophy. Mathematics ended up being the more dominant of those three,
but I feel that if circumstances or opportunities have been different, I could have easily done
some other combination of the three. You ended up doing a combination of philosophy and physics.
How did that come about?
Well, I was one of those undergraduates who was interested in everything.
I took a lot of different courses. When I started out, actually, my intention was to become an
architect. My freshman year, I took courses in civil engineering. I took a course on Bach.
I mean, I took all kinds of stuff, but there's a kind of past of mind that naturally leads you
into physics and into philosophy and into mathematics, actually, to an extent as well,
which is a kind of foundational interest in a certain sense of foundational.
Like to say, there's a sense in which it's not quite what many people think it is,
but there is a sense in which people say, well, biology, that's just really fancy
cellular stuff. Cellular stuff, that's just fancy chemistry. Chemistry is just fancy physics.
Once you get down to physics, that's not fancy anything else. That's the bottom level.
And that the laws of physics, for example, are supposed to be completely universal and
exceptionalists, whereas the principles of biology or economics or chemistry or whatever
are not. And so, in a way, physical law is more rigorous or more objective
than the principles that are used in other sciences. So there's a certain push downward
in a certain sense of downward that leads you into physics. That same push downward
on any topic leads you into philosophy. Sort of, well, what is this after all at base?
What are beliefs after all, or what is the good after all, where you're not so much
interested in the particular cases as in the fundamental principles? And that will also
lead you and lead Plato into mathematics because mathematics seems to have rigor in its proofs.
It's a place where you can actually demonstrate things, where you can get at the truth and know
you've gotten to the truth. So certain epistemological issues come up there. So I think
math, physics, and philosophy, certain parts of philosophy form a natural group.
In the John Bell Institute that I founded by charter, and I wrote the charter,
there are six governors and two have to be philosophers, two have to be physicists,
and two have to be mathematicians because all of these fields give you expertise that's relevant
for doing foundations of physics. So it wasn't too much of a surprise that I was interested in
both physics and philosophy, lots of philosophers of science. Their background is either in math or
sometimes in logic. And of course, if you're doing physics and you're interested in a foundational
way, you get interested in math because math is the language in which physics is written. And then
you need to think about how that works and how you can use mathematical objects to represent physical
reality. It's a very subtle question. So yeah, I can imagine going off in any of these directions
and being pushed a little bit about what you're just naturally best at. I mean, I was a pretty good
physics student, but there were ones that were better and there were certainly much better math
students than me. So I ended up getting my PhD actually in history and philosophy of science,
which makes sense and specializing in physics. That's great. In terms of going further along in
your career, now you're a professor and you work at the, I guess, intersection of philosophy and
physics. My experience with academia has been that it can be very, let's say, compartmentalized.
To be in academia, you need to be squarely in one department. You're in the physics department
or the philosophy department. And there can be maybe very little interaction between the two,
if at all. And it can be quite dangerous even to work at the intersection of the fields. If you're,
the physicists might think you're a philosopher, the philosophers might think you're a physicist.
So you can kind of easily fault the cracks if you try to do interdisciplinary work.
Is that at all mitigated by being a philosopher of science?
Yeah. I mean, it's certainly mitigated in the philosophy department. I mean,
it's certainly the case that physicists will look down, not just on philosophers,
but pretty much anybody who doesn't have a degree in physics. I mean, that's the stereotype
and there's more than a smidgen of truth in it. So you have to overcome a certain attitude
that physicists often have for somebody who doesn't have an official degree in the subject.
Not the other way, really. That is, philosophers are quite welcoming and they appreciate technical
background. They understand that if you're going to do philosophy of science, sure,
it's a really good thing that you understand the science and you've studied it. So it's not as if
I've ever come across anybody in philosophy who said, oh, you know too much physics to be doing
philosophy, you know, that sort of doesn't just doesn't make any sense. And historically, of course,
many philosophers were also physicists and mathematicians. I mean, Descartes and Leibniz,
and I mean, Newton was doing natural philosophy and he's somebody we discuss. So there's not a,
there wasn't a historical division there and contemporary philosopher, philosophy departments
are, if anything, very welcoming to people who have technical backgrounds that seem relevant to
philosophical questions. Much more than physics departments are welcoming to people who are,
have been trained to do a certain kind of conceptual analysis and clarity of argumentation,
which is really what you get out of, out of a philosophy training is very self-conscious
about arguments and argument forms and where arguments can go wrong and what tacit
presuppositions there are and what follows from what. That's what a training, a good
training in philosophy will make you very sensitive to. And I think that's why, you know, Einstein
complained about the physicists of his time that they didn't have enough philosophical background.
You know, Einstein, when he was young, they had reading groups, reading Hume,
and he appreciated philosophy and he appreciated the kind of rigor that philosophy, that good
philosophers bring to their arguments. Of course, bad philosophers, it's the opposite.
Yeah, lingering on that, that interplay between physics and philosophy a little bit longer. Do
you think in today's climate, the current interaction or lack thereof between physics
and philosophy, do you feel that there should be more interaction? It seems that Einstein,
you know, his philosophical thinking very much informed his, say, formulation of
general relativity and maybe his view of physics at large. Do you think the next breakthrough,
conceptual breakthrough in physics will require maybe some philosophical considerations?
I mean, there are two parts to that. There's the kind of plain vanilla part that nobody should
disagree with, which is that any such breakthrough requires really rigorous thinking, clarity of
thought. And unfortunately, that is sadly lacking in many physicists, even about things that aren't
controversial. I mean, sometimes I feel like if by the time I give this up, if I can manage to
just explain how the twins paradox works correctly so people don't make mistakes about it, that would
be an accomplishment. And there's nothing controversial about it, nothing really that hard
about it, but physicists get it wrong all the time. I mean, Feynman got it wrong in his lectures,
explaining what's going on in that case. Why? Not because there's anything really hard there,
but they're just not careful enough. And they kind of repeat what they've been told.
This is the way most people work, is they don't really work out things and understand them. They
kind of, if they hear it 10 times, then they'll repeat it the 11th time and think they understand
it. And that happens all the time. Now, in relativity, the real experts in relativity
understand all this. It's not news to them. In quantum theory, it's a mess. And even the people
who would be considered to be the greatest experts are often completely confused and just
conceptually confused. And that needs to get cleared up. So it's much more that
rigor of method that's needed here than philosophical insights in the sense of
some big, I don't know, Kantian or Hegelian or whatever system that's going to clear all this
up. That's not going to be it. But you certainly need to be more careful in argumentation and in
understanding the fundamental principles of the theories that you're using. And that has not been
encouraged in physics departments for over a century, largely because of quantum mechanics.
Actually, in a separate conversation we had, you actually thought that maybe
current physicists were working on some of the wrong problems. I don't know, you mentioned the
black hole information paradox, things like that. I don't know if you wanted to comment on that as
maybe a specific example. That's a case. What's going on? Everybody realizes correctly that there's
a difficulty bringing together relativity and quantum theory. I mean, there's difficulties just
at a mathematical level and there's difficulties at a conceptual level. And kind of grasping at
straws for some way to make progress. And they hit on this idea more or less quasi accidentally
that, oh, I can describe black holes that the laws that govern black holes look kind of analogous
to thermodynamic laws. So that was noticed by Hawkingen and so on. And then that got pushed
further. Oh, well, once you do quantum field theory on a curved manifold, you get this Hawking
radiation. So really, there is a thermodynamic entropy to black holes. And then we can somehow
have to think hard about black hole thermodynamics that that's going to help us put together
quantum mechanics and relativity. And I think that's just pure desperation to begin with because
we have exactly zero empirical evidence about black hole thermodynamics and zero empirical
evidence there even is Hawking radiation. And very little, in my opinion, understanding of
how the calculations that give you Hawking radiation work and what the principles from which
it is derived are. And then you just kind of get this mess that's jammed together and all these
people think, oh, if I can just calculate the number of possible interior states of a black hole
and then calculate the black hole entropy, and if I can get that number to come out right, that
shows I'm on the right track. I mean, string theorists have been saying this kind of stuff for
quite a long time. And then doing calculations that everybody admits nobody can follow from
beginning to end and kind of wheel in all these different weird principles. And nobody can give
you an intuitive explanation for how they work. And they say, but look, we got the right number at
the end. It shows what that string theory must be correct because it's giving us black hole entropy.
I mean, this is just, I mean, it's the kind of thing that doesn't stand up to scrutiny.
It's just the kind of thing that picked up steam, because it was something you could do.
There were kind of rules of the game sort of quasi rules of the game.
But if you really step back and say, is the right way to understand how to put together
relativity in so far as they can be put together, relativity and quantum theory,
going to run through the root of black hole thermodynamics, that's just, that's just so off
the wall and unconstrained certainly by anything empirical. And you can't, I literally can't
understand it. On the other hand, I mean, to give you the contrast, what do we know? We know,
we have experimental confirmation of violations of Bell's inequality. The Nobel Prize was just
given for that experimental confirmation. That's a fact. That's an established experimental fact.
And if you understand the significance of Bell's theorem, you're going to say, man,
that gives me a real conflict with relativity right there. And a conflict that doesn't come
out on relativity side, because general relativity could not predict violations like that. General
relativity is a local theory in Bell's sense. And general relativity taken as it was written down
could not possibly explain or account for or predict what you see in the lab
with respect to violations of Bell's inequality. That's real hard stuff. I mean, that's not fantasy.
That's out of the lab and with some very simple argumentation. So I think it would be much more
fruitful for people to be thinking hard about getting non locality into a theory that's still
from which relativistic constraints emerge in some natural way. So you, of course, you need to
understand why relativity works as well as it does and why various relativistic principles
have led to good predictions, even though there's every indication that the fundamental picture
of relativity can't really be right. Very interesting. And I think that's maybe a good
segue for us to get to the main part of our discussion today. So today, we'll be talking
about Bell's theorem, which is quite a remarkable theorem in that it's both profound and overlooked
at the same time, profound because it's a surprising and central result in the foundations of physics,
but also overlooked because it's not something you're taught in any standard physics course. I've
never seen it advertised on a physics syllabus. And so many physicists can go through their entire
career without ever needing to think about Bell's theorem. But it's also kind of funny because
mathematically, it's quite a simple theorem. It's not at all difficult to prove. But the really
difficult part is really getting the conceptual understanding correct. What are the actual
assumptions? What are the different trade-offs? If you try to vary the assumptions and maybe want
to hold certain things to be true, getting the terminology straight, and that's really where
the difficulty lies. And in fact, the difficulty is sufficient that even the Nobel Prize Committee,
when they wrote the description for the 2022 Prize for the work of Espe,
Klauser, and Zeilinger, when they described the significance of the Prize, they also messed it
up and we'll get into that later. So yeah, so Bell's theorem is quite funny for all these reasons.
Maybe before we dive in and give an outline of what we're going to talk about, I guess you sort
of already alluded to it, but maybe can you just give us a summary of how to think about Bell's
theorem, what it is, and why anyone should care. Sure. So the topic of Bell's theorem is locality
and you have to just stop there and say that's what it's about. It's about, in particular,
local causality in a certain sense that Bell makes clear. Sometimes people call it bell causality.
It's not about just as far as the misattributions of the Nobel Prize Committee. It's not about so
called hidden variables theories of quantum mechanics. That's what many people think. It's
somehow, they mistakenly believe that the net effect of Bell was to rule out so called hidden
variables in quantum theory. And the problem, I mean, there are many problems with that,
but for anybody who doesn't believe there's a problem, here's an observation. The most famous
hidden variables understanding approach to quantum theory is the De Broglie-Bohm pilot wave theory
and John Bell wrote a very nice paper called On the Impossible Pilot Wave,
advertising the theory, and he claimed elsewhere it's the best constructed theory. It shows the
best craftsmanship of all the approaches to quantum mechanics. He says that in quantum mechanics
for cosmologists or in six possible worlds of quantum theory. One of those, he says, of these
different approaches, Bohm shows the best craftsmanship. So people somehow managed to convince
themselves that Bell had ruled out a theory that he himself long after his proof was advertising
and supporting and promoting. And that should tell you right off the bat, you don't understand
what Bell did. He wouldn't be out advertising a hidden variables theory if he thought he had
ruled out hidden variables theories. That just makes no sense. And it wasn't his point. In fact,
the point of the theorem has nothing to do with quantum mechanics and it has nothing to do because
even the term hidden variables only makes sense in the context of quantum mechanics. And the theorem
is not about quantum mechanics. It's about any theory that is locally causal. And by that essentially
we can just say this, if you're familiar with relativity, any theory in which all of the causes
of an event lie in or on its past light cone. So let's just take that. We could go into maybe
much finer detail, but just take that. So take a theory where anything that could have a causal
effect on a certain event is in or on its past light cone, which means that light at least would
be able to get from the cause to the effect. So as it were, causation can't go faster than light.
In the context of relativity. That's a causally local theory. And of course, in that sense,
for example, Maxwellian electrodynamics is a causally local theory. And if all you had was
Maxwellian electrodynamics, you would never predict violations of bells in a column. That's not a
quantum theory. And that has nothing to do with hidden variables. Newtonian mechanics is going to
be causally local as long as causes only influence their effects by some process that doesn't go
faster than light. Then it'll be causally local. And what Bell shows is that there are constraints
on the sorts of phenomena that a causally local theory can predict or account for.
And then what you notice is that two things. The first is that quantum theory predicts violations
of those constraints. That's very interesting. But more interesting and much more important is
that you go into the lab and do some experiments and irrespective of quantum theory, the experiments
violate those constraints. The outcomes, the data from those experiments violate the inequality.
And so that tells you we've quantum mechanics aside entirely that physics cannot be locally
causing. And to that extent, yes, something as it were goes faster than light. It has to.
That brings immediately the tension with relativity into sharp focus. If you think that
relativity forbids that, now you've got an absolutely clear tension there. Now you can argue,
no, relativity doesn't really forbid it. Well, what really does relativity forbid? What really are
the principles of relativity? What does really relativity say? You can then get into a lot
of detailed questions that are very interesting and very important. My first book, quantum
non-locality and relativity was just saying, okay, if you think relativity forbids something from
going faster than light, just what is it that it forbids going faster than light? And then,
finally, maybe you don't think it forbids anything from going faster than light. Then what does it
do? What are the fundamental principles of relativity? And these are questions which
can be asked and answered and investigated. But you have to
have a very high premium on clarity and making distinctions and so on to do that kind of work.
And often people don't. All right. And on that note, that's why we're making this episode,
so that we can try to get the story straight. I mean, I'll say one more word maybe that'll help
people. It is often, again, a mistake, commonly repeated mistake. It's well known that Einstein
didn't like quantum theory as developed by Bohr and the so-called Copenhagen School. He really
didn't like it. It is often mistakenly said that what he really didn't like was the indeterminism,
the God plays dice stuff. But that's not what he really really didn't like. What he really didn't
like was the spooky action at a distance stuff. What he called telepathy, that the Copenhagenists
had to use telepathy to get their predictions. And he said he couldn't accept that. That's
nonlocality. That was really the issue from the beginning for Einstein, was that he saw
quantum theory as exposited by Bohr and Heisenberg was nonlocal. It had this spooky
action at a distance and he couldn't accept that. So it's worthwhile to see that the nub of the
whole thing from the beginning was nonlocality. And that what Einstein, Podolski and Rosen were
focused on in their paper in 1935 was nonlocality. And what Bell is addressing is nonlocality,
only Bell's consequence is that you have to accept it, right? You can't avoid it.
So his conclusion is anti-Einstein, but it's on the topic Einstein was worried about.
So as you mentioned, we talked about Bell's theorem, but of course, to properly understand
Bell's theorem, we have to understand it in the context of the work of Einstein, Podolski and
Rosen. In fact, Bell's paper was called on the Einstein-Podolski-Rosen paradox. Of course,
we have to look at that first. So anyways, let me write down what I think is going to be a suitable
outline for us and let's just see how it goes. So the first thing we're going to talk about is,
as you mentioned, sort of the prelude to this whole business, which is the EPR paradox coming
from Einstein, Podolski and Rosen. So that will set the stage for therefore Bell's theorem.
So we're going to look at it, I think from, you know, try to try to follow Bell's paper,
first of all, because well, that's the source of the theorem. And well, we'll go from there.
And we've been talking about Bell's theorem, but Bell's theorem produces an inequality.
There have been several versions of this inequality going by various names, but they're
all kind of collectively referred to as Bell's inequality. And so that we'll get there when
we talk about Bell's theorem. But the thing with Bell's theorem is that the kind of inequality
that you get from that paper is maybe not so easy to understand. It's not that intuitive.
And what's really nice, as I learned from talking to you in the book that you wrote,
there's a simplification that one can implement. I'll call it the G-H-Z version,
named after Greenberger, Horn, and Zeilinger. And what's nice about this version is that we can
get a much more tangible feel for how Bell's inequality is violated in a way that the original
paper doesn't make so clear. So it'll be very instructive, I think, to kind of do that. And
it also separates a lot of sort of the extraneous kind of assumptions and, you know,
kind of thoughts around Bell's theorem. It just disentangles things very, very cleanly. So it's
nice to do that. I thought what we could do after that is then maybe, now that we've kind of put
all the technical details out there, maybe you could maybe state what exactly the 22
Nobel Prize significance was, what they did in terms of the actual experiment or inequality
that they showed was violated. And then after maybe we do that, we can kind of clean up a few
things and talk about misconceptions. You've already alluded to those pertaining to Bell's
theorem, and there's a lot of them, and they're persistent, so I think it's good to really kind
of make it clear what those misconceptions are. And then sort of on a related note, there are also,
well, once we've kind of explained things mathematically, we can also talk about what are
really the necessary assumptions behind Bell's theorem. So Bell's theorem's necessary assumptions,
as opposed to maybe the happenstance assumptions that people often describe Bell's theorem. And
then we can therefore talk about, you know, and once we actually have the necessary assumptions,
we can talk about, say, loopholes, things like super determinism and whatnot. And then,
just to round things out, we can maybe finish with, say, talking about interpretations of quantum
mechanics. So, yeah, a lot of fascinating topics, a lot on our plate today. How does this look?
Let me just make one correction. Okay, sure, of course. Here, hold on, let me get my 10. Here,
where you've written paradox. It's an argument. Okay. And this is, you know, again, a point that
Bell makes. They didn't regard that paper as producing a paradox. A paradox is something
that you kind of don't know, you don't know what to make of it, right? They thought, no, there's a
very clear question before their mind when they write the paper. And it's the title of the paper,
is a quantum mechanical description of reality complete? So that's just a question. You have
a thing, a mathematical gadget called a wave function. And when you do quantum mechanics,
you ascribe to any system a wave function. And the question they asked was, it does that give
me a complete description of the system? That is, if I know the wave function, does it somehow
represent either directly or indirectly, all of the physical characteristics of that system?
There are many ways to phrase this. One way to phrase it is, take any pair of systems that are
given the same wave function. Are they physically identical? Or can there be any physical differences
between them? That question either is yes or no. The whole paper is arguing, no, it's not complete.
Quantum mechanics, that description, whatever it is, cannot be a complete description. It's
got to have left stuff out. In the same way that, I mean, maybe this would be an analogy,
if I have a box of gas, okay, it has a temperature, let's say, classically. But that's not a
complete description of it, because lots of boxes of gas that are different in their microscopic
details can have the same temperature. The temperature gets at something, but it sure
doesn't get at everything. Avogadro's numbers of particles with particular positions in momenta,
and a complete description of that system would specify all of that. And if all I do is say,
well, it's a 38-degree centigrade, I sure haven't done that. So there are various ways in which
a description can fail to be complete. If it's complete, then you're saying physics is done.
Somehow all the physics there is, I've represented. There's nothing more to find. And what they were
doing was arguing that quantum mechanics hasn't done that. And unfortunately, Bohr and so on were
arguing that it had. They're only making this argument in the context of the Copenhagen
insistence that you can't go beyond what they'd done, that they'd reached the end of the road.
They'd gotten to the very bottom of things. And the very bottom of things was, first of all,
not deterministic. And second of all, had various other characteristics of complementarity and so
on. That Einstein thought, no, I mean, why should I believe that? Why should I think that what you've
done is the end of the story? And they were giving an argument that it isn't. So that's what I want
to say. If you say it's a paradox, you would think, at the end of the day, Einstein scratching his head
and saying, oh, I don't know what to make of this, but it's just the opposite. I know exactly what to
make of it, right? Quantum mechanics is not complete. Let's say in contrast, I don't know,
Zeno's paradox were because they didn't have calculus. They didn't know how to think about it.
Is that right? Yeah. I mean, Zeno's paradox, exactly. You hear Zeno's paradox say about
Achilles and the tortoise. And you say, well, gee, this argument seems to suggest that Achilles
can't catch the tortoise. But of course, Achilles can catch the tortoise, right? I mean,
at the end of the day, you can say, yeah, now I understand Zeno that the fastest runner can't
catch the slowest animal, right? So you're just, you know, something's gone wrong somewhere.
But you don't quite know where. I mean, Einstein's not saying something's going
wrong somewhere here. He's saying, I'll tell you where it's going.
Okay. All right. Well, the name stuck. So I don't know. I mean, it is called hyper paradox.
And I'm not blaming you for that, but it is quite honestly. And I think this is why, again,
I'm just channeling Bell here when he said they didn't think it was a paradox. I think calling
it a paradox already puts you on the wrong foot about what exactly it is, right? And then if you're
on the wrong foot at stage one, it's not going to get better going forward. I think, you know, what
Bell saw was that from their premises, EPR provide a perfectly good argument. And he saw that one
of their premises, although this one's a little buried, it's a little bit hidden, is a locality
assumption. And so what he saw was that if you accept the locality assumption that's implicit
in EPR, you better, you have to accept their conclusion, which is that quantum mechanics is
incomplete. Sure. Okay. Why don't we dive into the what the EPR argument is so that now we're
going to start unfurling with these with these terms we've been talking about. I mean, so yeah,
why don't we go to the next slide and maybe you can give your, your formulation of the EPR argument.
I know we've talked about this before that EPR sort of, well, they have the formulation in their
paper. I know you like to think about in terms of a simpler setup, I would agree with you because
it's going to make things simpler later. So what, yeah, go ahead, feel free to describe it in the
way that you think is most helpful. So the, the, the place where locality is going to be buried
is in what EPR write down as a criterion of reality. Okay. And they're very careful also
about their terminology here. So I'll just write and I'm sorry again about my hand writing.
They're very careful about what about their words. Okay. Then they say a criterion is not a definition.
A criterion is a sufficient condition, but it doesn't have to be a necessary condition.
Right. That is, I'm not, it would be a much bigger task to say I'm going to, as it were,
give you a complete definition of physical reality or of what it takes to know that
something's physically real. I mean, they're not attempting such a thing. They wouldn't know what
to do, but they're, they're doing something much, much, much milder, but they think completely
uncontroversial. And I think it is what they say is completely uncontroversial. So what do
they say? They say, well, how do, how do I tell that there's some real physical characteristic
or feature of a system? Well, suppose I'm in the following situation. Suppose they say,
without in any way disturbing the system. So let's just put that, that's going to be important.
Right. So without disturbing the system, I can do what if without disturbing the system,
I can predict with certainty how it will behave. Right. So then you get can predict with certainty.
So my predictions are never wrong. Right. It's not a guess.
This is with complete accuracy. Suppose the system is such that in this situation,
I can predict with complete accuracy what it's going to do in some circumstance, say, if you,
you know, subject it to some experiment, then there must be some element of reality in the system
that makes it do that. I mean, there, there has to be something in the system that,
that is going to be responsible for producing that behavior. Yes. I mean, if I can know what
it's going to do, and I'm not disturbing it, something in the system there is making it do that.
That's the criterion. Right. So I can predict with certainty.
Then the conclusion is there exists an element of reality.
Can I just get a clarification here, because we know, for example, that
we have indeterminism and quantum mechanics, but more generally, if you have a situation
which of indeterminism, could you state with this criterion? Well, it's the same criteria.
I mean, look, it might be that you're in a situation where you can't predict anything,
and therefore, the criterion just doesn't apply. That doesn't mean the criterion's
wrong. It just means it's not useful. Okay. Okay. In order to apply it, I have to be able to make
a perfect prediction. This, this, this means it's a very, it's a very narrow criterion. I mean, it's a
very, it, it, it, it, it doesn't apply in many, many, many cases. Interestingly enough, it applies
in the, of course, it applies in the case that EPR analogs. Right. They can apply it because they
are in a situation where you can make perfect predictions under, under certain well-defined
circumstances, according to quantum mechanics. So all your, all your accepting here about
quantum mechanics is its predictive accuracy. And that's something that even Bohr is not going to
want to, you know, throw overboard. Right. Everybody's going to agree that the quantum,
everybody, for this argument, it's taken for granted that these predictions of quantum mechanics
are correct. Yes. So you're right. If, if, if I were to say, gosh, in my theory, I can't predict
anything with certainty, then you'd say, well, then this argument will not get any purchase.
So let's talk about the, now, now what, what happens to understand the history here
is that when Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen write this paper, they're doing a couple things as far
as I know for the very first time or anybody, any, in any case, anybody paying attention.
They're first of all looking at a system that involves a pair of particles
that can be separated arbitrarily far apart. So as we now say, you create a pair of particles,
your system is a pair of particles. One is sent to Alice way over there. Another is sent to Bob
way over there in their separate laboratories. And that's something you can do.
Certainly, according, you know, you just can do it. And of course, according to quantum
mechanics, you can do it. So it's not really an issue. But you've got this pair of particles.
And the only experiments that they're interested in are ones we call, and you have to be careful
about this terminology, but we would call position measurements and momentum measurements.
That's all they discuss. That is the only degrees of freedom in the system are position and momentum,
not spin, not polarization. And the reason I'm saying that is that part of the history is
EPR formulate their experiment with position and momentum. Later, David Bohm reformulates
the argument for spin or polarization. And then Bell picks up the spin and polarization example
because he can do things with it that have clear physical significance that you couldn't do
at all with just position and momentum. I mean, it wouldn't work. You wouldn't know
experimentally what you're talking about. So the transition to the spin example or the
polarization examples that everybody uses now is important conceptually. Now, the next point to make
is that even though Einstein, Podolsky and Rosen make their argument separately for position and
for momentum, given the state they write down, it's really unnecessary for the argument. You
can make the argument just looking at either just looking at position or just looking at momentum.
And I think that's often a mistake that people make is they think it's really important that you
can do both. It isn't. Rhetorically, it's useful that you can do both because it gives you something
to shoot at Heisenberg uncertainty relations. But the conclusion that the quantum state is
incomplete, which is the main conclusion, follows just from thinking about either momentum or position.
So let me do it just for momentum. So if we're all on the same page, we're going to
simplify this down. So what do we have? We have two particles. They're prepared in a certain
quantum state, which they write down, the EPR state. Particles are sent off to two different
labs arbitrarily far apart. Now, what is the characteristic of this quantum state? It's what
we would now call an entangled state, although that terminology didn't exist at the time.
And it's a state of net total, we would say total momentum zero. So the momentum of the pair of
particles, for sure, if you check both particles, if you, as we say, measure their momentum,
the total momentum will be zero, which means whatever momentum one shows up with the other
will show up with the opposite. If Alice is going at a certain velocity in this direction,
Bob's is going, I mean, they're equally massive, Bob's is going at the same velocity in exactly
the opposite direction. That's the important thing is that there will be, according to quantum theory,
a perfect correlation, or in this case, anti-correlation, between the outcome of Alice's
momentum experiment and the outcome of Bob's momentum experiment. And they know that.
They know that because they know how it was been prepared. Now, it turns out, and again, this is
just on the side, it's also true for position measurements. That is, if at a certain time
Alice makes a position measurement on the basis of her outcome, she can predict perfectly the
outcome of Bob's if he's making the same kind of position measurement. So you can make the same
argument either just for position or just for momentum. I'm just going to use momentum because
it's easier. It's actually mathematically simple. Sure. And I think just to write a formula to
ground what you just said, I think basically what you want to write is something like this. So
your wave function psi will basically be a superposition of states that look like the following.
You have say, I'm just going to use, you know, ket notation because that's just easy to write
instead of all the variables that you don't really need to write down. But there's like
basically P of Alice, and let's say tensed with minus P of Bob's say, and then you could just
take a, you know, a superposition, a sum or an integral of them depending on how you
want to think about it. But that's basically for all the different piece, right? For all these
different, right? So, so if you ask quantum mechanically, given how this pair of particles was
prepared, can I predict with certainty what Bob will see, what result he'll get answered? No.
There's a whole range of different results he could get. And quantum theory will give you
probabilities for each thing in that range. There's a whole range, an equal range,
but in the opposite direction for what Alice could see.
Right. That's represented by the sum here. The sum here tells you what that range is, right?
Yeah. And the theory does not make a strict prediction for either what Bob will see or
what Alice will see. But the curious thing is it does make with certainty of prediction that
whatever Alice sees, Bob will see the opposite and vice versa, right? This is the, this is the
source of the puzzle. Because what we get these, so let me just write down what you get. And again,
you don't need this for, for a bell inequality, but it makes the argument simpler if you have it.
You have perfect correlations, right? You have predicted, sorry, let's write that down,
perfect correlations. So here's something, here's something absolutely nobody can possibly
object to. If the predictions of quantum theory are correct, then if, if Bob makes him,
does a momentum experiment in his lab,
once he sees the outcome of his experiment, he is now in a position to, with perfect accuracy,
predict what the outcome of Alice's similar experiment will be. Whatever he sees, he knows
she's going to see the opposite. He doesn't know before he does this experiment what he's going
to see, but he knows whatever it is, it's going to, you know, she's going to see the opposite.
That's right. So if we look up at, at, at the criterion of reality, we've got the can predict
with certainty part, right? Bob can, once he's done his experiment, he can predict with certainty
what Alice will see. Yes? Now the only other part of that criterion of reality is without
disturbing the system. That is, did Bob, by doing his experiment in his lab, in any way
disturb the actual physical state of Alice's particle? Yes? Now Alice can be 100 billion
billion miles away. It's here that, that in a kind of tacit way, they think it's so obvious they
don't even say it. This is where locality comes into the EPR argument. They just thought it's
obvious that if Alice and Bob are, are, are in their labs and they're sufficiently isolated
from each other far apart, and maybe even light doesn't have time to get from Alice to Bob or
Bob to Alice in doing these experiments, then clearly whatever Bob does, he's not disturbing
Alice's particle. That's the locality assumption. Yes? So let me just write one more thing. So
basically what's going on here is that, let's say Alice is going to make a measurement of momentum,
right? And then she's going to get, let's say some value p star. And as soon as you do that,
you're going to collapse the wave function onto now this vector, which is just p star
tensored minus p star. And since Alice and Bob are very far away, they could not have
disturbed each other. Nevertheless, there's now this perfect correlation between the,
the measurements that they've gotten. Yeah, I mean, I, I mean, what you say is perfectly
correct. And people who understand that will follow it. The main question, and this was the
question Einstein had from the beginning, from the 1920s, was when you talk about collapse of the
wave function, is that a physical thing? Or is that merely an epistemic thing? Right? When you
collapse the wave function, do you think that that is literally a physical change in something?
Or is that merely getting information? Now, what, what bothered Einstein was that he thought they
had to treat it as a physical effect. And if it's a physical effect, then Bob, by doing some
experiment in his lab, has a physical effect on Alice's particle, because Alice's particle
goes from being in a state of indefinite momentum to a state of definite momentum. That's a physical
change, right? And that would be spooky action at a distance. That would be telepathy. That would
be the, the very thing Einstein couldn't believe in, that, that Bob, by doing something in his lab,
has any physical effect at all on Alice's particle. But if you take the collapse as a physical event,
it does. Because the normal thing would be to say, oh, Bob does his experiment, then I collapse the
wave function. The collapse wave function is now different with respect to Alice's particle, right?
So you've changed Alice's particle state. And Einstein thought that's crazy, right? That's
spooky action at a distance. That's telepathy. That's non-locality. So their assumption is no,
no, no, no, no. All, all Bob does is find out about his particle. And on the basis of what he finds
out, he now knows something new about Alice's, but nothing has physically changed. Now, Bell
uses this example of Bertelman's socks to get this across. So let me just talk about the example
for people who haven't read this. It's a wonderful paper, Bertelman's Socks and the Nature of Reality,
which is a funny title. And it's a funny paper. But you know, the physicist Bertelman, who was a friend
of Bell's, apparently, actually, as a matter of fact, for whatever reason decided he would always
wear socks of different colors. So he gets up in the morning and he puts on a pair of socks,
and you can't really predict what color any sock will be, but you can predict if you know
Bertelman, they'll be different. So if you see one sock and it's pink, now you know something you
didn't know about the other sock, namely, it's not pink, right? Because there's a perfect correlation
there. But again, there's nothing spooky about that. There's no action at a distance. There's
nothing like seeing one sock suddenly changes the color of the other sock. No, no, no. They had
their colors all along. They had their colors since he put them on in the morning. And all you're
doing is finding out something you didn't know, which is what color is on the right foot. And
when you find that out, and you know also about Bertelman, you now know something new about the
color of the sock on the left foot. But you didn't disturb the left sock. You're looking at the right
sock did not change the state of the left sock. And Bell's point is that that's the way Einstein
thought about all this. He thought there's nothing at all puzzling about these correlations. If you
think they have their momentum all along, if you think Bob's particle and Alice's particle already
had the momentum when they were created, one P and one minus P. And maybe, you know, if you do the
experiment many times, you'll get a range because the experiment doesn't prepare exactly the same
right state every time, but it always prepares a state where one is the opposite of the other.
Then all of this is very easy to explain and there's no spooky action at a distance.
But suppose you deny that. Suppose you say no, no, no. When the particles were created, they had
neither of them had any particular momentum at all. Then you have two puzzles, right?
One puzzle is why when I do what I call a momentum measurement, I get any result because you're
telling me it didn't have any momentum coming in. And maybe there you even say, oh, it's really
indeterministic, right? There's nothing that explains why you got this result rather than
another. Any of these results could have come out. But then you have the much deeper puzzle.
How does the other particle know what the first one did? And this is what, you know,
Bell says in this paper, he says it's as if a child had asked, but when you look at, you know,
suppose you think the socks don't have any color at all until you look, says how does the second
sock know what the first sock did when I looked at it, right? So there's a connection between the
indeterminism and the nonlocality. If you have this perfect correlation and there's anything
indeterministic on one side, then you need telepathy or action at a distance to communicate that
result or to restrict the result on the other side. So it always comes out different for the
sock. What you're saying is that basically, if you have indeterminism, which is what we have in
quantum mechanics, right? And you have perfect correlation, then that requires spooky action
at a distance, right? Okay, right. And then we can just turn that around and say, if you have
perfect correlations with you, which you do, and you don't want spooky action at a distance,
then you can't have indeterminism, right? Then you infer it has to be a deterministic theory.
Sorry, if there was any residual indeterminism, it would just spoil the perfect correlations.
Sorry, I was busy writing. Could you repeat that last part?
So yeah, so you've got indeterminism plus perfect correlations implies spooky action
at a distance. Logically, that's equivalent to giving you correlations plus no spooky action at
a distance, right? Okay. It gives you no indeterminism, that is, gives you determinism.
Sorry. It's modus ponens modus polens.
Yeah, sorry. Perfect correlation. I'm just being dense here.
Perfect correlation.
Yeah, plus.
Plus no spooky action at a distance.
Yeah, yeah, yeah. Okay. So let's just say, okay, so locality. Yeah, no, no, no action at a distance.
Yeah.
Implies determinism, I believe you said.
Implies determinism.
Yeah, okay.
And that's where, I mean, I have this quote in Berylman's socks, because I think it's very
important, you have to hear Bell's own personal frustration here, right? So he says,
this is on page 143 if anybody has this version. It's important to note that to the limited degree
to which determinism plays a role in the EPR argument, it is not assumed but inferred,
right? It's not an axiom, it's a theorem, right? It's not something he starts with,
it's something he arrives at. What is held sacred, right? What really is the fundamental
axiom or the fundamental principle held? Is the principle of local causality or no action at a
distance? Of course, mere correlation between distant events does not by itself imply action at
a distance, but only correlation between the signals reaching the two places. So if you
can imagine setting up these cases where, yeah, you have a signal that's sent out to Alice on
one side and Bob on the other, and when Alice gets hers, she knows what Bob's going to get,
or people say, tarot dollar bill in half and send one half out to Alice and one half out to Bob,
they don't know which one's coming. But once one sees theirs, they know what the other one is,
right? There's no spooky action at a distance in that. He says the signals in the idealized
example of foam must be sufficient to determine whether the particles go up or down, now we're
going to repeat this for spins, where any residual indeterminism could only spoil the perfect correlation.
Right? If whenever the particle gets to Alice, something really indeterministic happens,
and that result cannot be communicated to Bob, then Bob can't always get the opposite result.
Right? I mean, that whole paragraph is it. If you read that paragraph carefully, you see,
first of all, the main thing is EPR do not assume determinism, they derive it.
They, what do they derive it from? They derive it from the perfect correlations which were
predicted by quantum mechanics and a principle of locality. Right? And that's what you have to
understand. Bell, Bell understood, and he kind of assumed that anyone who read the EPR paper would
understand that is a good inference. Now, how do you get out of it? Well, it's easy to get out of
it if you don't like action at a distance, you just have to deny the completeness of quantum
mechanics because you say, no, no, no. In this experiment, when Bob got this particular value
and Alice got that particular opposite value, those were determined from the beginning.
And in the next experiment, when Bob got this different value and Alice got this different
opposite value, that was also determined from the beginning. But the quantum mechanical states
that you use in both cases are the same. But that means the quantum mechanical states were not
complete. There was more information, there was more stuff going on. And that stuff, extra stuff,
was what determines the outcomes. Right? That was already determined at the source,
what the outcomes would be. But the quantum state used to make these predictions does not
give you that. So it's incomplete. That was their total conclusion. They said, well,
quantum mechanics is not giving you the whole story. The only way to maintain it is,
is to buy this spooky action at a distance and take this wave collapse seriously as a physical
event rather than just conditionalization on new information. I mean, one way to put it is,
the only way you can conditionalize on new information is if there's new information you
didn't know from the beginning, right? If you already knew everything, you can't get new information.
You knew the wave function of this pair of particles. If that's all there was to them,
then you can't get new information about them because there is no new information about them.
Let me make a few comments just to kind of maybe summarize and state where we are right now. So
the first thing we observed in terms of what we talked about in the previous slide which
can be thought of in terms of wave collapse was this first thing that I'll start right here,
indeterminism plus perfect correlation equals nonlocality. And this is logically equivalent to
this reformulation down here. And this reformulation is the EPR argument, right? That is the conclusion
of the paper that perfect correlation and locality which they want to keep leads to determinism and
well, they don't say it in those words. What they, what we mean here by determinism in the
language of EPR is that the wave function is incomplete, right? The quantum wave function.
That's right. So that's the way EPR. Again, the title of the paper is quantum
mechanical description of reality complete. And the answer they offer is no. And furthermore
that the only way out of that conclusion is to embrace this spooky action at a distance
which they just regard as being insane. I mean, they certainly think if you're going to embrace
that you better have a better reason than has been offered here, right? Because this is a huge
thing you're taking on and I can easily give you a local theory that will make all these
predictions, right? I can easily give you a local theory where Alice and Bob always get
opposite momenta and Alice and Bob also if they do position measurements can now predict the other
one's position measurements without any spooky action at a distance. I just predetermined both
what the momentum and the positions will be. Now, at that point, you know, you run into the
Heisenberg uncertainty relations and you can make a kind of slightly sharper point and say
the quantum mechanical formalism doesn't even contain a state of definite position and definite
momentum, right? I mean, there's no such even mathematically. The formalism of the theory
doesn't allow for such a thing, a state that has a perfectly well-defined momentum and a
perfectly well-defined position. So, of course, if you say, well, the way to get out of this
nonlocality is to pre-assign a momentum and to predetermine the positions, then you're just
going to have to go beyond quantum formalism. But that's okay. That's just because quantum
formalism is incomplete. I mean, Einstein always thought that quantum formalism was more like a
statistical description of a system, which is an incomplete description or, say, a thermodynamic
description. As I said, if I give you the temperature of a box of gas, I'm telling you
something about it, but I'm certainly not telling you everything about it.
Yeah. Let me just say another thing here because I know it's taken me a while to kind of get used
to this language. But in terms of maybe another way to illustrate this last point here at the bottom,
we think about it in terms of coin flips. This is the thing about determinism versus
indeterminism. If every time I flip a coin, let's say I get heads, you get tails, or if I get tails,
you get heads, there can't be any indeterminism because if there was still some randomness left in
your coin flip result, then there's no way we could always get opposites. So the only way for
us to get opposite coin flips is if there's a deterministic connection that always guarantees
the opposite result. Exactly. Exactly. So let's just think about this case. I mean, this is a
perfect case. I give you a coin, I take a coin. We just go separately in our labs and flip our
coins and we record the results and we see no pattern. It just looks random. Each of us is
getting heads half the time and each of us is getting tails half the time. And there is no
algorithmic pattern to H, the H's and T's. So both of us say, well, maybe this is really a
random coin. I mean, really, really an indeterministic random coin. Every time you flip it, there's
just a 50% chance it comes up heads and a 50% chance it comes up tails and nothing is determining
that. But then when we get back together, we notice that whenever you got H, I got T and whenever I
got, you know, you got T, I got H, that there's this perfect anti-correlation. Then the natural is,
let's say, well, they can't be completely random in that way. Now there are two things that could
happen. It could be that from the beginning, your coin was programmed to come up T, T, H,
you know, blah, blah, blah. And mine was programmed to come up with the opposites. That would do it.
Or maybe one of the coins really is random, but somehow when yours comes up heads,
it can communicate telepathically to my coin, even though my coin is very far away,
and instantaneously, hey, I came up heads, you come up tails. That would do it too.
Right. Then you would, as it were, have a little bit of indeterminism
together with a causal connection that's keeping them tall. Right.
Those would work. But once you notice that the streams on the two sides
are perfectly correlated, you got to, that's something you need to explain.
Sure. Sure. And let's just pause here. So in the way that EPR are thinking about it,
if this were the coin flips in our, they would reject the communication between the coins and
say, wait, these coins are actually determined, right? Exactly. They would say, look, if you can,
all right, we have one hypothesis. They would say, yeah, this is a hypothesis that they're
communicating with each other. How can we rule that out? Well, let's just take them further and
further apart. Let's put them in rooms further and further apart. First of all, even if they were
communicating by, I don't know, radio waves or whatever, the signal should get weaker and weaker.
Because I'm separated. But also now, if you really want to be sure, flip them at the same time or
as we would say, it's space like separation. So even if they had, were jam packed with radio
transmitters and radio receptors, there wouldn't be enough time for a signal to get from Alice to
Bob or Bob to Alice. Then it's hopeless, right? They would say, I mean, then you need to violate
relativity. You have to have the information get there faster than light. So they would say, of
course, even, even if you can't quite figure out how these things are being predetermined.
Now, it's not, it's of course, not so bad, because in the, in the case they have, it's not like
there's just, I give you one coin and give me one coin and we keep flipping the same coin. We do it
every time on a fresh pair of particles. So all you need is to say, okay, this pair of particles
is prepared. So this one will come tails and that one will come heads. The next one is prepared. So
this one will come heads and that one will come tails, right? I don't need, but, you know, in each
case, you say, look, the preparation procedure just predetermined what they were going to yield
and predetermined them to be opposite. And nothing spooky is going on at all, right? It's just the
particles bring that information with them when they get there. But it has to be deterministic,
right? They have to bring enough information so each one knows what to do.
Sure, sure. Maybe just as an aside, and I, I think, I think we've probably
stated the EPR argument by now, but let me, let me just kind of linger on this determinism
for a second here, because it's, I think there's something interesting, maybe going on here in
the sense that, so we all learn at the very beginning when we learn about quantum mechanics
that the results are not deterministic. When I measure the momentum or position, I'm going to
get some distribution of values. Now, it's interesting that that in and of itself is not
something that Einstein was upset about or wanted to, to counteract. But in the end, he does get this
conclusion of determinism, not from vanilla quantum mechanics, but from this coupling of the
two particles experiment that we just did, where there's now a potential non-locality. And it's by
sort of opposing that, that you end up getting determinism. But it's not determined, is not
opposing determinism in and of itself when you first introduced the axioms and the wave collapse.
It's, it's, it's the outcome of this. So it's actually kind of, I think that's worth noting,
it's, it's not, it's very indirect. The thing that EPR bring into this discussion,
which is novel, is this entanglement between distant particles. That's right. That's right.
It's standard quantum mechanics. It's just nobody had thought about how to apply,
how standard quantum mechanics applies to a pair of particles where each of the part,
the particles have been well separated from each other. Yeah. Right. So, so, and what Einstein
realizes is, wait, just standard quantum mechanical technique allows you to write down what we now
call these entangled states, where you can predict these correlations out of these entangled
states, even though you can't predict the particular values. Now, the word correlation gets so abused
here. Many people will say the following thing, which is kind of incoherent. They would say,
in the state that they write down EPR, neither particle has a momentum, but the two momenta
are correlated or anti correlated. And this is just kind of syntactically doesn't make sense.
You know, if, if, if, if something doesn't have a value for its momentum, you can't say it is
correlated or anti correlated with something else that doesn't have a value. I mean, you can say
correctly that the physics is such that if I do a momentum experiment on both sides,
the outcomes will certainly be correlated or anti correlated. But you can't say that, that a system
that doesn't have a value for some quantity, also that value was correlated or anti correlated
with something else that doesn't have a value, right? It just, it makes no sense. I mean, it's
just literally gibberish to say that. But people say that all the time. So, oh, it's, it's not so
puzzling because the, the entangled state is correlated. No, it's not correlated, right? It's
entangled and it predicts correlations. But if you say the state doesn't actually have a momentum,
you can't say the momentum is correlated with anything.
Yeah. I mean, I, I mean, it's just a wording issue. But of course, what they really mean,
I'm just, I'm back on, on the second slide now is that it's a superposition of these
perfectly correlated states. Yeah. Yeah. Anyway, let's not get boggled with the semantics. We're
going to maybe have many more opportunities for that, which will be more meaningful. But
yeah, so I guess just, just, just to wrap this up, I think the point I was trying to make and,
and I guess you agree is that if you were only dealing with the quantum mechanics of a single
particle, no entanglement, then there would be no argument against determinism. And you would
just have indeterministic quantum mechanics for a single particle state. It's only when you bring
in the second particle use entanglement, you get this non locality phenomenon. And then you,
if you're EPR, you say, no, we don't allow that. And though we have to get determinism.
Absolutely. Because if you have only a single particle, I'll just say a word for people understand
this. The only condition where I can make a prediction with certainty is if it's already in
an eigenstate, right? But if it's in an eigenstate, then I can read that off of the quantum state,
right? So I don't have to say the quantum state is incomplete, because the quantum state just is
an eigenstate. You say, oh, yeah, that gives me the information already. So you wouldn't, you wouldn't,
you wouldn't have any latitude to argue for the incompleteness of the quantum state if you only
had a single particle. Okay, great. All right. I think this now sets the stage for Bell's response
to this EPR argument, right? So the EPR argument, just to again summarize, that's, that's basically
kind of this box here that we've sort of discussed at length now. Okay, why don't we pick up with
now how Bell enters into the story? Good. So and let me do an intermediate step. I mentioned this
before. EPR paper, the discussion is only a position in momentum measurements. So kind of the only
experimental setups you would even discuss in that paper are, you know, what we call a position
measurement, what we call momentum measurement, whatever they are, as I said, you could really
just do it with one set. Between that, when, when, when David Bohm writes his textbook on quantum
theory, he takes the same setup, but rewrites it for spin, for the quantum mechanical property of
spin. What year is this, by the way? So your EPR was 35, what was? Yeah, well, his textbook came out
in 51, I think. Okay. Okay. Okay. Because Bohm, Bohm produces this textbook called quantum theory.
He's at, he's an assistant professor at Princeton. He would like to discuss with Einstein. I mean,
there's this famous story, he really would be interested in discussions. He's kind of scared,
he doesn't know Einstein, he's trying to find somebody who can ask Einstein and he gets a
letter from Einstein just out of the blue and says, I read your book, it's a really interesting book,
come talk to me about it. And, and that's 19, that must be 1952, I think, because 1951, 1952,
because after that conversation, and again, Bohm writes this book, which is very much in the Copenhagen
style. It's an exposition of quantum theory from the point of view of Copenhagen. And Einstein says,
this is the clearest exposition I've ever read. I think you've done a really good
job of clearing out a lot of the obscurities, right, of what Bohr was trying to say.
But I still have problems. And, and, and Bohm goes to talk to him for an afternoon,
not more than a couple hours. And he famously comes back, I think his, I think actually his
roommate was Gell Mann, or anyway, he was talking to Gell Mann, who was also young. And he comes
back after that, and he says after this, he says, I'm back to square one, Einstein has completely
convinced me, you know, this is on the wrong track. And I assume that it was exactly the
discussion of non locality. Anyway, with then by 1952, he's already written this paper,
quantum mechanics in terms of hidden variables of the pilot wave theory, which is a deterministic
theory, deterministic non local theory. That's what wakes up Bell. That was, you know, the,
the, that's what awakened him from his dogmatic slumbers was, you know, he was told when he
learned quantum mechanics, Bell. Well, yeah, it's kind of weird, but you might think there's a
deterministic theory that could give you these results, but there isn't. And that was supposedly
proven by von Neumann. And Bell at the time, didn't read German. And he couldn't check what von Neumann
had written. And he says he just put it out of his mind. He said, Well, that's strange. I don't,
you know, he says, I guess, you know, the normal thought would be a kind of Einstein's thought
maybe quantum mechanics is more like just a statistical theory, because it deals in incomplete
descriptions. And it's only giving you statistical predictions, because it's not taking everything
into account. Yeah. And, and Bell raises this with his professors and the professors assure him that
von Neumann has proven no such theory could give the same predictions. And then Bell says he, he
one fine day in 1952, he wakes up and reads Bohm's paper. And he says, Bohm has just done what I
was told was impossible. I mean, I can see in this paper, he has produced a deterministic theory
that makes exactly the same predictions as standard quantum mechanics. Right. So he immediately knows
that what he was told as an undergraduate was untrue, or as a graduate, it was just untrue. It's
just false. It takes him a while to get hold of a English translation of von Neumann when he does,
he very quickly puts his finger on the assumption that von Neumann makes that he says is unphysical
and kind of a silly assumption to make. Who was she says, who was assumption. What, what is that
assumption? The assumption is that, so you have these operators, right. So in quantum mechanics,
you have these Hermitian operators that are associated with what are called observables,
like position and momentum or spin in different directions. And those operators mathematically
are related to each other by certain mathematical operations. Okay, they're linear combinations
of each other. And what von Neumann assumes is that if there is an additional quantity that's
determining the actual outcomes, that those quantities have to be related to one another
in the same way that these operators are related to one another mathematically.
And it's easy to see that can't work. And Bell says, you know, you see immediately off the,
but there's no reason for that to be true. There's just no reason to believe that these additional
quantities that you're going to introduce have to have the same mathematical relations among them
as these Hermitian operators have among them. So you can see it's a very clear assumption,
right. Mathematically, it's a clear assumption. It's just physically, it makes no sense.
It's not a natural assumption physically. If, for example, if two, if two Hermitian operators
are some linear combination, right, if a third operator can be written as a linear
combination of two of these Hermitian operators, then the associated underlying values
that determine the outcomes of the experiments, these new things I'm introducing,
they have to be mathematically related to each other in exactly the same way. The other things
are these additional variables that go beyond the quantum description that actually determine the
outcomes. Oh, I see. Okay. Okay. I think they're just not in the normal part of quantum mechanics
that I'm trying to say. These are the things that people mistakenly called hidden variables.
They're two additional variables. I mean, go again, go back to EPR. EPR says, look,
the quantum state is incomplete. Okay, then to complete it, I need additional variables, right.
I see. Okay. To complete it, I need to add some stuff. And I'm going to add stuff that actually
determines the outcomes of these experiments, right. The experiments are already associated
with these Hermitian operators, but that doesn't predict exactly what will happen. That only gives
me statistical predictions, yes. Now I'm going to add some variables that determine the actual outcome.
But they don't have to be mathematically related to each other
in the same way that the Hermitian operators are mathematically related to one another.
So anyway, I mean, whatever it was, you know, Bell says, look, I just have a counter example.
I mean, von Neumann can't have proven that a so-called hidden variables theory is impossible,
a deterministic, in fact, a deterministic hidden variables theory is impossible,
because I have one in front of me. Here it is. You know, it makes the same predictions.
Bell, you know, Bohm proves it in this paper. So von Neumann made a mistake.
Or at least, I mean, some people try to defend von Neumann. Certainly, everybody understood
that's what von Neumann had proved. And this was just a counter example. Now the thing about
the theory that Bohm writes down, which was already De Broglie had the idea back in 1925.
So this is not a new theory. And Einstein himself had been fooling around with theories like this
in the interim, we know, but he never accepted them. Why not? On its face, this thing is non-local.
I mean, there is explicit, in your face, spooky action at a distance in the dynamics of this theory.
So of course, if Einstein looked at that theory, he would see the theory, but he would say that's
not the kind of theory I'm looking for. I'm looking for a local theory. This is a manifestly
non-local theory. But it is a deterministic theory. It's a theory where there's no fundamental
randomness at all. The outcomes of all the experiments are already determined from the
initial state and the dynamics. So Bell asks himself the question, huh, I wonder if I can do
what Bohm did only get rid of the non-locality, right? I know I can have a deterministic theory
that gives me all the right predictions. The one I've got in front of me is also non-local.
Can I actually eliminate the non-locality in the way that Einstein wanted?
Let me just write this down.
He didn't have what Einstein wanted at all.
Yeah, so basically Bohm, he eliminated indeterminism,
but there's still, it still has non-locality.
Right. And now Bell comes along and says, oh, can I get rid of, well, I don't know how you phrase it,
but get rid of non-locality? Is that okay?
Can I have a theory like Bohm's in the sense it's deterministic? I mean, look, Einstein had already
proven in the EPR paper, if you want locality, you need determinism, right? Well, Bohm gave him
determinism, but he didn't get rid of the non-locality, right? It's a deterministic but
non-local theory. There's still non-locality. And so, of course, it's going to occur to you,
but wait, if it's a deterministic theory, at least in principle, I can get the EPR correlations
without any non-locality. That's kind of trivial. That's like Bertleman's socks.
Just predetermine the outcomes and predetermine them so they're always the opposite. Yes?
Yes. So Bell says, but now, can I, as it were, do something like what Bohm did? Give me a deterministic
theory. There's no longer the EPR argument that you need non-locality. So can I do a full theory
that gives me all the quantum mechanical predictions, but is local and therefore local and deterministic?
Right? That's the problem that he has in front of him. But notice it's not, again,
it's not because you care about determinism. It's because you care about locality and you already
knew if you wanted to hang on to locality, you had to go to determinism, right? That's the part where
EPR infer determinism. They don't presuppose it. They infer it from locality. So he says,
I wonder if you can do this and get all the quantum mechanical predictions. Now, the advantage
that Bell had that Einstein didn't have, certainly at the time of EPR, was because
Bohm has reformulated this in terms of spins, he's got a whole bunch of new experimental conditions
to think about. So the way to put it is this. In the EPR case, the only experiments you talked about
even in principle were momentum and position. And the whole point that Bohr makes is that
if you set up your lab to do a momentum experiment, you can't simultaneously do a position experiment
because the experimental conditions exclude each other. If you do one, you can't do the other,
you can't check both for position and momentum at the same time. This is the basis of complementarity.
So as far as Einstein, Podolski, and Rosen are thinking, Alice and Bob each have only two choices.
They either put position or they check momentum and so either they're both checking the same
thing or one's checking one, one's checking the other. Those are the only conditions they
could think about. But now you've got spin. Now the thing about the spin experiment is that to measure
spin of a particle, you measure it in a certain direction in space. And there's a continuum
of directions you can choose. There are infinitely many directions you can choose. So in terms of
the experimental condition between Alice and Bob, you not only have that they could measure spin in
the same direction and say measure in orthogonal directions, 1z and 1x, but they can measure offset
by 45 degrees or 30 degrees or 60 degrees or 10 degrees or 5 degrees. There's a continuum
of different experimental situations and quantum mechanics makes predictions about the correlations
you want to see between these results for all of these offsets. Now in the case of spin,
and we can go into the physics of a spin measurement if you want or not. I mean,
it would take a little to describe Stern-Garach magnets. But anyway, you've got an apparatus.
It creates a magnetic field that's pointed in a certain direction and you can adjust the direction.
That's really all you need to know. And you need to know that you set up a state
where if Alice and Bob measure in the same direction, whatever it is, this way, this way,
this way, if they set their devices in exactly the same direction, they always get opposite results.
If one particle will be deflected up and the other one's particle will be deflected down.
You can't predict from the quantum state which one will go up and which one will go down. Half
the time it'll do this and half the time it'll do that. But all the time they'll do something
different. So you get these perfect correlations. That sets up a situation exactly like EPR. Bob,
if he knows Alice is measuring in the same direction, Bob, when he sees his outcome,
can now predict with certainty Alice's. Let me just write down sort of what you just said.
So now we're in the setting of Bell's theorem and sort of let's just call it setup right now.
And we have Alice and Bob. We now have our entangled wave function. And it's such that,
let's see how do I want to write this, but so let's just write psi as the sort of the
entangled wave function. And I guess following the notation of Bell's paper,
Alice and Bob can each perform a measurement. Let's say Alice will
say measure spin in the A direction and Bob in the little B direction. So these are arbitrary
vectors in R3, unit vectors. And the point is that whenever B is set equals to A,
right. So let's call the, let's see, they're going to measure spin. Actually, let me back up here.
All right. So this is what they, this is the outcome
of a spin measurement
for Alice in the direction A and then likewise for Bob. And the point is that whenever
B is equal to A,
then there's this perfect correlation that happens, anti-correlation. They always get the
opposite, sort of like our heads and tails example earlier, right? Yeah. So now there's
basically an infinite family of perfect correlations for every unit vector A.
Whenever you choose B, also that same unit vector, you get the exact opposite result.
Right. And so by the same argument that EPR give, if it's a local theory, right, if Alice's
laboratory operation has no influence at all on Bob's particle or the outcome of Bob's experiment,
then the outcomes have to be predetermined for all directions at the source
because you get the perfect correlations in any direction. If we look at Bell's paper, right?
Okay. Let's do that. Let me, let me pull it up now.
On the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paradox.
Yep. Just read the, let's just read paragraph one.
Introduction. The paradox of Einstein-Pedolsky and Rosen was advanced as an argument
that quantum mechanics could not be a complete theory, but should be supplemented by additional
variables, right? That's just, if it's not complete, then there are additional variables.
That's just by definition. These additional variables were to restore to the theory causality
and locality. Now causality is determinism, but as Bell later said, the main point was to restore
locality. And the only way you could restore locality, if you have these perfect correlations,
is also causality, that is determinism. In this note, that idea will be formulated mathematically,
right? So the, the, the, what they were trying to do to restore locality
will be formulated mathematically and shown to be incompatible with the statistical predictions
of quantum mechanics. It is the requirement of locality. Notice, right? Not causality,
which is the determinism part. It is the requirement of locality, or more precisely,
that the result of a measurement on one system, it be unaffected by operations on a distant system
with which it has interacted in the past, that creates the essential difficulty. I mean, he,
Bell couldn't be clearer than this. But the problem is, if you don't know EPR paper and
you've even thought about it, this goes by too quickly, right? He's taking for granted what EPR
have already proven. And now he's going a step further. There have been attempts to show that
even without such a separability or locality requirement, no, quote, hidden variable interpretation
of quantum mechanics is possible, right? This is von Neumann and elsewhere. These,
these attempts have been examined elsewhere. That's his earlier paper, which is called
On the Problem of Hidden Variables in Quantum Mechanics. That one was published,
that one he wrote before this one. And this is, because he was thinking about this,
can I supplement, can I do what Einstein Podolsky and Rosen wanted? Can I actually carry that out?
And found wanting, that is, he says the, there have been these things claimed to be no additional
variables proofs. They don't work. And read the earlier paper to find out why they don't work.
There are different ones, none of them work. Von Neumann's doesn't work, right? All the other
ones, they don't work. Moreover, a hidden variable interpretation of elementary quantum theory has
been explicitly constructed. That's bone. So he knows they don't work because there's a counter
example, right? That particular interpretation has indeed a grossly non-local structure.
This is, this is characteristic according to the result to be proved here of any such theory,
which reproduces exactly the quantum mechanical predictions. Now, everything of what Bell is
doing, what's been done before, how this relates to what's been done before is in that paragraph.
Everything. It's there. It's clear. It's unambiguous. You just have to read it carefully.
What I'm going to do is show you that the attempt to restore locality, which EPR had already proven
and gives you the necessity of determinism, cannot be carried through. No local theory
can reproduce these predictions. Quantum theory was obviously to Einstein non-local.
That's what he always complained about. I mean, quantum theory as exposited by Bohr,
he always complained it was non-local. He said it has spooky action at a distance. It has telepathy.
It has this weird thing. I can't believe it, right? To Einstein, it was obvious that standard
quantum theory was non-local. I'm going to, you know, Bell says I'm going to prove every theory
has to be non-local if it's going to reproduce the prediction statistical predictions of quantum
mechanics. He says it is, this is characteristic according to the result to be proved here of
any such theory, which reproduces exactly the quantum mechanical predictions, right? In all cases,
including in these new cases that Einstein never thought about and and Bohm never thought about.
I mean, everybody, you know, they were thinking about these perfect correlation cases where
Bob and Alice are measuring in the same direction. And you might think, well, let me look at the
furthest they can get apart. Let Alice measure in X and Bob at right angles in Z. But that doesn't
give you anything because then there's no correlations. Then they're completely, the results are
random and uncorrelated, right? It would really be like you and me flipping coins,
right? A fourth of the time we both get heads and a fourth of the time we both get tails. There's no,
the real trick is to look at the correlations in the in-between thing where these are offset
by an amount, but not by 90 degrees. Now, in fact, for Bell's case, all you need to do is imagine a
situation where Alice, let's call this zero, Alice and Bob have a device. Each of them can set
their device in one of two orientations. They can both set it at zero, in which case they're
certainly going to get opposite results. Alice can offset 30 degrees this way, Bob can offset 30
degrees the other way. So either they're measuring in the same direction, they're off by 30 or they're
off by 60. Just that is enough to set up the situation. If you want to do it the way Bell did it
with an entangled pair of particles in a singlet state. I mean, we can go through that proof that
that's given in many books. It's a kind of statistical proof. And what he shows is that
unless what Alice does affects Bob's result or what Bob does affects Alice's result,
you cannot get the predictions of quantum mechanics.
Let me write down a few things, sir, because I think we said a lot of things and it might be
hard for people to absorb all that. What is Bell's theorem going to arrive at? We're going to get a
Bell inequality, which is a constraint on local theories. Okay. And here's the key thing. This
has nothing to do with quantum mechanics. It's just a very general mathematical result. Now,
you can apply it to quantum mechanics because quantum mechanics does make certain predictions,
but that's an application of it. That's not part of the inequality. The theorem is not about quantum
mechanics. The theorem is about any local theory. Right. But in sort of the fact that we're using
spins and working with certain numbers, that's the application of the inequality, but it's not
central to its formulation. Right. And all this talk about spins and so on, which again,
we could go into more details, but as far as anybody needs to know, all you need to know is
Alice and Bob each have, it's actually a magnet. We're imagining they can orient it
in one of two ways. And whenever they do an experiment, they get one of two outcomes,
which we call spin up or spin down. It essentially means the particle is either deflected
up or down relative to this magnet, or you get a dot on the screen that's either here or here.
How that works doesn't matter. All that matters is Alice and Bob have two choices, one choice
out of two to make. And whatever they do, there'll be a definite outcome, which we can call either
up or down. And that when they happen to set their devices in the same direction,
they always get opposite outcomes. Right. Then you get a perfect anti correlation.
I can say all that without mentioning quantum mechanics. Right. You know, you could throw
quantum mechanics away tomorrow. It would still be the case that you can build these magnets and
do this stuff and get these dots. That's just a description of the experiment.
It's not a theoretical description at all. It's just a description of the experimental condition
and the experimental outcome. So it bears no theoretical weight,
right? Except that you think, well, yeah, magnets, you can put them this way or put them that way.
And dots, they either occur here or they occur here. That's it.
Sure. Let me just write down Bell's inequality. We're not going to go deep into it,
but let's just, let's just finally write it down because we've been sort of verbalizing things a
lot. So Bell's inequality. Let me just write it down and the algebraic steps are in the paper.
They're not that enlightening. So we're not going to go into the details, but if you just,
well, let me just write it down what it's. So now here, A, E and C are these arbitrary unit vectors
and R3. And the, the only assumption was essentially this, this thing I had,
I didn't write down what P was. Sorry. So P of A and B are just exactly these correlations.
I'll just write it as an expectation because essentially all that's going on or that you have
Alice and Bob, you could think of them as just random variables. They're, they're,
they're random variables that depend on the, the detector settings, right? So you,
you pick a setting A or setting B and what Alice and Bob each get are random variables.
And P is the correlation between those random variables. And essentially the only,
the only constraint that we have is that's a P of AA equals minus one, because as we noted earlier,
whenever Alice and Bob choose the same direction to, with which to do a spin measurement,
they have perfect anti correlation. So that expectation is minus one.
So unless I'm missing any other implicit assumptions, that basically,
as long as you have random variables that are valued in plus or minus one, the outcome of,
which you can think of as the outcome of spin experiments, but they don't have to be interpreted
that way. But as long as you have plus or minus one of random variables that have this perfect
anti correlation, whenever the two measurements are aligned, then you have this inequality
that I've written here. And this is, this is Bell's inequality.
Right. And the point is that if you reason about this, even though it's not that clean
mathematically, we'll look at a cleaner example in a moment. If you reason about this in the
instantiation of the case in which A and B happened to be quantum mechanical experiments,
that with some effort, you can derive a contradiction, thus showing that quantum
mechanics cannot be local. But that's a separate issue than formulating the inequality itself.
Yeah. I mean, we've gone, right. We've gone so far in the direction of doing this for a pair of
particles in the spin state. But if you don't mind, let me just take five minutes and say what you
just said in a concrete example. Sure. I think anybody can follow very easily. So again, we're
going to imagine this situation. We create a pair of particles in this quantum mechanical state.
It's called the singlet state. We don't really care what it's called. All we care is what it
predicts. Alice either sets her device at zero or 30 degrees. Bob sets his device at either zero
or minus 30 degrees. Okay. So at the end of the day, either they're in the same direction,
they're off by 30 or they're off by 60. So the top part of this grid, this is going to be,
this is going to be Alice. This is going to be Bob. Okay. On the bottom, we're going to have these
entries. The entry here for zero degrees is going to mean, remember, we already know because Alice
and Bob get always the opposite results at zero degrees. Those have to be predetermined, right?
That was the whole point that, you know, it can't be anything random or how would the other one,
each one know. So we have Alice and Bob at zero degrees. They always get opposite results, right?
Now, it turns out, we'll call these results up and down. It turns out it's not really important
here that they actually, on each side, just look random. They each get up and down half the time.
But they're always opposite. So you say, I want to pre-program particles to do this. So this is,
what I have here is, this is pair of particles, sorry, one, two, three. I'm sending out these
pair of particles. And so for pair number one, let's say, I'm going to say, well, Alice, if she
measures the zero, it's going to be up. That means Bob has to be down. Her next one will be up. That
means Bob has to be down. Then her next one will be, sorry, down. So Bob's has to be up and so on.
Right? I just randomly put in a row for Alice and then the opposite row for Bob, right? However,
I will. All right. Up, down is now plus or minus one, but okay. Yeah. That corresponds to plus or
minus one. That gives me the perfect anti-correlation. The only way to get the perfect anti-correlation
when they measure in the same direction. Now, suppose Alice happens to set hers not at zero,
but at 30 degrees, okay? And Bob sets his, happens to set his at zero. So now we're comparing this
row to this row. The prediction is they'll again get opposite results, not all the time,
but most of the time, in fact, 75% of the time. Okay? So what I want to do is put in here
things for Alice, such that if I compare 30 to zero, they agree 75% of the time. So that means
there are only 25% of these can be changed, right? So in other words, I'll just put same, meaning
it's the same as for zero degrees. So this would be up. Same, same, then change, then change,
then same, then same, then same, right? Whatever it is, I can only change. I need to change exactly
25% because I want to go from 100% anti-correlation to 75%. Yes? And then the same thing, if Bob goes
at minus 30 analysis at zero, I want 75% anti-correlation. So again, I can only change,
I need to change exactly 25% of these. Randomly distribute it, doesn't matter, right? So change,
same, same, same, change. So if it's same, then that means this would be a D, D here, this would
be a U here and so on. Now, here's the key. If everybody's following me so far, I've only changed
25% going up and I've only changed 25% going down. So no matter how I did that, at least 50% of the
time, I didn't change either of them. Yes? So at least 50% of the time, they have to disagree.
But when you check, when Alice is at 30 and Bob is at minus 30 and you have a 60 degree difference,
they only disagree 25% of the time. In fact, what quantum mechanics predicts and what happens
is they agree now 75% of the time. They disagree only 25% of the time.
So yeah, I think they, let's see, the exact formula is cosine squared. This is the
disagreement rate, right? Right. So when it's zero, it's one.
That's right. And then when it's 30 degrees, that's right, cosine squared of that. Okay,
so when this is 30, right, this will end up being three quarters, right? So it disagrees
75% of the time. And when it's 60 degrees, it's 140. That's the problem. Now, you can just see,
you can't put U's and D's down on this so that they always disagree when you compare
zero Alice to zero Bob. They disagree 75% of the time when you compare
Alice zero to Bob minus 30 or Bob zero to Alice 30. And they disagree 25% of the time when you
compare minus 30 to 30. It just can't be done, right? If you only change 25% going up and you
only change 25% going down, you still have 50% that have to be the way they were originally.
It can't be done. So in a way, the math is that simple. Now, in this case, you have to look at
these long-term averages. And you have to assume you're making random selections whenever Bob and
on every run, what essentially Alice and Bob are doing are taking a random selection out of this
graph. And you're just saying, you can't set up this graph. I don't care what you do, put U's and
D's however you want. You can't set up this graph to give me those statistics. This is an instance
of Bell's inequality. Bell's inequality would say that the implementation of what you wrote down
as the general principle would be because the zero 30 correlation is 75% and the zero minus 30 is
I see what you're saying. The one for 30 minus 30 has to be at least 50%, right? That's where the
that's where the inequality is. Let's pause here because I think people who haven't thought about
this for maybe aren't so clear about the significance of what we just did. So basically,
if you look at this setup in terms of spin, the statistics that you described were encapsulated
by this formula I had here, this cosine squared formula, right? The point is that by simulating
trials of ups and downs or plus or minus ones that are attempting to be consistent with these
statistics, you will end up getting inconsistencies as we did with the 60 degree separation. And
that inconsistency, it was very subtle, but that inconsistency was due to the fact that we did not
allow communication between the results of A and B. We tried to do it sort of independently,
so to speak, without any communication. And then we just saw that it failed. What we assumed is
that Alice's result cannot depend on what Bob measures. That's exactly right. It can't depend
on Bob's decision to either do zero or 30. And Bob's result can't depend on Alice's decision to
either do zero. Let me just make this. So basically, this is this is bright red line here that says
Bob has a trial. Alice has a trial at zero degrees. And then the 30 degrees,
the plus and minus 30 degree outcomes only can refer to what Alice or Bob are doing
respectively, because again, Alice and Bob can't communicate. And when you are constrained by that,
then when you compare Alice and Bob again at the 30 and minus 30, you get a contradiction.
Right. The assumption is just that what happens in Alice's lab is independent, causally independent
of Bob's decision and what happens in Bob's lab, causally independent. Now, of course,
they could be correlated because the correlations were already set up at the source. I mean, it's
not, again, it's just silly to think it's not as if Einstein thought, oh, you've got a correlation,
you must have a spooky action at a distance. Of course not. His whole point was, no, I can get
correlations without spooky action at a distance, but only by predetermining the outcomes.
Right. So let's just say, so the correlations are these two zero zero rows here. That was the
perfect anti-correlation. And then from going to zero and 30, that was essentially using the blue
formula and the fact that A and B don't communicate. That's right. That's right. That's right. Beautiful.
Obviously, if what Alice's particle does can be sensitive to what Bob, how Bob sets his device,
then we can't even write in a row. Like we can't write for a row. Well, what will Bob do at minus
30? We would have to divide that and say, well, if Alice measures zero, then say he'll get up. And
if Alice measures 30, then he'll get down, right? But then you just make his outcome explicitly
dependent on Alice's measurement choice. That's spooky action at a distance. That's telepathy.
That's the very thing that Einstein doesn't like. I hadn't thought about these statistics.
I knew it was like very simple fractions in mathematics, but I just never wrote it down in
this kind of nice table. I think this presentation I learned out of Nick Herbert's book, Quantum
Reality, I think it's in there. This is not original to me. And this is because what Bell
was actually thinking about was these correlated pairs in singlet state. This is what he first
comes up with in the examples. Now, eventually, Greenberger, Horne, and Zeilinger realized that
if you look at triples of particles, you can do something even niftier, right? So what we're
going to do now is look at an even cleaner example of statistical results you cannot recover from
any local theory. That's the deal. Instead of looking at a case where we have two particles
that we start off in a state and send to Alice and Bob, we're going to have three particles that
we send to Alice, Bob, and Charlie. So we're just going to put them on our, in space time,
in labs that are separated. And again, as far as the theory goes, they can be separated as far as
you like. The experiments can be done at space like separation so that even light couldn't get
from any one of these experimenters to any other before they do their experiment.
At the center of all this, we have a little device that's producing triples of particles
in a certain entangled state. It doesn't matter what it is, and sends them off to Alice, Bob,
and Charlie. And then Alice, Bob, and Charlie, again, each one is going to do a spin experiment,
which means they've got a magnet. And this time, instead of it being 0 and 30 and 60 or
something like that, it's really either, say, z direction or x direction. It's some direction or
direction at right angles to it. We'll call them z and x. So Alice, you know, she's going to choose
to either measure in z or measure in x. Bob is going to choose either to measure in z or measure in
x. And Charlie is going to choose either z or z or x. These choices can be made by them in any
way you like. They can flip coins. They can use lotto balls. They can use, as Bell says, the
parity of digits of pi starting at the millionth digit. So plus any string of plus ones and minus
ones that are random in any way you like, they can use. None of them knows what the other one's
doing. So under those circumstances, since there's a binary choice made by Alice, a binary choice by
Bob, a binary choice by Charlie, there are eight possible global conditions when the three particles
come in, right, which are obviously they could all measure x, which we would represent xa, xb, xc.
Alice could measure x. And Bob could measure x. And Charlie could measure z.
Or just Bob could measure z. Or just Alice could measure z.
I mean, this is going to get a little boring, but okay, it's just combinatorics. Or let's say
Alice measures x and both Bob and Charlie measures z and so on. I'm not going to really bore you by
writing all eight. There are obviously eight possible global configurations that can occur.
And the nice thing about this case is we don't even have to say, well, 75% of the time you'll get this
and 25% of the time you'll get that. We don't have to use anything like that. We can only
say things that happen 100% of the time, right? So these are perfect predictions.
And they involve the kinds of perfect correlations that allow you to say what's going to happen.
Given now any two of the outcomes, you can say what the third one is going to be.
Okay. Now the only cases we really care about are where all three measure x or where two measure
z and the other measures x. So really down here, the case where Alice measures x and the other two
measure z, the case where Bob measures x and the other two measure z, and the case where Charlie
measures x and the other two measure z. There are four more cases, but we don't care about them
because there will be predictions for those cases, but they don't come into the argument.
Okay. Yeah. I mean, just maybe make a few comments because this looks maybe a little
coming out of nowhere. But basically, behind all this, there is some entangled state with all,
for all three of these observers. And you can think of A, B, and C, again, being binary random
variables because spin is valued in plus or minus one. But it's set up in such a way that even though
all three are individually independent coin flips, 50% plus one or minus one, their joint
distribution, however, are not independent. And it's such that if you had set your measurement
configuration, remember, each random variable, it depends on this direction. And in this case,
we really need two elements, x and z for our directions. If you choose the three sets of
measurements such that they're all x or one of them, exactly one of them is x,
then their joint distribution is such that any two of the measurements determines exactly
the third one. That is a property of these probability distributions.
And we can show that just by sitting what the predictions are because they're very simple
to state. In the case where they measure all three x's, the prediction is with certainty
that you will get an odd number of up outcomes. Okay, now, it doesn't tell you that number could
be one, it could be three. But that we don't care about that, it certainly will be odd,
it'll be either one or three, you won't get two, you won't get zero. Okay, and because that's made
with certainty, if I know two of the outcomes, I know what the other one has to be, right,
because if the two I have are ups, then the third one has to be an up to make it odd.
Or if the first two is one up, then the last one has to be down because it has to stay odd.
So again, you have the kinds of perfect correlations, which means from Alice's and Bob's
outcome, you can predict with certainty, Charlie's, from Bob's and Charlie's, you can predict Alice's
whatever. And it's those perfect outcomes that again, if you say that what happens in any of
these labs has no causal effect in any other lab, then you can make those predictions without
disturbing the third lab, right, you can, you can find out from Alice and Bob what they got
and now predict Charlie without disturbing Charlie, because all you need is their outcomes, yes.
So if they happen to all pick X, then the predictions are you'll certainly get an odd
number of ups. If they happen to pick one X and two Z's, then the prediction is certainly you'll
get an even number of ups. And again, of course, if you know two, you know what the last one has to
be. Sure, that's it. Yeah, yeah, maybe just a small finicky thing. Should we change ups to downs
because I think if up is plus one, and down is minus one, I think it's cleaner when you think
about, right? Sure, sure, sure. Not going to change the argument if you want to change it down.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, let's let's do that. Alright, even number of downs. Yeah, because in terms of
what we wrote in terms of Bell's, the notation in Bell's setup, right, we talked about,
when we're going to take expectations of products of variables that we want to multiply things in
either plus or minus one. And so in this case, basically, in this setting here, what we're basically
saying is that, okay, going back to Bell's notation, you could think of A of X, B of X,
and C of X as being minus one, because we could think of up as plus one and down as minus one,
right? Again, these are up or down or plus or minus one value random variables, but if we're
going to do arithmetic, we should do plus or minus one. So that's that's this case. And then in the
second case, then, let's say A X, B Z, C Z will be one and likewise with the three other cases,
or the two other cases where there's exactly one X. Yeah, yeah, exactly. I mean, it'll work out however
you want. I just wanted to, you know, it's easy enough to hold in your head. Yeah, all three X's
in this case will say odd number of downs. In the other case where there's one X and two Z's,
even number of down. Yeah, yeah. Now by the reasoning of the EPR paper, if there's no spooky
action at a distance, then from the results of any two, I can predict with certainty the results
of the last one without disturbing it, because if it's local, and the two of them do their
results get their results at space like separation, and you say, look, what they did can't make any
difference. What they chose can't make any difference. The outcome that they got can't
make any difference. I can now predict without disturbing it what the third one will get. Then
the third one has to already, there has to be an element of reality that determines what it'll be.
Right. I mean, it can't be random. How could it be random if from looking at what Alice and
Bob got, I can tell you for sure what Charlie's going to get. There can't be something random
going on in Charlie's lab, right? You wouldn't always get the right result. Exactly. This is the
three coin flip version of the thing we did earlier. It's just I have three people, two people.
It's just the EPR criterion of reality. Under the assumption that by separating Alice, Bob,
and Charlie, we causally isolate them from each other. We causally isolate their choices about
how to orient their magnets and the outcome that they get. What happens in one lab can have no
influence on what happens in another lab. Now, if we do that, now it's very nice. Now you say,
okay, so in a local theory, I have to be able to predetermine what the outcomes would be
in such a way as to respect these statistics, to respect these requirements. The nice thing
about this is you can set this up in a beautiful diagram. Again, this, I think, was invented by
David Merman. It's just extremely pretty. You can show this to somebody. You say, all right,
this circle here, that's what Alice, the results she'll get if she happens to set her
magnet in the x direction. This is what Bob will get if he happens to set his. This is what Charlie
will get if he happens to set his in the x direction. Then Z for Alice over here,
Z for Bob over here, and Z for Charlie here. That's all there is. Each Alice, Charlie, and
Bob each has two choices. The nice thing about this diagram is that the situation where they all
pick X's, sorry, the situation, maybe I'll choose a color here, the situation where they all pick X's
is this axis with the red dots, and the situation where one picks an X and the other one picks a Z
is this one, this one, and this one. Nice symmetric little diagram. What do the
predictions say? They say, well, if they happen to all pick X, we need an odd number of down
outcomes, right? In these three circles, again, here, here, and here, I have to put an odd number
of D's. On the other rows, the ones connected by blue lines, I have to put an even number.
Now, the first thing to do is just try. Let's just try something random and see what happens.
I need an odd number along the red row. It's one or three, just for fun. Let's make it three,
because that's easy. I'll put D, D, D. Now, if they happen to pick all X's, we're safe.
This ZC in the middle, nothing's required here. I'll just put a U in there. Again,
we're just trying something. Now, the constraints start to bite. Along this row,
I need an even number. I've got a D, a U. I'm forced to put a D here. Now, I only have this
one circle left, but I'm screwed, because to have an even number coming down this row,
I've already got two D's. This has to be a U, but to have an even number coming down this row,
I have a D and a U. It has to be a D. I can't. There's no way I can finish it,
so that no matter which triple they happen to hit on, I'll get the right result.
You might say, well, okay, try something else. You just made some random choices,
but then there's this beautiful argument of mermons. It says you can't do it. There's no
conceivable way to put U's and D's in these six circles, and that's all there is to do here,
that satisfy all the requirements at the same time. Why not? Here's the argument. It's by reductio.
Suppose you could do it. Suppose you could put the U's and D's down in such a way
that you get odd along that one and even along the other ones. So pick up the three
along the red, throw them in a hat. You just threw an odd number of D's. Then pick up these three,
throw them in a hat, even number. These three, throw them in a hat, even number. These three,
throw them in a hat, even number. So odd, even, even, even. I now have an odd number of D's in the
hat, but I picked up every disc twice because every single circle is on the intersection of two of
these rows. So no matter what I do, I can't get an odd number. If I pick every one up twice,
so it's just easy to see. You can absolutely convince yourself there's nothing up my sleeves.
There's no hidden anything. It's just a simple mathematical fact that you cannot
put U's and D's in these six circles that satisfy all four of those constraints at the same time.
So that means no matter what you do, there's some chance if it's a local theory, if what Alice gets,
if she measures X, for example, is independent of what Bob and Charlie decide to do,
then there's no way you can prearrange this so it'll always give you the right results. It can't
be done. But it always does do that. Then you say, well, let's go check in the lab. What does
nature do? Answer, nature does what quantum mechanics predicts. Nature does always give you
an even number in this case and an odd number in those cases. So nature is doing something that no
local theory can do. Therefore, nature isn't local. That's it. The experiments, the experiments
which originally were done on the bipartite case that we talked about, you have to go to the lab
and check. You know what quantum mechanics predicts. Fine, but that's not the issue. The issue is what
does nature do? The answer is nature does what quantum mechanics predicts. It violates Bell's
inequality. It gives you results that cannot be replicated in any local theory. Even if it's on
entirely unquantum mechanical ground, it doesn't matter. Again, quantum mechanics kind of drops
off to the side. The issue is locality. Can you come up with a local theory that'll make these
predictions? Answer, no. This is what happens in reality. So real physics can't be local.
Actually, on this, no, okay. Let's see. Let me make one comment here that was maybe implicit,
but just to help our viewers. It was very important that the choice of which measurements
to make, all x's or 1x, that is not known in advance. And therefore, all the constraints have
to be satisfied because, well, since you don't know which choice is going to be made, in order
for it to be satisfied in general, it has to satisfy all of the constraints. So on the one
side, of course, if you knew from the beginning, oh, Alice is going to check this, Bob's going to
check that, Charlie's going to check that, then of course, trivially you could arrange to give
a good answer. But you don't know that. Again, if you think of all the different ways that those
decisions could be made, you can't prearrange it. There's no way that anybody has the information
about what they're all three going to be. I've said from the beginning, and maybe this is the
right time to bring it up. The main thing that Bell keeps saying is the fundamental principle
that's kept sacred is locality, no action at a distance. Mathematically, the only mathematical
assumptions that go in is the mathematical expression of that, which is to say that the
probability of Alice getting some outcome can't depend on what Bob decides to do. But then there's
another one, which is called statistical independence. It says that essentially these choices are
random choices that Bob and Charlie and Alice are making with respect to the state of the particles
coming in. In other words, what you see from this diagram is that if I prearrange these,
then there must be at least one of these experimental conditions that it would get wrong.
The assumption is that these experimental conditions are being chosen completely randomly,
at least occasionally, you'd hit the bad one. If every time they come in, one out of four would
go bad, and you keep doing this randomly after a while, you'd hit a bad one and you'd get a bad
result. Someone can say, no, no, no, they just never hit a bad one. It's true that there's always
at least one that cannot be prearranged, but they never actually choose that one. They always
miss that one. Then you think, well, this is just crazy. Why would they miss it? By what mechanism
would they miss it? By what would keep them, what would be their flippant coins, or they're using
the digits of pi or whatever to make these choices, what's going to somehow magically steer them away
from the bad choice every single time? There's the second assumption called statistical independence.
Bell writes a nice paper about it after this comes out, and people are looking for every
loophole they can find, and they say, look, you're making this assumption that the choices
that are made are statistically independent of the state of the incoming particles.
Bell says, yeah, that's the assumption that underlies pretty much all scientific experimentation.
If you deny that, then you can do anything. If you deny that, then experimentation just does
you no good. As we say, it's the same way, I always like to say, the tobacco people
really would like to deny that smoking causes cancer. You say, well, what's the evidence that
it does? Well, the gold standard evidence is a controlled experimental random trial, where you
take a bunch of rats, and you randomly assort them into two groups, and then expose one to smoke,
and then don't expose the other to smoke, and treat them otherwise exactly the same,
and then seed you get more cancer over here than over here. Now, someone could say, yeah,
but maybe these rats that got cancer, they were all predisposed to get cancer, and it just happened
when you sorted them, you put all the certain to be sick rats over in the experimental group,
and all the certain to be well rats over in the control group, and you say, wait, I just sorted
them by flipping coins, I just sorted them by the digits of pi. How in the world, you're saying,
no matter what I do, no matter how I set this up, always the sick rats are going to go this way,
and the, you know, not sick rats are going to go that way. And you'd say, of course,
as a logical, purely logical point, you'd say, well, that would explain the outcome without
the smoke having anything to do with it. But that would undermine all scientific method,
all experimental method, right? Then you could never draw any conclusions from any experiment.
I mean, it's just, it's so desperate. And you have theories that make these predictions.
They're non local theories. But they're not conspiratorial. They don't involve they accept
statistical independence. And they actually account for these results. But they do it
by non local means. These exist. People, some people are so upset about non locality that
they're willing to literally grasp it any straw, to avoid the conclusion. And I just don't get it.
Of course, you know, I'm a philosopher, we read Descartes, and you say, well, gee, maybe, you
know, maybe we're all asleep and dreaming, maybe no experiments are ever done. Maybe it's all,
you know, maybe we're all plugged into the matrix. And after a while you shrug your shoulders and say,
okay, fine, but then you're not doing science anymore, right? If you're going to entertain
skeptical hypotheses at that level, then you're not, you're not engaged in the scientific activity
anymore. Because you're, you're involved in situations where you're saying science can't be
done. Right, you can never find out about the world. If you're plugged into the matrix,
you can never find out about the world. Because no matter what you do, you're just going to see
whatever they've programmed into the computers, right? You have no access. So of course, logically,
that's possible, but then give up on science, right? Okay, great. Okay, so I guess we've,
you just summarized the two essential assumptions of Bell's theorem, locality,
and statistical independence. Maybe there's, there's at least two more things I want to cover.
Why don't we step back a little bit and summarize what the Nobel Prize
confirmed, what, what kind of experiments did they do and what inequality did they,
the, well, they were testing the original, yeah, that, so that's easy to, they were testing the
original Bell one, the one we talked about where you just have a pair of particles in a singlet
state or a pair of photons, you can do with photons too. What's the trick about it? Well,
first of all, you need the two labs to be far enough apart, and the experiments be done fast
enough for the thing to be at space like separation. That is that, that, that, that as it were, the,
the choice of which experiment is done on, on Alice's side, even light, a light signal
couldn't carry that information over to Bob's lab fast enough to have an influence on his outcome.
Oh, is this the zero 30 minus 30 set of experiments? Okay. So there, there, you would say Alice's choice
of either 30, zero or 30 and Bob's choice of either zero and minus 30, those have to be made so quick.
Now, of course, that means really quick. If you're doing this in a lab, you know, there's so much
time, okay, light from one side to the other. What, what, what aspe did, which was really clever,
because it's of course much too fast to actually reoriented divides. So we set up two devices,
one set as a word zero and one set at 30, and then set up a really fast optical switch.
He was doing photons that can send the photon either to this one or to that one. Okay. And this
has to do with polarization, not spin. Yeah, this is your check. Instead of spin,
you're checking polarization, but it's the same thing either the photon gets through where it
doesn't. There's a binary response, right? You've all, all that's important if you have two settings
and you have a binary response, right? So he sets up these optical switches to make these decisions
as it were unbelievably fast. Then, of course, there, there are some, there were some technical
loopholes. In the early experiments, the detectors were not perfectly efficient. So
a lot of these photons would just go missing. They wouldn't show up because, you know, the
detector efficiencies aren't great. And if, if some of the, the photons go missing or some of
the electrons go missing it, it creates a technical loophole where you could actually manage in a
clever way to get these results in the recorded data with a local theory. So one thing you wanted
to do was improve detector efficiency. One thing you wanted to do was move the labs further and
further apart. So now Zeilinger is doing these down on Tenerife between different islands, you
know, that are kilometers apart. They're not within a lab or, you know, and you're sending,
you're sending these entangled pairs and they're going to do it up, they do it up in space, right?
I mean, you can, you can keep stretching the labs further, further apart and you can keep
improving the detectors efficiencies and, and thereby get rid of these loopholes. And so that's
more or less from the earliest experiments were done by Clouser because he was, he was told by
Abner Shimoni, who was one of the first people to appreciate Bell's paper. Hey, these are interesting
experiments. I mean, we know what quantum mechanics predicts, but nobody's checked. And so Clouser did
the first kind of much more simple experiments and Aspey made these quick optical switches and
then Zeilinger kept stretching these further and further apart and improving detector efficiencies
to where nobody questions the experimental, the fact that nature violates these inequalities,
right? I mean, the, the kind of technical loopholes have all been filled by now. You just,
you have to somehow account for nature's ability to give you these results. And as I say, the only,
the only things that go into the theorem are locality, bell locality, and the statistical
independence condition and, and denying the statistical independence condition. First of all,
nobody has an actual theory that does that and makes these predictions. It's just a kind of vapor
where, well, if I deny that, that, you know, if somehow, you know, if somehow these aren't
really random selections, but, you know, then you're in such a cloud cuckoo land of fantasy
that you couldn't do physics anymore. The right thing to do is just accept the result. I mean,
you know, suck it up. Okay. Let's see, actually, I think this might be a good place to transition
to one of the other things I think we should definitely talk about our misconceptions around
Bell's theorem. Right. So we, we, we, I know hidden variables is kind of a dirty word for you,
but we did see it explicitly in Bell's paper when we were looking at before. He does use the term
and so do, so do follow up papers. Maybe this is a good point to clarify in what sense it is
legitimately used and what, in what sense it's not. And the right term, and this is again,
Bell will say in the right place, the right term is just additional variables. Why that connects
to the EPR paper, the EPR paper was exactly is the quantum state complete. If it's not,
then there must be additional variables. Right. You can give me the quantum state of the system,
but if the quantum state is not complete, there must be more to it physically than that.
Those are additional variables. Bell at one point says that the term hidden variables is a piece
of historical silliness, because if there are these additional variables, they better not be
hidden. I mean, that's his point. It's, it's those variables that are actually giving you the outcomes
and the outcomes are not hidden. If the outcomes were hidden, so what is the outcomes?
The, what is a correct usage of hidden like, you know, there must be some correct usage. I don't,
I don't know. I think what, I think that terminology comes in when by people who think
the real issue is determinism in determinism. So they're thinking, oh, if it's really deterministic,
then whether you get this outcome or that outcome must be determined by some variable you don't know
about, because quantum mechanics only makes statistical predictions. So call that the hidden
variable, the thing that determines the outcome. But in, in something like Bohm's theory, these
additional variables are particle positions. So in the theory, you actually have particles,
and those positions are not hidden. They better not be hidden. They're the kinds of things you
actually see, like with the cat liver die. Well, if you know where it's particles, what its particles
are doing, you know whether it's alive or dead. They're, they're a non-hidden part, right? It's as,
as it were the quantum state or the wave function that's more or less hidden, harder, harder to get
your hands on. Maybe I should say, let me just write this since we're talking about it. In that
regard, I would say, okay, if you, if you accept this as a, as a reasonable definition of a hidden
variable, which is basically a variable that you just marginalize out, then I think Bell's usage
of the word hidden variable is justified, because that's exactly what he does. He has this lambda
and he marginalizes it out. And that's, it doesn't appear anywhere else. Yeah, I understand in that
calculation, you, you, you, I mean, you, you take the statistical, you do your statistics by summing
over them. You could say that, but again, if you, if you, if you think about the, the main example
of a theory that adds these additional variables is this pilot wave theory of de Broglie and Bohm.
And there the additional variables, the things that are not nailed down by the quantum state
are particle positions. And to say that those are hidden gives you entirely the wrong idea
about how those particle positions connect to what you literally can see. They are kind of what you
can easily see. When you look around you, right, you can look at your cat and see whether it's alive
or dead. In this theory, what determines whether it's alive or dead is what the particles are doing.
So that's what you can easily see. So, you know, one could have a puzzle. Well, why should I add
additional variables anyway, if they're hidden, it must be for some, you know, I don't know,
metaphysical reason or something, because they're hidden. I mean, I can't see them. Why should I care
if they're there? But then you don't understand when you get beyond Bell to the more general
question of understanding quantum theory. And this was one of the things you wanted to talk about.
You need to understand how the theory connects up to experience in general.
And that means you need to understand what is and isn't really visible.
Literally what you can see and what you can't see. And there the term hidden variables will give you
entirely the wrong idea about how these theories work. Yeah, so I think, okay, so I think, okay,
this is helpful. If we're ever to be the most charitable to the people who use the word hidden
variable, let's just say they really mean extra variable and extra just kind of a cover. Okay,
if you if you just did that, then that carries no more connotation, but
something not coded up in the wave function. Sure, sure. Okay, so there was this other actually
point that might be a little contentious. But we've discussed outside this interview,
which is that some people also claim that part of Bell's theorem is this assumption called
local realism. So we know what locality is, but there's realism. And my interpretation of that
is, if we think about quantum mechanics, right, in the Copenhagen interpretation, there's no fact
of the matter about the outcome of a measurement until you perform the measurement, the wave
function collapses. But before then, there's no fact of the matter about what the value of a
measurement is. The realism assumption is that there is this extra variable lambda that determines
the measurement for, you know, for, for, for all time as it were, I mean, okay, that's not
right. So so so. And so when you look at Bell's paper, he does write down, you know, a of little
a of lambda, things like that. So so it at least seems superficially like he's introducing this
assumption of realism. So can you respond to that? How do you want to think about that? I can
respond to that. But because I already have what you just described the right word for it is the
word you used, it's determinism. And as Bell said, yeah, he does assume determinism, but not
because it's a fundamental assumption, because EPR had already proven as a theorem that a local
theory has to be deterministic. Right. That was that's why I say you have to start with EPR. If
you've got perfect correlations and locality, that forces determinism on you. So the problem is,
when people say, oh, that's just an assumption of Bell is if you can deny it and you're out of the
woods, no, you can't deny it. If you deny it, then you're back in the woods with just the EPR
correlations. You don't even have to go as far as Bell's inequality. If you deny determinism,
you can't explain the perfect correlations. If you've got a local theory. Yeah, I said earlier
on, right, locality plus perfect correlations imply determinism.
So if you deny determinism, you have to be either denying locality or denying the perfect
correlations. Now you better not be denying the perfect correlations, because those are
predictions of quantum theory. So that means you're denying locality. So you're already some.
Yeah, okay, off the think about this more offline, I understand the words you're saying,
I think I'm just as with many things, it takes a while for it to kind of sink in.
What's puzzling me right now is that there is a historical fact of the matter about
how Bell wrote his paper and his position in relation to EPR. Now, if I were just to scrub
all that and just do the bare mathematics, I nevertheless do write down A of lambda.
And I'm just trying to figure out if you just forget EPR rightly or wrongly and just think
about it in terms of math, it does seem like the notation suggests that it's an assumption.
You see what I'm trying to say? I understand what you're saying. But again, I've already
read the relevant quotes from Bell. One is when he's talking about EPR, when he says,
I can't get across to people that determinism is not an assumption of EPR, but a conclusion,
right? It's an inference. They don't. I mean, if you just started out saying, well, I'm going to
assume we have a deterministic theory, then somebody's going to say, well, so what? I don't
think we do have a deterministic. Yeah, but I think he's irrelevant. Let me just start. They don't
assume we'll cover it. Sure. Sure. I guess what I'm trying to say is think of it as a relay race,
right? So you're saying EPR ends with determinism as a conclusion and Bell picks up the baton and
starts with that. All I'm just saying is that if you only saw the end of the relay and not the whole
thing, then it looks like it looks like Bell picks up the assumption when in reality he
he picked it up as a conclusion. Inherits it. Yes. The inherent assumption, he inherits a
conclusion. No, he inherits a conclusion, which becomes a quote unquote assumption in E.C.
What I'm saying. Yeah, but if you call it an assumption at that point, you've missed it, right?
Okay. Assumptions maybe not the right starting point. His starting point is determinism,
which looks superficially like an assumption. But when you backtrack and look at the whole
pipeline, it becomes inheriting a conclusion. Right. And that's why as you say, you know,
the paper is called on the Einstein-Pedolsky-Rosen paradox. And I read the entire introductory
paragraph where he tells you this is as far as EPR got.
They, you know, I'm going to show you that they showed you already,
if you want a local theory, it's got to be deterministic. I'm now going to show you that
even then, you can't get all the predictions of quantum mechanics. Right.
But you just have to read that first paragraph carefully. I mean, yes, if you,
if you thought that, that Bell was starting out of nowhere.
But what more can he do? I mean, he says it's on the EPR paper and he tells you in the first
paragraph what he's taking from the EPR paper. And, and then he tells you later, you know, EPR
do not assume determinism. They infer it. He can't be clearer. Right. I think it's just people who
don't, again, people don't like the conclusion. So they want something they can deny. And they
say, oh, I'll just deny determinism. Now I'm home free. Now, whatever Bell wrote has no relevance,
because he assumes determinism. Whatever he proved as a theorem doesn't apply to my theory,
because it's not a deterministic theory. That's what millions of people have done.
But it just completely misunderstands the dialectic here. And he insists over and over again,
what's held sacred is locality, locality, locality, try to make a local theory. You will soon find
you're forced into determinism. And then you'll soon find that doesn't even, even with that,
you can't get, you can't get all the votes you want. I see. We've talked a lot. I think we've
met a lot of progress. Maybe just one, one final thing if there's nothing else. How do you think
about interpretations of quantum mechanics? Because there's several. There's also many worlds,
which we haven't talked about yet. Yeah. Do you, do you have anything to say about
interpretations of interpretations of quantum mechanics and, and, and, you know, how Bell's
theorem plays a role in it, if at all? Yeah, I mean, first of all, I'll say what I always say.
I hate the word interpretation, because it sounds like quantum mechanics is some
theory, which is then further interpreted, but that's not right. There's no,
there are different theories. Okay, there's quantum phenomena. You can talk about the
predictions of standard quantum formalism. That's fine. They're quantum phenomena,
which are the kinds of things that, that, that those next standard predictive stuff
predicts and turn out to be correct in the lab, as far as we can tell. But there's no,
there just is nothing that would count in a proper sense as a theory that you call quantum
mechanics. You have different theories that are trying to account for these phenomena.
And there's a general argument that I've given that I think is perfectly correct,
which says that there are three things you'd like to hold. There are three principles you would
prefer to hold, but you can't have all three as a logical matter. They are mutually inconsistent,
right? You can't have all three. You can have any two, but you can't have all three.
And what that means is you can then, any approach to this, the first thing you want to do is identify
which one of these does it give up, right? So let me just state what they are.
The first one is the very one that EPR is worried about. Is the quantum mechanical wave
function complete? That is, if a system is described by a certain wave function, does that
capture all of its physics? Or, contrarially, could you have two systems described by the same
wave function, but that are nonetheless physically different, right? So that's one question.
Certainly Bohr wanted to maintain, Heisenberg wanted to maintain, the quantum description
is complete, and Einstein and Podolski and Rosen were arguing it isn't complete. So that's question one.
Question two, once you've got this wave function, how does it evolve? In particular, does it always
evolve by Schrodinger evolution, which is a linear unitary evolution? Or does it sometimes
not evolve by Schrodinger evolution, which is what we normally call the collapse of the wave
function, which instead of being smooth and deterministic and linear is stochastic and
sudden and wildly nonlinear? Okay. So, okay, that's a binary choice. Is it always Schrodinger? Is it
sometimes not Schrodinger? Most people would like it always to be Schrodinger, because as soon as you
say, sometimes it collapses, you then have to confront the question, when? How? How do these
collapses occur? If you, again, if you say the wave function is incomplete, then you're confronted
with the question, well, what else is there? Give me the additional variables, right?
The third thing you'd like to believe is that when you do an experiment like Schrodinger's
experiment on the cat, it has a unique outcome, right? You start with one cat, you end with one
cat, and the cat you end up with is either alive or dead, period end of story. Okay.
That seems like a kind of basic assumption of all experimental science, that when I do experiments,
I get an outcome, and there's one outcome, and I know what it is, and I can collect statistics and
so on. Now, the problem is you can't hold all three, because if the wave function is complete,
and it always evolves by Schrodinger evolution, then in a setup like Schrodinger gives with the cat,
it won't end up in a state where the cat is either definitely alive or definitely dead.
So you can't have all three. The pilot wave theory gives up one. Okay. Because the wave function
is not complete. There's, in addition to the wave function, if you want to describe the situation
of a system, you have to tell me where the particles are. You have to give me the particle
configuration. You can't read that off the wave function. But the wave function does always evolve
by Schrodinger evolution. And experiments have unique outcomes, right? Sometimes the cat ends
up alive, and sometimes the cat ends up dead. And there's a definite fact at the end of every
experiment, whether the cat you put in, the single cat you put in, is alive or dead. Okay. So pilot
wave gives up one, keeps two and three. Okay. Objective collapse theories, like Girardi,
Romini, Weber, the sort of thing that Penrose wants to do, take wave collapse seriously
as a physical change. So sometimes the wave function doesn't evolve by Schrodinger evolution.
It collapses. And that collapse is both sudden and indeterministic and most importantly global.
It's not a local thing. Okay. So they can try and maintain the completeness of the wave function,
and they get unique outcomes because the outcomes are determined by the collapses.
But they give up on the linearity of the evolution.
If you want to keep the complete GRW, Girardi, Romini, and Weber objective collapse theory,
this is also true of Philip Perls has a continuous reduction theory. Roger Penrose talks about an
objective reduction theory, an OR theory, he calls it. Those take root two, right? They give up on two.
Okay. If you want to keep the completeness of the wave function and the linearity,
then you've got to give up on the uniqueness of outcomes. That gets you to many worlds.
Right. I do the experiment. I start with one cat, I end up with a million cats or a billion cats or
an infinite number of cats, some of which are alive and some of which are dead.
Where does Copenhagen fall into this? Copenhagen falls into this as not being a clear theory.
They're just not clear enough about what they're doing. Despite it being textbook quantum mechanics.
Now, Bohr says, let me say one thing, Bohr says the experimental situation and the experimental
outcomes have to be described in classical language, which means he's not going to go
with many worlds. He thinks of necessity, you have to say, I set up the experiment this way and that
cat, it ended up alive. Period end of story. So he's not going to go that way. And he seems,
he insists on the completeness of the wave function. That's why he didn't accept the EPR paper.
So they're kind of as a logical situation rather forced into a collapse theory.
And that's what von Neumann, when he writes mathematical foundations of quantum theory,
it's explicitly a collapse theory. He says, the wave function can evolve by two completely different
equations. Sometimes it evolves in a nice smooth linear way. When? When you don't observe it.
Or you don't measure it. Sometimes it randomly collapses in a very different way. When? When
you measure it or observe it. Well, that puts the measurement problem right at the center of your
physics. Because then you're going to say, well, when what counts as a measurement? You're telling
me that this fundamental difference in physical behavior depends on whether I'm doing a measurement.
What counts as doing a measurement? Now, you know, Einstein comes along and says, can a mouse do it?
Right. Can a dog do it? What constitutes a measurement? If you don't tell me, I mean,
this is the measurement problem as it appears in that tradition, because they,
they're really collapsed theories. I mean, if you ask me what they are, what they have to be,
although they wouldn't forthrightly admit it. They're collapsed theories. But when you ask,
but when do these collapses occur? They say, oh, when you make an observation.
And then people go nuts quite rightly and say, well, when is that? Who has the special ability
to make observations? Right. So I would say that's really what they're forced into.
But they're not happy about it.
On this note, maybe we can finish up with where do you fall in this spectrum of
pick two? Well, I think, I think the many worlds thing has all kinds of just conceptual problems,
even understanding what you could mean by probability. Because if every time you do an
experiment, you get every possible outcome, what does it mean to say there's a 50%, you know,
75% chance of this and a 25%. I mean, it has all kinds of problems. I find it kind of,
I'm not at all, I don't see what you get out of it. I think the kind of pilot wave thing is much
cleaner. I mean, this is the same thing Bell, when he goes through these, he says that the
bone theory shows the finest craftsmanship. And I think that's true. You write down two equations,
you write down the Schrodinger equation, and you write down the so-called guidance equation
for the additional variables. They're both just equations. I mean, in the non-relativistic case,
they're nice. First order differential equations give you all the right predictions. What more
do you want? It's a non-local theory. I mean, the main complaint against that theory from the
beginning was it was non-local. But that was before Bell. And after Bell, you want to shrug
your shoulders and say, okay, it's non-local. So what? We know the right theory has to be non-local.
So that's not, it's not a reasonable complaint. To me, the collapses don't feel right. I mean,
I don't like this. I certainly don't like this idea of alternating between Schrodinger evolution
and then this collapse the evolution, right, this kind of jumpiness. But it's a theory. I mean,
it's worth taking seriously. It's worth working out. It makes slightly different predictions
because of the collapses. Bell writes a nice paper about that called Are There Quantum Jumps,
where he's expositing the GRW theory. He writes a nice paper about Bohm called On the Impossible
Pilot Wave, where he's expositing that theory. He never writes about many worlds because he could
never make sense of it in a way that he thought, you know, even with something that he could think
could be developed. And I guess I'm pretty much in agreement on that. I understand why people
are attracted to many worlds because if you do any of the other things, immediately the question
is clear. You're adding additional variables, what are they? You're collapsing the wave function,
how and when, right? I mean, you take on the obligation to answer those questions.
Many worlds is so kind of hard to understand what it's doing and how it's supposed to work
that it's not even clear what questions you're supposed to ask, right? And so I think it gives
the illusion of being clearer when actually it's just, it's obscurity is more hidden. The other
ones, because they make these rather forthright assertions, you say, okay, follow up that assertion
by giving me more details. And you do, and then you run into some problems, right? You can do it
for non-relativistic quantum mechanics with Bohm, but then when you get to relativistic quantum field
theory and you get to particle creation annihilation, you have to do something else. You have to make
adjustments when there are different phenomena that you're worried about, okay? But they're all
non-local. They have to be. You're not going to get away from the non-locality by any of these three
choices. It was a mistake. It's a mistake that used to be made, I think it's made less, that many
world's people would say, oh, ours is a local theory because decoherence happens at the speed of
light or something like that, which just doesn't make any sense. I mean, we could go into that.
That claim just doesn't even have any content and it's not true. And now people who do many worlds,
many of them will recognize, yeah, it's a non-local theory too. But you say, yeah, of course, it's
non-local. It has to be non-local. It better be non-local, right? That's not a bug. That's a feature.
If you've got a theory and it's a local theory, I know your theory is wrong.
Well, this is great, Tim. And thanks for this overview of the different theories of quantum
mechanics laid out very cleanly here. Any final thoughts?
No, I think we've probably beaten everybody into the ground at this point.
Well, I learned a lot. This is a lot of fun hashing out things carefully. I think it's
great. I think this will be a very rewarding, well, it certainly was rewarding for me and
hopefully other viewers will find that to be the same. Okay, great. Thanks for putting up with
me for so long. My pleasure. Yeah, thanks a lot for your time.
