The Future is Faster than you Think

—Peter
This one is for the late Joe Lefler and the crew from Pandora’s Box. Thanks for so much magic. Thanks for believing in me long before anyone else did. Thanks for Derek Dingle’s cockroach pass. Still miss you. Down the funny stairs.

—Steven

FOREWORD
Your authors met in 1999. Steven was working on an article about Peter’s organization, the XPRIZE, which was then focused on unlocking the space frontier. Peter was working on, well, unlocking the space frontier.

Very quickly we discovered a shared obsession with cutting-edge technology and the use of that technology for tackling seemingly impossible challenges. This overlap led to a great friendship and a multi-decade writing partnership, of which The Future Is Faster Than You Thinkis the latest installment. This is our third exploration of how technology can extend the bounds of possibility and transform the world. Technically, it’s also the third book in “The Exponential Mindset Trilogy,” a series that includes this work and our two prior works, Abundanceand BOLD. You don’t need to read these books before diving into this one, but a little context is helpful.

Abundanceis a book about how accelerating technologies are demonetizing and democratizing access to food, water, and energy, making resources that were once scarce now abundant, and allowing individuals to tackle impossible global challenges such as hunger, poverty, and disease. In BOLD, we tell the story of a different impossible: how entrepreneurs have been harnessing these same technologies to build world-changing businesses in near record time, and providing a how-to playbook for anyone interested in doing the same.

In this, our third installment, we expand on these ideas, examining what happens when independent lines of accelerating technology (artificial intelligence, for example) converge with other independent lines of accelerating technology (augmented reality, for example). Sure, AI is powerful. Augmented reality is too. But it’s their convergence that is reinventing retail, advertising, entertainment, and education—just to name a few of the major transformations still ahead.

As we’ll see in the pages to come, these convergences are happening at an ever-increasing rate. This has turbo-boosted both the rate of change in the world and the scale of that change. So buckle up is our point, because you’re in for a wild ride
The inspiration for this book emerged from the authors’ firsthand experience of this ride, a palpable acceleration in the pace of change in their own businesses and the world. Diamandis is working on his twenty-second startup, the most recent of them in the fields of longevity and healthcare. Coupled with his leadership roles in Singularity University, XPRIZE, Bold Capital Partners, and Abundance 360, this frenzied daily dance provides him a continuous infusion of converging technological insights.

Steven has encountered this acceleration in both his work as an author, where this book marks his sixth devoted to the topic of technology, and as the founder and executive director of the Flow Research Collective, where he focuses on the research and training of peak performance—that is, the very psychological tools we humans need to thrive in this world of amplified change.

As authors, we’d also like to say that this wild ride has been something of a challenge. In the pages ahead, you’ll find descriptions of cutting-edge researchers and companies built atop their research. However, keeping pace has not been easy. Companies on the cutting edge when we started writing in early 2018, were often edged out by other companies by the time we completed the writing in late 2019. In other words, while the names are important, those names might change. The heart of this book belongs to the overarching trends of convergence and the transformative impact they’re having on business, industry, and our lives.

There is little doubt that the decade to come will be filled with radical breakthroughs and world-changing surprises. As the chapters ahead make clear, every major industry on our planet is about to be completely reimagined. For entrepreneurs, for innovators, for leaders, for anyone sufficiently nimble and adventurous, the opportunities will be incredible. It will be both a future that’s faster than you think and arguably the greatest display of imagination rendered visible the world has yet seen. Welcome to an era of extraordinary.PART ONE THE POWER OF CONVERGENCECHAPTER ONE ConvergenceFlying Cars
The Skirball Cultural Center sits just off the 405 Freeway, on the northern edge of Los Angeles. Built atop the thin spine of the Santa Monica Mountains, the Center offers spectacular views in nearly every direction, except for the freeway below—which is bumper-to-bumper for miles on end.

Of course it is.

In 2018, for the sixth straight year, Los Angeles earned the dubious honor of being the most gridlocked metropolis in the world, where the average driver spends two-and-a-half working weeks a year trapped in traffic. Yet help may be on its way. In May 2018, the Skirball Center was ground zero for Uber Elevate, the ridesharing company’s radical plan for solving this traffic: their second annual flying car conference.

Inside the Skirball, giant screens displayed a night sky dotted with stars that slowly faded into a blue sky dotted with clouds. Beneath the clouds, it was standing room only. The event had attracted a motley crew of the power elite: CEOs, entrepreneurs, architects, designers, technologists, venture capitalists, government officials, and real estate magnates. Nearly a thousand in total, dressed in everything from Wall Street slick to eternally casual Friday, all gathered to witness the birth of a new industry.

To kick off the conference, Jeff Holden, Uber’s (now former) chief product officer, took the stage. With curly brown hair and a gray Uber Air polo shirt, Holden had a boyish demeanor that belied his actual role in the affair. This event, in fact, the entire concept of getting Uber off the ground, was Holden’s vision.

It was quite a vision.

“We’ve come to accept extreme congestion as part of our lives,” said Holden.1“In the U.S., we have the honor of being home to ten of the world’s twenty-five most congested cities, costing us approximately $300 billion in lost income and productivity. Uber’s mission is to solve urban mobility.… Our goal is to introduce an entirely new form of transportation to the world, namely urban aviation, or what I prefer to call ‘aerial ridesharing.’ ”
Aerial ridesharing might sound like sci-fi cliché, but Holden had a solid track record of disruptive innovation. In the late 1990s, he followed Jeff Bezos from New York to Seattle to become one of the earliest employees at Amazon. There, he was put in charge of implementing the then zany idea of free two-day shipping for a flat annual membership fee. It was an innovation that many thought would bankrupt the company. Instead, Amazon Prime was born, and today, 100 million Prime members later, that zany idea accounts for a significant portion of the company’s bottom line.

Next, Holden went to another startup, Groupon—which is hard to remember as a disruptive enterprise today, but was then part of the first wave of “power to the people” internet companies. From there, he went to Uber, where, despite the turmoil the company experienced, Holden strung together a series of unlikely wins: UberPool, Uber Eats, and, most recently, Uber’s self-driving car program. So when he proposed an even zanier product line—that Uber take to the skies—it wasn’t all that surprising that the company’s leadership took him seriously.

And for good reason. The theme of the second annual Uber Elevate wasn’t actually flying cars. The cars have already arrived. Instead, the theme of the second Uber Elevate was the path to scale. And the more critical point: That path is a lot shorter than many suspect.

By mid-2019, over $1 billion had been invested in at least twenty-five different flying car companies. A dozen vehicles are currently being test-flown, while another dozen are at stages ranging from PowerPoint to prototype. They come in all shapes and sizes, from motorcycles stacked atop oversized fans, to quadcopter drones scaled up to human size, to miniature space-pod airplanes. Larry Page, cofounder and CEO of Alphabet, Google’s parent company, was among the first to recognize their potential, personally funding three companies, Zee Aero, Opener and Kitty Hawk. Established players like Boeing, Airbus, Embraer, and Bell Helicopter (now just called Bell, a reference to the future disappearance of the helicopter itself) are also in the game. Thus, for the first time in history, we’re past the point of talking about the possibility of flying cars.

The cars are here.

“Uber’s goal,” explained Holden from the stage, “is to demonstrate flying car capability in 2020 and have aerial ridesharing fully operational in Dallas and LA by 2023.” But then Holden went even further: “Ultimately, we want to make it economically irrational to own and use a car.”
How irrational? Let’s look at the numbers.

