The coldest place in the universe is located in sunny California. On the outskirts of Berkeley, inside an oversized warehouse, hangs a large white pipe. It’s a human-made contraption, a next generation cryogenic refrigerator cooled to .003 Kelvin, or just north of absolute zero.

Back in 1995, astronomers in Chile detected temperatures of 1.15 Kelvin inside the Boomerang Nebula. It was a record-setting discovery: the coldest naturally occurring spot in the cosmos. The white pipe, meanwhile, is nearly a degree cooler—which makes it both the chilliest corner of our universe and the kind of radical freeze needed to hold a qubit in superposition.

Hold a what in a what?
In classical computing, a “bit” is a tiny chunk of binary information, either a one or a zero. A “qubit” is the newer version of this idea, or a quantum bit. Unlike binary bits, which are an either/or scenario, qubits utilize “superposition,” which allows them to be in multiple states at once. Think of the two options of flipping a coin: heads or tails. Now think about a spinning coin—where both states flash by at once. That’s superposition, only it requires super-cold temperatures to achieve.

Superposition means power. A lot of power. A classical computer requires thousands of steps to solve a hard problem, but a quantum computer can accomplish that same task in two or three steps total. To put this into perspective, IBM’s Deep Blue computer that beat Gary Kasparov at chess examined 200 million moves a second. A quantum machine can bump that up to a trillion or more—and that’s the kind of power hidden inside that large white pipe.

The pipe belongs to Rigetti Computing, a six-year-old company at the center of one of the most interesting David v. Goliath sagas in technology. Currently, the main contestants in the race toward “quantum supremacy”—that is, the race to build a quantum computer that can solve a problem unsolvable by classical machines—are tech behemoths such as Google, IBM, and Microsoft, academic standouts like Oxford and Yale, the government of China and the US, and the aforementioned Rigetti.

The company got going in 2013, when a physicist named Chad Rigetti decided that quantum computers were a lot closer to prime time than many suspected, and that he wanted to be the one to push the technology over the finish line. So he left a comfortable job as a quantum researcher at IBM, raised over $119 million in funding, and built the coldest pipe in history. Over fifty patent applications later, Rigetti now manufactures integrated quantum circuits that power quantum computers in the cloud. And he’s right, this technology does solve one great problem: the end of Moore’s Law.

Over the next two chapters, we’re going to examine ten exponential technologies that are all beginning to converge. All are surfing Moore’s Law, a six-decade wave of rising computational capacity. Transistor power—which is how you measure the size of this wave—is often calculated in FLOPS, or floating operations per second. In 1956, our computers were capable of ten thousand FLOPS. In 2015, this had become one quadrillionFLOPS. And it’s this trillionfold improvement that’s been the most important force driving technology forward.

Yet, over the past few years, Moore’s Law has been slowing down. The issue is physics. Improvements to integrated circuits have come via shrinking the space between transistors, which allows us to pack more of them onto a chip. In 1971, channel distance—that is, the distance between transistors—was ten thousand nanometers. By 2000, it was roughly one hundred nanometers. Today, we’re closing in on five, which is where the trouble starts. At this microscopic scale, electrons begin to jump around, destroying their ability to calculate. This makes it the hard physical limit of transistor growth—the swan song of Moore’s Law.

Except—maybe not.

“Moore’s Law was not the first, but the fifth paradigm to provide accelerating price-performance,” writes Ray Kurzweil in “The Law of Accelerating Returns.” “Computing devices have been consistently multiplying in power (per unit of time) from the mechanical calculating devices used in the 1890 U.S. Census, to Turing’s relay-based ‘Robinson’ machine that cracked the Nazi Enigma code, to the CBS vacuum tube computer that predicted the election of Eisenhower, to the transistor-based machines used in the first space launches, to the integrated-circuit-based personal computer which I used to dictate this essay.”
Kurzweil’s point is that every time an exponential technology reaches the end of its usefulness, another arises to take its place. And so it is with transistors. Right now, there are a half-dozen solutions to the end of Moore’s Law. Alternative uses of materials are being explored, such as replacing silicon circuits with carbon nanotubes for faster switching and better heat dissipation. Novel designs are also in the works, including three-dimensional integrated circuits, which geometrically increase the available surface area. There are also specialized chips that have limited functionality, but incredible speed. Apple’s recent A12 Bionic, for example, only runs AI applications, but does so at a blistering nine trillion operations a second.

Yet all of these solutions pale in comparison to quantum computing.

In 2002, Geordie Rose, the founder of an early quantum computer company D-Wave, came up with the quantum version of Moore’s Law, what’s now known as Rose’s Law. The idea is similar: The number of qubits in a quantum computer doubles every year. Yet Rose’s Law has been described as “Moore’s Law on steroids,” because qubits in superposition have way more power than binary bits in transistors. Put it this way: A fifty-qubit computer has sixteen petabytes of memory. That’s a lot of memory. If it were an iPod, it would hold fifty million songs. But increase that by a mere thirty qubits and you get something else entirely. If all the atoms of the universe were capable of storing one bit of information, an eighty-qubit computer would have more information storage capacity than all the atoms in the universe.

For this same reason, we have no real idea what innovations will arise once quantum computing actually starts to mature. But what we do know is tantalizing. Because chemistry and physics are quantum processes, computing in qubits will usher in whatOxford’s Simon Benjamin calls “a golden age of discovery in new materials, new chemicals, and new drugs.” It will also amplify artificial intelligence, remake cybersecurity, and allow us to simulate incredibly complex systems.

How will quantum computing help lead to new drugs, for example?
Chad Rigetti explains:“[The technology] change[s] the economics of research and development. Say you’re trying to create a new cancer drug. Instead of building a large-scale wet lab to explore the properties of hundreds of thousands of compounds in test tubes, you’re going to be able to do much of that exploration inside a computer.” In other words, the gap between neat idea and new drug is about to become a whole lot shorter.

And everyone can play. Quantum computing is already available to the masses. Right now, if you go to the website for Rigetti Computing (www.rigetti.com), you can download Forest, their quantum developer’s kit. The kit provides a user-friendly interface to the quantum world. With it, almost anyone can write programs that can be run on Rigetti’s thirty-two-qubit computer. Over 120 million programs have been run.

The development of a user-friendly interface for quantum computing marks a critical inflection point. Maybe, thecritical inflection point, but this takes a little explaining.…
In BOLD, we introduced “the Six Ds of Exponentials,” or the growth cycle of exponential technologies: Digitalization, Deception, Disruption, Demonetization, Dematerialization, and Democratization. Each represents a crucial phase of development for an exponential technology, one that always leads to enormous upheaval and opportunity. Since understanding these stages will be indispensable to understanding the evolution of quantum computing (and the other technologies we’ll be discussing), they’re worth taking a moment to review:
Digitalization: Once a technology becomes digital, meaning once you can translate it into the 1s and 0s of binary code, it jumps on the back of Moore’s Law and begins accelerating exponentially. Soon, with quantum, this will be on the back of Rose’s Law and an even wilder ride.

Deception:Exponentials typically generate a lot of hype when first introduced. Because early progress is slow (when plotted on a curve, the first few doublings are all below 1.0), these technologies spend a long time failing to live up to the hype. Think about the initial days of Bitcoin. Back then, most people thought crypto was a novelty toy for übergeeks or a way to buy illegal drugs online. Today, it’s a reinvention of our financial markets. This is a classic example of the deceptive phase.

Disruption:This is what happens when exponentials really start to impact the world, when they begin disrupting existing products, services, markets, and industries. An example is 3-D printing, a single exponential technology that threatens the entire $10 trillion manufacturing sector.

Demonetization:Where a product or service once had a cost, now money vanishes from the equation. Photographs were once expensive. You took limited numbers of pictures because film and developing that film cost a lot of money. But once photos became digital, those costs vanished. Now you take photos without thinking of them, and the difficulty comes in sorting through too many options.

Dematerialization:Now you see it, now you don’t. This is when the products themselves disappear. Cameras, stereos, video game consoles, TVs, GPS systems, calculators, paper, matchmaking as we knew it, etc. These once independent products are now standard fare on any smartphone. Wikipedia dematerialized the encyclopedia; iTunes dematerialized the music store. Etc.

Democratization:This is when an exponential scales and goes wide. Cell phones were once brick-sized instruments available only to a wealthy few. Today, almost everyone has one, making it nearly impossible to find anywhere in the world untouched by this technology.

So what does this mean for quantum computing? Well, in light of this growth cycle, a user-friendly interface is what bridges the gap between a technology’s deceptive and disruptive phase. Consider the internet. In 1993, Marc Andreesen designed Mosaic, the first user-friendly interface for the internet (what became the Netscape browser). Before he did, there were twenty-six websites online. A few years later, there were hundreds of thousands; a few years after that, millions. This is the real power of a user-friendly interface—it democratizes technology. By allowing nonexperts to play, an interface allows a technology to scale. And fast. Thus the fact that 1.5 million programs have been run on Rigetti’s Forest—its user-friendly interface to the quantum world—tells us that radical change is right around the corner.

Artificial Intelligence
