Change came on May 24, 1844, when Samuel Morse sent four words down a wire: “What hath God wrought?” His transmission was both a question for the ages and the birth of a new age, the age of networks. Morse sent those words down an experimental telegraph line stretched from Washington, DC, to Baltimore, Maryland, the two-node sketch of the world’s first information network.

Thirty-two years later, Alexander Graham Bell raised those network stakes by exactly five words. In March of 1876, Bell placed the first telephone call, sending out his nine-word demand: “Mr. Watson, come here. I want to see you.” But he also expanded the capabilities of those networks—and that was the bigger deal.

Bell’s invention didn’t increase the speed of data transmission—electricity moving through wires is still electricity moving through wires—but it massively improved both the quantity and quality of information transmitted. Even better, telephones came with user-friendly interfaces. No need to spend years learning to dot and dash, simply pick up the receiver and dial.

And with that first user-friendly interface, network development moved out of deception and crept toward disruption. In 1919, less than 10 percent of US households had landlines. Want to place a three-minute coast-to-cast call? No problem. All that’s required is a small fortune, $20 at the time, almost $400 in today’s money. By the 1960s, though, spending a minute on the phone from the US to India cost only $10. Today, it’s around 28 cents (with Verizon’s basic monthly plan).

Yet this thousandfold reduction in cost and increase in performance was just the warm-up round. Over the past fifty years, networks have moved from the disruptive phase and into damn near everywhere. We’ve now wired nearly every square meter of the planet—fiberoptic cables, wireless networks, internet backbones, aerial platforms, satellite constellations, and more. The internet is the world’s largest network. In 2010, about a quarter of the Earth’s population, 1.8 billion people, were connected to it. By 2017, penetration had reached 3.8 billion, about half the world’s population. But over the next five years, those connections will extend to all of us, the unwired masses, the total sum of humanity. At gigabit speeds and very little cost, an additional 4.2 billion new minds are about to join the global conversation. Here’s how it’s all going to go down.

5G, Balloons, and Satellites
When researchers talk network evolution, “G” is the term du jour. It stands for “generation.” We were at 0G in 1940, when the first telephone networks began to roll out. This was the deceptive phase. It took forty years to crawl our way to 1G, which showed up via the first mobile phones in the 1980s, marking the transition from deceptive to disruptive.

By the 90s, around the time the internet emerged, 2G came along for the ride. But the ride didn’t last long. A decade later, 3G ushered in a new era of acceleration as bandwidth costs began to plummet—at a staggeringly consistent 35 percent per year. Smartphones, mobile banking, and e-commerce unleashed 4G networks in 2010. But starting in 2019, 5G will begin to hotwire the whole deal, delivering speeds a hundred times faster at near-zero prices.

How fast is 5G? With 3G, it takes forty-five minutes to download a high-definition movie. 4G shrinks that to twenty-one seconds. But 5G? It takes longer to read this sentence than it takes to download that movie.

Yet, even as these cell networks kudzu the planet, others are sprouting in the territory far over our heads. Alphabet is now rolling out Project Loon—which, when they first proposed it, could have been short for “Project Loony.” Born a decade back out of Google X, the tech giant’s skunk works, the idea was to replace terrestrial cell towers with stratospherically located balloons. That idea is now a reality.

Light and durable enough to cruise the slipstreams some twenty kilometers above the Earth’s surface, Google’s fifteen by twelve-meter balloons are providing 4G-LTE connections to users on the ground. Each balloon covers five thousand square kilometers, and Google’s plan is a network of thousands, wiring the unwired, providing continuous coverage for anyone, anywhere on Earth.

Google’s not the only one vying for the real estate far above our heads. Beyond the stratosphere, three major competitors are engaged in an entirely new kind of space race. First up is the work of an engineer named Greg Wyler, who has a long history of trying to use technology to eradicate poverty. Back in the early 2000s, on a shoestring budget, Wyler helped bring 3G to communities in Africa. Today, backed with billions from SoftBank, Qualcomm, and Virgin, he’s launching OneWeb, a constellation of about two thousand satellites bringing 5G download speeds to everyone.

Despite the radical network upgrade of OneWeb, Wyler’s a David compared to the financial Goliaths of Amazon and SpaceX. In early 2019, Amazon joined this satellite competition, announcing Project Kuiper, a constellation of 3,236 satellites designed to provide high-speed broadband to the world. SpaceX, with a four-year head start on Amazon, topped this in 2019, when the company began to deploy a monster constellation of over 12,000 satellites (4,000 at 1,150 kilometers, and 7,500 at 340 kilometers). If Musk succeeds, it’ll mean global gigabit connection speeds.

Higher still?
At eight thousand kilometers, in what’s technically called medium-Earth orbit, O3B is the latest G on the block. O3B stands for “Other 3 Billion,” a set of Boeing-built multi-terabit satellites known as the “mPower network” that will bring connectivity to all who currently lack it.

Taken together, before the midpoint of the next decade, anyone who wants to be connected will be connected. For the very first time, that old sixties saying—“One Planet, One People, Please”—will, from a network perspective, finally be here. And as the population online doubles, we’re likely to witness one of the most historic accelerations of technological innovation and global economic progress yet seen.

Sensors
In 2014, at an infectious disease lab in Finland, health researcher Petteri Lahtela made a curious discovery. He realized that a great many of the conditions he’d been studying shared a peculiar overlap. While examining diseases that doctors consider unrelated—Lyme disease, heart disease, diabetes, for example—he found that all of them negatively affected sleep.

For Lahtela, this raised questions about cause and effect. Did all these diseases cause sleep problems or did it work the other way around? Could these conditions be alleviated, or at least improved, by fixing sleep? More importantly, how to do that?
To solve these puzzles, Lahtela decided he needed data. A lot of data. To gather it, he realized he could take advantage of a recent technological inflection point. In 2015, driven by advances in smartphones, small and powerful batteries converged with small and powerful sensors. So small and powerful, in fact, that Lahtela realized that building a new kind of sleep tracker might be possible.

Any electronic device that measures a physical quantity like light, acceleration, or temperature, then sends that information to other devices on a network, can be considered a sensor. The sensors that Lahtela was considering were a new breed of heart rate monitors. A great way to track sleep is via heart rate and heart rate variability. While a number of such trackers were already on the market, these were older models that all had issues. Fitbit and the Apple Watch, for example, measured blood flow in the wrist via an optical sensor. Yet the wrist’s arteries sit too far below the surface for perfect measurement, and people don’t often wear watches to bed—where they can interrupt the sleep they’re designed to measure.

Lahtela’s upgrade: the Oura ring. Not much more than a sleek, black titanium band, the ring has three sensors that can track and/or compute ten different body signals, making it the most accurate sleep tracker on the market. Location and sampling rates are its secret weapons. Since arteries in the finger are closer to the surface than those in the wrist, the Oura gets a much better picture of what’s happening in the heart. Plus, while Apple and Garamond measure blood flow twice a second, and Fitbit gets that up to 12 times, the Oura captures data 250 times a second. In studies conducted by independent labs, this combination of better imaging and higher sampling speed makes the ring 99 percent accurate compared to medical-grade heart rate trackers, and 98 percent accurate for heart rate variability.

Twenty years ago, sensors this accurate would have cost millions and required a decent-sized room to house. Today, the Oura costs around $300 and sits on your finger—which is the impact that exponential growth has had on sensors. The street name for this network of sensors is the “Internet of Things” (IoT), the growing network of interconnected smart devices that will soon span the globe. And it’s worth tracing the evolution of this revolution to understand how far we’ve come.

In 1989, inventor John Romkey connected a Sunbeam toaster to the internet, making it the very first IoT device. Ten years later, sociologist Neil Gross saw the writing on the wall and made a now famous prediction in the pages of BusinessWeek: “In the next century, planet earth will don an electric skin. It will use the Internet as a scaffold to support and transmit its sensations. The skin is already being stitched together. It consists of millions of embedded electronic measuring devices: thermostats, pressure gauges, pollution detectors, cameras, microphones, glucose sensors, EKGs, electroencephalographs. These will monitor cities and endangered species, the atmosphere, our ships, highways and fleets of trucks, our conversations, our bodies—even our dreams.”
A decade after that, Gross’s prediction bore out. In 2009, the number of devices connected to the internet exceeded the number of people on the planet (12.5 billion devices, 6.8 billion people, or 1.84 connected devices per person). A year later, driven by the evolution of smartphones, sensor prices began to plummet. By 2015, all this progress added up to 15 billion connected devices. As most of those devices contain multiple sensors—the average smartphone has about twenty—this also explains why 2020 marks the debut of what’s been called “our trillion sensor world.”
Nor will we stop there. By 2030, Stanford researchers estimate 500 billion connected devices (each housing dozens of sensors), which, according to research conducted by Accenture, translates into a $14.2 trillion dollar economy. And hidden behind these numbers is exactly what Gross had in mind—an electric skin that registers just about every sensation on the planet.

Consider optical sensors. The first digital camera, built in 1976 by Kodak engineer Steven Sasson, was the size of a toaster oven, took twelve black-and-white images, and cost over $10,000. Today, the average camera that comes with the average smartphone shows a thousandfold improvement in weight, cost, and resolution over Sasson’s model. And these cameras are everywhere. In cars, drones, phones, satellites, and such, and with an image resolution that’s downright spooky. Satellites photograph the Earth down to the half-meter range. Drones shrink that to a centimeter. But the LIDAR sensors atop autonomous cars capture just about everything—gathering 1.3 million data points per second.

We see this triple trend of decreasing size and cost, and increasing performance everywhere. The first commercial GPS hit shelves in 1981, weighing fifty-three pounds and costing $119,900. By 2010, it had shrunk to a $5 chip small enough to sit on your finger. The “inertial measurement unit” that guided our early rockets is another example. In the mid-sixties, this was a fifty-pound $20 million device. Today, the accelerometer and gyroscope in your cell phone do the same job for about $4 and weigh less than a grain of rice.

