The judge in question was over sixty years old and weighed close to 270 pounds. Since the game modeled gravity, from the judge’s perspective, all of those pounds were suddenly plummeting to the bottom of a pit. Now, if this were taking place in the physical world, the best way to save your own life would be to dive for the other side of the pit—stretching your body out horizontally in hopes that your fingers might find a tiny purchase on the far lip.

And that’s what the judge did.

“He dove at a forty-five-degree angle,” Bailenson explains, “toward a table with a sharp corner that had my computer [sitting] on it.”
But all’s well that ends well. The judge ended up unharmed, and Bailenson ended up with a great story to illustrate the sensory trickery that VR experts term “presence.” Essentially, when VR’s done correctly, for reasons that are neurobiological, we can’t tell we’re in the Matrix. If pixels remain hidden, if the field of view mimics a human’s, and everything from shadows to motion is created with exacting verisimilitude, the brain believes the illusion—which is why federal judges dive into tables.

Presence is a new development. For all of history, our lives have been limited by the laws of physics and mitigated by the five senses. VR is rewriting those rules. It’s letting us digitize experience and teleport our senses into a computer-generated world where the limits of imagination become the only brake on reality.

Much like AI, the concept of VR has been around since the sixties. The 1980s saw the first false dawn, when the earliest “consumer-facing” systems began to show up. In 1989, before the iPhone, if you had a spare $250,000, you could purchase the EyePhone, a VR system built by Jaron Lanier’s company VPL (Lanier coined the term “virtual reality”). Unfortunately, the computer that powered that system was the size of a dorm room refrigerator, while the headset it required was bulky, awkward, and only generated about five frames a second—or six times slower than the average television of that era.

By the early 1990s, the hype had faded, and VR entered a two-decade deceptive phase. Still, the underlying technology didn’t stop developing. By the turn of the millennium, it was good enough to fool judges walking planks. But as the 2000s progressed, the convergence of increasingly powerful game engines and AI image-rendering software turned deceptive into disruptive and the VR universe opened for business.

Startups started starting up. And being acquired. In 2012, Facebook made waves when they spent $2 billion to acquire the VR company Oculus Rift. By 2015, Venture Beatreported that a market which typically saw only ten new entrants a year, suddenly had 234. The year 2017 was a banner one for Samsung, when they sold 3.65 million headsets and turned enough heads that everyone from Apple and Google to Cisco and Microsoft decided to investigate VR.

Phone-based VR showed up soon afterward, dropping barriers to entry as low as $5. By 2018, the first wireless adaptors, standalone headsets, and mobile headsets had hit the market. Resolution-wise, 2018 was also when Google and LG doubled their pixels-per-inch count and increased their refresh rate from VPL’s 5 frames a second to over 120.

Around the same time, the systems began targeting more senses than just vision. HEAR360’s “omni-binaural” microphone suite captures 360 degrees of audio, which means immersive sound has now caught up to immersive visuals. Touch has also reached the masses, with haptic gloves, vests, and full body suits hitting the consumer market. Scent emitters, taste simulators, and every kind of sensor imaginable—including brainwave readers—are all trying to put the “very” into verisimilitude.

And the number of virtual explorers continues to mount. In 2017, according to an eMarketer study, there were 22 million monthly users, which increased to 35 million by 2018. By the middle twenties, estimates put the VR market around $35 billion or so, and it’ll be hard to find a field not touched.

In Part Two of this book, we’ll take a closer look at how VR will remake markets, from entertainment to healthcare. But consider, to offer one example here, education—where VR offers an entirely new kind of learning. Since demonstrating the technology to federal judges, Jeremy Bailenson and his team at Stanford have spent two decades exploring VR’s ability to produce behavioral change. He’s developed first-person VR experiences illustrating racism, sexism, and other forms of discrimination. For instance, experiencing what it would be like to be an elderly, homeless, African-American woman living on the streets of Baltimore produces lasting change in users: a significant shift in empathy and understanding.

“Virtual reality is not a media experience,” explained Bailenson in a 2010 speech at NYU law school. “When it’s done well, it’s an actual experience. In general our findings show that VR causes more behavior changes, causes more engagement, causes more influence than other types of traditional media.”
And as much development as there is in virtual reality, a larger amount is taking place in augmented reality. In 2016, when Nintendo’s Pokémon GO was downloaded more than a billion times, AR entered its disruptive phase. Apple took the next leap in two steps: first, coming out with an AR developers suite that lets anyone design apps for their platform, and second, purchasing Akonia Holographics, a company that makes thin, transparent lenses for smart glasses.

Entrepreneurs also got in on the fun. As of this writing, there are over eighteen hundred different AR startups to be found on the crowdfunding site AngelList. By 2021, experts predict that all this activity will add up to a market in excess of $133 billion.

While AR isn’t as cheap as VR (yet), $100 will get you an entry-level Leap Motion headset, while $3000 covers a top-shelf Microsoft HoloLens. Similarly, heads-up displays in luxury automobiles, arguably the first AR tech to go wide, will soon come standard in economy models.

In our classrooms, AR allows kids to explore both virtual objects and virtual worlds. On our streets, AR creates a different kind of learning experience—as every building projects its history into your field of view. Retail takes this to another level. Hungry and on a budget? Your AR lens shows you all the lunch specials on the block, complete withcustomer ratings. In industry, AR-training simulations are teaching us to operate all sorts of machines—including how to fly planes. Museums have AR-enhanced displays, real estate agents do the same for home tours. In healthcare, AR lets surgeons “see inside” clogged arteries and medical students peel back layers on virtual cadavers.

So yeah, get ready player one—there are federal judges diving your way.

3-D Printing
The most expensive supply chain in the universe extends only 241 miles. It’s the resupply network running from Mission Control down here on Earth straight up to the astronauts aboard the International Space Station (or ISS). The expense comes from weight. It costs $10,000 per pound to get an object out of the Earth’s gravity well. And because it can take months to actually reach the Space Station, a significant portion of ISS’s precious real estate is taken up by the storage of replacement parts. In other words, the most expensive supply chain in history leads to the most exotic junkyard in the cosmos.

In BOLD,we told the story of Made In Space, the first company trying to solve these problems. The company’s goal was to build a 3-D printer that works in space. Well, it’s a few years later and Made In Space is now in space. Which is why, on a 2018 ISS mission, when an astronaut broke his finger, they didn’t have to order a splint from Earth and wait months for its arrival. Instead, they flipped on their 3-D printer, loaded in some plastic feed stock, found “splint” in their blueprint archive, and created what they needed, when they needed it. It’s a level of on-demand manufacturing capability unlike anything we’ve seen before.

But it took a while to get here.

The original 3-D printers showed up back in the eighties. They were clunky, slow, hard to program, and easy to break, and only printed plastic. Today, the machines have colonized most of the periodic table. We can now print in hundreds of different materials, in full color—in metals, rubber, plastic, glass, concrete, and even in organic materials such as cells, leather, and chocolate. And what we can now print is getting increasingly impressive. From jet engines to apartment complexes to circuit boards to prosthetic limbs, 3-D printers are fabricating enormously complex devices in increasingly shorter time frames.

This is a big deal for industry. The on-demand nature of 3-D printers removes the need for inventory and everything that inventory demands. Other than the space required for feedstock materials and the printer itself, the technology all but erases supply chains, transportation networks, stock rooms, warehouses, and all the rest. This one development, a single exponential technology, threatens the entire $12 trillion manufacturing sector.

And fast.

Until the early 2000s, 3-D printers were exceptionally pricey machines in the hundred thousand dollar range. Today, they can be purchased for under $1000. As prices have dropped, performance has increased, and convergences have begun to arise—moving 3-D printing into a wider variety of markets.

A couple years back, for example, the Israeli company Nano Dimension converged 3-D printing and computation, bringing the first commercial circuit board 3-D printer to market and allowing designers to prototype new products in hours instead of months. Another convergence is 3-D printing and energy, where the tech is already used for making batteries, wind turbines, and solar cells—or three of the most expensive and important components of the renewables revolution. Transportation is seeing similar impacts. Engines used to be among the most complicated machines on the planet. GE’s advanced turboprop once contained 855 individually milled components. Today, with 3-D printing, it has twelve. The upside? A hundred pounds of weight reduction and a 20 percent improvement in fuel burn.
