
Biotech and 3-D printing is another intersection. The first 3-D printed prosthetics arrived in 2010. Today, hospitals are rolling them out at scale. In 2018, a Jordanian hospital introduced a program that can fit and build an amputee a prosthetic in twenty-four hours, for less than $20 US. At the same time, because 3-D printers can now print electronics, we’re seeing companies like Unlimited Tomorrow and Open Bionics selling 3-D-printed multi-grip bionic prosthetics at non-bionic prices.

And replacement body parts are about to become replacement organs. Back in 2002, scientists at Wake Forest University 3-D printed the first kidney tissue capable of filtering blood and producing urine. In 2010, Organovo, a San Diego–based bioprinting outfit, created the first blood vessel. Today, a company called Prellis Biologics is printing capillaries at record speeds, while Iviva Medical is doing the same with 3-D printed kidneys—which is why 3-D printed organs are predicted to hit the market by 2023.

3-D printing’s impact on the construction industry is happening even faster. In 2014, the Chinese company WinSun 3-D printed ten single-family homes in under twenty-four hours, each costing less than $5,000. A few months later they printed a five-story apartment complex over a weekend. In 2017, a different Chinese company combined 3-D printing with modular construction to erect a fifty-seven-story skyscraper in nineteen days. In 2019, the California-based company Mighty Buildings merged these 3-D printing developments with robotics and materials science to do something no one had yet done: meet US building code standards while 3-D printing single-family homes at one-tenth the labor cost and with a final product three times cheaper than the industry standard.

But the story that might best illustrate the actual world-changing power of 3-D printing belongs to a guy named Brett Hagler. A couple years after the 2010 earthquake in Haiti, Hagler took a trip to the island. He was shocked to find tens of thousands of people still living in tent cities so long after the disaster. So Hagler decided to find a way to use emerging technology to provide permanent shelter for people who need it most. He formed a nonprofit called New Story, raised research capital from a group of investors known as “the Builders,” and created a solar-powered 3-D printer that can work in the worst environments imaginable. His machine prints a four hundred to eight-hundred-square-foot home in forty-eight hours at the cost of $6,000 to $10,000 (depending on location and raw material costs). And this isn’t a bunker—it’s a nifty modern design complete with wraparound porches.

In the fall of 2019, in Mexico, New Story began construction of the world’s first 3-D printed community—fifty homes to be given or sold (using no interest, micro-repayment loans available to anyone) to people who were currently homeless. “The data is pretty clear,” explains Hagler. “Shelter is a basic need. If you can satisfy it, everything else improves: health, wellness, income, education levels for children. 3-D printing is an incredible tool for fighting poverty. It’s up to us to use it.”
Blockchain
In the short time it’s been around, the blockchain has accrued some wonderfully colorful monikers. It’s been called the exponential technology of record keeping, the sexiest accounting solution in the history of the world, and the end of government as we know it. In simpler terms, blockchain is an enabling technology, one that began its life by enabling digital currency.

Digital currencies, or the notion that we can use ones and zeroes to replace dollars and cents, were first proposed in 1983. Yet the idea was stymied by the seemingly intractable “double-spending problem.” In a nutshell: If you have a dollar bill and give it to a friend, then your friend has the dollar bill. If you have a digital dollar bill and give it to a friend—if the core of that currency is nothing more than ones and zeroes—then what’s to stop you from giving that friend a copy of the dollar bill and keeping the original for yourself. After all, this is exactly how all other digital sharing works. When you send an email, your computer stores the original and sends a copy. This is fine for exchanging letters, but it’s lousy for trading money. This is the double-spending problem and it’s exactly what bitcoin was designed to solve.

Bitcoin appeared in 2008, when an online paper authored by a still-anonymous person (or persons) calling themselves Satoshi Nakamoto proposed a digital peer-to-peer payment system that allows cash to be exchanged without the need for a financial institution. The following year, the first bitcoin software was made public, yet because the coins had only been mined but not traded, there was no way to assign them monetary value. In 2010, Laszlo Hanyecz solved that problem, buying two pizzas—costing $25—with 10,000 bitcoins. At the time, based on the cost of those pizzas, the coins were worth $.0025 each. By 2019, they were just shy of $15,000.

Yet the real revolution lies beneath bitcoin: blockchain technology. A blockchain is a distributed, mutable, permissible, and transparent digital ledger. We’ll take them one at a time. Distributed means it’s a shared, collected database, so everyone on the network—that is, anyone who owns the currency—has a copy of the ledger. Mutable means that anytime anyone enters new information in the ledger, all ledgers change. It’s permissible in the same way that cash is permissible—anyone can use it. Finally, the system is transparent because everyone on the network can see every transaction on the network—which is how the double-spend problem was actually solved.

The real innovation, though, is how transactions are recorded in the ledger. In normal financial exchanges, when money is moved around, a trusted third party is needed: If I cut you a check, it’s a third party, typically a bank, who ensures I have the cash to cover it. But cryptocurrencies remove the middleman from the exchange, instead validating transactions with every computer on the network. Once deemed valid, the record of that transaction is bundled with other records into a “block,” then added to the record of all prior blocks (the “chain”).

By cutting out the middleman and bringing accounting into the digital age, blockchain is doing to banks what the internet did to traditional media: gutting them. For starters, it creates banking where before there was none. Because the technology is permissible, the hundreds of millions of people currently without a bank account now have a place to store their money—a $308 billion opportunity according to a recent Accenture report.

Blockchain also provides an easy way to transfer that money, especially between countries. Right now, the international remittance market is worth $600 billion. All of that money is being skimmed off the top, with “trusted” middlemen like Western Union taking a hefty fee from every transaction they process.

What’s more, one reason so many people don’t have a bank account is because they also lack an official identity. Blockchain solves this problem as well, providing people with a digital ID that will follow them around the internet. What can we do with this identity? Own our own data, for one. Blockchain IDs could also facilitate fair and accurate voting. Lastly, if your identity can be established, then a reputation score can easily be attached. This score allows for things like peer-to-peer ridesharing, which today require trusted third parties named “Uber” and “Lyft.”
In the same way that blockchain can validate identity, it can also validate any asset—for example, ensuring that your engagement ring isn’t a blood diamond. Land titles are another opportunity, especially since a considerable portion of the planet lives on land they don’t own, or not officially. Consider Haiti. The combination of earthquakes, dictatorships, and forced evacuations makes determining who actually owns which bits of property a giant quagmire. A blockchain land registry could record every transaction ever, so land titles could always be backtracked, sale by sale, to the original owner.

A land registry also gets us to one of blockchain’s other advantages—it has a smart contracts layer built in. Sports betting is one example. Right now, internet gambling requires a “trusted third party,” a gambling site, who guarantees the bet will be paid. But if two gamblers can decide in advance what source to trust as an arbiter of results—say, the sports page of the New York Times—then they can build a blockchain contract that allows them to bet with one another, have the system settle the bet via the pages of the Times, then automatically move the money. It’s a smart contract because it executes itself, without need for human involvement.

And it’s for all of these reasons that the tech is exploding. As of 2018, major financial firms like J.P. Morgan, Goldman Sachs, and Bank of America are rolling out crypto-strategies at scale. Initial coin offerings, or ICOs, are blockchain’s version of crowdsourcing (which we’ll explore in depth in Chapter Four) are also exploding, with a market value of almost $10 billion as of 2018. In total, what began less than a decade ago with the sale of two pizzas, will, according to Gartner, Inc., grow to $176 billion by 2025, and could exceed $3.1 trillion in 2030.

To figure out where this is all going, there’s one more property of the blockchain worth discussing—the fact that it can serve as a bridge between worlds. Vatom, Inc., a company created by technology pioneer Eric Pulier, is using the blockchain to create “smart objects,” which, in fiscal terms, are both a new kind of asset class and a way to move value between the virtual world and the actual world. In plainer English, well, that’s where things get a little strange. The truth of the matter is we don’t yet have words for what smart objects make possible.

We’ll explore this in layers.

At the most basic level, a smart object is a digital object with a blockchain layer sitting beneath it. The blockchain layer means the smart object is unique, providing digital objects with authenticity and scarcity. If you have a Vatom-empowered Tom Brady football card, you can be sure it’s the only one of its kind. If you give me your card, now I have it and you don’t. It works, in other words, like a physical object.

Here’s the next level. Say you’re wearing smart glasses walking around New York City and spot a billboard for Coca-Cola with six bottles on it. Point your phone at the billboard and click to buy it, and suddenly one of the Cokes jumps off the billboard and onto your phone. There are now five Cokes on the billboard and one living in a special smart object holding pen on your phone. Two things to note. To get the Coke onto your phone, you didn’t have to download an app or upload a website. Simply point and click and everything else is automatic. Even better, you didn’t just get a digital copy of the Coke on the billboard—you got the actual Coke. There are now five Cokes left on the billboard, as one now lives on your phone. You can walk into a bar and swipe the Coke from your phone to the bartender’s phone. Now the bartender hands you a real Coke. The smart object works like a coupon. Yet something amazing just happened, by trading your digital coke for a real coke, you’ve moved value from the digital world to the physical world.

Digital objects are also mutable. Say, in the Coke example, you didn’t give the drink to a bartender and instead gave it to a friend. Turns out, Coke is running a secret campaign. If you give your Coke to a friend, once you swipe it onto your friend’s phone it becomes two Cokes. Now your friend can redeem one for herself and give one to another friend.

Things get stranger still. Smart objects are AI-enabled, meaning they can learn and have memories. Say you need a new suit. You go into Brooks Brothers and buy one. Upon purchase, you also get a digital copy of the suit. No forms to fill out, it just appears on your phone. Even better, the digital suit comes with a movie that shows the entire history of every thread in the suit. This wasn’t programmed in since the smart suit learned its own history along the way. Why does this matter? Now you have blockchain-backed proof that no part of your garment was constructed using child labor.

Take this one step further. Because of the AI layer, these objects don’t live in one fixed spot. In fact, they’re less like objects and more like another form of life, moving, by their own volition, around the digital world. Say you’re at Microsoft and want to hire a new game designer for a fantasy game. So you design a smart flaming sword that’s built to scrape social media and find individuals who have a passion for fantasy, cryptography, game design, and whatever other skills you need. You find John Smith, a perfect candidate, who happens to be on vacation in the Bahamas. He’s walking down the beach, wearing his smart glasses—which are providing a history of the beach as he strolls along. Suddenly, out of nowhere, a giant flaming sword falls out of the sky and embeds itself in the sand before John’s feet. He tries to pull it out, but it doesn’t budge. Yet the handle glimmers—sixteen numbers wink into existence, then wink out again. But John, because he’s into cryptography, realizes the numbers are actually a puzzle. John solves the puzzle, says the answer aloud, and can now pull the sword from the beach. As he does, the sword turns into a small pink dragon that tells him he’s been selected as a potential game designer for Microsoft and asks if he’s interested in applying for the job.

And we can go on like this for a while. Smart objects don’t just bridge the gap between worlds, they gamify the world. If blockchain is a science-fiction technology that’s become science fact, then smart objects seem to invert this process, turning regular reality back into science fiction.

Material Science and Nanotechnology
In 1870, Thomas Edison had a “materials science” problem. By then, researchers had already figured out that passing electricity through certain metals made them hot enough to turn white and start emitting light. What Edison realized, if he could just find the right material—one that produced minimal waste heat, used little power, yet was durable enough to survive the shock of electricity—he could create the first lightbulb.
