
But that search took a while.

With little more than his intuition as a guide, Edison spent over fourteen months testing over sixteen hundred materials before settling on carbon-coated cotton thread that lasted 14.5 hours. A few years later, he upgraded to carbon-coated bamboo thread, creating a bulb capable of twelve hundred hours. But in 1904, market forces took hold and other innovators got involved. Much brighter and longer lasting tungsten filaments were the result—meaning Edison’s sixteen hundred intuitive experiments produced a suboptimal solution that was gone within decades.

But today, engineers can skip all that bench work and never have to settle for a suboptimal solution. By using silicon chips instead of test tubes to virtually try out new materials, researchers can now do in hours what used to take months or years. In other words, we are in the middle of a materials science revolution.

As the name suggests, materials science is the branch devoted to the discovery and development of new materials. It’s an outgrowth of both physics and chemistry, using the periodic table as its grocery store and the laws of physics as its cookbook. Unfortunately, because that table is vast and its laws complicated, materials has been a historically slow science. The lithium-ion battery, for example, which today powers everything from our smartphones to our autonomous cars, was first proposed in the 1970s, yet couldn’t make it to market until the 1990s, and didn’t begin to reach maturity until the past few years. But this rate of development was too slow for President Obama.

In June 2011, at Carnegie Mellon University, the President announced the Materials Genome Initiative, a nationwide effort to use open source methods and artificial intelligence to double the pace of innovation in materials science. Obama felt this acceleration was critical to America’s global competitiveness, and held the key to solving significant challenges in clean energy, national security, and human welfare.

And it worked.

By using AI to map the hundreds of millions of different possible combinations of elements—hydrogen, boron, lithium, carbon, etc.—the downstream result of Obama’s initiative is an enormous database that allows scientists to play a kind of improv jazz with the periodic table. “Over the last few years,” explains materials scientist Jeff Carbeck, the head of Advanced Materials at Deloitte Consulting, “we’ve been able to take the ten thousand materials we do understand, and, with the help of high-performance computing and quantum mechanics, start to predict properties of new materials that don’t exist yet. [In a few years], if you want a next-generation knee implant, an AI will use this database to screen all the materials available and help choose the ones that are going to be the safest and most reliable.”
Thanks to Obama’s initiative, we have a new kind of map of the physical world. This map allows scientists to combine elements faster than ever before, and is helping them create elements we’ve never seen before. An array of new fabrication tools are further amplifying this process, allowing us to work at altogether new scales and sizes, including the atomic scale, where we’re now building materials one atom at a time. These tools have helped create the metamaterials used in carbon fiber composites for lighter-weight vehicles, advanced alloys for more durable jet engines, and biomaterials to replace human joints. We’re also seeing breakthroughs in energy storage and quantum computing. In robotics, new materials are helping us create the artificial muscles needed for humanoid, soft robots—think Westworldin your world.

Better materials also mean better devices. “If you built a version of today’s smartphone back in 1980,” explains Omkaram Nalamasu, the chief technology officer for Applied Materials, Inc., “it would cost something like $110 million, be fourteen meters tall, and require about two hundred kilowatts of energy… that’s the power of advances in materials [science].”
The most important story in materials might be in solar. Right now, the “conversion efficiency” of the average solar panel—a measure of how much captured sunlight can be turned into electricity—hovers around 16 percent, at a cost of $3 per watt. Perovskite, a light-sensitive crystal and one of our newer new materials, has the potential to get that up to 66 percent, which would double what silicon panels can theoretically muster. Perovskite’s ingredients are also widely available and inexpensive to combine. What do all these factors add up to? Affordable solar energy for everyone.

Nanotechnology is the outer edge of materials science, the point where matter manipulation gets nano-small—that’s a million times smaller than an ant, eight thousand times smaller than a red blood cell, and two-and-a-half times smaller than a strand of DNA. The concept dates to physicist Richard Feynman’s 1959 speech, “There’s Plenty of Room at the Bottom,” but it was K. Eric Drexler’s 1987 book, Engines of Creation, that really put nanotechnology on the map. Drexler described self-replicating nanomachines—meaning very tiny machines that can build other machines. Because these machines are programmable, they can then be directed to produce more of themselves, or more of whatever else you’d like. And because this takes place on an atomic scale, these nanobots can pull apart any kind of material—soil, water, air—atom by atom, and use these now raw materials to construct just about anything. In this world, according to Drexler, a puddle of pond scum can be reorganized into a flawless, multi-carat diamond ring.

Progress has been surprisingly swift since then, with a bevy of nano-products now on the market. Never want to fold clothes again? Nanoscale additives to fabrics help them resist wrinkling and staining. Don’t do windows? Not a problem, nano-films make windows self-cleaning, antireflective, and capable of conducting electricity. Want to add solar to your house? We’ve got nano-coatings that capture the sun’s energy. Nanomaterials make lighter automobiles, airplanes, baseball bats, helmets, bicycles, luggage, power tools—the list goes on. Researchers at Harvard built a nanoscale 3-D printer capable of producing miniature batteries less than one millimeter wide. And if you don’t like those bulky VR goggles, not a problem, researchers are now using nanotech to create smart contact lenses with a resolution six times greater than today’s smartphones.

And even more is coming. Right now, in medicine, drug delivery nanobots are proving especially useful in fighting cancer. Computing is a stranger story, as a bioengineer at Harvard recently stored seven hundred terabytes of data in a single gram of DNA. On the environmental front, scientists can take carbon dioxide from the atmosphere and convert it into super-strong carbon nanofibers for use in manufacturing. If we can do this at scale—powered by solar—a system 10 percent the size of the Sahara Desert could reduce CO2in the atmosphere to pre-industrial levels in about a decade. The applications are endless. And coming fast. Over the next decade, the impact of the very, very small is about to get very, very large. In Part Two, we’ll examine how these developments touch major aspects of society, but before we get there, let’s turn our attention to a special class of materials—the basic components of life: cells, genes, proteins—and see the change they’re bringing to biotechnology.

Biotechnology
The 1970s were good for John Travolta. While the actor had broken through in 1972, he captured the public’s attention with his starring turn in the 1975 TV show Welcome Back, Kotter. But it was playing the protagonist in the three-time Emmy award–nominated made-for-TV movie The Boy in the Plastic Bubblethat cemented him as a real star in 1976.

The movie was based on the life of David Vetter, a boy from Texas who suffered from “X-linked severe combined immunodeficiency,” a genetic disease that destroys the immune system. Living with this condition requires living inside a bubble, a self-contained atmosphere that protects against any and all germs. Everything that passes into the bubble—water, food, clothing—has to first be sterilized. For patients with the disease, simply breathing normal air can be fatal.

About four years before Travolta took his turn in the bubble, an article in Scienceargued that a new form of treatment might hold promise for patients with severe combined immunodeficiency and other genetic diseases. Known as gene therapy, the idea was unusual yet useful. Genetic diseases are caused by mutations in the DNA, so the solution was to find a way to replace that bad DNA with good DNA. Or, in computer terms, debug the system.

But how to get that good DNA into place?
That’s where viruses came into play. These microscopic parasites thrive by attaching themselves to cells. Once there, they inject their own genetic material into those cells, causing the host to replicate the virus’s DNA—like a hijacked assembly line. Gene therapy piggybacks on this process, stripping out the disease-causing portion of a virus’s code and replacing it with good DNA. Once the virus injects the good DNA into the host cell, first the symptoms of the disease disappear, then the disease itself is cured.

While the promise of gene therapy is tremendous, the science was not easy. It took almost two decades for the first treatments to arrive, which is when the trouble started. In 1999, an eighteen-year-old boy named Jesse Gelsinger, with a rare metabolic disorder, took part in a gene therapy drug trial at the University of Pennsylvania. Gelsinger’s condition wasn’t fatal. The combination of an extremely restrictive diet and thirty-two pills a day kept symptoms under control. But the trial had the potential to cure him completely, so he signed up. Four days after receiving the initial injection, Gelsinger wasn’t cured. He was dead. The first recorded death from gene therapy.

More mishaps occurred. Not long after, in a gene therapy trial in France aimed at treating Bubble Boy disease, two out of the ten children involved developed cancer. Immediately, the FDA suspended all gene therapy trials until further notice. The dotcom crash in 2001 was the killing blow, as money from the exploding Web had been fueling gene therapy startups. This was the dank pit of the deceptive phase, from which many were convinced there would be no escape.

But escape did come—in the form of more science.

Even though gene therapy faded from sight, research continued. And continued. Then, on April 18, 2019, it burst back into view with a staggering announcement: Bubble Boy disease had been cured. Ten babies born with the condition, born, technically, without immune systems, had been treated. It wasn’t that their symptoms were better. It wasn’t that their condition was manageable. Before treatment, they didn’t have immune systems; afterward, they did. The disease was gone.

Other diseases are not far behind. With over fifty gene therapy drugs in the final phases of clinical trials, we are starting to see cures for incurable conditions. Yet gene therapy is merely a subset of a larger shift in biotechnology.

Biotechnology is about using biology as technology. It’s turning the fundamental components of life—our genes, proteins, cells—into tools for manipulating life. In a very real sense, this story starts with the human body, which is a collection of 30 to 40 trillion cells, the function of which determines our health. Each of these cells contains 3.2 billion letters from your mother, and 3.2 billion letters from your father—this is your DNA, your genome, the software that codes for “you.” It’s your hair color, eye color, height, a significant chunk of your personality, propensity to disease, lifespan, and so forth.

Until recently, it’s been difficult to “read” those letters, and even tougher to understand what they do. This was the goal of the Human Genome Project, a $100 million ten-year effort completed in 2001. Since then, though, the price has plummeted, outpacing Moore’s Law by a factor of three. Today, sequencing a human genome takes a few days and costs less than $1000. A few years from now, companies like Illumina are promising to do the same in an hour and for $100.

Why does cheaper, faster genomic sequencing matter? It’s a healthcare gamechanger. Consider that there are a few main ways to fix a cell. Gene therapy replaces defective or missing DNA inside a cell, gene-editing techniques like CRISPR-Cas9 allow you to repair the DNA inside that cell, and stem cell therapies replace that cell entirely. Thanks to faster genomic sequencing, all of these interventions are now hitting the market.
