
CRISPR-Cas9, for example, has become our leading weapon in the fight against genetic diseases. Technically, it’s an engineering tool that allows us to target precise locations in the gene code and then rewrite that DNA. Want to remove the string of DNA that produces muscular dystrophy? Simple. Just target that spot in the genome, unleash CRISPR-Cas9, and snip, snip, snip—problem solved.

More importantly, CRISPR is cheap, fast, and easy to use. Over the past five years, it’s become the only way to edit a genome. Most recently, scientists at Harvard unveiled CRISPR 2.0, a next generation editor that’s extremely precise. It can target and change a single letter in a single string of DNA. What good is a single letter out of 3.2 billion? “Of more than 50,000 genetic changes currently known to be associated with disease in humans,” David Liu, the Harvard chemical biologist who led the work, told the LA Times, “32,000 of those are caused by the simple swap of one base pair for another.”
Human germline engineering is another CRISPR application, which enables editing the DNA of an embryo itself—think designer babies. While germline engineering remains controversial—now think Gattaca—it could mean ridding families of scourges like cystic fibrosis and sickle cell anemia, making it a medical advance as potentially important to this century as vaccines were to the last.

There’s also stem cells to consider. One of the body’s main repair mechanisms, stem cells have the remarkable ability to turn into any other type of cell, which is why the body uses them to repair worn-out tissue. Stem cell therapy works the same way.

Currently, there are only a handful of approved stem cell therapies in the United States, but this doesn’t account for the incredible amount of work being done in labs all over the globe. Researchers are pioneering treatments for cancer, diabetes, arthritis, heart disease, macular degeneration, skeletal tissue repair, pain management, neurological diseases, auto-immune conditions, burns and other skin diseases, blindness, and much more.

What’s more critical here is it’s not just stem cells or gene therapy or CRISPR—it’s the combined power of all these techniques, their convergence, that holds the most potential.

Perhaps the biggest consequence of this convergence will be individually customized medicine or what’s called “N-of-1 medicine.” In N-of-1 medicine, every treatment you receive has been specifically designed for you—your genome, transcriptome, proteome, microbiome, and all the rest. It’s a level of preventative care not seen before. You’ll know the foods, supplements, and exercise regimen that are perfect for you. You’ll understand which microbes inhabit your gut, and what diet keeps them healthy and fit. You’ll know which diseases you’re most likely to develop and be able to take steps to prevent them. It’s an era of incredibly personalized medical care, where the tools of life have become tools for the preservation of life, and many of the diseases that plagued earlier generations have begun to fade from memory.CHAPTER FOUR The Acceleration of Acceleration
The only constant is change, and the pace of change is accelerating—this is the argument we’ve been making. This increasing pace is the result of three overlapping amplifiers. First, the exponential growth of computing power and all the technologies explored in the last two chapters that are riding atop this growth. Next, accelerating individual technologies are converging with other accelerating technologies, producing overlapping waves of change that threaten to wash away almost everything in their path—or what happens when AI and robots converge and hundreds of millions of jobs disappear.

The final amplifier we want to explore is an additional set of forces, seven in total. Each of these is a by-product of converging exponentials, a “second order effect” in the technical parlance, that acts as an additional innovation accelerant. While each force functions independently, their real effect is combinatory. Think of them as steps in a mathematical equation, an algorithm designed (in a sense by all of us) to increase the rate of change in the world and the scale of its impact. Each step acts upon every other, each one amping up the next, all of them together accelerating our acceleration, producing more change in a year than our grandparents experienced in a lifetime.

Over the course of this chapter, we’re going to explore these forces independently, while Part Two of this book will look at their impact collectively, seeing how these intersections will reshape our lives over the next decade. But, for now, let’s take things one force at a time, starting, in fact, with time itself.

Force #1: Saved Time
In “The Original Macintosh,” a collection of online anecdotes about the creation of that fabled machine, Apple computer scientist Andy Hertzfeld recounted a typical Steve Jobs story. It’s typical, because, in this story, like in so many others, Jobs was frustrated.

The issue was speed.

The first Mac was supposed to be a very fast computer. And it was, at least on paper. Built around Motorola’s 68000 microprocessor, the system was actually ten times faster than the Apple II. But it had limited RAM, making it necessary to upload extra info via floppy discs. And this was especially true during startup—which would occasionally drag on for minutes.

The delay was driving Jobs nuts. One day, he stormed into engineer Larry Kenyon’s cubicle with a typical Jobsian demand: “The Macintosh boots too slowly,” he said. “You’ve got to make it go faster.”
Kenyon listened patiently. He’d heard it before. Once again, he told Jobs all the various ways they could make the computer speed up. Tinker with this, toggle with that. But, unfortunately, all of that tinker-toggling took place after startup.

Jobs wasn’t pacified.

“You know,” he continued, “I’ve been thinking. How many people are going to use this Macintosh? A million? No, more than that. In a few years, I bet five million.… Well, let’s say you can shave ten seconds off of the boot time. Multiply that by five million users and that’s fifty million seconds, every single day. Over a year, that’s probably dozens of lifetimes. So if you make it boot ten seconds faster, you’ve saved over a dozen lives. That’s really worth it, don’t you think?”
Over the coming months, they did manage to shave ten seconds off of the boot time. And Jobs wasn’t wrong: Those extra seconds did manage to save people time. But this wasn’t an isolated incident. There’s a pattern here, as “saved time” turns out to be one of the major benefits of technology.

Put differently, it’s not just startup times that have shrunk.

Consider the search engine, one of our most widely used technologies. Prior to its arrival, if you wanted to know something, you went to a library—which took time. How much? Back in 2014, University of Michigan behavioral economist Yan Chen gave participants a bunch of questions, provided half of them with internet access and the other half with a library. Then she started the clock. Online inquiries averaged seven minutes an answer, offline required twenty-two, meaning every time we type a query into a search engine, technology saves us fifteen minutes. If we apply a little Jobsian logic to this, simply taking the 3.5 billion queries a day processed by Google, we find that Google alone saves us 52.4 billion minutes a day. That is to say, Jobs was right—that’s a lot of lifetimes.

And the same can be said about the time saved via online shopping, entertainment, and all the rest. Buying a watch used to require, you know, going to the store. Watching a movie meant riding in a car to a theater. Booking a plane ticket once included telephone calls, hold times, and sometimes, flesh-and-blood humans. Not anymore, and this has consequences.

Innovation demands free time. A few centuries back, one major reason the world changed so slowly was we lacked the time to make a difference. Most of our day was spent on basic necessities: growing or catching food, carrying water, sewing, darning, scrubbing, etc. Yet, as Jobs pointed out, technology solves this problem.

Over the past hundred years, labor-saving devices—a term that once meant electricity, running water, and appliances—have managed to reduce housework, our agreed upon least favorite activity, from fifty-eight hours a week in 1900 to 1.5 in 2011. For entrepreneurs and inventors, this is like getting a week’s worth of work back, for free, every month, simply by being alive.

What this actually means is that saved time isn’t just a benefit of technology, it’s also a driver of innovation—another force accelerating our acceleration. And the time we’re saving today pales in comparison to what tomorrow will bring. In the late 1800s, New York to Chicago was four weeks by stagecoach. A few decades later, trains reduced that to roughly four days. Airplanes shrunk it to four hours. But a few years hence, the Hyperloop will be doing that trip in under an hour, and virtual reality and avatars have the potential to take that to zero.

Sensors add intelligence to our appliances, but they also add hours to our lives. Consider that soon, when you run out of coffee, your refrigerator will notice and order more. A blockchain smart contract will place that order and an Amazon drone will bring it to your house. The only time you notice you’re out of coffee is when you’re moving the bag from your outside delivery box to your kitchen cabinet. Of course, pretty soon your very own butler-bot will do the coffee moving for you.

Where the biggest advantages will start to accumulate is in our working lives. In fields ranging from material science to medical research, by allowing us to test new compounds inside a computer rather than a laboratory, AI collapses discovery times from years to weeks. Quantum computing does more of the same, only faster. 3-D printing removes months and months from product fabrication, building construction… well, you get the picture.

