All of this has an impact on the rate of innovation. As this bonanza of extra hours continues to pile up, inventors, entrepreneurs, those proverbial gals and guys in the garage, will get far more time to experiment, fail, pivot, fail again, pivot again, and, eventually, get it right. Technology has shrunk innovation development times and expanded the time innovators can devote to development. It’s an accelerating feedback loop of acceleration—but it’s not the only one.

Force #2: Availability of Capital
It was one of the greatest one-two combo-punches in history. In 1957, the Soviets landed the first punch when they launched Sputnik 1 into orbit. Afterward, all hell broke loose. Edward Teller, father of the hydrogen bomb, called it “the greatest defeat for America since Pearl Harbor.” Senator Mike Mansfield warned: “What is at stake is nothing less than our survival.” But the Soviets went even further, following up that first punch with another, just four years later, when Yuri Gagarin became the first person to orbit the Earth. In America, these two blows caught everyone on the chin, deepening the chill of the Cold War and igniting the space race.

So how did we fight back? With cash. A lot of cash.

A few months later, President Kennedy responded by creating the Apollo program, pouring 2.2 percent of the US GDP into the aerospace industry. This influx of greenbacks supercharged an era of innovation that took only eight years to go from Alan Shepard’s suborbital hop to Neil Armstrong’s lunar footprints.

Of course it did.

Nothing accelerates technological development like money. More bucks, more Buck Rogers. More cash means more people experimenting, failing, and, eventually, driving breakthroughs. And this brings us to our next force: an unprecedented rise in the availability of capital.

Today, it is easier for innovators to find funding than ever before. And this abundance is financing even more innovation—more moonshots, more crazy ideas, just plain more. Money might not make the world go round, but it certainly makes the future faster. So where is all this cash coming from?
Digital technology.

While new technology has always meant new ways to make money, digital technology gave us a critical variation on this theme: new ways to raisemoney. Crowdfunding was the first of these and represents, in terms of dollars spent, the low end of our capital availability spectrum.

For those unfamiliar, crowdfunding is pretty straightforward. The “crowd” in question refers to the billions of people currently online. The funding part means asking that crowd for money. Typically, a crowdfunder presents their product or service to the world, usually via a video posted to a dedicated site like Kickstarter, and asks for money in one of four forms: as a loan (technically peer-to-peer lending), as an equity investment, in exchange for a reward (e.g., a T-shirt), or as an advanced purchase of the proposed product or service.

And it can add up to a lot of money.

The very first crowdfunding project took place in 1997, when the British prog-rock band Marillion raised $60,000 through online donations to finance a US tour. Twenty years later, the size of that market had grown considerably, reaching, by 2015, a worldwide total of $34 billion. And while Marillion had to invent the entire back-end process that drove their campaign, today’s entrepreneurs can choose from any of the six hundred different crowdfunding platforms available in North America alone.

Kickstarter, for example, one of the most popular reward-based platforms, has launched over 450,000 projects, with over $4.4 billion pledged to the site. It has also sped up the startup process considerably. The most successful Kickstarter campaign to date, a smart watch called Pebble Time, raised just over $20 million in little over a month—something that would have taken years to accomplish in Marillion’s day.

And like many other digital platforms, crowdfunding is riding atop Moore’s Law and experiencing double-digit growth. By 2025, experts project the total amount of money moving through the ecosystem will rise to $300 billion. Yet the biggest development isn’t in the amount of cash involved; rather, it’s who gets access to that cash.

Peer-to-peer microlending sites like Kiva have brought available capital to parts of the world where investors have long turned a blind eye, while reward-based programs have given us everything from difficult to fund ocean cleanup technologies to pie-in-the-sky breakthroughs such as Oculus Rift. By democratizing access to capital, crowdfunding allows anyone, anywhere, with a good idea and access to a smartphone, to seek the cash they need to get going. It’s why Goldman Sachs described crowdfunding as “potentially the most disruptive of all the new models of finance.”
If crowdfunding is the new way for entrepreneurs to raise capital, then venture funding, our next category, represents the old. Yet the old has always played a large role in accelerating the new. Over the past five decades, we have venture capital to thank for Apple, Amazon, Google, and Uber, among many others, making it not just a force accelerating our acceleration, but one of the foundational drivers of the process.

In the United States, venture funding rose from $8.1 billion in 1995 to $61.4 billion in 2016. And then came the banner year of 2017. In the US, investments reached $99.5 billion (the second highest total in history, with the highest being $119 billion spent in 2000, during the dot-com boom). But the bigger story was the rest of the world. Asia, a relatively new player, peaked at $81 billion, while European VCs set an all-time high: $21 billion.

More importantly, large chunks of this money are flowing directly into technology, greasing the wheels of innovation even more. VC investment in serious technology is especially prevalent. Blockchain has seen serious increases in recent years, as have voice-activated interface technologies (like Alexa). AI is also on the rise, with investments climbing from $5.4 billion in 2017 to $9.3 billion in 2018. And biotechnology experienced a similar boom, rising from $11.8 billion in 2017 to $14.4 billion in 2018.

Yet, when it comes to raising staggering sums of money in an eyeblink, little can compare with initial coin offerings (or ICOs). Emerging out of the cryptocurrency realm, ICOs are a new form of crowdfunding underpinned by blockchain technology. Startups can raise capital by creating and selling their own virtual currency—called either “tokens” or “coins.” These tokens give you ownership in the company (or, at least, voting power) and the promise of future profits, or can take the form of a security, representing fractional ownership of a piece of real estate or the like.

ICOs have become famous for raising money quickly, in very large amounts, and under some strange circumstances. Filecoin, for example, is a blockchain-based decentralized data storage network that allows participants to lend out the extra storage space on their servers in exchange for Filecoins (the name of their token). When it launched its ICO in August 2017, the project raised $257 million in only thirty days. The first $135 million was raised in the first hour alone. Yet they didn’t even have a working product.

Far from an isolated incident, one month prior to Filecoin’s success, Tezos, a self-governing currency (billed as a Bitcoin-update), raised $232 million in just thirteen days. Then there’s the EOS token, one of the most popular cryptocurrencies trading today, which brought in a record-breaking $4 billion from its yearlong ICO.

And these token trends are not slowing down. The number of ICOs per quarter has also ballooned, from roughly a dozen during the first quarter of 2017, to over a hundred by the last quarter of 2017, and there’s been even more activity since.

Yet, forget ICOs for a moment. When it comes to the mother lode of deployable capital, the real heavyweight title belongs to sovereign wealth funds (SWFs). These investment behemoths hold an estimated $8.5 trillionin assets. That’s trillion, with a “T.”
Traditionally, SWFs have invested money in public equities, infrastructure and natural resources, but as the economic promise of startups continues to climb, these funds are increasingly hunting outsized returns on entrepreneurial shores. In 2017, according to the Sovereign Wealth Lab research center at Madrid’s IE Business School, forty-two SWF deals valued at around $16.2 billion flowed in this direction.

And this pales beside Softbank CEO Masayoshi Son’s mega-fund, the “Vision Fund.” Driven by his belief in the “Singularity”—Ray Kurzweil’s idea that developments in AI will lead to unprecedented technological growth and unfathomable changes for civilization—Son decided to try to accelerate this process.

“I totally believe [in] this concept,” he said in a recent speech. “In next thirty years, this will become a reality. I truly believe it’s coming, that’s why I’m in a hurry—to aggregate the cash, to invest.”
And aggregate cash is what he did. The Vision Fund got started in September 2016, when Mohammed bin Salman, then the deputy crown prince of Saudi Arabia, flew to Tokyo in search of ways to diversify his country’s oil-dominated investment portfolio. There, Son pitched his idea: build the largest fund in history and use it to finance technology startups. Less than an hour later, bin Salman agreed to become the cornerstone investor. “Forty-five minutes, $45 billion,” Son later said on The David Rubenstein Show. “One billion dollars per minute.”
