Quickly thereafter, companies like Apple, Foxconn, and Qualcomm joined in. And that only brings us to today. According to Son, the $100 billion Vision Fund is just “the first step.” He’s already announced that he’s working to establish a second Vision Fund in the next few years. “We will briskly expand the scale. Vision Funds 2, 3 and 4 will be established every two to three years. We are creating a mechanism to increase our funding ability from 10 trillion yen to 20 trillion yen to 100 trillion yen.”
Any way you slice it, that’s a lot of yen. Add it to the pile already created by crowdfunding, venture capital, and initial coin offerings, and you start to see this availability of capital as much more than just the thrum of business. It’s a technology turboboost that’s turning dollars and cents into ideas and innovation at a record-setting pace.

Force #3: Demonetization
In the last chapter, we introduced the Six Ds, or the developmental stages through which all exponential technologies pass. We introduced these stages as temporal markers, ways to keep track of where a tech is today and where it’s heading tomorrow. Here, we want to return to one of those stages—demonetization—to explore how it’s also acting as a force for acceleration.

Let’s start with the simple fact that innovation demands research. So what’s better than having millions of research dollars at your disposal? How about having those millions of dollars stretch a million times further.

This is what demonetization provides.

In 2001, as we learned last chapter, sequencing the entire human genome took nine months to complete and cost $100 million. Today, Ilumina’s latest generation sequencer can do that in an hour and for $100—or 6,480 times faster and a million times cheaper. As a result, if you’re working in genomics, then your government research grants now go much further than ever before, accelerating insights and catalyzing breakthroughs.

And what is true for gene sequencing is true in dozens of fields. Tools once accessible to only the wealthiest companies and the largest government labs are now available at near-zero prices to just about anyone. The obvious example is the supercomputer in your pocket. That would have been a multimillion-dollar machine a few decades back. In Abundance, we calculated the amount of technology—music players, video cameras, calculators, etc.—that came free of charge inside what was then a fairly expensive smartphone ($800 or so) at over a million 2012 dollars. Today, the average $50 smartphone found in Mumbai has all the same equipment. Of course it does. Sensors like cameras, accelerometers, and GPS have shrunk a thousandfold in size and a millionfold in price.

Not too long ago, robots were the sole province of big business. Today you can buy one to vacuum your home for less than you’d spend on a vacuum cleaner. We’re also seeing the electricity needed to power those robots drop in price. Renewables, according to a 2019 report by the International Renewable Energy Agency, now account for one-third of the world’s power, and their cost has dropped below coal. At the current rate of decline, solar is five doublings away from being able to produce enough power to meet all of our energy needs. Eighteen months later, after solar doubles again, we’ll meet 200 percent of our energy needs with this tech alone. We’re heading toward a total demonetization of the power that powers the planet. Since all innovators require power, in itself this will further accelerate the rate of change in the world.

But to really increase that rate of change, accelerated innovation alone won’t get it done. Someone always needs to bring these innovations to market. And thanks to demonetization, nearly every basic business requirement—energy, education, manufacturing, transportation, communication, insurance, and labor—is growing exponentially cheaper. More bucks means more Buck Rogers. But demonetization provides much more bang for that buck—which is, after all, how you get to warp speed.

Force #4: More Genius
In 1913, Cambridge mathematician G. H. Hardy received an unusual letter in the mail. “Dear Sir,” it began, “I beg to introduce myself as a clerk in the Accounts Department of the Port Trust Office at Madras on a salary of 20 pounds per annum.” The letter went on to offer nine pages of mathematical ideas, including 120 different results in numbers theory, infinite series, continued fractions, and improper integrals. “Being poor,” the letter concluded, “if you are convinced there is anything of value I would like to have my theorems published.…” It was signed S. Ramanujan.

Now, it isn’t unusual for a Cambridge mathematician to receive equations in the mail, but this letter piqued Hardy’s interest. Although the math started out in familiar calculus, it quickly went in startling directions, reaching conclusions that, as Hardy later remarked, “must be true because, if they were not true, no one would have the imagination to invent them.”
Thus began one of the wildest tales in math. Born in Madras in 1887, Srinivasa Ramanujan’s mother was a housewife, his father a clerk in a sari shop. While he showed an early aptitude for numbers, Srinivasa had no formal training or real access to teachers. He also had little patience for academia. In college, he failed every class but math, but even his math professors couldn’t understand his work. He flunked out before turning twenty and spent the next four years in extreme poverty. Finally, in desperation, at age twenty-three, he wrote that letter to Hardy.

Confusion—that was Hardy’s first reaction. He showed the letter to a colleague, the mathematician John Littlewood, trying to figure out if it was a joke. It didn’t take long for them to figure out it wasn’t a joke. The philosopher Bertrand Russell ran into the duo the next day, finding them, as he later wrote, “in a state of wild excitement because they believe they have found a second Newton, a Hindu clerk in Madras making 20 pounds a year.”
Hardy brought Ramanujan to Cambridge. Five years later, he was elected to the Royal Society, making him both one of their youngest members in history and the first from India. Before dying four years later of tuberculosis, Ramanujan contributed over 3,900 formulae to math, including solutions to problems long considered unsolvable. He also made critical contributions to computer science, electrical engineering, and physics. Resoundingly, he’s considered one of history’s great minds, an unabashed genius. But of all his accomplishments, perhaps most amazing is the fact that he was noticed at all.

Until recently, most genius was squandered. Even if you were born with incredible talents, the chances of you being able to use those abilities were limited at best. Gender, class, and culture mattered. If you weren’t born wealthy and male, your chances of getting more than a third-grade education were slim to none. And even if you did manage to get enough education to unlock your talent, being recognized for that talent, being able to use it to make a difference—as Ramanujan discovered—was no simple feat.

While IQ isn’t the only metric for genius, the standard distribution of the Stanford-Binet scale shows that only 1 percent of the population qualifies. Technically, this makes for 75 million geniuses in the world. But how many of them actually get to make an impact?
Until recently, not that many.

One of the by-products of our hyper-connected world is that these extraordinary individuals will no longer be casualties of class, country, or culture. We don’t tend to think about opportunity costs surrounding lost brilliance, but they’re arguably substantial. Yet, thanks to our increasing interconnectivity and the exponential explosion of networks, all of these barriers to discovering genius are starting to fall. The results will be more breakthrough ideas, faster innovation, and greater acceleration.

And this is only half of the story.

While genius may be a rare phenomenon, we are starting to understand its underlying neurobiology. There are two major strains to this work, a near-term and a far-term approach. In the near term, research into what might be called “the neurological basis for innovation”—that is, creativity, learning, motivation, and the state of consciousness known as flow—have allowed us to amplify these critical skills like never before.

Consider the nine-dot problem, a classic test of creative problem-solving. Connect nine dots with four lines in ten minutes without lifting your pencil from the paper. Under normal circumstances, fewer than 5 percent of the population can pull this off. In a study run at the University of Sydney in Australia, none of their test subjects did. But then the researchers took a second group of subjects, and used transcranial direct stimulation to artificially mimic many of the changes produced during flow. What happened? Forty percent solved the problem—a record result.

The long-term approach takes a similar tack, using technology to improve cognitive function, only soon the technology will be permanently implanted in our brains. Entrepreneurs such as Elon Musk, who started a company called Neuralink, and Braintree cofounder Bryan Johnson, who founded Kernel, alongside established companies like Facebook, have been pouring hundreds of millions of dollars into next-generation brain implants. The implants have been dubbed “neuro-prosthetics” or “brain-computer interfaces,” and the goal, as Johnson explains, “is not about AI versus human. Rather, it’s about creating HI, or ‘human intelligence,’ the merger of humans and AI.”
Everybody agrees that Cyborg Nation is still a long ways off, but progress is moving faster than many suspect. We already have brain-computer interfaces that can help stroke victims regain control over paralyzed limbs, and others that help quadriplegics use computers simply by thinking. Sensory replacement devices are already here (think cochlear implants), and full-scale visual prosthetics—that final horizon—are coming this decade.

Memory is the latest frontier. In 2017, USC neuroscientist Dong Song borrowed the seizure-control neural implants used by epilepsy patients. By repurposing them to stimulate the neuronal circuits involved in learning and retention, Song produced a 30 percent boost in memory. In the near term, this is a new treatment for Alzheimer’s; in the long run, it’s brain-enhancement for everyone.

Ray Kurzweil famously pegged the development of the full cyborg to the middle 2030s. Kurzweil’s averaging an 86 percent success rate for his predictions, but even if he’s off by a decade, with the progress we’re already seeing in everything from networks to neuroscience, the end result is more genius, more breakthroughs, and more acceleration.

Force #5: Communications Abundance
Our next innovation accelerator is the power of the network—a tool that allows minds to connect with other minds, exchange ideas, and spark invention. In Abundance, we explored how the rise of the coffeehouse in eighteenth-century Europe became a critical driver of the Enlightenment. These egalitarian establishments drew people from all walks of life, allowing novel notions to meet and mingle and “have sex,”as author Matt Ridley famously wrote. By becoming a hub for information sharing—a network—coffee shops were foundational in driving progress forward.

