Not surprisingly, we see similar network effects in cities, which are essentially coffee shops writ large. Two-thirds of all growth takes place in urban environments because population density leads to the cross-pollination of ideas. This is why Santa Fe Institute physicist Geoffrey West discovered that doubling the size of a city produces a 15 percent increase in income, wealth, and innovation (as measured by the number of new patents).

But just as the coffeehouse pales in comparison to the city; so does the city pale in comparison to the globe. In 2010, roughly one-quarter of the Earth’s population, some 1.8 billion people, were connected to the internet. By 2017, that penetration had reached 3.8 billion people, or about half the globe. And over the next half-dozen years, we are going to wire up the rest of humanity, adding 4.2 billion new minds to the global conversation. Soon, all eight billion of us, every single human, will be networked together at gigabit speeds.

If network size, density, and fluidity have turned cities into the best transformation engines we’ve yet managed to create, then the fact that we are about to link the entire globe into a single network means the whole planet is just a few years away from becoming the largest innovation lab in history.

Force #6: New Business Models
Traditionally, innovation means the discovery of breakthrough technologies or the creation of new products or services. But this definition doesn’t capture some of the most potent innovation taking place today: the creation of new business models.

A business model is the systems and processes a company uses to generate value. For most of history, these models were remarkably stable, dominated by a few key ideas, upgraded by a few major variations on these themes. “The basic rules of the game for creating and capturing economic value were once fixed in place for years, even decades, as companies tried to execute the same business model better than competitors did,” explains a 2015 article in the McKinsey Quarterly
In the twentieth century, this added up to around one major business revolution per decade. The 1920s, for example, gave us “bait and hook” models, where customers are lured in with a low-cost initial product (the bait, say, a free razor) and then forced to buy endless refills (the hook, aka: razor blade refills). In the 1950s, it was the “franchise models” pioneered by McDonald’s; in the 1960s we got “hypermarkets” like Walmart. But with the arrival of the internet in the 1990s, business model reinvention entered a period of radical growth.

In less than two decades, we’ve seen network effects birth new platforms in record time, bitcoin and blockchain undercut existing “trusted third party” financial models, and crowdfunding and ICOs upend the traditional ways capital is raised. What do all of these new models share? By significantly shortening the distance between “I’ve got a neat idea” and “I run a billion-dollar business,” these models are more than an upgrade to our systems and processes, they’re actually another force for acceleration.

More importantly, the scale of disruption is increasing. What began as accelerating and converging technologies has become accelerating and converging markets, meaning the business model changes of the last few decades are nowhere near the changes that are coming. But this doesn’t mean we’re blind to the future. We can now see seven emerging models that could end up defining business over the next few decades. Each is a revolutionary new way of creating value; each is a force for acceleration.

The Crowd Economy:This includes crowdsourcing, crowdfunding, ICOs, leveraged assets, and staff-on-demand—essentially, all the developments that leverage the billions of people already online and the billions coming online. All have revolutionized the way we do business. Just consider leveraged assets, which allow companies to scale at speed. Airbnb has become the largest “hotel chain” in the world, yet they don’t own a single hotel room. They leverage (that is, rent out) the assets (spare bedrooms) of the crowd. These models also lean on staff-on-demand, which provides a company with the agility needed to adapt to a rapidly changing environment. Sure, this once meant call centers in India, but today it’s everything from micro-task laborers behind Amazon’s Mechanical Turk on the low end to Kaggle’s data scientist-on-demand service on the high end.

The Free/Data Economy:This is the platform version of the “bait and hook” model, essentially baiting the customer with free access to a cool service (like Facebook) and then making money off the data gathered about that customer (also like Facebook). It also includes all the developments spurred by the big data revolution, which is allowing us to exploit micro-demographics like never before.

The Smartness Economy:In the late 1800s, if you wanted a good idea for a new business, all that was required was to take an existing tool, say a drill or a washboard, and add electricity to it—thus creating a power drill or a washing machine. In his excellent book The Inevitable, author and Wiredcofounder Kevin Kelly points out that we’re about to see an updated version of this economy, with AI replacing electricity. In other words, take any existing tool, and add a layer of smartness. So cell phones became smartphones and stereo speakers became smart speakers and cars become autonomous cars.

Closed-Loop Economies:In nature, nothing is ever wasted. The detritus of one species always becomes the foundation for the survival of another species. Human attempts to mimic these entirely waste-free systems have been dubbed “biomimicry” (if you’re talking about designing a new kind of product) or “cradle-to-cradle” (if you’re talking about designing a new kind of city) or, more simply, “closed-loop economies.” A simple example is the company Plastic Bank, which allows anyone to pick up waste plastic and drop it off at a “plastic bank.” The collector is then paid for the “trash” in anything from cash to WiFi time, while the plastic bank sorts the material and sells it to the appropriate recycler—thus closing an open loop in the life cycle of plastic.

Decentralized Autonomous Organizations:At the convergence of blockchain and AI sits a radically new kind of company—one with no employees, no bosses, and nonstop production. A set of preprogrammed rules determines how the company operates, and computers do the rest. A fleet of autonomous taxis, for example, with a blockchain-backed smart contracts layer, could run itself 24-7, including driving to the repair shop for maintenance, without any human involvement.

Multiple World Models:We no longer live in only one place. We have real-world personae and online personae, and this delocalized existence is only going to expand. With the rise of augmented reality and virtual reality, we’re introducing more layers to this equation. You’ll have avatars for work and avatars for play, and all of these versions of ourselves are opportunities for new businesses. Consider, for example, the multimillion-dollar economy that sprung up around the very first virtual world, Second Life. People were paying other people to design digital clothes and digital houses for their digital avatars. Every time we add a new layer to the digital strata, we’re also adding an entire economy built upon that layer, meaning we are now conducting our business in multiple worlds at once.

Transformation Economy:The Experience Economy was about the sharing of experiences—so Starbucks went from being a coffee franchise to a “third place,” that is, neither home nor work, but a “third place” in which to live your life. Buying a cup of coffee became an experience, a caffeinated theme park of sorts. The next iteration of this idea is the Transformation Economy, where you’re not just paying for an experience, you’re paying to have your life transformed by this experience. Early versions of this can be seen in the rise of “transformational festivals” like Burning Man, or fitness companies like CrossFit, where the experience is generally bad (you work out in old warehouses), but the transformation is great (the person you become after three months of working out in those warehouses).

What all this tells us is that business as usual is becoming business unusual. And for existing companies, as Harvard’s Clayton Christensen explains, this is no longer optional: “Most [organizations] think the key to growth is developing new technologies and products. But often this is not so. To unlock the next wave of growth, companies must embed these innovations in a disruptive new business model.”
And for those of us on the outside of these disruptive models, our experience will be better, cheaper, faster. Bettermeaning new business models do what all business models do—solve problems for people in the real world betterthan anyone else. Cheaperis obvious. With demonetization running rampant, customers—and that means all of us—are expecting more for less. But the real shift is the final shift: faster. New business models are no longer forces for stability and security. To compete in today’s accelerated climate, these models are designed for speed and agility. Most importantly, none of this is in any danger of slowing down.

Force #7: Longer Lives
Computers run our world and algorithms run computers, which begs the question: Where do algorithms come from? Fear of poetry, that’s where. Fear of the maddening influence of poetry.

Ada Lovelace was born in 1815, in London, the daughter of the infamous genius poet, Lord Byron. When Byron deserted the family before Ada was a teenager, her mother took charge of her education. A very intelligent woman, Lady Byron hired tutors for her daughter, particularly emphasizing math and science skills—which was a fairly radical step at a time when women were not really allowed into either profession. But Ada’s mother had an ulterior motive. She was absolutely convinced it was the arts, and specifically poetry, that had driven her husband, Lord Byron, insane. Lady Byron was worried the condition might be hereditary and thus steered her daughter away from anything that might bring on such troubles.

The tutoring paid off. In 1833, when Ada was seventeen, her life took a turn for the computational. It was then that she met Charles Babbage, who held the same chair at Cambridge University that had been once occupied by Isaac Newton and would later belong to Stephen Hawking. After learning of her love of math, Babbage invited Ada and her mother to see his “difference engine,” his steam-powered calculating machine.

Stunned by what she saw, Ada was determined to understand it. She got a copy of the machine’s blueprints from Babbage. And she studied. And studied. And when Babbage created the next version of the difference engine, this time renamed the “analytical engine,” Ada was ready. The analytical engine was the concept for the world’s first programmable computer, only this one powered by steam. Luigi Menabrea, an Italian engineer, had written a paper about Babbage’s idea—in French. Ada decided to translate it into English and, at the urging of Babbage himself, add her own ideas to the mix.

Which is exactly what she did. But Ada’s ideas included a new idea, a novel way for the analytical engine to perform calculations. Ada Lovelace wrote the world’s first published computer program—our first algorithm. Unfortunately, maybe it was the strain of her discoveries, maybe it was just bad luck, but not long after she finished the translation, Ada fell ill. The world’s first computer programmer and one of the most interesting minds in history was dead by age thirty-six.

And this raises a second question: How many of us die before we’re done? What might Ada Lovelace or Albert Einstein or Steve Jobs have accomplished with an additional thirty years of healthy life? It’s ironic that as we reach our later years, when we have the most knowledge, the sharpest skills, and the greatest number of fruitful relationships, old age takes us out of the game. This brings us to our final accelerating force, which is an attempt to solve this problem: the extended healthy human lifespan.

Extending the healthy human lifespan means increasing the number of years we’re operating at peak capacity and capable of making the greatest contribution to society. It’s the ability to chase our dreams for a much longer period of time. How much longer?
Two hundred thousand years ago, the average caveperson hit puberty around age thirteen, and had children not long after. By the time most of our ancestors were in their mid-twenties, their children were having children. Once that happened, since food was scarce and precious, the best thing you could do to ensure the survival of your lineage was not steal a meal from your grandkids. Thus evolution built in a fail-safe—a twenty-five-year (average) lifespan.

In the millennia that followed, little changed. By the Middle Ages, lifespan had crept up to thirty-one. By the end of the nineteenth century, we broke forty for the first time. It was at the turn of the twentieth that real acceleration emerged. Everything from the discovery of germ theory and the creation of antibiotics, to the implementation of better sanitation and the increased availability of clean water, radically improved childhood mortality. In 1900, 30 percent of all deaths in the United States were children under five. By 1999, it was 1.4. In parallel, the green revolution and better transportation networks increased average caloric intake, thus increasing lifespan yet again. The end result was a net gain of nearly thirty years, with average lifespan hitting seventy-six by the turn of the millennium.
