
Since then, our ability to recognize and treat the two largest killers—cardiac disease and cancer—has us living routinely into our eighties. And when we tackle neurodegenerative disease, research shows we can expect average lifespan to reach and perhaps exceed one hundred years. But many people believe we’re not stopping there.

Convergence is fueling this conviction. The intersection of AI, cloud computing, quantum computing, sensors, massive data sets, biotechnology, and nanotechnology is producing a plethora of new healthcare tools. A dizzying array of entrepreneurial companies have started leveraging these tools to commercialize lifespan extension.

The first time most heard about these efforts was in September of 2013, when Google (now Alphabet) announced its latest startup, Calico. Headlines across the country proclaimed that the tech giant was squaring off against death itself. “Google’s New Project to Solve Death” shouted Time; “Google Wants to Cheat Death” declared the Atlantic. The real truth is a little more subtle. What Calico is actually doing is publishing papers with titles like “A window into extreme longevity; the circulating metabolomics signature of the naked mole-rat, a mammal that shows negligible senescence.” But the real point is that more money and more minds than ever before—that is, Google-sized money and minds—are being spent on anti-aging.

And Google’s got company.

We’ll get into this in greater detail in a later chapter, but for now know that three main approaches are being investigated. First is “senolytic medicines.” In order to prevent runaway cell division (i.e., cancer), the body normally halts this process after a set number of doublings. These shut-off cells, called “senescent cells,” create inflammation, a significant cause of aging. That’s why the Jeff Bezos–backed Unity Biotechnology is attempting to develop senolytic medicines that target and destroy these cells, restoring proper function to previously inflamed tissue. Of greater note, giving middle-aged mice these same medicines can extend their healthy lifespan by as much as 35 percent.

Next is the so-called “young blood” approach. Back in 2014, Stanford and Harvard researchers showed that blood infusions from young mice reversed cognitive impairments in old ones. Since then, a variety of companies have been trying to isolate and commercialize different components of this process. Elevian, for example, a Harvard University spinoff, is working on a young blood factor called GDF11. When injected into older mice, GDF11 has been able to regenerate their hearts, brains, muscles, lungs, and kidneys.

Stem cells, our third approach, are showing the most promise. Samumed, LLC, for example, is targeting the signaling pathways that regulate the self-renewal and differentiation of adult stem cells. If successful, their patented molecules should be able to regrow cartilage, heal tendons, remove wrinkles, and, by the way, stop cancer. This also explains why Samumed, a company still in stealth mode, has a $13 billion valuation.

A different approach is being pioneered by Celularity, a company founded by stem cell pioneer Bob Hariri (Peter is also a cofounder). Hariri’s experiments demonstrate that, in animals, placental-derived stem cells can extend life 30 to 40 percent. The company’s mission is to make this approach viable in humans, harnessing stem cells to amplify the body’s ability to fight disease and heal itself.

What does all this add up to? Well, Ray Kurzweil often discusses the concept of “longevity escape velocity,” or the point at which science can extend your life for more than a year for every year that you are alive. As far future as this sounds, according to Kurzweil, we are a lot closer than you might expect. “It’s likely [that we’re] just another ten to twelve years away from the point that the general public will hit longevity escape velocity.”
We are creeping ever closer to a technological fountain of youth. Thus, the impact that each of us can make with a couple more decades is another force accelerating our acceleration. When coupled to our six prior forces, the resulting convergent combination is dizzying. We’re heading toward a world of long-lived, AI-enhanced, globally interconnected humans—a world far different from the one in which we find ourselves today.

And this brings us to Part Two of this book. To help us make sense of the very different world ahead, over the next eight chapters, we’re going to explore the impact converging exponentials and their secondary effects—that is, the seven forces discussed in this chapter—are having on the wider world. Of course, because there’s no reasonable way to cover such a vast topic, we’ve focused our inquiry. The sectors of society covered in Part Two represent both the top ten contributors to our economy and those areas with the greatest impact on our daily lives.

Furthermore, to help keep things manageable, we’ve interspersed longer chapters with shorter ones. The next chapter is a lengthy examination of the future of shopping, for example, while the one following it is a shorter look at the adjacent field of advertising. In Part Three, we’ll also explore energy and the environment. And when we’re done, we’ll have a 360-degree look at how converging exponentials are reshaping tomorrow.PART TWO THE REBIRTH OF EVERYTHINGCHAPTER FIVE The Future of ShoppingThe First Platform Play
It started with watches, it ended with hedge fund managers, and in between it reshaped a nation. What was it? The Sears catalog.

Richard Warren Sears was born on December 7, 1863, in Stewartville, Minnesota. His mother was a housewife, his father a failed gold miner turned successful blacksmith and wagon maker. But his newfound financial security didn’t last. In Richard’s early teenage years, his father lost all their money in a disastrous stock-farm investment. The family never recovered. A few years later, insult was added to injury and his father died suddenly, leaving Richard to support his sisters and mother. He was sixteen years old.

Out of desperation, Sears taught himself telegraphy, and found work with the railroad. While he rose to become a station agent, he still didn’t earn enough money to support his family, which meant he was always looking for new ways to increase his income. One of those ways arrived in 1886.

A Chicago wholesaler had shipped a case of watches to a jeweler in Redwood Falls, Minnesota, but the jeweler had refused delivery. So the watches were still sitting at the railroad station where Sears worked. Never one to miss an opportunity, Sears contacted the manufacturer with an offer to sell the watches himself. Their hard cost was $12 a piece, but stores typically sold them at double the price. Sears, though, lit upon an idea—charge less.

It was the birth of discount pricing, and Sears’s timing was fortuitous. In the early 1870s, the nation was in the throes of the great railway expansion. For the first time in history, average citizens could travel hundreds of miles in a day. But keeping time during those journeys was an issue.

Back then, every city tracked time by its own clock, so America had three hundred different time zones. In 1883, wanting to ensure the trains ran on schedule, the railways decided to standardize matters. They divided the country into four time zones, and clocks were adjusted accordingly. Suddenly, especially for station agents, watches kept trains running on time. Everyone needed one. Plus, Sears’s asking price? An incredible deal at $14.

Sears ended up making a $5,000 profit (over $120,000 today) on that first crate of watches. He was twenty-three years old and a newly minted entrepreneur. Using the profits from that initial order to purchase another crate, he founded the R. W. Sears Watch Company, advertised his wares in local newspapers, and set out to expand his territory.

In 1887, Sears hired a young watch repairman named Alvah Curtis Roebuck to assist him. A partnership bloomed, and the business blossomed. Four years later, the duo published their first catalog, a 52-page selection of watches and jewelry. Two years after that, the catalog was a 196-page wonder, especially for a country that had grown up rural. No longer selling just watches and jewelry, they expanded into everything from saddles to sewing machines, changing shopping forever.

Over the next decade, the company continued to grow, with a serious assist from the Postal Service. Many rural counties didn’t have mail delivery, which had become a hot button issue. Congress felt that delivery costs would be prohibitive, and local retailers—the folks who ran the mom-and-pop stores that dominated the country—were fiercely protective of their natural monopoly.

But in 1896, Congress passed the Rural Free Delivery Act, opening up this new territory. Sears rushed in to fill the void, with the advent of the automobile, aiding the rush. A network of roads soon emerged, allowing mail-order merchants to reach nearly every home in America—which is what helped the Sears catalog become one of the most potent forces for democratization in US history.

Before these catalogs, local merchants played all kinds of games with both the availability and price of goods. The rich had access to high-quality merchandise, while the poor had to sift through the dregs. Sears rewrote those rules. His catalog didn’t discriminate. Prices were clearly marked, and everyone—regardless of class, creed, or color—paid the same price.

This approach paid off. “Within 10 years,” wrote journalist Derek Thompson in the Atlantic, “the book bloomed to more than 500 pages. Before long, the so-called Consumer’s Bible read like an index of the entire U.S. economy. The company sold dolls and dresses, cocaine and tombstones, and even build-it-yourself houses. Decades before technology analysts started talking about platforms, Sears was the OG platform technology.”
In 1915, at its height, the catalog was twelve hundred pages long, sold over a hundred thousand items, and generated over a hundred million a year in revenue. And this was just the beginning, since Sears went into retail next.

The 1920s brought a giant wave of urbanization. Americans moved from the country to the city, and Sears capitalized on the shift, opening over three hundred retail stores, in every major metropolis, before decade’s end. By the middle of the next decade, one US dollar out of every hundred was spent at Sears. And there are important reasons for this incredible success.

