Author Jeremy Rifkin points out that all major economic paradigm shifts share a common denominator. “At a moment in time,” Rifkin told Business Insider, “three defining technologies emerge and converge[emphasis ours] to create… an infrastructure that fundamentally changes the way we manage power and move economic activity across the value chain. And those three technologies are new communications technologies to more efficiently manage economic activity, new sources of energy to power the economic activity, and new modes of mobility… to more efficiently move the economic activity.”
This was the exact wave Sears rode to prominence. The US Postal Service was its communications technology, cheap Texas oil was its fuel source, and the automobile was its new mode of transport. Yet paradigm shift replaced paradigm shift, and we all know where that road ends. After a 132-year run, in the autumn of 2018, Sears filed for bankruptcy. Between 2013 and 2018, the company shuttered over a thousand stores, lost $6 billion in revenue, and left its hedge fund owners to sell what remained for spare parts.

So what happened?
Walmart happened. Even though Sears pioneered the idea of discounted goods, Walmart beat them at their own game. They out-demonetized and out-democratized Sears. They built their stores on cheaper land, paid cheaper wages, and sold cheaper goods. But most importantly, they saw the exponential writing on the wall.

“The tragic irony of the Sears saga,” continues Thompson in the Atlantic, “is that communications technology, marshaled so brilliantly during Sears’s rise, was instrumental in the company’s downfall. In the 1980s, Walmart and other more modern retailers used digital technology to understand what shoppers were buying and to relay those findings to Walmart headquarters, which could place bulk orders for the new bestselling brands and products. With Walmart playing a superior game of sell-cheap-stuff-efficiently, Sears’s fall was swift. In the early 1980s, it was five times as big as Walmart, by total revenue. By the early 1990s, Walmart was twice as big as Sears.”
But this was only chapter two of retail disruption. History, of course, has a way of repeating itself. Amazon, a company founded about the same time Walmart was disrupting Sears, would blend the best of both models. They used the same postal service that Sears rode to prominence and the same communications tech that helped Walmart do the same. They became the everything store that replaced the everything store that replaced the everything store. And it’s not just Sears and Walmart feeling the pinch.

To say that the retail space has changed over the past decade would be a stunning understatement. E-commerce giants such as Amazon and Alibaba are digitizing the industry, riding exponential growth to new heights. Meanwhile, many brick-and-mortar stores have joined Sears in bankruptcy—in 2017 alone, the total was 6,700. All one needs to do is look at the following table to understand the massive upheaval afoot.

COMPANY
2006
VALUE ($B)
2016
VALUE ($B)
2019
VALUE ($B)
06–18
% CHANGE
Sears
14.3
0.9
BK
–100%
JCPenney
14.4
2.75
.18
–98%
Nordstrom
8.5
10.2
4.8
–43%
Kohl’s
18.8
9.4
7.3
–61%
Macy’s
17.8
12.2
4.8
–73%
Best Buy
21.3
14.5
17.6
–17%
