Target
38.2
42.1
54.4
+42%
Walmart
158.0
216.3
319.47
+202%
AMAZON
17.5
474.4
893.1
+5103%
And if this level of disruption looks unsettling, realize the e-commerce revolution is just getting under way. Even though online sales increased from $34 billion in Q1 of 2009 to $115 billion in Q3 of 2017, this growth spurt only accounted for 10 percent of total retail sales. Why? A great many people are still not connected to the internet.

In Abundance, we referred to the “Rising Billion” as those newly enabled digital masses coming online in the decade ahead, taking the connected measure of humanity from 3.8 billion in 2017 to 8.2 billion in 2025. The majority of these people won’t frequent retail stores or shopping malls. Instead, for reasons that will become much clearer as we go along, they’ll make their purchases digitally, via mobile devices, from the comfort of their homes. To put this in broader terms, because retail is nestled at the convergence of communications, energy, and transportation breakthroughs, it’s a canary in a coal mine, ground zero for Rifkin’s “next major economic paradigm shift.” And one thing’s for certain, shopping will never be the same.

AI and the Retail Experience
No one really understands the impact AI will have on retail, but once you start to get a handle on what’s coming, it’s fairly clear the unfair advantages it’ll bring to store owners, splitting the market into two camps: those who make full use of AI, and those who declare bankruptcy.

AI makes retail cheaper, faster, and more efficient, touching everything from customer service to product delivery. It also redefines the shopping experience, making it frictionless and—once we allow AI to make purchases for us—ultimately invisible.

Let’s begin with the basics: the act of turning desire into purchase. For most of us, this means going to the store and buying what we need. Some of us rely on online marketplaces, and sometimes those marketplaces deliver our desires, sometimes they don’t. Now, if you’re lucky enough to employ a personal assistant, you have the luxury of describing what you want to someone who knows you well enough to buy that exact right thingmost of the time.

For most of us who don’t, enter the digital assistant.

Right now, the four horsemen of the retail apocalypse are waging war for our wallets. Amazon’s Alexa, Google Assistant, Apple’s Siri, and Alibaba’s Tmall Genie are going head-to-head in a battle to become the platform du jour for voice-activated, AI-assisted commerce. Note the glaring absence of any traditional retailers from this list. This is unlikely to change given the head start these horsemen have—already they’ve spent billions in the AI arms race.

We’ve seen a market shift like this before. Nokia was the world leader in cell phones, but when smartphones showed up, they ended up out of business. Why? They were in the phone business, but suddenly the phone business had become the computer business. With companies like Apple and Google as their new competitors, they could never catch up. And this brings us back to our predicted parade of retail bankruptcies.

For baby boomers who grew up watching Captain Kirk talk to the Enterprise’s computer on Star Trek, digital assistants seem a little like science fiction. But for millennials, it’s just the next logical step in a world that is auto-magical. And as those millennials enter their consumer prime, revenue from products purchased via voice-driven commands are projected to leap from $2 billion today to $8 billion by 2023. And while we’re still a ways away from making retail purchases completely frictionless, the data indicates the direction the trend is heading: On average, consumers using Amazon Echo spent more than standard Amazon Prime customers: $1,700 versus $1,300.

Perhaps there is no better example of the disruptive potential of digital assistants than the 2018 demo of Google Duplex. Every year, at the Google I/O conference, seven thousand attendees get together for three days of keynotes, code labs, and—the highlight—interactive demos. In Silicon Valley, product demos are where legends are born. In decades past, it was black turtleneck–clad Steve Jobs who wait, wait, there’s one more thing’d his way into the history books. But in 2018, the soft-spoken Google CEO Sundar Pichai may have stolen back the crown.

Pacing the stage of Mountain View’s Shoreline Amphitheatre, Pichai began his demo by pointing out that a big part of getting things done still involves making phone calls. “You may want to get an oil change,” he noted, “maybe call a plumber in the middle of the week, or even schedule a haircut appointment.… We think AI can help with this problem.”
Then, piped through the Shoreline’s massive speakers, with follow-along captions projected on a giant screen behind him, Pichai played the audience a series of pre-recorded phone calls made by Google Duplex, their next generation digital assistant. The first call made a reservation at a restaurant, the second one booked a haircut appointment. The haircut appointment cracked everyone up, primarily because Duplex has natural language abilities which include dropping a long “hhmmmmm” into the middle of the conversation. In neither case did the person on the other end of the phone have any idea they were talking to an AI.

For certain, this issue of AI anonymity raised some red flags of the “If an AI can fool a receptionist, who else could an AI fool?” variety. In the days after the conference, the demo produced a backlash, and Duplex now announces itself as “Google’s automated booking system.” But the system’s success speaks to how seamlessly AI can blend into our retail lives and how convenient it will continue to make them.

This is just the begining. The next retail arena being disrupted by AI is customer service. According to a recent Zendesk study, good customer service increases the possibility of a purchase by 42 percent, but bad customer service translates into a 52 percent chance of losing that sale forever—meaning more than half of us will stop shopping at a store due to a single disappointing customer service interaction. These are significant financial stakes. They’re also problems perfectly suited for an AI solution.

The same technology Pichai demonstrated that can make phone calls for consumers can also answer phones for retailers—a development that’s unfolding in two different ways. First, for organizations interested in keeping humans involved, there’s Beyond Verbal, a Tel Aviv–based startup that has built an AI customer service coach. Simply by analyzing customer voice intonation, the system can tell whether the person on the phone is about to blow a gasket, is genuinely excited, or anything in between. Based on research conducted on more than seventy thousand subjects in more than thirty different languages, Beyond Verbal’s app can detect four hundred different markers of human moods, attitudes, and personality traits.

Already it’s been integrated in call centers to help human sales agents understand and react to customer emotions, making those calls more pleasant, but also more profitable. For example, by analyzing word choice and vocal style, Beyond Verbal’s system can tell what kind of shopper the person on the line actually is. If they’re an early adopter, the AI alerts the sales agent to offer them the latest and greatest. If they’re more conservative, then it suggests items more tried-and-true.

Second, there are companies like New Zealand’s Soul Machines working to replace human customer service agents altogether. Powered by IBM’s Watson, Soul Machines builds lifelike customer service avatars designed for empathy, making them one of many helping to pioneer the field of emotionally intelligent computing. We’ll explore this in depth a little later, but what’s critical here is a single stat: 40 percent. With their technology, 40 percent of all customer service interactions are now resolved with a high degree of satisfaction and without any human intervention. And because the system is built using neural nets, it’s continuously learning with every interaction—meaning that percentage will continue to improve.

The number of these interactions continues to grow as well. Software manufacturer Autodesk now includes a Soul Machine avatar named AVA (Autodesk Virtual Assistant) in all of their new offerings. She lives in a small window on the screen, ready to soothe tempers, troubleshoot problems, and forever banish those long tech support hold times. For Daimler Financial Services, they built an avatar named Sarah who helps customers with arguably three of modernity’s most annoying tasks: financing, leasing, and insuring a car. Of course, in a future where “distributed autonomous organizations (DAOs)” will control fleets of autonomous taxis, there will soon come a point that a DAO’s AI will be talking to Daimler’s Sarah about that financing, leasing, and insuring. It’s an AI-to-AI negotiation, no human required.
