
Yet, as we’ll soon see, this isn’t just about AI—it’s about AI converging with additional exponentials. Add networks and sensors to the story and it raises the scale of disruption, upping the FQ—the frictionless quotient—in our frictionless shopping adventure.

Go, Go, Gone Are Cashiers
It’s April 2026, a cold, rainy day in Chicago. You’re supposed to meet your mother for lunch, but forgot your coat. On the Uber autonomous ride downtown, a quick online search reveals a shop selling those new eco-friendly vegan leather jackets you’ve heard so much about—the leather grown from stem cells and no cows harmed along the way.

You click the “interested” button on your screen, slide the phone back into your pocket, and forget about it. The store’s AI interfaces with your phone’s AI and automatically redirects your taxi. Upon arrival, you realize you’re outside one of those throwback “craft retail” shops where they still employ actual humans. A woman named Sylvia meets you at the door, holding the vegan-leather coat you selected. The jacket fits perfectly—which isn’t a surprise. A couple months ago you used the modified Wii sensor in your phone to map your body down to its every last flap and fold. Most shoes have weight sensors these days, so as your waistline fluctuates, the body map automatically adjusts. Long before you walked into that shop, both your phone and the store’s computers knew your shape and size.

No need to wait in line to pay for the item either. A variety of cameras and sensors track both you and the jacket, so as you walk out the door, the price is instantly deducted from your bank account. Perhaps your cryptocurrency account. Plus, because those sensors also know that this is your first trip to this store, they try to tempt you into a second shopping adventure by texting you a digital coupon that will deduct 25 percent off your next purchase.

At the same time your transaction settles, sensors built into the rack where your jacket once hung alert the store’s AI. The AI orders another jacket from the manufacturer and texts an employee to restock the now empty hanger. Also, turns out, this is the third vegan leather jacket sold in two days, so the inventory control system notices the trend and orders a couple of backup jackets in popular sizes just in case.

The above scenario isn’t that far off. In fact, it requires little beyond the ever expanding impact of the Internet of Things (IoT) on our world, something that will happen almost automatically as more and more devices are connected to the internet. And it’s quite an impact. By 2025, according to research done by McKinsey, the value of the IoT on retail will be somewhere between $410 billion and $1.2 trillion. Even better, most of this technology has arrived.

Automatic checkout, which frees customers from the drudgery of waiting, is already here. Amazon introduced Americans to it in January 2018, when the initial Amazon Go store opened for business in Seattle. The following year Amazon Go opened seven more stores and has plans for three thousand more by 2021. The New York Timesdescribes passing through the store’s turnstiles as “similar to entering the subway, with an [in-store] experience that is more closely akin to shoplifting.”
Upon entering, visitors scan a QR code on their phone and the AI does the rest. Cameras track customer movement down the aisles and weight sensors built into the shelves do the same for the products. Just grab what you want, drop it into your backpack and head home. On your way out the door, the cost is automatically charged to your Amazon account.

Once again, this is about frictionless shopping. Long lines deter customers. Plus, cashiers cost money. By reducing staff requirements—the only employee in an Amazon Go store is the single human checking IDs near the liquor section—McKinsey estimates automated checkout will save retailers $150 to $380 billion a year by 2025. Which is why Amazon is not the only company chasing this cashier-less future; the San Francisco startup v7labs is helping all retail stores make this same transition, while Alibaba’s cashier-less Hema stores were tested in China a full two years ahead of Amazon.

Smart shelf technology is already here, employing RFID (radio frequency identification) tags and weight sensors to detect when an item has been removed. The innovation deters theft, automates restocking, and ensures that inventory is always in the right spot. Today, Intel’s version has a screen built into the shelf. Tomorrow, smart shelves will be AI-enhanced and capable of conversation. Is the sweater you’re holding dry clean only? Just ask the shelf.

Perhaps the biggest shift in retail will be one of efficiency, especially in supply chain management. Back in 2015, a Cisco study found that IoT solutions will have more than a $1.9 trillion impact on this sector, and for good reason. AI can detect patterns in data that humans cannot. This means that every link in the supply chain—inventory levels, supplier quality, demand forecasting, production planning, transportation management, and more—is being revolutionized.

And fast.

Seventy percent of retail and manufacturing companies currently digitize every aspect of their logistics operations. More importantly, all this disruption is occurring even before the robots arrive in retail. But…
The Robots Are Coming, The Robots Are Coming
On August 3, 2016, the prayers of stoned Dungeons & Dragons players were answered. That day, Domino’s Pizza introduced the Domino’s Robotic Unit, or DRU for short. The first home delivery pizza robot, the DRU looks like a cross between R2-D2 and an oversized microwave. LIDAR and GPS sensors help it navigate, while temperature sensors keep hot food hot and cold food coldAlready, it’s been rolled out in ten countries, including New Zealand, France, and Germany, but its August 2016 debut was critical—as it was the first time we’d seen robotic home delivery.

It won’t be the last.

A dozen or so different delivery bots are currently entering the market. Starship Technologies, for example, a startup created by Skype founders Janus Friis and Ahti Heinla, has a general-purpose home delivery robot. Right now, the system is an array of cameras and GPS sensors, but soon models will include microphones, speakers, and the ability—via AI-driven natural language processing—to communicate with customers. Since 2016, Starship has carried out fifty thousand deliveries in over one hundred cities in twenty countries.

Along similar lines, Nuro, the company cofounded by Jiajun Zhu, one of the engineers who helped Google develop their self-driving car, has a miniature self-driving car of their own. Half the size of a sedan, the Nuro looks like a toaster on wheels, except with a mission. This toaster has been designed to carry cargo—about twelve bags of groceries (version 2.0 will carry twenty)—which it’s been doing for select Kroger stores since 2018 (in 2019, Domino’s also partnered with Nuro).

As these delivery bots take over our streets, others are streaking across the sky. Back in 2016, Amazon was first, announcing Prime Air, their promise of drone delivery in thirty minutes or less. Almost immediately, companies ranging from 7-Eleven and Walmart to Google and Alibaba jumped on the bandwagon. While critics remain doubtful, the head of the FAA’s drone-integration department recently said that drone deliveries may be “a lot closer than… the skeptics think. [Companies are] getting ready for full-blown operations. We’re processing their applications. I would like to move as quickly as I can.”
While delivery bots are starting to spare us that trip to the store, for those who prefer shopping the old-fashioned way—i.e., in person—once you actually arrive at that store, robots will be there to help. Actually, they’ve been there for a while.

In 2010, SoftBank introduced Pepper, a humanoid robot capable of understanding human emotion. Pepper’s cute: four feet tall, with a white plastic body, two black eyes, a dark slash of a mouth, and a base shaped like a mermaid’s tail. Across her chest is a touch screen to aid in communication. There’s been a lot of communication. Pepper’s cuteness is intentional, as it matches its mission: help humans enjoy life as much as possible. Over twelve thousand Peppers have been sold. She serves ice cream in Japan, greets eaters at a Pizza Hut in Singapore, and dances with customers at a Palo Alto electronics store. More importantly, Pepper’s got company.

Walmart uses shelf-stocking robots for inventory control, Best Buy uses a robo-cashier to allow select locations to operate 24-7, and Lowe’s Home Improvement employs the LoweBot—a giant iPad on wheels—to help customers find the items they need while tracking inventory along the way.

The biggest benefit robotics provides might be in warehouse logistics. In 2012, when Amazon dished out $775 million for Kiva Systems, few could predict that just six years later there would be forty-five thousand Kiva robots deployed at all of their fulfillment centers, helping process a ridiculous 306 items per secondduring the Christmas season.

Many other retailers are following suit. Order jeans from the Gap and soon they’ll be sorted, packed, and shipped with the help of a Kindred robot. Remember the old arcade game where you picked up teddy bears with a giant claw? That’s Kindred, only her claw picks up T-shirts, pants, and the like, placing them in designated drop-off zones that resemble tiny mailboxes (for further sorting or shipping). The big deal here is democratization. Kindred’s robot is cheap and easy to deploy, allowing smaller companies to compete with giants like Amazon.

For retailers interested in staying in business, there doesn’t appear to be much choice in the matter. By 2024, the US minimum wage is projected to be $15 an hour (the House of Representatives already passed the bill, but the wage hike is meant to unfold gradually between now and 2025), and many feel that number is way too low. Yet, as human labor costs continue to climb, robots won’t just be coming, they’ll be here, there, and everywhere. It’s going to become increasingly difficult for store owners to justify human workers who call in sick, show up late, and can easily get injured. Robots work 24-7. They never take a day off, never need a bathroom break, health insurance, or family leave. Going forward, this means technological unemployment will become more of an issue—and more on this in Part Three—but in retail, the robotic benefits for both companies and customers are considerable.

3-D Printing and Retail
In 2010, Kevin Rustagi was frustrated. So were his friends Aman Advano, Kit Hickey, and Gihan Amarasiriwardena. These four recent MIT grads had been thrust into the working world, where they quickly discovered they hated their outfits. Business clothes sucked. And it didn’t make sense—athletes got to perform in all sorts of high-tech gear, but accountants had to make do with Dockers?
