So they decided to bring a little whiz-bang to the boardroom. Together, they formed the Ministry of Supply, a clothing company intent on borrowing space suit technology from NASA for a line of dress shirts. In 2011, with an original fundraising goal of $30,000, a runaway Kickstarter campaign netted them almost half-a-million. They were in business.

Soon afterward, the “Apollo” dress shirt hit the market. Looking like a traditional button down, the Apollo is anything but. The shirt uses “phase change materials” to control body heat and reduce perspiration and odor. It also adapts to the wearer’s shape, and stays tucked in and wrinkle-free all day. As TechCrunchsummarized: “In essence, it’s a magic shirt.”
That magic shirt led to magic pants, suits, and more. Ministry of Supply now makes high-performance smart clothing for both sexes, including a new line of intelligent jackets that respond to voice commands and learn to automatically heat to your desired temperature. Recently, they extended their high-tech approach to manufacturing. Head into their Boston-based retail outlet on fashionable Newbury Street and you can have your high-performance shirt—or suit, blouse, or pants—3-D printed while you wait. It takes about ninety minutes. And the machine is a marvel. With four thousand individual needles and a dozen different yarns, the printer can create any combination of materials and colors desired, with zero waste.

And if you can’t make it to Boston, not a problem. These days, if you want 3-D-printed clothing, all you need is a smartphone. Since fashion designer Danit Peleg’s 2015 introduction of the first line of 3-D-printed clothing available via the Web, a half-dozen designers have followed suit. Both Reebok and New Balance deploy the technology, the former to upgrade the speed and quality of its manufacturing facilities, the latter to build custom insoles for athletes. Many other fashion houses are not far behind.

And fashion is only part of the story, as 3-D printing is now showing up all over retail. Staples, the office supply company, has been offering the service for years. They recently launched an online version where customers upload designs for office products from home, Staples employees print them in-store, and the final product is delivered to your door. The French hardware manufacturer Leroy Merlin has taken this a step further, allowing customers to print bespoke hardware in their stores. Need a ten-inch flat-head nail or a curving socket wrench made to reach around corners? They’ve got you covered.

And this is only where we are today. Over the next ten years, 3-D printing will reshape retail in four key ways:
The End of the Supply Chain:With 3-D printing, retailers can now purchase raw materials and print inventory themselves, either at warehouses or in the retail outlet. This means the end of suppliers, manufacturers, and distributors.

The End of Waste:Okay, maybe not the complete end of waste, but with consumers preferring eco-friendly products and retailers looking to minimize materials cost, the exactitude of 3-D printing is a ready-made solution.

The End of the Spare Parts Market:If you’re a farmer in Iowa and your tractor breaks during harvest time, waiting a few days for a spare part could jeopardize the entire season. A 3-D printer solves this problem. And it’ll solve the same problem for everything from coffeemakers to skateboard wheels. This doesn’t just mean an end to the spare parts business, it also means a new level of longevity for the products we purchase.

The Rise of User-Designed Products:Sure, there will always be some version of Apple in the market—an uber design-centric company pushing out products so slick they always find a buyer. Yet, for everything from fashion to furniture, customer-designed will replace designer-designed as standard operating procedure.

But this does raise a final question: With Alexa placing our orders, 3-D printers manufacturing those orders, and drones delivering the results to your doorstep, why, in the not too distant future, would anyone go anywhere to go shopping?
Retail’s Last Hope
In “Welcome to the Experience Economy,” an article for the Harvard Business Review, author Joseph Pine tracks two hundred years of economic development via a curious metric: the birthday cake.

As a vestige of the agrarian economy, mothers made birthday cakes from scratch, mixing farm commodities (flour, sugar, butter, and eggs) that together cost mere dimes. As the goods-based industrial economy advanced, moms paid a dollar or two to Betty Crocker for premixed ingredients. Later, when the service economy took hold, busy parents ordered cakes from the bakery or grocery store, which, at $10 or $15, cost ten times as much as the packaged ingredients. Now, in the time-starved 1990s, parents neither make the birthday cake nor even throw the party. Instead, they spend $100 or more to “outsource” the entire event to Chuck E. Cheese’s, the Discovery Zone, the Mining Company, or some other business that stages a memorable event for kids—and often throws in the cake for free. Welcome to the emerging experience economy
By replacing premade ingredients with premade experiences, the experience economy is a new kind of disruptive business model satisfying a new kind of need. For most of history, we didn’t want prepackaged experiences because life itself was the experience. Just staying safe, warm, and fed was adventure enough. Technology changed that equation.

At the turn of the Industrial Revolution, the richest people on the planet didn’t have air-conditioning, running water, or indoor plumbing. They lacked automobiles, refrigerators, and telephones. Plus, computers. Today, even folks living below the US poverty line draw on these conveniences. Those better off draw on much more. So much, in fact, that we’ve started to take our stuff for granted. As a result, for many, experiences—tactile, memorable, and real—have become more valuable than possessions
Retailers have capitalized on this trend. Starbucks made bank extending the familiarity of the local coffee shop to a global scale. Outdoor retailer Cabela’s turned their showrooms into faux outdoor adventures complete with waterfalls. And now converging exponentials will take the experience economy to new heights.

Consider the Westfield shopping center group’s ten-year vision for the future of retail, “Destination 2028.” Replete with hanging sensory gardens, smart changing rooms, and mindfulness workshops, Westfield’s proposed shopping center will be a “hyper-connected micro-city” with an incredible amount of personalization. Smart bathrooms will provide individually customized nutrition and hydration tips; eye scanners and AI can personalize shopping “fast lanes” based on prior purchases; and magic mirrors will offer virtual reflections of you wearing an entire range of new products.

Combining entertainment, wellness, learning, and personalized product-matching, Westfield’s “Destination 2028” aims to help make you into a better you—and they’re betting that this is worth the inconvenience of leaving the house to do your shopping.

It’s a big bet. In the US, there are over eleven hundred malls and forty thousand shopping centers. Minnesota’s Mall of America is a small town, spanning 5.6 million square feet and housing five hundred stores. China’s biggest mall covers over 7 million square feet and is larger than the Pentagon. This upgraded experience economy might mean these malls have a chance of staying in business.

But it’ll be a very different business. If successful, retail will become a convergent industry, where time spent at the mall pays multiple dividends. Shopping becomes healthcare becomes entertainment becomes education and so forth. Or, as we’ll see in the next section, our malls become a memory, as shopping itself becomes another task outsourced to your AI.

No More Shopping Malls
Earlier in this chapter we ran through a thought experiment about the year 2026, when sensors, networks, and AI will have converged to remake shopping. Here we want to run another experiment, pushing the clock forward a few more years and adding five additional technologies to the retail mix.

Welcome to April 21, 2029, a sunny day in Dallas. You’ve got a fundraising luncheon tomorrow, but nothing to wear. The last thing you want to do is spend the day at the mall. No sweat. Your body-image data is still current, as you were scanned only a week ago. Put on your VR headset and have a conversation with your AI, which you’ve conveniently named JARVIS (because your coauthor can’t seem to shake his Iron Manfetish).

“It’s time to buy a dress for tomorrow’s event” is all you have to say.

In a moment, you’re teleported to a virtual clothing store. Zero travel time. No freeway traffic, parking hassles, or angry hordes wielding baby strollers. Instead, you’ve entered your own personal clothing store. Everything is in your exact size. And we mean everything. The store has access to nearly every designer and design on the planet. Ask JARVIS to show you what’s hot in Shanghai, and presto, instant fashion show. Every model strutting the runway looks like you, only dressed in Shanghai’s latest.

The phone rings. It’s your best friend. She joins you in the shop via her own VR headset. As you two chat, your AI listens. Your comments become commands: “I’d love some black pumps to match my new dress” makes racks of perfectly fitting shoes appear.

Yet none of these shoes seem exactly right. “How would this dress look with those satin Jimmy Choos sitting in your closet?” asks your friend. No problem. Every piece of physical clothing you own in the real world has a digital twin available in the virtual. You ask, and instantly, you’re wearing them.

When you’re done selecting your outfit, the AI pays the bill. While your new clothes are being 3-D printed at a warehouse—before speeding your way via drone delivery—a digital version has been added to your personal inventory for use at future virtual events. And the cost? With no middlemen, less than half of what you paid in stores.
