
Back in present day, let’s break this future apart.

3-D body-scanning is already here. By using infrared depth sensing and imaging technology to produce an exact digital copy of the surface of your body, companies like Levi’s and Bloomingdales have imaging booths in select stores, while brands like Nike, Boss, and Armani are not far behind. Nor is it just the big brands getting involved. Bombfell is a fashion subscription service for casual menswear that pairs human fashion experts with AI, selecting from over eighty different brands and sending them your way. Online retailers are also in the mix, with Amazon acquiring the 3-D body-scanning startup Body Labs in 2017 as a way to make bespoke clothing just another feature available through Prime Wardrobe.

As far as an AI fashion advisor goes, those too are here, courtesy of both Alibaba and Amazon. During their annual Singles’ Day shopping festival, Alibaba’s FashionAI concept store uses deep learning to make suggestions based on advice from human fashion experts and store inventory, driving a significant portion of the day’s $25 billion in sales. Similarly, Amazon’s shopping algorithm makes personalized clothing recommendations based on user preferences and social media behavior.

And the VR system itself? Well, right now there’s Hololux, a collaboration between Microsoft and the London College of Fashion. Their VR goggles let you shop in mixed reality anywhere in the world. Want to check out the Prada store on London’s High Street—once again, no problem.

So, there you have it, a future in which shopping is dematerialized, demonetized, democratized, and delocalized—otherwise known as “the end of malls.” Of course, if you wait a few years after that, you’ll be able to take an autonomous flying taxi to Westfield’s Destination 2028—which might be an experience worth having, so, maybe, it’s not the end of malls. Either way, it’s a top-to-bottom transformation of the retail world.

Now, if we could only do the same thing to advertising.…CHAPTER SIX The Future of AdvertisingMadder Men
In the Emmy Award–winning TV show Mad Men, a classic 1960s-era advertising agency was the center of the action. It was an agency filled with big egos, boozy lunches, and emerging technology, an era when print, television, and radio ads ruled the roost. And those Mad Men had a good run. For almost half a century, this trilogy of media defined how companies pushed their products to the public, and those agencies rode that wave until it crashed onto those game-changing shores known as the internet.

Certainly, when the dot-com revolution first arrived, few understood the disruption it would bring to advertising. Yet, in nearly no time at all, Craigslist gutted newspapers’ classified sections, and banner ads—of all things—gutted magazines. Next came the spread of DVRs and paid digital services of the Hulu, Netflix, Amazon variety, a series of innovations that collectively saved humanity from the drudgery of TV commercials. And now, less than two decades after the arrival of the internet, Google and Facebook together command more advertising dollars than all print media on the planet.

In 2017, Google’s ad campaign revenue totaled over $95 billion; Facebook’s reached over $39 billion. Taken together, this is roughly 25 percent of all global advertising expenditure. Fueled by open source e-commerce platforms, mobile devices, and advances in online payment infrastructure, social media marketing has replaced virtually the entire traditional advertising industry. That took fewer than fifteen years.

And the numbers are huge. In 2018, the global advertising industry surpassed $550 billion, driving Google’s valuation north of $700 billion and Facebook’s above $500 billion. The reason for this spike is that these numbers are based on our data and the telling trail left by our searches: our likes and dislikes, what we desire, who our friends are, and what we (and they) are clicking on these days.

But with a blitzkrieg of technologies converging on the industry, advertising will continue to change. First, it’s likely to get a little more invasive and a lot more personal. Yet this won’t last. Not long after, the entire social media marketing market will vanish. How long will that take? We give it ten to twelve years.

Let’s take look at why.

The Spatial Web
For all of human history, the experience of looking at the world was roughly the same for everyone. Other than mental illness, psychedelic drugs, or an overactive imagination, reality was a shared constant—what you saw out there was what I saw out there. But now the boundary between the digital and the physical is beginning to fade. The world around us is gaining layers of information. Invisible without the right apparatus, but don a pair of AR glasses and you’ll find rich, personalized, and interactive data where none has ever been before. And this means my world and your world are now very different worlds.

Welcome to Reality 2.0, or Web 3.0, or the Spatial Web. To understand the Spatial Web, it helps to start with the first Web, version 1.0, where static documents and read-only interactions meant that the best way advertisers could reach consumers was through banner ads. Web 2.0 was an upgrade, introducing multimedia content, interactive Web ads, and participatory social media. Yet all this was still mediated by 2D screens. Web 3.0 is the next phase. Because of the convergence of high bandwidth 5G connections, augmented reality eyewear, our emerging trillion-sensors economy, and, to stitch it all together, powerful AI, we have gained the ability to superimpose digital information atop physical environments—freeing advertising from the tyranny of the screen.

Imagine stepping into a future Apple Store. When you approach the iPhone display, a full-sized AR avatar of Steve Jobs materializes. He wants to give you a tour of the product’s latest features. Avatar Jobs is a little too much, so with nothing more than a voice command, he’s replaced with floating text—and a list of phone features hovers in the air in front of you. After you’ve made your selection, eschewing the iPhone for a new pair of AR iGlasses, another voice command is all it takes to execute a smart contract.

Next, glasses on, you head over to a friend’s house. While chatting in her kitchen, you gaze at her new cabinets. Sensors in the glasses track eye motion, so your AI knows your focus has been lingering. Via your search history, it also knows you’ve been considering remodeling your kitchen. Because your smart recommendation preferences are turned on, cabinet prices, design, and color choices fill your field of vision. It’s a new form of advertising, either an extension of frictionless shopping, or a novel type of spam, depending on your perspective.

The early version of this reality is already here. Known as “visual search,” the feature is currently available from an assortment of companies. A partnership between Snapchat and Amazon, for example, allows you to point their app-camera at an object, then get a link showing either the product itself or something similar, available for purchase. Pinterest, meanwhile, has a multitude of visual search tools, such as Shop the Look, which dots every object in a photo. Like the couch? Click the dot. The site will find you similar products for sale. Or take Lens, their real-time visual search tool. Point the app-camera at a scene and the app will generate links to all the products in that scene.

Google takes this one step further. Released in 2017, their Google Lens is a general visual search engine. It does more than just identify products for sale, it decodes an entire landscape. You can learn anything you want: the botanical breakdown of the plants in a flowerbed, the breeds of dogs romping through a park, the history of the buildings lining a city street.

IKEA has taken things the farthest. By using their AR app via smartphone, you can map your living room. This gives you a digital version complete with all the furniture in its exact dimensions. Need a new coffee table? Their technology lets you try out different styles in different sizes. Your choice triggers a smart payment, and just like that, IKEA customizes your coffee table and delivers it to your doorstep. Need help assembling? Their AR app can walk you through it step-by-step.

All this visual search competition has kicked development into overdrive, spiking consumer adoption rates as well. As more people use these systems, more data is fed back to the AI running them. By fall of 2018, this feedback loop had pushed visual searches above a billion queries a month. Pretty much every global brand is preparing for a world of “point, shoot, and shop.” It’s another reason we may be looking at the end of the shopping mall, because reality becomes the shopping mall. And if you think this sounds invasive—well, wait, wait, wait, there’s downright creepy to consider.

The Eerie Power of Hyper-Personalization
You’ve been spotted. You’re just out for a casual stroll through a department store, and their facial recognition system has you in its sights. Your AR glasses light up: “Hi, Sarah, great to see you.…”
Damn, you forgot to change your preferences to “Do Not Disturb.”
A microsecond later, the store’s TV monitors continue the assault. Maybe it’s a hologram of the President of the United States calling out your name, “Sarah, just one second. Your pores are a matter of national security. I want to tell you that your genome sequence matches a new line of L’Oréal skincare products.”
When you don’t respond to POTUS, the AI switches tactics. Now it’s Mom. You flinch, involuntarily. Her voice is deeply imprinted on your brain. But you know better, and just keep walking. Heck, sometimes it’s your favorite movie stars (based on data from your Netflix account), or your favorite sports star (based on internet searches). The one that freaks you out the most? Father McFarland, your priest. Whatever the case, it’s a far cry from the Marlboro Man. If it weren’t so annoying, it might actually be funny.

Does this sound like a far-off fantasy? Guess again.

Sure That Sounds Like Mom, But Can You Prove It?
