Remember Mission: Impossible? Remember the throat mic that Tom Cruise used to mimic the voice of the bad guy? Well, impossible no more. Two companies have demonstrated real-life versions. The Montreal-based startup Lyrebird—named after the sound-imitating bird—has a novel speech synthesis technology which allows them to mimic the voice of someone with very little data.

Thirty sentences is all it takes. A three-minute video at your surprise birthday party—hell, you don’t even remember anyone filming—is more than enough. And researchers at the Chinese search giant Baidu have an AI that works faster than Lyrebird. Just ten 3.7-second samples is enough to train a voice-imitation system more than 95 percent of the time. A hundred five-second clips and the match will be almost perfect.

While Lyrebird and Baidu’s speech synthesis technologies are not yet completely convincing, the field is rapidly advancing—and not just to make advertising creepier than normal.

“There are plenty of great use cases for the technology,” says Leo Zou, a member of Baidu’s communications team, in Digital Trends. “Voice cloning could help patients who lost their voices. It’s also an important breakthrough for personalized human-machine interfaces—a mom can easily configure an audiobook reader with her own voice, for example. [Additionally,] the method allows for original digital content. Hundreds of characters in video games will have unique voices because of this. Or speech-to-speech language translation, as the synthesizer can learn to mimic a speaker in another language.”
Deeper Fakes
In 2018, a YouTube video of former President Barack Obama made its way around the internet. Over 6 million people tuned in to see him seated beside an American flag, speaking earnestly to the camera. “President Trump,” he explained, “is a total and complete dipshit. Now, I would never say these things. At least not in a public address. But, someone else would, someone like Jordan Peele.”
Then the video shifts to a split screen. On the left, Obama continues talking. On the right, we see actor-director-comedian Jordan Peele actually speaking the words being put into the former President’s mouth. The video is a deepfake, an AI-driven, human image synthesis technique that takes existing images and videos—say, Obama speaking—and maps them onto source images and video—such as Jordan Peele imitating President Obama insulting President Trump.

Peele created the video to illustrate the dangers of deepfakes. He felt the need to make it because it’s really just one of thousands. Political chicanery, revenge porn, celebrity revenge porn—they’ve all been tried and tried again. And while these early versions are pretty close to the genuine article, their fakery is detectable.

Researchers at Carnegie Mellon University have recently developed new algorithms capable of far greater realism. Their AI not only transfers head position, facial expression, and eye gaze from one video to another, it transmutes subtle details—eye blink rate, slight eyebrow flicks, the micro-wiggle of a shoulder. And with fewer glitchy distortions. The results are convincing. Study subjects overwhelmingly thought the videos were real.

While there are some positive uses for the technology (which we’ll examine in the upcoming entertainment chapter), the application’s downside is impossible to ignore. Many are concerned about “fake news,” which has the power to destroy reputations, set off civil unrest, and even shape global politics. There are also legal ramifications. Deepfakes make it easier for those “caught on tape” to claim it wasn’t them—because you never know—and that’s exactly the problem.

Yet, the problem in advertising—that is, being followed around department stores by marketers disguised as Mom—is more a temporary blip than a longstanding trend. Pretty soon advertising itself might actually go away.

Goodbye Advertising, Hello JARVIS
From the Mad Men of old to the Madder Men of today, the purpose of advertising hasn’t changed: to sell you stuff. So ads extol benefits: Buy X because it’ll make you Y—sexy, successful, shiny, whatever. But what happens when you are no longer the one making the buying decisions? Oh yeah baby, it’s Shopping JARVIS to the rescue.

Imagine a future when you simply say: “Hey JARVIS, buy me some toothpaste.” Does JARVIS watch TV? Did he happen to catch those late-night ads filled with bright-white smiles? Of course not. In a nanosecond, JARVIS considers the molecular formulations of all available options, their cost, the research that supports their teeth-whitening claims, the research that condemns their breath-freshening claims, published client-satisfaction reports, and finally—maybe later rather than sooner—it evaluates your genome to determine the flavor formulation most likely to tingle your taste buds.

Then it makes a purchase.

Taking it a step further, in the future, you’ll never actually have to order toothpaste. JARVIS will be monitoring your supply of regularly consumed items—from coffee, tea, and almond milk to toothpaste, deodorant, and all the rest—and will order supplies before you realize what needs restocking.

How about purchasing something new? That drone your son wants for his birthday? Just specify functionality. “Hey JARVIS, could you buy me a drone for under a hundred dollars that is easy to fly and takes great photos?”
What about fashion decisions? Will we trust our AIs to choose our clothes? Seems unlikely, until you consider that AIs can track eye movement as we window-shop, listen to our daily conversations to understand likes and dislikes, and scan our social feeds to understand our fashion preferences as well as those of our friends. With that level of detail, Fashion JARVIS will do a damn good job of selecting our clothing—no advertising required.

We’re heading toward a future where AI will make the majority of our buying decisions, continually surprising us with products or services we didn’t even know we wanted. Or, if surprise isn’t your thing, just turn that feature off and opt for boring and staid. Either way, it’s a shift that threatens traditional advertisers, while offering considerable benefits to the consumer.CHAPTER SEVEN The Future of EntertainmentGoing Digital
One way to tell the story of the rise of digital entertainment is through four key decisions made by Reed Hastings, founder and CEO of Netflix. The first of these was made in 1999, when Hastings was a computer scientist turned entrepreneur. He’d already taken his first software company public, then taken a hefty buy-out, leaving him a sizable nest egg to plunge into his next company. Hastings lit upon an interesting idea: Rent DVDs over the Internet and use the postal service to deliver them. He decided to give it a try—which was the decision that birthed Netflix.

The second decision came a few months later, when Hastings had a bigger idea: Never charge late fees. The third decision was Netflix’s real breakthrough, the killer app, the “queue.” Subscribers could create a list of movies they wanted to watch and as soon as the company received word that a prior DVD had been mailed back, Netflix would send out another. Because their DVD rental policy allowed three movies to be checked out at once, users were never without something to watch, and the convenience turned the company into everyone’s default movie rental house. It was one of the earliest platform plays, and it helped transform the industry, making Netflix a titan.

In 1999, the year Netflix launched, they had 239,000 subscribers; only four years later they hit a million. But it was Hasting’s fourth decision—his 2007 choice to replace the postal service with broadband streaming—that was the real game-changer. By fall 2018, subscriptions had rocketed to 137 million, and experts predict that could double over the next few years.

Netflix is now the eight-hundred-pound streaming gorilla. Fifty-one percent of all streaming subscriptions flow their way, earning them over $4.5 billion in annual revenue and $150 billion in market cap. But it’s what they’re doing with all that money that’s even more disruptive.

Netflix is creating content. A lot of content. In 2017, they spent $6.2 billion on original movies and TV shows, outspending major studios such as CBS ($4 billion) or HBO ($2.5 billion), and just shy of the $8–10 billion-a-year range of heavyweight contenders like TimeWarner and Fox. A year later, Netflix doubled their spend to $13 billion, placing them in the ranks of the majors.

But, again, the real news is what they did with that money. In 2018, while the big six movie studios released a combined seventy-five films, Netflix’s war chest produced eighty new features and over seven hundred new TV shows.

This is why any understanding of the impact of exponentials on entertainment should start with Netflix. In fact, in the annals of exponential disruption, the company’s assault on Blockbuster is now a classic tale. The fact that Blockbuster passed up the opportunity to buy Netflix for $50 million is perhaps only matched by Kodak’s failure to capitalize on digital photography, the very technology they’d invented. Yet, Netflix’s assault on Blockbuster was merely the result of a solitaryconvergence.

To kill home video, Netflix leveraged a new network, the internet, to allow Americans to order DVDs from the comfort of their couch. Today, Netflix is utilizing a short stack of converging exponentials—particularly broadband and artificial intelligence—to take on the trillion-dollar entertainment ecosystem.

And it’s not just Netflix.

