Streaming platforms are exploding. Most big technology companies are getting in on this action, the byproduct of converging technologies leading to converging markets. In 2018, Apple spent over $1 billion on original programming, while Amazon dropped $5 billion. Sling, YouTube, Hulu, even that guy who repairs lawnmowers and has three million followers on Facebook—they’re all coming to eat Hollywood’s lunch.

Throughout the rest of the chapter, we’ll explore how converging exponentials will remake entertainment over the next decade. Three major shifts—call them who, what and where—are underway. We’re seeing alterations in whois making content, whatkind of content is being made, and wherewe’re experiencing that content.

Since the inception of the silver screen, entertainment has primarily been the product of a few well-capitalized, tightly controlled studios and networks. The combination of TV ad sales and box office revenue produce just shy of $300 billion a year. By hoarding a few scarce resources—tech, talent, financing, and distribution—a handful of Hollywood studios and TV networks have maintained a virtual stranglehold on those dollars.

But accelerating exponentials have a way of making scarce resources abundant. This time is no different. And this brings us to the first of three major shifts in entertainment, a shift in whomakes content.

The Rise of the Uber-Creator
In the early 2000s, as videos cameras, editing systems, and audio recorders started to become standard on our phones, people began doing something both obvious yet unexpected—using these tools to make content. Continents of content. We coined a new phrase for these continents: user-generated content. Blogs captured the written side of this exchange; podcasts, the audio form. However, video was an issue. There was no one place these user-generated videos could call home, a hub from which everything could be freely shared.

Companies raced to fill that gap, Google foremost among them. The tech giant was desperate to be first, but their video sharing service was stuck in legal hell. Lawyers were freaked about rights. What was Google supposed to do if users posted content they didn’t own?
YouTube, though, didn’t have that problem. Back then, the company was just three ex–Pay Pal employees with an idea, a garage, and a credit card. They were just too small to care about lawyers.

They didn’t stay that way. While Google dithered about who could post what, YouTube exploded. Less than six months after YouTube cofounder Jawed Karim posted “Me at the Zoo,” the rather unremarkable first video to go up on the site, a clip of Brazilian soccer phenom Ronaldinho became the first to garner a million views. This led to a $3.5 million investment from Sequoia Capital, which YouTube used to upgrade their network and cement their position. A little more than a year later, Google decided it was easier to join forces than compete. They shut down their video sharing service and shelled out $1.65 billion to purchase YouTube, calling the site “the next step in the evolution of the Internet.”
Understatement.

Every day, billions of people watch billion of videos on the site. For the younger generation, YouTube has completely replaced television as their medium of choice. Meanwhile Hollywood’s longtime stranglehold on talent has been shattered as YouTube democratized content distribution for all of us. Social media influencers are the result, a new breed of uber-creators challenging traditional media in untraditional ways.

Take cooking shows. Celebrity chefs like Gordon Ramsay and Rachael Ray are now up against YouTube shows like Binging with Babish, where host Andrew Rea recreates meals from famous TV shows and movies for over a million viewers an episode. Or Cooking with Dog, where the kitchen escapades of a silent Japanese woman are narrated by her poodle, Francis, for the pleasure of millions. Or the 800,000 who regularly tune in to My Drunk Kitchen, which is pretty much as it sounds.

And these new stars are bringing in big bucks. In 2018, YouTuber Logan Paul racked up $14.5 million for his comedic vlogs, while gamer Daniel Middleton (DanTDM) took home $18.5 million. Neither is working alone. Musicians are also making bank, as are kids playing with toys. A seven-year-old named Ryan, the star of Ryan ToysReview, takes in over $22 million a year, earning him the number one spot on Forbes’s list of highest paid YouTube entrepreneurs. Plus, since nothing makes money like money, the venture crowd has gotten in on the action. Upfront Ventures, Khosla Ventures, First Round Capital, Lowercase Capital, SV Angel, and more, are all betting on user-generated content—meaning the uber-creator has now become as bankable as big name Hollywood stars.

As technologies continue to converge, the scale of disruption will only increase. The smartphone video camera was an uprising, allowing the masses to become makers. Then platforms like YouTube gave those makers a playground, and a way to get paid. But there are now app-based services like Bambuser that help anyone make their own live-streaming broadcast network, a development that allows creators to take aim at entire entertainment ecosystems.

Blockchain will amplify this process. By allowing artists to create unchangeable digital records of their work (making piracy impossible), and because its transaction costs are negligibly low or nonexistent, blockchain is bringing us to that fabled land of content creation: micropayments. This is what writers, artists, filmmakers, comics, and journalists have been waiting for since the internet first arrived. Direct to fan, no middlemen. A true meritocracy of creativity—or so the story goes.

Right now, new content platforms are popping up to capture all this energy. Niche markets are everywhere. Pretty much anything you can watch or listen to other people do—coding software, building robots, petting cats—there’s a channel for that, on-demand or livestreamed, and backed up with apps that allow new levels of fan interactivity. The most unusual development isn’t just the uber-empowerment of creators, it’s also the kinds of creators being empowered.

In June of 2016, the extremely eerie short film Sunspringwas released online, the end result of a neural net–powered AI being fed hundreds of sci-fi film scripts and allowed to take a crack at writing one of its own. Two months later, Twentieth Century Fox debuted the trailer for the upcoming thriller Morgan, also created with the help of an AI—this time, IBM’s Watson.

To pull this off, Watson “watched” trailers for a hundred horror movies, then conducted visual, audio, and composition analysis to understand what humans deemed scary. By applying this same kind of analysis to Morgan, the AI identified the film’s critical moments. Although a human was needed to arrange those moments into a coherent order, Watson reduced the amount of time it takes to make a trailer from ten days to one.

Movies aren’t the only format entering the machine age. Researchers at the Georgia Institute of Technology have developed Scheherazade, an AI that creates Choose Your Own Adventure–style stories for video games. While current AI-driven video games start out with a fixed number of datasets, thus a fixed number of possible storylines, Scheherazade enables unlimited plot points. It’s literally an infinite adventure machine—only, it’s not all about the algorithms. Scheherazade has help, human help. Content creation is done via collaboration between an AI and the crowd.

Which brings us to the second shift in entertainment, a shift in the kind of content being created.

From Passive to Active
The next major shift in entertainment is in whatkind of content is being made. Over the next three sections, we’ll see that content is about to become much more collaborative, immersive, and personalized. We’ll break each of these down in turn, but the place to start is with the death of “passive” media.

Passive media means information flows in only one direction. It’s traditional newspapers, magazines, television, movies, and this book. Active is the opposite. It means the information flows both ways, and finally, the user gets to have their say.

Active media isn’t new. Many companies now treat users as developers. The Wikipedia page for “Video games with user-generated gameplay content” lists ninety-five separate titles and is definitely incomplete. Popular titles such as Doom and Mario Maker include easy-to-use map editors so anyone can construct their own levels and share them online. But AI-gaming technologies like Scheherazade take this interactivity to whole new heights.

Also, into other media.

Enter MashUp Machine, an AI-driven platform for participatory storytelling. By blending machine intelligence with crowd intelligence, this app creates interactive animated movies. And it’s a two-way street. As users customize content, the AI learns the ins-and-outs of their storytelling styles, allowing it to make suggestions and help the process along.

Quality will only continue to improve. With machines helping us tell stories, our machines will become better storytellers. Soon, AI won’t just scan content for relevant topics and sticky memes to produce more content. Instead, it’ll digest entire novels, consume entire films, and—by inputting enough storytelling—know how to distinguish diamonds from dung.

