This problem has been compounded by quality control gone wild, teachers being forced to teach the test, students standardized like never before. Sadly, what we’re actually testing is a very narrow bandwidth of skills, many of which have nothing to do with the needs of adult life. Point of fact: When was the last time you factored a polynomial?
Batch processing children is both an industrial hangover and an educational disaster because of basic biology. Everyone is wired differently. Some of this is nature, some nurture, but the end result is the same: We’re individuals, and there’s no standard set of engaging experiences that can maximize learning for all. Put these problems together, and this helps explain why a 2015 study by the US Department of Education found some seven thousand students drop out of high school every day, or one student every twenty-six seconds. That’s 1.2 million students a year, with more than half of those dropouts citing boredomas the number one reason they left.

But converging technology offers a host of new solutions to the challenges of quality and quantity. Every technology that’s currently making an impact on entertainment is doing double duty in education, meaning, as we’ll see in a moment, one-size-fits-all is no match for the app store.

One Billion Android Teachers Per Year
In 2012, Nicholas Negroponte, the founder of MIT’s Media Lab, dropped off a bunch of solar charging systems and a pile of Motorola Xoom tablets in a pair of remote Ethiopian villages. The tablets were preloaded with basic learning games, movies, books, and the like, then sealed inside of boxes. Rather than being handed to the adults, the sealed boxes were given directly to children. These kids could neither read nor write. They had never seen this kind of technology before. Nobody was given instructions. Negroponte’s question was simple: What happens next?
For decades, Negroponte has been trying to answer this question. He’s been the leading voice for an unusual idea: Children, armed only with a laptop loaded with educational apps and games, could teach themselves to read and write while also learning how to navigate the internet.

Years earlier, to advance this cause, he’d founded the nonprofit One Laptop per Child, with the goal of building a $100 tablet computer that could be put into the hands of children in need. Still, questions remained: Was a cheap tablet sufficient to solve this problem? How much teaching and direction would kids actually need? Could children teach themselves simply by playing with the apps and games?
The Ethiopian experiment was meant to answer those questions—which it did, and then some. “I thought the kids would play with the boxes,” Negroponte told the MIT Review. “Within four minutes, one kid not only opened the box, [but also] found the on-off switch… [and] powered it up. Within five days, they were using forty-seven apps per child, per day. Within two weeks, they were singing ABC songs in the village, and within five months, they had hacked [the] Android [operating system].”
Certainly, learning to read by computer is not a new idea. In Abundance, we explored research conducted by Sugata Mitra, a professor of education technology at Newcastle University. Mitra’s work shows that functional illiteracy isn’t a barrier to computer literacy. In his studies, children in India’s slums were given access to a net-connected computer. Very quickly, they learned to use the equipment, surf the Web, and teach themselves the basics of reading and writing.

Negroponte’s Ethiopia experiment went further. What excited the One Laptop per Child team was how the tablets unlocked self-directed learning and creativity, and more importantly, how technologically sophisticated the kids had to become, on their own, to unlock those skills in the first place. “The kids had completely customized the desktop,” Ed McNierney, the nonprofit’s CTO, told the MIT Review, “so every kid’s tablet looked different. We had installed software to prevent them from doing that. And the fact they worked around it was clearly the kind of creativity, the kind of inquiry, the kind of discovery, that we think is essential to learning.”
In 2017, the XPRIZE decided to take things to the next level, launching the $15 million Global Learning XPRIZE. Principally funded by Elon Musk, in partnership with Google, the prize was a software development challenge aimed at the 263 million children in the world without access to school. To claim it, a team had to develop Android-based software that would allow a child to quickly self-educate with nothing more than a tablet—that is, learn the basics of reading and writing (in Swahili, as Tanzania was where the winning software would be tested) and math in under eighteen months
The competition attracted about seven hundred teams from around the world. Nearly two hundred delivered software, and out of this pool, five finalists were selected and each received a million dollars for their software to be loaded onto some five thousand Pixel C tablets donated by Google. In partnership with the World Food Program, XPRIZE identified some twenty-four hundred illiterate children in 167 different ultra-remote villages in Tanzania. These villages had neither schools nor literate adults. They then installed solar chargers (to charge the tablets), pretested the children (to later benchmark progress), and distributed the tablets.

In May of 2019, two teams split the final $10 million purse, Kitkit School from South Korea and Onebillion from Kenya. Both had created software that, in an hour a day, produced an education equivalent to what those children would have received attending a Tanzanian school on a full-time basis. Per the rules of the competition, the software produced by all five finalists, including the two winning teams, has been open-sourced (it’s available for free on GitHub).

For this software to become a real weapon in the fight against illiteracy, there is also the issue of getting a tablet into the hands of any child in need (or adult, for that matter). But that’s the real goal of the prize. If this self-education software comes pre-installed on every Android phone and tablet, then—when you’re ready to replace your device—you can instead donate it to charity. You help the environment by recycling, and you help society by empowering a child. In a very real sense, you’re donating a teacher. And with over a billion Android handsets manufactured each year, this software could make a serious dent in what has to be the single greatest squandering of talent in history—the 263 million young minds that need our help.

The Ultimate Field Trip
History class, 2030. This week’s lesson: Ancient Egypt. The pharaohs, the queens, the tombs—the full Tut.

Sure, you’d love to see the pyramids in person. But the cost of airfare? Hotel rooms for the entire class? Taking two weeks off from school for the trip? None of these things are feasible. Yet, even if you could go, you couldn’t go. Many of Egypt’s tombs are closed for repairs, and definitely off-limits to a group of teenagers.

Not to worry, VR solves these problems.

In regular reality, Queen Nefertari’s resting place sits in the Valley of the Queens—not that civilians ever get to look inside. To preserve the relics, the tomb has been shuttered to the public for decades. In VR world though, you and your classmates can easily visit the burial chamber, trace the hieroglyphics, even check out her sarcophagus up close. You also have a world-class Egyptologist as a tour guide: “If you turn your attention to the filigree at the back of the tomb, you will notice a sculpture of Osiris, the Egyptian god of…”
But turning your attention to the back of the tomb doesn’t require waiting until 2030. In 2018, Philip Rosedale and his team at High Fidelity pulled off this exact virtual field trip. First, they 3-D laser scanned every square inch of Queen Nefertari’s tomb. They also shot thousands of high-resolution photos of the burial chamber. By stitching together more than ten thousand photos into a single vista, then laying that vista atop their 3-D scanned map, Rosedale created a stunningly accurate virtual tomb. Next, he gave a classroom full of kids HTC Vive VR headsets. Because High Fidelity is a social VR platform, meaning multiple people can share the same virtual space at the same time, the entire class was able to explore that tomb together. In total, for their fully immersive field trip to Egypt: zero travel time, zero travel expenses.

This was a rich learning experience for the kids who took the trip. Research shows that multi-sensory learning trumps other forms—even if we do that learning in VR. This means the technology allows us to create an infinite variety of immersive high quality teaching environments. Yet this is only where we are today.

Tomorrow? Well, many experts think education could be VR’s killer app. More likely, it will be a combination of VR and AI. Here’s one reason why: Remember virtual Tony Robbins? The same neural nets that enable Lifekind to duplicate the renowned life coach allow us to duplicate anyone. Want to check out ancient Greece? Not only do you get every Doric column, you also get a bearded gent in a white toga greeting you with, “Hello, I’m Plato, let’s tour my academy.”
As cool as it might sound to learn ethics from the guy who invented ethics, VR can actually take this farther. Jeremy Bailenson, the director of Stanford’s Virtual Human Interaction Lab whom we met in Chapter Three, has spent the past sixteen years studying VR’s ability to expand empathy, the emotional foundation of ethics. In that time, he’s discovered that VR can quickly and significantly shift our attitudes and actions toward everything from homelessness to climate change to racial prejudice. Spend time in VR world as an elderly homeless woman and the amount of empathy you feel for the homeless will significantly increase—and that increase remains once you exit the VR world. The technology doesn’t just change how we feel and act in the virtual, but how we feel and act in the actual. In other words, VR unlocks the possibility of an entirely different kind of moral education.

Nor is empathy the only emotion VR appears capable of training. In research conducted at USC, psychologist Skip Rizzo has had considerable success using virtual reality to treat PTSD in soldiers. Other scientists have extended this to the full range of anxiety disorders. When you put all of this together, VR, especially when combined with AI, has the potential to facilitate a top-shelf traditional education, plus all the empathy and emotional skills that traditional education has long been lacking.

Most crucially, when AI and VR converge with wireless 5G networks, our global education problem moves from the nearly impossible challenge of recruiting teachers and funding schools for the hundreds of millions in need, to the much more manageable puzzle of building a fantastic virtual educational system that we can give away for free to anyone with a headset. It’s quality and quantity on demand.

School 2030
It’s 2030 and school is in session—only what does school 2030 actually look like? Turns out, our first glance at that future actually arrived in 1995, when science-fiction author Neal Stephenson published the novel The Diamond Age. This coming-of-age story is set in a neo-Victorian future where nanotechnology and AI are woven into the fabric of everyday life, and education is handled by the book—that is, by the Young Woman’s Illustrated Primer
The primer is an AI-driven, individually customized learning companion disguised as a book. The book answers questions in a contextually relevant and engaging fashion. Packed with sensors that monitor everything from energy levels to emotional state, the primer creates a rich learning environment aimed at producing a specific transformation. Rather than molding children to the needs of society, the primer has more humanist aims: to produce strong, independent, empathetic, and creative thinkers
As it turns out, Neal Stephenson is now the chief futurist at Magic Leap, helping use augmented reality to birth his illustrated primer, version 1.0. Magic Leap’s technology allows you to place holograms in the world around you. Concepts that are difficult to visualize via a 2D screen—such as human anatomy—come alive in this 3-D world. Imagine a virtual autopsy, being able to strip away layers of skin or muscle inside a navigable operating room. The experience of learning in a 3-D environment is a rich one, making it much more likely to cross the bridge from short-term into long-term memory.

But the real magic of augmented reality is that it extends the classroom into the world. With the mix of AR and AI, every walk becomes a history lesson. Amble the streets of Manhattan, for example, and you can see the buildings as they were a century ago, complete with holographic Victorians serving as virtual historians.

Of course, AR alone doesn’t get us to the Primer, but if we couple it to ongoing convergences, the picture becomes clearer. Today’s AI revolution gives us another component, the ability to create individually customized learning environments. Add in sensors that respond to neurophysiological data—so students can, for one example, keep themselves in a growth mindset (which research shows is needed for learning), or, to offer a second example, push themselves toward a flow state (which research shows can amplify learning). Put it all together and we start to see a very different future, one of distributed, individually customizable, accelerated learning environments. So what is school like in 2030? Well, what would you like to learn today?CHAPTER NINE The Future of HealthcareMartine and the Moonshots
It was the news no one wants to receive.

