In 1992, Martine Rothblatt’s daughter was told she had fewer than five years to live. The doctors called it pulmonary hypertension, a rare lung disorder that historically infects about two thousand Americans at any one time. Yet it’s easy to misinterpret the smallness of this number—the disease itself is a ruthless killer, claiming just about every life it touches. The small number of people living with pulmonary hypertension is a testament to its virulence, not its frequency. Either way, her daughter was dying, so Martine decided to square off against this killer.

The doctors told her that her quest was impossible. There were a lot of doctors. Also, a lot of time between doctor’s visits—mostly spent in a medical library. Martine had a system: Find an article in a journal about pulmonary hypertension, backtrack the terminology to a college textbook, backtrack the key ideas to a more general high school textbook, and repeat.

And repeat.

Martine doesn’t remember the moment she decided to tackle the ultimate moonshot—cure an incurable disease in less time than it would take her daughter to die from the disease—but that’s par for the course. By the time she got interested in pulmonary hypertension, Martine Rothblatt was already two moonshots in to what is currently a seven-moonshot career. And counting.

Today, Martine Rothblatt is one of the highest paid female CEOs in America. How she got there though? That’s the more interesting story.

Martine began her life as Martin, a Jewish boy from a Hispanic neighborhood in Chicago. He grew up to be, at least for a while, nothing spectacular. First a college dropout, next a globetrotting backpacker. But a chance encounter with a NASA tracking system in the Seychelle Islands gave him a crazy idea: unite the world through satellite communications.

Martin, like Martine, was a go-getter. His Seychelles vision led to graduate school at UCLA for dual degrees in law and business. He parlayed those into an expertise in space law, which laid the foundation for a series of space-based communications companies. These include both the world’s first global satellite radio network, and Sirius XM, still the satellite radio category killer, which Rothblatt cofounded in 1990.

In the middle of this, Martin got married, had a daughter named Jenesis, got divorced, got remarried, had two more children, then decided he was a she trapped in the wrong body. So Martin embarked on her second moonshot, sex reassignment surgery, and became Martine, staying married to the same woman. Actually, they stayed happily married.

But that’s when Jenesis got sick.

Martine cashed out of Sirius. She plunged that money into hunting for a cure. Eventually, this led her to an orphan drug for pulmonary hypertension. Glaxo owned the patent, but they’d shelved it. Martine built a team of scientists and managed to license the “drug”—though we’re using that word euphemistically. What she actually got from Glaxo was a small Baggie filled with a few tablespoons of white powder that—in tests with rats—had showed a little promise a long time ago.

Still, United Therapeutics was born.

A hundred top chemists said the patent would never become a medicine, but three years later, when Martine’s daughter was literally taking her last breaths, that medicine hit the market. Today, Jenesis is in her mid-thirties, the drug that saved her life generates a billion and a half dollars a year in revenue for United Therapeutics, and the number of patients now living with pulmonary hypertension has climbed from two thousand to forty thousand.

And if this were the end of the story, it would be a hell of a tale. Yet Martine’s drug was a half measure. It managed the condition, but wasn’t a cure. In fact, right now, the only cure for pulmonary hypertension—or, for that matter, pulmonary fibrosis, cystic fibrosis, emphysema, or COPD—is a lung transplant. But in the US, only two thousand lungs a year become available, while over a half-million people die of lung failure from tobacco-related ailments alone. These dire facts led to another Martine moonshot: create an unlimited supply of transplantable organs.

“We do this with cars and buildings all the time,” explains Martine, “we swap out old parts for new parts and can keep things running, essentially, forever. I wanted to find a way to do this for the human body.”
She took a three-pronged approach to this problem. First, to solve the problem of lung replacement, she decided not to reinvent the wheel. Today, because the lungs of the dying fill up with toxic chemicals, over 80 percent of those donated for transplant end up in trash cans. So Martine helped perfect a way to keep lungs alive outside the body, what’s technically called “ex vivo lung perfusion.” Already, this procedure has saved thousands of lives, but once again, she wasn’t done.

Next, Martine attacked the larger problem of organ shortages through xenotransplantation. It’s an old and controversial idea—harvest fresh animal organs to replace failing human ones—but issues of disease, rejection, and animal cruelty have kept it sidelined. Martine decided to push through.

Pig organs are similar to human organs, so she started there. By teaming up with Synthetic Genomics and Craig Venter, the same scienst who decoded the human genome, she made the most complete genetic map of a pig to date. Next, CRISPR knocked out all the genes that led to viruses, eliminating the dangers of disease and producing a “clean” pig. Now their latest goal is the biggest: knock out the genes that lead to organ rejection in humans. If successful, it’ll mean a near infinite organ supply—albeit one that comes with a whole lot of suffering for pigs.

To combat that final problem, Martine is using cutting-edge tissue engineering techniques in an attempt to bypass animals entirely. Out of collagen, she’s begun 3-D printing an artificial lung scaffold. To turn that scaffold into a living lung, she’s experimenting with stem cells.

And, lastly, because it often takes too long to get an organ from its current location to a waiting patient, Martine backedBeta Technologies’ flying car, with plans to use these eco-friendly vehicles to whisk newly minted organs to patients in need. Finally, at age sixty, just for the fun of it, she became a helicopter pilot herself, and then, in a vehicle designed by her company, set a world record for speed in an electric helicopter. All of which is to say, by sometime in 2028 or so, Martine believes that death by organ failure will become a problem to be managed rather than a sad fact of life. And we have seven moonshots’ worth of reasons to believe her.

Turning Sick Care into Healthcare
It probably goes without saying that Martine Rothblatt’s outsider assault on the healthcare industry was aided and abetted by converging exponentials. CRISPR, genomics, stem cells, 3-D printing, electric vehicles—the list goes on. But it’s helpful to remember that even though Martine’s story is a testament to what determination and technology now make possible, it’s only one story. There are thousands more, maybe not quite as extraordinary, but just as impactful.

When it comes to healthcare, the system itself is often sicker than the patients. Even the terminology is misleading. Today, going to the doctor is about sickcare more than healthcare. It’s reactive, not proactive. Doctors make after-the-fact interventions, fighting a rearguard battle that’s often inefficient, overpriced, and in certain cases, downright surreal. In the US, for example, fear of liability has doctors spending $210 billion per year on procedures patients don’t need.

The research side isn’t any better. Out of every five thousand new drugs introduced, only five make it to human testing, and only one of those is actually approved. This is why the average medicine takes twelve years to get from lab to patient, at a cost of $2.5 billion, and Americans spend an average of $10,739 per person per year on healthcare—more than any other country on Earth. If nothing changes, by 2027, this single industry will consume nearly 20 percent of the US GDP.

But plenty is changing. The scope of this story is huge. If we wanted, we could fill multiple volumes with all that’s unfolding. To keep things manageable, we’re focusing on six shifts, four that are technological and two paradigm shifts.

On the technological front, every step in the medical treatment train is being reinvented. On the front end, the convergence of sensors, networks, and AI is upending medical diagnostics. In the middle, robotics and 3-D printing are changing the nature of medical procedures. On the back end, AI, genomics, and quantum computing are transforming medicines themselves.

Concurrently, as a result of these convergences, two major paradigm shifts are under way. The first is the shift from sick care to healthcare, from a system that is retrospective, reactive, and generic, to one that is prospective, proactive, and personalized.

