The next is a change in management. For most of the last century, the healthcare industry was an uneasy partnership between big pharma, big government, and the full spectrum of doctors, nurses, and trained medical professionals. Now we’re witnessing an invasion. Many of the big technology companies are getting into this game, all intent on making an impact. “If you zoom out into the future,” Apple CEO Tim Cook recently said (in that same interview with the Independentwhere he talked about the potential of AR), “and ask what was Apple’s greatest contribution to mankind, it will be about health.”
Racing Apple are Google, Amazon, Facebook, Samsung, Baidu, Tencent, and others. As we shall see in a moment, all of these companies have three clear advantages over the establishment: They’re already in your home, into artificial intelligence, and experts in collecting and analyzing your data. While it remains an open question whether we want to turn our healthcare over to the big technology companies, what is certain is that these three advantages are fundamental to detecting diseases early enough to make a difference, which is definitely the first step in turning sick care into healthcare.

DIY Diagnostics
On a wintery Wednesday in January 2026, you’re being watched. Carefully watched. Technically, you’re asleep in your bed, but Google’s home assistant knows your schedule. Thanks to your Oura ring, it also knows you’ve just completed a REM cycle and are now entering Stage 1 sleep—making it the perfect time to wake you up.

A gentle increase in the room’s lighting simulates the sunrise, while optimized light wavelengths maximize wakefulness and improve mood. By the time you’ve gone through your bathroom rituals—toilet, toothbrush, etc.—you realize mood isn’t the problem. It’s that tightness in your joints, the chill in your bones.

Are you getting sick?
The NIH released their universal flu vaccine a few months back, but you didn’t have time for the shot. Now you’re wondering if skipping it was a mistake.

But no need to wonder.

“Hey Google, how’s my health this morning?”
“One moment,” says your digital assistant.

It takes thirty seconds for the full diagnostic to run, which is pretty good considering the system deploys dozens of sensors capturing gigabytes of data. Smart sensors in toothbrush and toilet, wearables in bedding and clothing, implantables inside your body—a mobile health suite with a 360-degree view of your system.

“Your microbiome looks perfect,” Google tells you. “Also, blood glucose levels are good, vitamin levels fine, but an increased core temperature and IgE levels…”
“Google—in plain English?”
“You’ve got a virus.”
“A what?”
“I ran through your last forty-eight hours of meetings. It seems like you picked it up Monday, at Jonah’s birthday party. I’d like to run additional diagnostics, would you mind using the…”
Well, take your pick. Alphabet’s healthcare division, called Verily Life Sciences, is developing a full range of internal and external sensors that monitor everything from blood sugar to blood chemistry. And that’s just Alphabet. The list of once multimillion-dollar medical machines now being dematerialized, demonetized, democratized, and delocalized—that is, made into portable and even wearable sensors—could fill a textbook.

Consider the spectrum of possibilities. On the whiz-bang side, there’s Exo Imaging’s AI-enabled, cheap, handheld ultrasound 3-D imager—meaning you will soon be able to track anything from wound healing to fetus growth from the comfort of your home. Or former Google X project leader Mary Lou Jepsen’s startup, Openwater, which is using red laser holography to create a portable MRI equivalent, turning what is today a multimillion-dollar machine into a wearable consumer electronics device and giving three-quarters of the world access to medical imaging they currently lack. Yet simpler developments might be more revolutionary.

In less than two decades, wearables have gone from step-counting first-generation self-trackers to Apple’s fourth-generation iWatch that includes an FDA-approved ECG scanner capable of real-time cardiac monitoring. Or Final Frontier Medical Devices’ DxtER, the winner of the $10 million Qualcomm Tricorder XPRIZE, a collection of easy-to-use, noninvasive medical sensors and a diagnostic AI accessible via app. DxtER reliably detects over fifty common ailments.

All of these developments point toward a future of always-on health monitoring and cheap, easy diagnostics. The technical term for this shift is “mobile health,” a field predicted to become a $102 billion market by 2022. Step aside, WebMD. The idea here is to put a virtual doctor, on demand, in your back pocket.

And we’re getting close. Riding the convergence of networks, sensors, and computing, AI-backed medical chatbots are now flooding the market. These apps can diagnose everything from a rash to retinopathy. And it’s not just physical ailments. Woebot is now taking on mental health, delivering cognitive behavioral therapy via Facebook Messenger to patients suffering from depression.

So where are these trends actually headed?
Take Human Longevity Inc. (HLI), one of the companies Peter cofounded. HLI offers a service called “Health Nucleus,” an annual, three-hour health scan consisting of whole genome sequencing, whole body MRI, heart and lung CT, electrocardiogram, echocardiogram, and a slew of clinical blood tests—essentially the most complete picture of health currently available.

This picture is important for two reasons. The first is early disease detection. In 2018, Human Longevity published stats on their first 1,190 clients. Nine percent of their patients uncovered previously undetected coronary artery disease (the number one killer in the world), 2.5 percent found aneurysms (the number two killer in the world), 2 percent saw tumors—and so forth. In total, 14.4 had significant issues requiring immediate intervention, while 40 percent found a condition that needed long-term monitoring.

The second reason this is important? Everything Human Longevity is measuring and tracking via half-day annual visits will soon come to you on demand. Thanks to always-on, always watching sensors, your smartphone is about to become your doctor.

Reading, Writing, and Editing the Code of Life
For a decade, experts have been trumpeting personalized genomics as a healthcare revolution. When we understand your genome, the thinking goes, we’ll know how to optimize “you.” We’ll know the perfect foods, the perfect drugs, and the perfect exercise regimen, just for you. We’ll know the types of gut flora best suited for your microbiome, the supplements that best commingle with your physiology. You’ll learn the diseases to which you’re most susceptible, and, more importantly, how to prevent them. Or so the story goes.…
In 2017, Jason Vassy, a professor of medicine at Boston’s Brigham and Women’s Hospital, decided to take a closer look at that story. A hundred patients were recruited. Half had their DNA screened; the other half answered questions about family medical history, which is the standard method for establishing genetic risk. In the results, Vassy wanted to compare overwhelm and anxiety versus real world usefulness. Critics of personalized genomics worry about information overload for doctors, needless anxiety for patients, and expensive and unnecessary follow-up testing for both. But that’s not what Vassy discovered.

Instead, according to results published in the Annals of Internal Medicine, there was no trace of these concerns. What did happen was that 20 percent of the patients who had their DNA screened discovered rare, life-threatening conditions that required immediate action. Once again, in results very similar to what Health Nucleus uncovered, lives were saved.

Yet the more important result comes not from any one patient being screened, but from their combined aggregate of genomes. The larger and more complete our genetic data sets, the more robust the preventative power of genomics will become. This is also why, in 2018, the National Institutes of Health launched their All of Us project, distributing nearly $27 million in grants to sequence a million genomes, and Harvard geneticist George Church recently founded Nebula Genomics to do something similar.

Church is also involved in the Genome Project-Write, which is the farther future—an attempt to write a human genome from scratch. If successful, GP-Write, as it is known, will help us grow transplantable organs, give us new weapons in the war on viruses and cancer, and provide cheap medicines and vaccines.

