Another frontier is the use of CRISPR to edit genomes. It’s still early, but progress is impressive. Researchers recently genetically engineered cocaine resistance into mice, switched off the gene responsible for Duchenne muscular dystrophy in dogs, and have begun developing personalized cancer therapies in humans. There’s even work in insects. Researchers at Imperial College in London have CRISPR-created a new breed of mosquito that cannot reproduce. It’s also designed to outcompete its malaria-laden siblings, making this a healthcare revolution via species-wide gene editing—and it’s already happening. In late 2018, field trials were getting under way in Burkina Faso, a country plagued by malaria.

But the biggest news isn’t about this company or that technique, it’s that half of the thirty-two thousand most common genetic disorders are caused by an error in a single base pair—meaning one letter in the code is out of place. This may be something we can soon correct. We’re not there yet, but before too long, between traditional gene therapy and CRISPR, we will soon gain the ability to purge sixteen thousand diseases from our lives. So you’ve got to ask yourself, if the curing of one disease is a miracle of the biblical variety, what do you call the curing of sixteen thousand?
The Future of Surgery
There’s no healthcare on Mars. The Red Planet is devoid of hospitals, HMOs, and all the rest. And while none of this matters today, in the 2030s, when NASA is planning to launch the first human exploration mission to the planet, it’ll be a much bigger issue. On Mars, astronauts won’t just be out of network, they’ll be off-world, with the nearest emergency room nine months and a gravity-assist away.

Traumatic injury keeps astronauts up at night. Not only has it never happened before—so we have zero experience with this particular space catastrophe—it’s all but guaranteed to happen on Mars. Studies put the odds of a serious medical problem in space at .06 percent per person per year. On a multiyear interplanetary mission, remaining emergency free would require, well, as Elon Musk once explained: “If safety is your top goal, I would not go to Mars.”
Dr. Peter Kim wants to solve this problem. An associate surgeon in chief at Children’s National Medical Center in Washington, DC, Kim is part of the research team behind STAR—Soft Tissue Autonomous Robot—a robot that can already outperform surgeons on the specific task of suturing soft tissue.

Soft tissue repair is messy. It’s bloody. It demands exacting precision. Since doctors vary in both levels of training and dexterity, over 30 percent of soft tissue surgeries end in complications. In space, these kinds of complications can easily become fatal, so figuring out how to perform soft tissue surgery before we start colonizing other planets is mission critical
STAR is one of our best hopes. For starters, dexterity is standard—it comes built in. And with an AI involved, training isn’t an issue. Right now, STAR sews tissue five to ten times faster than a human, and with far greater precision. Tomorrow’s version will have more sophisticated force feedback and an array of multispectral cameras that can see through soft tissue. Kim wants tomorrow’s system aboard the first mission to Mars to ensure that surgery in space doesn’t end up looking like outtakes from Alien
Yet, while critical off-world, STAR’s real promise is here on Earth. There are roughly 50 million surgeries undertaken in the US each year, yet fewer than 5 percent are done robotically. However, the single most important question you can ask as you interview your surgeon is “How many times have you performed this procedure?” More importantly, “How many times have you performed it today?” Surgeons with the most practice in the widest variety of conditions produce the best results. This is why, ten years from now, when you’re wheeled into the operating room and see a human doctor, your immediate response will be: “No way. I want the robot.”
Dozens of surgical robots are now heading to market. There are bone-crushing robots for orthopedics already in use, with five different spinal surgery robots about to come online, and specialty bots of nearly every variety in development. Most of these are cobots—meaning the robot assists the surgeon rather than replacing the surgeon. Yet it’s autonomous robots like STAR that hold the most promise. With the ability to perfectly execute routine procedures at a fraction of today’s cost, robo-surgeons bring demonetization into the operating room.

Unwilling to let entrepreneurs have all the fun, big tech companies are also rushing into that room. Exhibit A: Verb Surgical, a partnership between Alphabet and Johnson & Johnson. With their fleet of cheap and much-improved surgical robots hitting the market in 2020, Verb’s stated, unassuming goal is the “democratization of surgery.” What does that mean in plain English? Your medical bills will get a lot smaller.

And while full-grown surgical robots have gotten much of the attention, their smaller cousins might be the more impactful development. Take the Israeli startup, Bionaut Labs. In medicine today, a great many of the issues we face are local in nature. Cancer, for example. We have lung cancer or ovarian cancer. Unfortunately, we often treat local cancers with system-wide solutions, such as chemotherapy. These system-wide approaches tend to be inaccurate, inefficient, and prone to side effects, which are three reasons why drug design is stratospherically expensive and 90 percent of all potential treatment candidates fail to make it out of the lab.

But Bionaut has built an almost microscopic robot that moves through tissue at speed—some sixty centimeters per hour—in a minimally invasive, absolutely precise manner. Guided by weak magnetic fields, these remote-controlled microbots carry diverse payloads that can be released on demand, exactly when and where needed. They’re a few years away from prime time, but the plan is to use them for diagnostics, targeted medicine delivery, and minimally invasive surgery.

While both macrobots in operating rooms and microbots in our bodies will transform surgery, in our converging universe nothing ever operates on its own. AI is already in this surgical mix. It parses the blizzard of signals pouring into the ICU, aids autonomous robots as they navigate the human body, and—via cobots like the Da Vinci robot—steadies the tremors in a surgeon’s hand. But, once again, it’s not just AI.

3-D printing has also entered the operating room. Actually, it’s been there for a while. In Abundance, we described how the tech was then hitting prosthetics, beginning to impact organ printing, and about to enter bionics. Today, an internet search reveals people with little training creating exceptionally functional prosthetic limbs on equipment bought at Staples. People with training, meanwhile, are crafting organs, ears, heart shunts, spinal cords, cranial plates, hip joints, and individually customized surgical tools. And with the ability to 3-D print electronics, we’re making bionic body parts as well. In fact, in 2018, a team from the University of Minnesota successfully printed a rounded semiconducting material capable of turning light into patterns—which has been the main impediment to creating that ultimate spare part: a printable, bionic eye.

Cellular Medicine
Cellular medicine was a notion that first emerged in the 1990s, after the discovery of stem cells. Novel yet simple, the idea was to use these cells as weapons against illness. In the years since, this idea has come to include more cell types than just stem cells, but the treatment remains the same. Inject patients with living cells which, to a varying degree, can influence and/or revitalize an assortment of functions: regrow hair, rejuvenate tissue, kill cancer, repair cardiac damage, quiet autoimmune diseases, even increase muscle mass.

Earlier in this book we mentioned neurosurgeon and entrepreneur Bob Hariri, who helped pioneer the field of cellular medicine with his year 2000 discovery that the human placenta houses an abundant supply of stem cells—providing a noncontroversial supply of this potential treatment option.

After Hariri’s company was acquired by pharma giant Celgene, he led a team of over a hundred scientists and engineers in an effort to turn placental stem cells into real medicines. Along the way, they made two other critical discoveries. First, as people age, their supply of stem cells rapidly diminishes, a process known as “stem cell exhaustion” (that we’ll explore in depth in our next chapter). Second, the placenta doesn’t just contain stem cells, but also houses immunological cells such as natural killer cells and T-cells, both of which are critical in the body’s natural ability to fight cancer—as long as they recognize the danger.

Normally our immune system destroys cancer cells at very early stages of development. But, as we age, cancers can pile up. Some go undetected, and that’s when the situation gets dangerous. To attack that danger, we’ve invented a new kind of therapy known as CAR-T (for chimeric antigen receptor T-cell) therapy. In this approach, a patient’s white blood cells are collected and their T cells are separated out and genetically reengineered to target and kill specific cancer cells. These reprogrammed cells are then injected back into the patient, effectively becoming a kind of heat-seeking cancer missile.

Unfortunately, this isn’t cheap.

In 2017, when the first CAR-T therapies were released, the price was roughly half-a-million dollars per patient. Since every patient’s CAR-T cells have to be individually weaponized, the problem was how to manufacture this medicine at scale. In 2018, Celgene spun out their cellular medicine division with Hariri at the helm, and by using placental-derived immunological cells, this new company, Celularity, has created a one-size-fits-all version of the medicine. Rather than a bespoke therapy, Celularity can create CAR-T in bulk and at speed, getting drugs to patients in hours after diagnosis, rather than the weeks it now takes.

Celularity scientists have also figured out how to weaponize placental natural killer cells (pNK cells), genetically modifying them into CAR-NK cells to enhance their tumor-targeting abilities. And like placental CAR-T cells, placental CAR-NK cells can be made into a one-size-fits-all medicine, giving us the ability to make cancer treatments available to the masses. This is the most important point. Cancer is the number two killer in the world, and placentas are abundant. There are over a hundred million births per year, and 99 percent of those placentas are thrown away. Saving this supply gives us the potential to manufacture these medicines cheaply and at scale.

The Future of Drugs
Traditionally, if a pharmaceutical company wants to create a new medicine, they have two choices. Either they comb enormous medical libraries for potential candidates or send an expedition to an exotic locale to hunt for naturally occurring possibilities—like some rare tree bark that has anti-cancer properties. Neither is a sure thing, both take years of effort, and that’s barely the starting line. Once candidates are identified, they’re next analyzed, synthesized, and more years pass. Finally, these discoveries are tested, initially in animals, then in small groups of humans, eventually in large groups of humans. In short, drug discovery is a long, slow war.

It really is a war. The body count is high. Ninety percent of all drug possibilities fail. The few that do succeed take an average of ten years to reach the market and cost between $2.5 billion and $12 billion to get there. But computer scientist turned biophysicist Alex Zhavoronkov believes he’s found a shortcut.

Around 2012, Zhavoronkov started to notice that artificial intelligence was getting increasingly good at image, voice, and text recognition. He knew that all three tasks shared a critical commonality. In each, massive datasets were available, making it easy to train up an AI. Similar datasets were present in pharmacology. So, back in 2014, Zhavoronkov started wondering if he could use these datasets and AI to significantly speed up the drug discovery process.

He’d heard about a new technique in artificial intelligence known as generative adversarial networks (or GANs). By pitting two neural nets against one another (adversarial), the system can start with minimal instructions and produce novel outcomes (generative). Researchers had been using GANs to do things like design new objects or create one-of-a-kind, fake human faces, but Zhavoronkov wanted to apply them to pharmacology. He figured GANs would allow researchers to verbally describe drug attributes: “The compound should inhibit protein X at concentration Y with minimal side effects in humans,” and then the AI could construct the molecule from scratch.

To turn his idea into reality, Zhavoronkov set up Insilico Medicine on the campus of Johns Hopkins University in Baltimore, Maryland, and rolled up his sleeves. “It took us three years of hard work to develop a system that researchers could actually interact with in this way,” he explains. “But we pulled it off, and this has allowed us to reinvent the drug discovery process.”
Instead of beginning their process in some exotic locale, Insilico’s “drug discovery engine” sifts millions of data samples to determine the signature biological characteristics of specific diseases. The engine then identifies the most promising treatment targets and—using GANs—generates molecules (that is, baby drugs) perfectly suited for them. “The results are an explosion in potential drug targets and a much more efficient testing process,” says Zhavoronkov. “AI allows us to do with fifty people what a typical drug company does with five thousand.”
