The results have turned what was once a decade-long war into a month-long skirmish. In late 2018, for example, Insilico was generating novel molecules in fewer than forty-six days, and this included not just the initial discovery, but also the synthesis of the drug and its experimental validation in computer simulations.

Right now, they’re using the system to hunt for new drugs for cancer, aging, fibrosis, Parkinson’s, Alzheimer’s, ALS, diabetes, and many others. The first drug to result from this work, a treatment for hair loss, is slated to start Phase I trials by the end of 2020. They’re also in the early stages of using AI to predict the outcomes of clinical trials in advance of the trial. If successful, this technique will enable researchers to strip a bundle of time and money out of the traditional testing process.

Beyond inventing new drugs, AI is also being used by other scientists to identify new drug targets—that is, the place a drug binds to in the body and another key part of the drug discovery process. Between 1980 and 2006, despite an annual investment of $30 billion, researchers only managed to find about five new drug targets a year.

The trouble is complexity. Most potential drug targets are proteins, and a protein’s structure—meaning the way a 2D sequence of amino acids folds into a 3-D protein—determines its function. But a protein with merely a hundred amino acids (a rather small protein) can produce a googol-cubed worth of potential shapes—that’s a one followed by three hundred zeroes. This is also why protein-folding has long been considered a really hard problem for a really big supercomputer.

Back in 1994, to monitor this supercomputer protein-folding progress, a biannual competition was created. Until 2018, success was fairly rare. But then the creators of DeepMind turned their neural networks loose on the problem. They created an AI that mines enormous datasets to determine the most likely distance between a protein’s base pairs and the angles of their chemical bonds—aka, the basics of protein folding. They called it AlphaFold.

On its first foray into the competition, contestant AIs were given forty-three protein-folding problems to solve. AlphaFold got twenty-five right. The second-place team managed a meager three.

If we couple AlphaFold’s progress to Insilico’s GANs and add in the anticipated breakthroughs in quantum computing—another technology being aimed at drug discovery—we’re not far from a world where individually customized medicine will move from science fiction to the standard of care. And don’t blink, because as radical a shift as this may seem, none of it includes the breakthroughs happening in the adjacent field of longevity.CHAPTER TEN The Future of LongevityThe Nine Horsemen of Our Apocalypse
Earlier in this book, we explored how extending the healthy human lifespan will have a significant impact on the rate of change in the world. The equation was fairly simple—longer lives means more time spent at our productive best which means more innovation. But what we didn’t cover in any detail was how this would happen. Here, on the back end of our exploration of the related field of healthcare, we want to turn our attention to this question of longevity, seeing how the forces of convergence are rewriting the rules in the race between technology and mortality.

And the place to start: mortality itself, the life clock known as aging. “Aging is not just a running down of the system,” explains longevity researcher and director of the National Institutes of Health, Francis Collins. “It is a programmed process. Evolution probably had an investment in having the lifespan of a particular species not go on forever. You’ve got to get the old folks out of the way so the young ones have a chance at the resources.”
To get the old folks out of the way, evolution devised a fail-safe: planned obsolescence, otherwise known as aging. It’s a redundant plan. Scientists now believe there are nine main “causes” of our decline, the nine horsemen of an internal apocalypse. We’re going to spend the rest of this chapter investigating the strategies being deployed to defeat this decline. Yet, before we do that, we first need to meet these horsemen, and explore the fundamental question they answer: What, exactly, is killing us?
Genomic Instability:DNA doesn’t always replicate according to plan. Typically, these errors in gene expression get caught and corrected, but not always. Over time, these misfires build up, causing our body to wear down—meaning genetic instability leads to genetic damage leads to a limit on lifespan. Think of it as a broken copy machine, except, instead of producing unreadable pages, our broken genetic copier produces diseases like cancer, muscular dystrophy, and ALS.

Telomere Attrition:At the heart of a cell, DNA is packed into threadlike structures called chromosomes. Chromosomes are capped by telomeres, or short snippets of DNA repeated thousands of times. These repetitions act as barriers—like bumpers on a car—designed to protect the core of the chromosome. But as DNA replicates, telomeres get shorter. At a critical shortness threshold, the cell stops dividing, and we become much more susceptible to disease.

Epigenetic Alterations:Nature impacts nurture. Over the course of a lifetime, factors in our environment can change how our genes express, sometimes for the worse. Exposure to carcinogens in the environment can silence the gene that suppresses tumors, for example. These cells start to grow uncontrollably and cancer is the result.

Loss of Proteostasis:Inside a cell, proteins run the show. They transport materials, send signals, switch processes on and off, and provide structural support. But proteins become less effective over time, so the body recycles them. Unfortunately, as we age, we can lose this ability. The trash collector goes on strike and we suffer a toxic buildup of proteins that can, for example, lead to diseases such as Alzheimer’s.

Nutrient Sensing Goes Awry:The human body relies on over forty different nutrients to stay healthy. For everything to work perfectly, cells need to be able to recognize and process each of these. But this ability breaks down as we get older. For example, one reason people gain weight as they age is that our cells can no longer properly digest fat. And one reason we die is that this impacts the insulin and IGF-1 pathway and can result in diabetes.

Mitochondrial Dysfunction:Mitochondria are power plants. By converting oxygen and food into energy, they provide the basic fuel for our cells. But performance declines over time. The result is free radicals, a damaging form of oxygen that mangles DNA and proteins and leads to many of the chronic illnesses associated with aging.

Cellular Senescence:As cells undergo stress, they occasionally become “senescent,” both losing their ability to divide and, simultaneously, becoming resistant to death. These “zombie cells” can’t be removed from the body. They build up over time, infect neighboring cells, and ultimately create a zombie apocalypse of inflammatory debilitation.

Stem Cell Exhaustion:As we age, our supply of stem cells plummets, in certain cases by a ten thousandfold decline. Worse, the ones we do manage to hang on to become far less active. This means that the body’s internal tissue and organ repair system loses its ability to do its job.

Altered Intercellular Communication:For the body to function properly, cells need to communicate. This happens constantly, with messages flowing through our bloodstream, immune system, and endocrine system. Over time, signals get crossed. Some cells become unresponsive, others become inflammation-producing zombie cells. This inflammation blocks further communication. Once this happens, messages can’t get through and the immune system can’t find pathogens.

And now that we know what’s killing us, let’s see what just might be saving us.

Longevity Escape Velocity
Want to win a Nobel Prize? Study worms. And don’t just study any worm. Study the roundworm, Caenorhabditis elegans, or, as her friends call her, C. elegans
And this worm has a lot of friends.

Six scientists have already taken home Swedish gold for their work on the creature. As a result, C. eleganswas the first organism to have its genes sequenced, its whole genome screened, and its connectome, the wiring diagram of the brain’s neurons, mapped. But despite this celebrated history, many feel the roundworm’s greatest contribution is still to come, as C. elegansis also the first animal to go head-to-head with death—and win.

In a petri dish, C. eleganslives about twenty days. Back in 2014, a group of NIH scientists at the Buck Institute for Research on Aging decided to try and increase that number. Previous research had shown there were two ways to have an impact. Knocking out a gene named rsks-1 increases lifespan by six days; knocking out daf-2, meanwhile, extended it by twenty days. But what happened, these researchers wanted to know, if they knocked out both genes at once?
“Taking an educated guess, [the researchers] estimated that such double-mutants might live about forty-five days,” wrote NIH director Francis Collins, who funded the work. “But, to their surprise, when they actually created such worms, some of the critters were still alive and squirming at a hundred days. That’s an amazing five-fold increase in worm lifespan—the equivalent of four-hundred-year-old humans.”
Applying this same process to human lifespan—that’s exactly what’s at the heart of the field of longevity. Genetics, of course, play a critical role. Building out on this earlier work on C. elegans, other researchers have since identified over fifty more genes that seem to trigger age-related decline. Five of these genes seem especially key, as removing any of them produces a 20 percent boost in lifespan.

But it’s not just genetics. Martine Rothblatt’s mission to produce an endless supply of human replacement parts is also crucial to longevity. As is the democratization of surgery being provided by robotics, and the drug discovery work being done by AIs and quantum computers. But the point isn’t this or that technique, it’s the combinatory power of all of these approaches that are leading us in a very new direction.

The old direction was our thirty-year lifespan, which held constant from the Paleolithic Age to the front end of the Industrial Revolution. During the twentieth century, marvels such as antibiotics, sanitation, and clean water extended our average age to forty-eight years by 1950, then to seventy-two years by 2014. But these days, Ray Kurzweil and longevity expert Aubrey de Grey have begun talking about “longevity escape velocity,” or the idea that soon, science will be able to extend our lives by a year for every year we live. In other words, once across this threshold, we’ll literally be staying one step ahead of death.
