
Kurzweil thinks this threshold is about twelve years away, while de Grey puts it thirty years out. Why should we believe them? One basic fact: You can’t take it with you. All the money in the world is useless in the grave. So how much would the wealthy pay for an extra healthy decade or two or three? A lot. This helps explain the increasing investments being made into anti-aging technologies, with Google’s Calico—an acronym standing for “California Life Company”—being perhaps the most visible example. More critical, while a longer life for the wealthy might not seem that worthwhile of a goal, as we’ve seen with every other accelerating technology, it isn’t long before the benefits become demonetized and democratized. And this means that possibly you, and definitely your children, will have the potential to tack decades onto your lives, simply because, as time passes, all of us will intercept a gaggle of anti-aging technologies along the way.

Let’s turn our attention to a few of the most promising ones.

The Anti-Aging Pharmacy
Easter Island is remote. It’s exotic. It’s home to strange rumors and stone heads and sometimes strange rumors about stone heads. Some say the elders, with the right spells, can wake the heads from their slumber, controlling them like a giant stone army. Others say the heads themselves have the control—over your life force, with both the ability to steal it, bringing on an early death, or amplify it, conferring virility and strength on a chosen few. Then, in the mid-1960s, a small team of researchers discovered that this last bit, that conferring of strength and virility part, might be more than a rumor.

It started when the very small and very isolated community living on Easter Island decided they’d had enough. Enough smallness. Enough isolation. It was time, they decided, to build an airport.

Scientists freaked out. One of the most ecologically untainted regions of the world was about to lose its purity. In an emergency effort, an international team was rushed in to collect flora, fauna, and microbial samples, including—most critically for this story—dirt excavated from beneath one of the island’s mysterious heads.

The dirt ended up in the hands of a Canadian microbiologist named Suren Sehgal, who discovered it did, in fact, contain magical powers—of the antifungal variety. Sehgal purified the compound, naming it rapamycin after the island’s original name, Rapa Nui. Despite its potential, Sehgal’s research money ran out, and the compound was shelved until the late 1970s, when he got enough funding to take a second look. This is when he discovered there was more magic in that dirt. Rapamycin wasn’t just an antifungal, it also suppressed the immune system, giving it a lot of potential in organ transplant operations.

This potential became an industry. Rapamycin has since been used for everything from coating heart stents to ensuring that patients don’t reject their new kidney. And then researchers made an even more incredible discovery about this magic dirt: Rapamycin inhibits cancer growth.

The compound blocks a protein that facilitates cell division. Do this in worms, flies, and yeast and the result isn’t just cancer protection, it’s longevity. This raised the next question: Would the magic work in mammals?
In 2009, NIH scientists answered that one, showing that rapamycin extends the lives of mice by as much as 16 percent. In 2014, the combination of all of these findings led Novartis to decide to test it in humans, marking the first official trial of an anti-aging compound by a major drug company. But once scientists figured out that there really was magic in that dirt, the search for other anti-aging compounds was under way.

One place this search led was our medicine cabinet, where we found a drug called metformin. The world’s most common diabetes drug, metformin blocks sugar production and helps regulate insulin. But it also slows the “burn rate” of cells, defending against oxidative stress, fighting cancer, and—as we recently learned—significantly extending the lifespan of worms, mice, and rats. Does it work in humans? That remains an open question, but researchers are trying to find out.

While rapamycin and metformin protect against the ravages of old age, other scientists are looking for compounds that turn back the clock entirely. Known as senolytic therapies, these drugs destroy the inflammation-producing zombie cells believed to be one of the causes of aging. A half-dozen companies are now involved in this effort, producing about a dozen drugs that obliterate zombie cells, delaying or alleviating everything from frailty and osteoporosis to cardiological dysfunction and neurological disorder.

Backed by investments from Jeff Bezos, the late Paul Allen, and Peter Thiel, Unity Biotechnology is one of the most interesting of these. They’ve developed a way to identify, then kill senolytic cells, or at least they’ve developed a way that works in mice. But it really works. Periodic treatments from midlife forward both extend lifespan by 35 percent and keep the mouse healthier along the way. Everything from lower energy levels to the development of cataracts and kidney dysfunction—all common symptoms of aging—are either avoided entirely or their onset is significantly delayed. With nearly a dozen drugs under development for nearly all the maladies of decrepitude, including a few that have completed Phase I human trials and are still moving forward, Unity remains one to watch in the anti-aging space.

Finally, there’s Samumed, maybe the most watched of today’s longevity companies. Backed by a $12 billion valuation, this San Diego–based biotech is focusing on the Wnt signaling pathways, which, like the name sounds, are one way the body sends messages. In this case, those messages govern a group of genes that both aid the growth of a developing fetus and seem to play a heavy role in aging. Errors in Wnt signaling have been directly linked to twenty different diseases, including cancer. This is also why these pathways have been a longtime target of almost every major pharmaceutical company. Samumed, though, may have cracked the code.

They’ve focused their efforts on one particular Wnt pathway that regulates the behavior of adult stem cells. Via this methodology, Samumed has developed nine different so-called “regenerative medicines.” All are in the FDA’s pipeline, including everything from hair-loss drugs to Alzheimer’s drugs. Yet it’s their success against arthritis and cancer that has garnered the most attention.

We’ll start with arthritis, which afflicts 350 million people worldwide. We currently have no known treatment for the condition. But, in 2017, Samumed published the results of a small study on knee osteoarthritis. Sixty-one patients were in the trial, each receiving a single injection of a Wnt-rebalancing drug directly into their knee. All sixty-one saw improvement. When researchers measured the impact of the drug six months later, they found less pain and greater mobility, including an average of nearly two millimeters of new cartilage.

“The molecule stays [there] for about six months,” explains Samumed CEO Osman Kibar, “during which it [stimulates] stem cells to grow new cartilage. And that new cartilage is that of a teenager. The key is that progenitor stem cells are there even when you’re eighty years old, they just need to be properly signaled.”
Yet this may only be the beginning.

“An injection of the same molecule into the spine of rats whose intervertebral disc has been destroyed regenerates a whole new disc,” Kibar says. “If you look at the quality of the cells, the disc is younger and stronger.”
Getting this to work in humans is a different story. Very few drugs make the leap from mice to men (or women), but other Samumed molecules developed to repair both rotator cuff and Achilles tendon injuries have already made it through Phase I trials, and their knee arthritis drug is now entering Phase III. There’s still a lot more work to be done, but the upside could be a drug that provides decades of healthy mobility.

Arguably the more exciting arm of Samumed’s research is their work in cancer—which is essentially stem cells gone haywire. By silencing the signaling pathway that leads to this frenzy, Samumed’s drugs target—quite literally—every type of tumor. Most of these medicines are still in preclinical or Phase I safety and efficacy trials, yet, under compassionate use laws, Samumed has been able to give them to terminal patients. Here too the results have been remarkable.

In one small effort, a low-dose three-treatment protocol halted tumor growth in 80 percent of the study group. In another study involving pancreatic cancer, a longer protocol with this same compound managed to stave off this normally fatal disease. “All treatments had failed this woman,” explains Kibar, talking about one patient’s experience. “She weighed less than seventy pounds, and the doctors had sent her home [to die]. But now, after a year on our medicine, she’s back to normal. She’s traveling, dating, weighs one hundred and twenty pounds, just living her regular life. Of course, we’re still in the early days for this compound, but it’s a promising start to say the least.”
The Bloody Fountain of Youth
In the early 2000s, a group of Stanford researchers went looking for the fountain of youth in an unusual place: the Dracula myth. Legends going back to the ancient Greeks, recaptured in the Roman poetry of Ovid, and revived again in Gothic vampire tales, talk of the rejuvenating effects of young blood. These Stanford researchers decided to test the theory—on mice.

Updating the gruesome, ancient technique of parabiosis, they linked together the circulatory system of a young mouse to the circulatory system of an old mouse, then pumped the former’s blood through the latter’s system. Results were visible to the naked eye. The young blood revived the older animal.

Upon closer inspection, the benefits went far beyond the visible. A variety of the old mouse’s tissues and organs now had the characteristics of a far younger, healthier mouse. Follow-up studies both confirmed this finding and showed that the opposite was also true. Transfuse younger animals with blood from older ones and the clock spins forward, accelerating decrepitude, amplifying aging.

This work sparked a ton of interest. Within a decade, researchers had begun to tease apart why this youthful transformation was occurring. A team at Harvard got involved, discovering that young blood sparks the formation of new neurons in the brain and reverses age-related thickening of the walls of the heart. Finally, getting down to the root of the matter, the Harvard team also found one particular molecule, known as “growth differentiation factor 11,” or GDF11, that appeared responsible for all, or at least some, of these benefits.

In a 2014 paper published in Cell, a different team of researchers showed that simply injecting GDF11 into mice increased strength, memory, and blood flow to the brain. Additional studies have extended these benefits, demonstrating that GDF11 can reduce age-related cardiac issues, accelerate muscle repair, improve exercise capacity, and amplify brain function.
