
All of this work has sparked entrepreneurial interest. The Harvard spinout Elevian, for example, led by entrepreneur Dr. Mark Allen and a quartet of the school’s regenerative biology professors, is seeking longevity in GDF11 and similar age-retardant molecules. The Stanford spinout Alkahest, meanwhile, is searching for an optimized plasma cocktail as a treatment for Alzheimer’s.

Wiredcalled these kinds of efforts a “needle in a haystack approach,” because blood plasma contains more than ten thousand different proteins. Really, it’s a needle in a gold-stack approach, because identifying which proteins produce the young blood effect has led to a biological gold rush. Startups are hot on the trail, not to mention major pharmaceutical companies. In 2017, the National Institute on Aging committed $2.35 million in funds for scientists interested in the work. So yes, here in the twenty-first century, not only are flying cars and personal robots both suddenly real, but, well, so is Dracula.

For thousands of years, we’ve been searching for the location of the fountain of youth. But what all this work makes clear is that what we’ve actually been hunting is less a place than a time. The fountain of youth is a specific period in history, the point at which technologies converge on mortality. So while “Will we be able to live forever?” remains an unanswered question, turning a hundred years old into the new sixty—that is, significantly extending human lifespan—has changed from a question of “if” to a matter of “when.”CHAPTER ELEVEN The Future of Insurance, Finance, and Real EstateThe Full Future
We’ve been working our way through the future, focusing on those sections of society with the most impact on our daily lives. So far we’ve covered transportation, healthcare, longevity, retail, advertising, entertainment, and education. In Part Three, we’ll broaden our scope to the wider topics of energy, the environment, and government. But what about everything in between? In short, what about the future of the rest of your life?
That future will certainly be different from the past. Technological acceleration appears to be leaving no stone unturned. From architecture and artistry to aviation and accounting, dozens of industries will soon be transformed. Yet, in the final two chapters of Part II, we’re going to turn our attention to four specific areas—insurance, finance, real estate, and food.

We’ve chosen this quartet for a number of reasons. For starters, three of these sectors—finance, insurance, and real estate—are top ten industries in America. In fact, when coupled with what we’ve already covered in Part II—excluding government and security, two topics we’re saving for Part III—these sectors round out our look at the main ways Americans make a living. In this chapter we’ll examine the first three. Then, in the next chapter, we’ll close out Part II with a look at the future of food, because it’s both foundationally important and wildly accelerating. Thus, in total, the sectors we’ll review in this chapter are the front runners in the race to reinvent the rest of your life.

Let’s dive in.…
Coffee, Risk, and the Origins of Insurance
In 1680, Edward Lloyd arrived in London. He was thirty-two years old and hunting for opportunity. He found one in coffee. Fueled by this then novel beverage, London’s coffeehouse scene was exploding. Over three thousand java shops were already scattered throughout the city. Was the marketplace too crowded for another competitor? Lloyd didn’t think so. In 1686, he launched his own establishment, Lloyd’s Coffee House, on London’s Tower Street.

At the time, London was driven by two economic engines: shipping and finance. Lloyd’s was located at the epicenter of both, tucked into a tiny area between the Tower of London and Thames Street. Given this location, from the beginning the shop was popular with merchants, sailors, and shipowners.

Back then, coffeehouses earned patron loyalty by offering a mix of caffeinated beverages, the latest news and information, and the opportunity to participate in heated intellectual debate. Lloyd’s offerings went further than most. To provide reliable and accurate shipping news to his customers, he established a network of correspondents in ports across Europe and published the news they gathered on tip sheets. Spending time at Lloyd’s meant gaining access to detailed intelligence on ships, cargo, and foreign events.

This big data/big caffeine combo was a big winner. By 1691, business was booming and Lloyd needed to expand. He moved his operation to 16 Lombard Street, across from the Royal Exchange and into the heart of the merchants’ quarter. This newer, much larger venue was tricked out with wall-to-wall blackboards and a central pulpit. The blackboards replaced the tip sheet. The central pulpit provided a place to announce maritime auction prices and real-time shipping news. And here, amidst black coffee and blackboards, Lloyd turned an idea first invented by the Babylonians into the foundation of the modern insurance industry.

Nearly four thousand years ago, the Babylonians developed a strategy for merchants sailing the Mediterranean. If a merchant took out a loan to fund a shipment, they would pay an additional sum in exchange for a guarantee: Should his goods be stolen or lost at sea, the lender would cancel the loan. In the fourth century BCE, loan rates differed according to the time of year. Prices were cheaper during the calm summer seas versus the more dangerous winter swells—that is, the Babylonians developed a risk-based pricing idea similar to the foundation of modern insurance.

Some two millennia later, this notion of risk-based, data-driven maritime insurance reached new heights in the confines of a certain London coffeehouse. The bankers who frequented Lloyd’s were willing to collect premiums in exchange for taking shipping risks. They dubbed this process “underwriting,” as bankers would literally write their names on the blackboard under the name of the ship and a list of the trip’s details: its cargo, crew, weather, and destination.

Today, some 320 years later, this idea of “underwriting” has grown into a multitrillion-dollar insurance industry. Lloyd’s humble coffeehouse evolved into the famed Lloyd’s of London, which generated 33.6 billion pounds’ worth of insurance premiums in 2017. Yet, driven by forces very similar to those that originally helped sculpt Lloyd’s—an upsurge in information and collaboration—the insurance industry is again about to be completely transformed.

Three major changes are under way. First, by shifting the risk from the consumer to the service provider, entire categories of insurance are being eliminated. Next, crowdsurance is replacing traditional categories of health and life insurance. Finally, the rise of networks, sensors, and AI are rewriting the ways in which insurance is priced and sold, remaking the very nature of the industry.

But let’s start with a simple question: If you’re riding in an autonomous car as a service, and there is no driver, do you need insurance?
The Car That Doesn’t Crash
Insurance is a game of averages. The industry’s basic business model is assess risk and set premiums—or, covering this much risk will cost this much money. With a large enough number of customers and long enough stretches of time, this averages out to a profit for the underwriter. Car insurance premiums, for example, are currently calculated according to the age and history of the driver, traits of the car itself, and where the driver and that car live. Get enough drivers involved, stay in business long enough, and the result is massive profit. But what happens over the next decade, when autonomous vehicles take to the road and change every aspect of that calculation?
Right now, human error sits at the center of auto insurance. People—distractible, emotional, and sometimes irrational—are responsible for 90 percent of the 1.2 million traffic fatalities a year. Yet, without humans in the driver seat, 90 percent of that danger gets removed. For an insurance industry built on assessing risk, this alone is a huge change.

Now take it a step further. Today, we insure the stuff we own. But autonomous cars shift us from car-as-property to car-as-service, removing the need for consumer-facing auto insurance altogether. Which is why the accounting firm KPMG predicts the car insurance market could shrink by an astounding 60 percent by 2040.

This shrinking has already begun. Waymo automatically provides passengers with insurance every time they step inside one of their vehicles. And it’s an assessment made with a confidence that comes from big data.

In 2018, Waymo vehicles had autonomously traveled some 10 million miles on public roads, and an additional 5 billion miles inside of a simulation. All of those trips were data-gathering missions, with the resulting information being used to train Waymo’s AI. The big deal here is both safety and a nearly unassailable market advantage. All that data puts Waymo far ahead of the competition. It means that our autonomous car transition hasn’t really begun and already traditional insurance companies are years behind the curve.

When we combine autonomous vehicle technology with smart traffic systems and sensor-embedded roads—two developments that have already begun rolling out—transit risks don’t just plummet, they mutate. For instance, if the LIDAR sensor that’s helping steer an autonomous car goes on the blink and causes an accident, who do you blame? Not the passenger. Maybe the carmaker. Maybe the LIDAR supplier. Or, who’s fault is it if your Waymo loses its 5G connection and suddenly can’t drive? Is it Alphabet, who owns the car; Verizon, who manages the connection; or OneWeb, who owns the satellite that provides that connection? What if an autonomous vehicle gets hacked or stolen?
While these questions remain to be answered, and certainly the scenarios they describe sound dangerous, it’s helpful to remember that today, we routinely give testosterone-laden teenage boys control of two-ton vehicles. Not to mention the fact that roughly 1 million people are arrested for DUIs each year. In other words, just like the old tech, the new tech comes with trade-offs. But this time around, one of those trade-offs might be the end of auto insurance as we know it.

Crowdsurance
Before the arrival of exponential technology, size was the ultimate insurance advantage. Again, it comes down to averages or, more technically, what it takes to calculate an average in the first place.

Statistically accurate actuarial tables demand a ton of data. To gather that ton, you need an army of customers. To find those customers, you also need an army of salespeople. To analyze the data generated by these two armies, you need, no surprise, another army, of statisticians. Managing all these armies takes another army. And, up until now, this law of large armies guaranteed insurance was a game played by giants.

It was also a game of statistics. In both health and life insurance, the premiums of the healthy cover the costs of the unhealthy. But the healthy end up paying unnecessarily high premiums for this privilege, making them the consistent losers of this particular game.

