So what happens when the ultra-healthy tire of this arrangement and decide to use social media to find other ultra-healthy folks, share data, and self-insure? All it takes is a few people raising their digital hand and saying, “Hey, look at my genes, see how much I exercise, check out my Oura ring data, my Apple Watch data. If anyone else is healthy like me, let’s come together and do this.”
In the insurance game, when the lowest risk clients opt out, the statistics stop working. With the ultra-healthy gone from the pool, the risk curve shifts dramatically. To cover costs, either everyone’s rate increases or the insurance company goes bankrupt. But if everyone’s rate goes up, then everyone goes elsewhere for insurance, and, once again, the insurance company goes bankrupt.

Which is exactly what’s happening.

Introducing decentralized, peer-to-peer insurance, or what’s become known as “crowdsurance.” Crowdsurance eliminates the middleman. Instead of an insurance company, there’s a technology stack—an app connected to a database connected to an AI-bot. The stack oversees a network made up of people who pay premiums and file claims which the network then approves. To put it differently, the stack removes three out of the four armies needed to create an insurance company. And the only remaining army? The customers—the ones left to decide what to do with all the money they just saved on health and life insurance.

Take the New York–based Lemonade, arguably the best funded of today’s crowdsurance startups. Via an app, Lemonade brings together small groups of policyholders who pay premiums into a central “claim pool.” Artificial intelligence does the rest. The entire experience is mobile, simple, and fast. Ninety seconds to get insured, three minutes to get a claim paid, and zero paperwork.

Adding more technology to this arrangement, companies like the Swiss firm Etherisc sell “bespoke insurance products” on the Ethereum blockchain. Because smart contracts remove the need for employees, paperwork, and all the rest, all sorts of new insurance products are being created. Etherisc’s first offering is something not covered by traditional insurers: flight delays and cancellations. Individuals sign up via credit card, and if their plane is more than forty-five minutes late, they’re paid instantly, automatically, and without the need for any paperwork. And they’re only one example. The crowdsurance space is exploding. Brand new micro-insurance categories—boat-hull insurance, chihuahua insurance—are moving out of the planning stages and into the marketplace. To return to our historical terms, it’s as if the sailors who frequented Lloyd’s started making deals directly with the blackboards, and everybody else was just left to drink their coffee in silence.

Dynamic Risk
Founded in 1937, Progressive Insurance started out by trailblazing a niche nobody wanted: high-risk drivers. Then, true to their name, they maintained their edge via technology. Progressive was the first insurance company to have a website, the first to allow customers to purchase policies through that website, and the first to dress up that site with high-quality video content and voice-over-internet tools. By pioneering apps for policy purchasing and management, they were also first into mobile. All of these developments helped modernize insurance and made Progressive one of the more profitable corporations in America. But in 2004, they became first into a different category, and this decision was a little more than progressive. In an actuarial kind of way, it was downright revolutionary.

Not at the beginning.

At first, all Progressive did was ask customers in Minnesota to volunteer for a research program, “TripSense.” Literally a black box, TripSense plugged into a car’s diagnostic port and tracked three variables: mileage, speed, and travel times. When completed, volunteers shipped the box back, and Progressive sent them twenty-five bucks for their trouble.

In 2008, this pilot went mainstream. Renamed “Snapshot,” this upgrade was designed to collect a single piece of information: vehicular speed at one-second intervals. Progressive then used that information to calculate two additional data points: miles driven and “hard-braking events,” such as a driver slamming on the brakes to avoid hitting a cat. Why? Because Snapshot had morphed from a pilot project into a radical idea: price auto insurance according to driving habits rather than driving history.

The technical term for this is dynamic pricing. The paranoid term: Big Brother is always watching. Either way, Progressive helped replace the traditional auto insurance model with sensors. Everything from driving speed and braking habits to radio volume and the number of other cars on the road can impact your rate. Drivers now get insured based on car usage rates (the less you drive, the less you pay), good driving trends (you consistently stay within the speed limit), and low-risk driving times (your daily commute does not take place after midnight).

This same trend is creeping into home insurance. Pricing used to be based on the state of the home at policy purchase, but 30 percent of all home claims are from water damage that occurs long after the policy is sold. Now insurance companies get real-time metrics using in-pipe temperature sensors and in-wall water detectors, and home owners are notified about potential problems well before they occur.

Thanks to all the data from our wearables, this same shift will soon arrive in health insurance. Insurance companies will suddenly have the opportunity to prevent disease before it happens rather than swoop in post-op to clean up the mess. The upside will be cheaper insurance for healthier living, the downside is Big Brother. Do rates go up when you sneak a cigarette? Do they go down when you eat your vegetables?
The term McKinsey coined to describe this kind of AI-driven, sensor-laden insurance is “pay-as-you-live,” morphing the traditional “detect and repair” role of an insurance company into “predict and prevent.” Your rates fluctuate with your choices in an almost entirely automated process. By 2030, the number of humans required to process a claim will drop by 70 to 90 percent, while processing times will shrink from weeks to minutes. This points toward a future where insurance companies become front-line guardians of the health of society, and quite a change from the days of Lloyd, his coffee, and his blackboards.

Finance
Look at the skyline of São Paulo, Hong Kong, or New York. Check out the tallest buildings, those iron monsters. Who owns that high-flying real estate? Insurance companies and financial firms. Why? For the same reason that Willie Sutton allegedly said he robbed banks—“Because that’s where they keep the money.”
Since we’ve already covered insurance, we’ll shift focus to the changes in banking and finance, where exponential technologies are steamrolling both industries, completely altering this business of money. We got a peak at this transformation earlier, when we decoded the dollars pouring into crowdfunding, ICOs, venture capital, and sovereign wealth funds. To understand what else is coming, let’s start with a simple question: What, exactly, do we do with our money?
We store it, of course. Mostly in banks. We also move it around, sometimes transferring cash between companies, other times borrowing or lending among individuals. Next, we invest it, trying to use our money to grow more money. Finally, since the time coins were conch shells, we trade it for the stuff we want. Thanks to converging exponentials, each of these areas is being reimagined, with bits and bytes replacing dollars and cents, and neither economics nor the way we live our lives will ever be the same.

Good Money
Gunnar Lovelace grew up poor. He was raised by a single mother in an intentional community in California, and never forgot his family’s struggle to meet basic needs, chief among them food and money. Lovelace went on to become a serial entrepreneur, and while his first three startups were in tech and fashion, he poured those profits into his fourth venture, Thrive Market, or his attempt to solve the struggle for food.

A purpose-driven venture, Thrive uses eco-friendly packaging, zero-waste shipping, and nontoxic ingredients to deliver high-quality organic food at lower prices directly to the door of over 9 million consumers. But Thrive only solves the first of Lovelace’s problems, there’s still the struggle for money to consider. This brings us to his fifth company, Good Money, which is using this same value-driven approach to take on the storage side of the traditional banking industry.

Right now, most of our money sits in banks, and mostly, we’re abused for the privilege. On average, we pay $360 a year in banking fees. The larger banks, meanwhile, average $30 billion a year in overdraft charges alone. But where things go truly sideways is what the banks do with our money.

Banks get to invest our money, typically at significant profit, wherever they see fit. This often includes projects that don’t align with customers’ values. Wells Fargo, for example, lost a ton of business when they were outed as major backers of the controversial Dakota Pipeline. So while the bank is making bank, not only is your money not working for you, it might actually be working against you.

Good Money does the opposite, in a half-dozen different ways. Technically a mobile wallet, Good Money lives on your phone and holds both regular and crypto currencies. It can be used at any ATM, with zero annual fees, no ATM charges, and an interest rate a hundred times larger than most banks. Customers also become owners. Put money into Good Money and you get an equity share in return, while the company funnels 50 percent of their profits into impact investments and charitable donations.

With this strategy, Good Money is targeting people who prefer value-driven companies, and the 40 million Americans who have been driven out of the traditional banking system by overdraft fees and blackball lists. But the largest mobile market is a third category entirely, the unbanked, those without any place to store their money.

The issue is infrastructure, especially in poorer countries, where the cost of building and maintaining banks simply exceeds the value they can generate. The economics are upside down. Yet, while over two billion people in the world still lack bank accounts, nearly all of them have mobile phones. And this brings us to a Vodafone executive named Nick Hughes and one of the more stubborn of all international economic problems: microfinance
An Unusual Proposition
At the 2002 World Summit for Sustainable Development, Vodafone’s Nick Hughes gave a presentation about risk. His goal was a long shot: convince large corporations to help poorer nations by allocating research dollars for high risk/high reward ideas. An official from the UK’s Department for International Development was in the audience. Afterward, he approached Hughes with an even more unusual proposition.

The Department had begun paying attention to mobile phone usage and noticed that in parts of Africa, people were treating mobile phone minutes as a quasi-currency, trading them for goods and services that would normally require cash. They saw potential here and, more importantly, had a million dollars to invest. If Vodafone agreed to match funds, the Department agreed to finance a pilot project.
