
Real Estate
Our story begins in the Great Recession of 2008, where the reckless behavior of two familiar players—big banks and big insurance—plunged the country into chaos. Real estate was especially hard hit. The bottom fell out of the market, and kept on falling. The housing crisis ensued, and things went from bad to worse to downright miserable. Which is when Glenn Sanford had what really should have been a stupid idea: start a real estate company.

But it was a company built for the times. In the face of rising overhead costs and decimated revenues, Sanford decided not to do what real estate agents had always done: open an office. Ditching the brick-and-mortar model entirely, he created eXp Realty, the first cloud-based national real estate brokerage.

Devoid of realestate, Sanford built a fully immersive mega-campus using a virtual world platform called VirBELA (which eXp now owns). Today, eXp Realty’s campus is home to sixteen thousand agents from all fifty US states, three Canadian provinces, and four hundred major real estate markets—all supported without a single office.

Instead of coming into work, agents and managers stay home. Using either a VR headset or their laptop, they gather virtually, on a campus replete with a lobby, library, theaters, meeting rooms, and a sports field. Sanford, meanwhile, attributes at least $100 million of his company’s $650 million market cap to money saved via reduced infrastructure and overhead.

While Sanford’s reinvention has had significant consequences for the real estate industry, it was merely the result of a trio of convergences: computation, networks, and VR. Pile on what’s coming: AI, 3-D printing, autonomous cars, aerial taxis, and floating cities, and everything changes fast. And that includes the one component of the industry that Sanford left intact: the real estate broker.

Say Goodbye to Your Broker
Most people, if they’re lucky, get to buy a home. Typically, it’s once in a lifetime. Often, it’s the largest purchasing decision they’ll ever make, the biggest check they’ll ever cut, and for many, the most terror they’ll ever feel. We’re about to tell you a story about how AI is changing this process, but before we get there, it’s helpful to remember this is really a story about nervous people making hard decisions in the real world.

Truthfully, AI has been helping people make hard real estate decisions for a little while now. Zillow, Trulia, Move, Redfin, and many other companies have invested millions in the technology. Already, property searches, evaluation, consulting, and management are easier, faster, and more accurate than ever before. Investors now have analytical capabilities far beyond any human, blending established real estate variables such as rent, occupancy rates, and local school data, with novel inputs: Web clickstream data, satellite imaging, geolocation tracking, etc. And like the AI arms race in other industries, in real estate too, the companies with the best data will end up dominating the market.

If AI is already doing all this on the research side of real estate, why not let it handle brokering as well? Or, more specifically, why not let the convergence of AI, VR, and sensors become your broker?
In a future where always-on preference tracking is a standard feature of any personal AI, why hire a stranger to sell you real estate? Your AI already knows you, via your likes and dislikes, possibly better than you know yourself. We’re not long from the day when most of your real estate search—home, apartment, office, whatever—will be conducted from your couch, via a VR headset, with the help of your personal AI. It’ll be like talking to Siri if Siri were an interior designer: “Industrial modern loft, concrete floors, close to a Whole Foods,” etc. Your real estate AI will offer up selections that fit your criteria, while the VR headset makes taking a tour a 24-7 proposition.

As a seller, this means potential buyers can come from two miles to two continents away. As a buyer, each immersive VR tour is an AI learning experience. Advanced eye-tracking software follows your gaze, while voice recognition algorithms listen for pleasure or aversion in your vocal tone. Both add to your list of likes and dislikes, with the AI recommending better and better properties as your search goes along.

Curious what this living room might look like with a fresh coat of blue paint? No problem. VR programs can modify environments instantly, changing countless variables, from flooring to wallpaper to the sun’s orientation. Keen to input your own furniture into a VR-rendered home? Advanced AI could one day compile all your existing furniture, art, and books, then impose them on any virtual space, providing certainty in a place where we’ve never had much before. In essence, AI-driven, VR real estate platforms will allow you to explore any property on the market, do any remodel you’d like, then figure out if the home you dreamed up is really the home of your dreams.

Reinventing the City
“Location, location, location” is the real estate mantra, but there’s an important addition to this story: “Proximity, proximity, proximity.”
The value of your home is partially measured in its proximity to a half-dozen locations: a central shopping district, the best schools, your place of work, favorite restaurants, the homes of your closest friends, etc. But over the next decade, with the transportation transformation that’s coming, we’re changing the relationship between here and there. So what happens when driverless cars, flying cars, and the Hyperloop make proximity a possibility for all?
If Las Vegas to Los Angeles becomes a half-hour Hyperloop commute; if upstate Vermont to middle-of-Boston becomes a flying car ride away; if remote Virginia into Washington, DC, is an hour-long nap in an autonomous Uber, why not buy twice-the-house for half the price in outlying areas? Travel time can now be repurposed any way you like—sleep, meditation, conversation, take your pick. When previous geographically undesirable locations become easy to reach, proximity itself becomes democratized
The point is that our definition of “prime real estate” is going to start to shift over the next decade. But this isn’t just about altering the relationship between here and there—it’s also about making more “here.”
Enter: floating cities.

Floating cities are a proposed solution to a trilogy of modern problems: rising seas, skyrocketing populations, and threatened ecosystems. In the five hundred coastal cities now threatened by global warming, they could offer what we need most: flood-proof, tsunami-proof, and hurricane-proof living. Plus, close to 40 percent of humanity already lives near the ocean, so, if successful, floating cities will create an abundance of prime real estate in places where none has existed before.

Earlier versions of this notion met considerable resistance, but in 2019, in the face of mounting climate change dangers, the United Nations decided the technology was worth a second look. One idea they’ve been considering is Oceanix City, a zero-waste, energy-positive design by Tahitian entrepreneurs Marc Collins and Itai Madamombe. It consists of a series of hexagonal islands arranged in a circle, with each of these self-sustaining 4.5-acre platforms able to house three hundred people, with the complete 75-acre property capable of sustaining up to ten thousand.

A second design by the San Francisco–based Seasteading Institute is being tested in the waters off French Polynesia. Known as the Floating Island Project, the idea here is less a floating city and more a test platform for the designs of future floating cities. With a hundred acres of beachfront property and a special economic zone for inhabitants, this project is aiming to have a dozen structures erected by 2021.

In both locations, sustainability is key. Water capture technologies provide drinking water; an array of greenhouses, vertical farms, and fish farms supply the food; and sunlight, wind power, and wave energy power the whole lot. Electric boats, or soon, autonomous flying cars, will zoom inhabitants to work on the mainland. Or, more importantly, maybe not. With drone delivery for supplies, and avatar commuting for business meetings, you may never have to leave the island.

Exponential technology is dematerializing, demonetizing, and democratizing nearly every aspect of real estate. Corporate infrastructure has gone virtual; brokers aren’t far behind. Location and proximity, the twin pillars of the industry, are next, arguably demonetized before this decade’s done. Today’s scarcity of bespoke addresses for the lucky few will become tomorrow’s prime real estate at affordable prices for the average many.

When you couple the changes in real estate to the remaking of finance and insurance, we’re seeing a drastic shift in both the skylines of cities and the business of business. By making these processes faster and cheaper, cutting out the middleman (or woman), and making these opportunities available to all, we’re reimagining three of the largest wealth creation engines in history. Which is, once again, another reason that the future will be faster than you think.CHAPTER TWELVE The Future of Food
It’s 2030 and you’re hungry. Recently, you’ve been checking out the latest craze: hybrid cuisines. Your AI has a few suggestions based on everything from your historical preferences to your nutritional needs and your calendar. Tomorrow, you’re going surfing, so packing on a few extra calories beforehand is a good idea. Tonight’s choice: Asian-Yiddish fusion. Since you’ve never tried this hybrid before, better safe than sorry. You let your AI select the actual dishes.

Eight minutes later, an Amazon drone arrives with two bags of raw ingredients. You unload these into seven bays attached to your 3-D food printer. There’s a vegetable you’ve never seen before. Scanning a small code brings up a blockchain-backed food identity tracking app. Turns out, it’s a new kind of squash, originally from Vietnam, now sourced at a vertical farm just down the road.

The remaining ingredients get passed over to your robo-chef, really nothing more than a pair of articulated arms with a touch screen interface. But no need to touch that screen, as the recipes were uploaded back when you first ordered dinner. Since the system is fully automated, no need to hang around either.

Heading out of the kitchen, you notice the robot arm slicing fresh tuna with a smooth motion. With 20 different motors, 24 joints, and 129 sensors, this kitchen-bot can mimic the movements of a human hand and arm. In fact, this particular bot was trained using machine learning from videos of top chefs cooking at five-star restaurants.

