Even better, since you’ve selected Moo-Less Meats as your lab-grown provider, you know this tuna wasn’t caught using bottom-trawling, dynamite fishing, or any other ecological nightmare. Instead, it was grown from stem cells, with no animals or environments harmed along the way. Finally, since the entire process has been both automated and customized, there is zero food waste. You eat everything on your plate and then, because it’s been 3-D printed out of chocolate, you eat the plate.

In 2020, just about everything in this story is already here. Sure, it’s not in your kitchen, but it will be soon. Before we consider the modifications to your apartment this might require, let’s start our investigation into the future of food, where the food under investigation actually starts—in the nuclear heart of the star we call the Sun.

The Inefficiency of Food
The tale of food is a tale of waste. Inefficiency is built into every step of the story. Consider the origins of the meal on your plate. “All animals eat plants or eat animals that eat plants,” author Richard Manning wrote in an essay for Harpers. “This is the food chain, and pulling it is the unique ability of plants to turn sunlight into stored energy in the form of carbohydrates, the basic fuel of all animals. Solar-powered photosynthesis is the only way to make this fuel. There is no alternative to plant energy, just as there is no alternative to oxygen.”
The food on our plates begins its journey some 93 million miles away, in the solar portion of solar-powered photosynthesis. Even though millions and millions of metric tons of hydrogen are fused every second, less than one-billionth of that energy actually reaches the Earth. And, of the total that does hit the planet’s surface, less than 1 percent is actually used for photosynthesis.

But the squandering doesn’t end there. Once our food is grown, it still needs to be transported. Nothing about this process is easy on the environment. At holiday dinners, there is a pretty good chance the food on the table logged more travel miles than the family around the table. The average American meal travels fifteen hundred to twenty-five hundred miles to get to your plate. Potatoes from Iowa, wine from France, beef from Argentina—you get the energy-intensive picture.

Even more energy is squandered on the back end of that same meal. While one out of eight Americans struggles to put food on the table, 40 percent of the food in the United States is never eaten. Either it rots in the field or ends up in a landfill. In fact, according to the National Resources Defense Council, if we could “rescue” just 15 percent of that food, we’d be able to feed 25 million of the 42 million Americans now facing food insecurity.

Help is on the way, as every step in our food chain is now being completely transformed. At the front end of this process, researchers are beginning to figure out how to ramp up a plant’s ability to turn sunlight into food. Tobacco is the lab rat of plant biology. By improving a plant’s ability to use sunlight to make sugar, researchers at UCLA got a 14 to 20 percent boost in tobacco crop yield. The Bill Gates–backed RIPE Project at the University of Illinois has matched and improved those numbers. Studies run at the University of Essex took this farther. By increasing the levels of a protein involved in photorespiration, they improved tobacco yields by 27 to 47 percent. The UN estimates that we need to double overall crop production by 2050 to feed a population estimated at over 9 billion. What all this work shows is that improving photosynthesis can get us more than halfway there.

These upgrades may take a while to move from lab to table, but companies are already preparing for the next step in this process: transportation. Not only are our vehicles becoming more energy-wise, our food is becoming more durable.

The Santa Barbara–based Apeel Sciences is using biomimicry and materials science to take on the problem of food waste. Nature, it turns out, endows fruits and vegetables with a natural anti-spoilage mechanism: the peel. Technically known as “cutin,” this outer layer of a plant’s epidermis is a waxy skin of fatty acids meant to trap moisture in. Apeel has found a way to use completely natural, plant-derived materials to make cutin in the lab, where it can be sprayed onto food (or the food can be dipped in it). It’s odorless, tasteless, colorless, and food coated with it is still considered organic. Avocados, protected in this manner, take 60 percent longer to soften and are already available at most major American grocery stores.

Protecting against spoilage helps preserve our food for longer, but it doesn’t completely solve the transportation question. So companies have started to bypass this step altogether. In order to make moving food from farm to table more efficient, they’re moving the farm. It’s an idea known as “vertical farming,” or growing food inside of skyscrapers rather than outside in fields. Since over 70 percent of humanity will live in cities by 2025, driving farm-grown vegetables an average of two thousand miles to reach our urban plates is not only wasteful, it’s unhealthy. Every second a plant is out of the ground, its nutritional value decreases. If it takes two weeks for food to make it to your table—a not uncommon travel time—it can reduce the nutritional value by as much as 45 percent. With vertical farms, locally grown means locally grown. IKEA, for example, now feeds customers in their stores with food grown vertically in their stores.

Beyond eliminating travel time, vertical farms solve a number of other problems. Since they are completely closed environments, the need for pesticides also disappears. As does the need for water. Relying on hydroponics and aeroponics, vertical farms allow us to grow crops with 90 percent less water than traditional agriculture—which is critical on our increasingly thirsty planet.

Vertical farming has been progressing at an incredible rate. Back in 2012, when we first wrote about the concept in Abundance, there were merely a handful of pilot projects in existence. Today, there’s an industry.

The largest player around is the Bay Area–based Plenty Unlimited Inc. With over $200 million in funding, Plenty is taking a smart tech approach to indoor agriculture. Plants grow on twenty-foot-high towers, monitored by tens of thousands of cameras and sensors, and optimized by big data machine learning. This allows them to pack forty plants into the space previously occupied by one. It also produces yields 350 times greater than outdoor farmland, and uses less than 1 percent as much water. And rather than bespoke veggies for the wealthy few, Plenty’s processes allow them to knock 20 to 35 percent off the costs of traditional grocery stores. To date, Plenty has their flagship operation in South San Francisco; a one-hundred-thousand-square-foot farm in Kent, Washington; an indoor farm in the United Arab Emirates; and they have started construction on over three hundred farms in China.

On the other side of the US, in a repurposed seventy-thousand-square-foot factory in Newark, New Jersey, a company called AeroFarms has figured out how to grow over 2 million pounds of leafy greens a year with neither sun nor soil. Instead, inside their facility, rows of AI-controlled LEDs provide the exact wavelength of light each plant needs to thrive. Using aeroponics, nutrients are misted directly onto the plants’ roots, so no soil is required. Rather, plants are suspended in a growth mesh fabric made from recycled water bottles. And here too, sensors, cameras, and machine learning govern the entire process.

None of these farms are yet big enough to impact our global food problem, but the exponentials are conspiring in their favor. Agriculture, as Plenty CEO Matt Barnard recently told reporters, is seriously benefiting from convergence. “Just like Google benefited from the simultaneous combination of improved technology, better algorithms and masses of data, we are seeing the same [in vertical farming].”
We’re also seeing robots enter the picture. Right now, 50 to 80 percent of a vertical farm’s cost is human labor, but the Silicon Valley–based Iron Ox has designed a thousand-pound robot that can tote around eight-hundred-pound growing containers. Or, as Engadgetrecently wrote: “Old MacDonald was a droid.”
In short, not only is farming getting taller, it’s getting stronger. And smarter. And most importantly: far more efficient
The Inefficiency of Growing a Cow
Scary fact: By 2050, to feed a population of 9 billion, the world will need 70 percent more food than it did in 2009. A lot of that food will be meat. By 2050, primarily thanks to the modernization of China and India, global meat consumption is expected to increase by 76 percent. This is problematic, to say the least.

Today, 50 percent of all habitable land on Earth is used for agriculture, with 80 percent of that land reserved for livestock. A quarter of the planet’s available landmass is currently used to keep 20 billion chickens, 1.5 billion cattle, and 1 billion sheep alive—that is, until we can kill and eat them. The suffering quotient is through the roof. As is the waste. One out of eight Americans will go to bed hungry tonight, yet farm animals consume 30 percent of the world’s food crops.

Worse is the water involved. Meat production accounts for 70 percent of global water use. Compared to fifteen hundred liters required to produce a kilogram of wheat, it takes fifteen thousand liters to produce a kilogram of beef, meaning there’s enough water in an adult steer to float a US Navy destroyer.

Meat is also responsible for 14.5 percent of all greenhouse gases and a considerable portion of our deforestation problem. In fact, we’re in the midst of one of the largest mass extinctions in history—and more on this in Chapter Thirteen—and loss of land for agricultural production is currently the largest driver of that extinction.

The core of the issue is the same: inefficiency.

Today, we must raise an entire cow to produce a single steak. We also need to deal with all the waste and the greenhouse gases that cow produces along the way, and dispose of the animal’s carcass on the back end. Yet, as advances in biotechnology have begun converging with advances in agrotechnology, we can now bypass this entire process, growing that same steak from a single stem cell—no cow required.

Here’s the cultured meat formula. Take a few stem cells from a live animal, typically via a biopsy so the animal isn’t harmed. Feed these cells a nutrient-rich solution. Power the whole process in bioreactors. Give the industry a few years to mature and the technology a few years to shed costs and, finally, we can produce an infinite number of steaks to feed an increasingly carnivorous population.

Or, at least, that’s the goal, but we still have a few hurdles to clear. As of today, the nutrient-rich solution remains animal-based and riotously expensive. If one of the main aims is cruelty-free meat, the solution will have to be entirely plant-derived, which scientists and companies are still working on. Due to our inability to deliver this solution with precise timing and locational accuracy, we’ve had more success mimicking “softer” meats—like raw hamburger or chorizo—than growing steak itself. Lastly, in a collaboration between the food and energy industries, researchers are still working on ways to power the whole system. Eventually, bioreactors will require less power and/or could run completely off renewables, but we’re not there yet.

Still, the environmental benefits are considerable. Cultured meat uses 99 percent less land, 82 to 96 percent less water, and produces 78 to 96 percent less greenhouse gases. Energy use drops somewhere between 7 and 45 percent depending on the meat involved (traditional chicken ranching is much more energy intensive than traditional beef ranching). By freeing up a quarter of our landmass, we can reforest, providing the habitat required to halt the biodiversity crisis and the carbon sinks needed to slow global warming. And while that’s a haze of numbers to consider, what they point to is amazing: an ethical and environmental solution to world hunger.

