Cultured meat is also a healthier solution. Since we’re growing steak from stem cells, we can increase helpful proteins, reduce saturated fat, and even add vitamins. The meat requires no antibiotics and, given the danger of diseases like mad cow, is actually safer for humans. By turning to cultured meat, we’re lowering the global disease burden and, since 70 percent of emerging diseases come from livestock, decreasing our risk of pandemic. Plus, tests with both consumers and chefs have shown that taste is no longer a factor.

Currently, doing this at scale remains expensive. Back in 2013, the first cultured burger cost $330,000. By 2018, Memphis Meats had gotten that down to $2,400 a pound, while Aleph Farms has steak down to around $50 a pound. Yet again, exponentials are on their side: Memphis believes accelerating technology will bring that burger cost down to around $5 within a few years, and in higher end Asian restaurants, lab-grown chicken is already on the menu.

As it progresses, cultured meat has the potential to become far more cost-effective than conventional meat. Production is mostly automated, without much need for land or labor. It also takes a few years to grow a cow, but only a few weeks to grow a cow’s worth of steak in the lab. And it’s more than steak. The meats in development range from pork sausage and chicken nuggets to foie gras and filet mignon—it all depends on which cells you start out with. In late 2018, Just Inc. announced a partnership with Japanese Wagyu beef producer Toriyama to develop meat from the stem cells of what has long been the rarest and most expensive steak on Earth.

What’s true for meat is also true for milk. Perfect Day Foods, a Berkeley, California–based company, has figured out how to make cheese without need of cows. By blending gene sequencing with 3-D printing and fermentation science, they’ve created a line of animal-free dairy products.

Add this all together and we see a very different future of food. In a few years, humans will become the first animals that get their protein from other animals without any animals being harmed along the way. Slaughterhouses will become a ghost story we tell our grandchildren. And a planet that is already strained under the weight of nearly 8 billion souls will have a fighting chance when our numbers top 9 billion.PART THREE THE FASTER FUTURECHAPTER THIRTEEN Threats and Solutions
Let’s widen our scope. Up to now, this book has had two primary goals. In Part One, we examined the forces of acceleration, seeing how converging technology is unleashing waves of change historically unrivaled in their capacity for disruption. In Part Two, we tracked those waves through society, paying particular attention to their impact on our day-to-day lives. In both cases, we kept the scope of our examination limited to the next ten years.

In Part Three, we’re broadening our horizons in two key directions. In this chapter, we’ll focus on disruptions to our disruption—that is, a series of environmental, economic, and existential risks that threaten the progress we’ve made. Obviously, each of these categories is thick enough to fill a textbook. Our goal isn’t the exacting details. Rather, we want to outline the problem, then examine the ways in which converging technologies might provide solutions.

In our next chapter, we’re going to take the longer view, expanding our focus from the coming decade to the century ahead. We’ll explore five great (mostly) tech-driven migrations that are beginning to unfold. We’ll unpack economic relocations, climate-change migrations, virtual worlds explorations, outer space colonization, and hive-mind collaborations—or the quintet of mass movements that will reshape the demographics of the globe and the nature of society over the next hundred years.

We’ll begin by turning our attention to the ongoing water crisis, then expand into climate change and species die-off, before shifting focus to technological unemployment, rogue AIs, and other threats that go bump in the exponential night.

Water Woes
In 2018, the United Nations Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change released their “Special Report on Global Warming,” which reached a stark conclusion: We humans have broken the planet. By falling in love with industrial technology and failing to address the environmental devastation it produced, humanity has put the Earth—what Carl Sagan once called, “the only home we have ever known”—on a crash course with disaster. According to the world’s top climate scientists, we have just twelve years to fix this problem. Either limit global warming to 1.5 degrees or face catastrophic consequences.

A few months later, the World Economic Forum seconded that notion, releasing their Global Risks Report, the latest edition of a periodic issuance designed to highlight the top five threats humanity will face over the next decade. Traditionally, the WEF’s concerns are economic—oil crises, financial crashes, that sort of thing. But 2018 marked the first time that fiscal fears didn’t make the top five. Instead, today’s biggest dangers are all ecological in nature: water crises, biodiversity loss, extreme weather, climate change, and pollution.

Over the next few sections, we’ll examine how technology is helping us tackle the WEF’s top five concerns, but this doesn’t happen automatically. Ours is not a techno-utopian argument. Solving our planet’s ecological woes requires technology, for certain, but it also demands one of the largest cooperative efforts in history. If we can learn to work together like never before, we like our chances. But in light of these recent reports, sooner rather than later.

And this brings us to Dean Kamen.

Dean Kamen is a kind of geek superhero, a nerd Batman in a denim work shirt. For starters, he lives in a secret lair—an island fortress complete with hidden rooms, helicopter launchpads, and after peacefully seceding from the United States, its own constitution. His résumé includes over 440 different patents, including insulin pumps, robotic prosthetics, and all-terrain wheelchairs. Because so many of his inventions have had such an impact, in 2000, President Bill Clinton awarded Kamen the highest honor awarded to inventors, the National Medal of Technology.

In Abundance, we recounted the story of Kamen’s “Slingshot,” an innovation named after the weapon David used to defeat Goliath, yet designed to fell a different giant: the threat of water scarcity. Today, 900 million people lack access to clean drinking water. Waterborne diseases are the number one killer on Earth, claiming 3.4 million lives a year, most of them children. Climate change, our rapidly ballooning population, and consistently poor resource management aren’t helping matters. By 2025, according to the UN, half the globe will be water stressed.

To turn this tide, Kamen designed the Slingshot, a vapor compression distillation system powered by a Stirling engine—or, a water purifier the size of a mini-fridge capable of running off any combustible fuel, including dried cow dung. Using less electricity than required to power a hair dryer, the Slingshot can purify water from any source: polluted groundwater, saltwater, sewage, urine, take your pick. One machine provides clean drinking water for three hundred people a day; a hundred thousand machines—now that’s the kind of cooperative effort we’re talking about.

This is also why we want to return to Kamen’s story, picking up in 2012, where we left off. Back then, the Slingshot had just completed a round of beta testing, successfully providing a couple months of clean drinking water to a number of remote African villages. Simultaneously, Kamen had just made a handshake deal with Coca-Cola. The inventor agreed to build the soft drink behemoth a better soda fountain, and in return, Coke agreed to use their global distribution network to get the Slingshot into water-starved countries.

Both kept their word. Kamen helped design the “Freestyle Fountain Beverage Dispenser,” which uses “micro-dose technology” to mix over 150 different beverages on demand (talk about choice paralysis). Coca-Cola, meanwhile, teamed up with ten other international organizations and began distributing the Slingshot in 2013, a core feature of their “Ekocenter” kiosks. Part general store and part community center, Ekocenters are solar-powered shipping containers that provide remote, low-income communities with safe drinking water, internet access, nonperishables (like mosquito repellant), first-aid supplies, and, of course, Coca-Cola products for sale. By 2017, there were 150 Ekocenters operating in eight countries, most of them run sustainably, by local female entrepreneurs, distributing 78.1 million liters of safe drinking water a year—not bad for a handshake deal.

Yet the Slingshot is not the only deal in town.

Technology has begun converging on our water woes, with thousands of players working on an enormous range of approaches. There are high-tech nanotechnology-infused desalination plants and medium-tech solar-powered groundwater pumps and low-tech fog capture methods. To offer another example, Kamen’s Slingshot has competition from the Bill Gates–backed Omni Processor, which turns human feces into potable drinking water while simultaneously producing electricity for power and ash for fertilizer
There’s also the California-based company, Skysource, winner of the $1.5 million Water Abundance XPRIZE, whose technology extracts two thousand liters of water a day from the atmosphere—or enough for two hundred people. It does this with renewable energy and at a cost of no more than 2 cents a liter. As the daily water needs for a planet of 7 billion are between 350 and 400 million gallons a day, using technologies like Skysource to tap the more than 12 quadrillion gallons contained in the atmosphere at any one time might be the only way to quench that thirst.

Or consider the “smart grid for water,” which is what happens when exponential technologies converge on the farm. The smart grid allows for everything from precise soil monitoring and crop watering to the early detection of insects and disease. Estimates vary, but most studies find the smart grid capable of saving us trillions of gallons a year—which is the point. We’re not lacking in technological know-how. We are water-wise, but execution dumb, attacking a biosphere-wide problem with a piecemeal approach.

Yet this is also the typical developmental curve for exponentials. Water technologies are moving out of the deceptive and into the disruptive phase, stitching these piecemeal efforts together into the global solutions we actually need. And one reason we can say this with confidence is that water technologies appear to be about five years behind energy technologies, which—as we’ll soon see—are scaling up into a worldwide force for tackling the next problem we’ll consider: global warming.

Climate Change for Optimists
Forty billion tons of CO2—that’s the cost of burning fossil fuels. Every year, we dump 40 billion tons of carbon dioxide into the atmosphere. How to wrap your mind around that amount? In 2017, Scientific Americanjournalist Caleb Scharf tried to find a comparison and lit upon forest fires.

Trees store carbon. If you burn an acre of coniferous forest, it releases 4.81 tons of carbon. Therefore, to release 40 billion tons of carbon requires burning 10 billion acres of forest per year, or the equivalent of 42 million square kilometers. Unfortunately, explained Scharf, “the entire continent of Africa is a mere 30 million square kilometers. So [Africa], plus another third, on fire, each year.”
These emissions, the detritus of incinerated coal, oil, and natural gas, are the principle driver of global warming. In fact, according to the Carbon Majors Database, since 1988, 71 percent of greenhouse gas emissions can be backtracked to just a hundred fossil fuel companies. For this reason switching to clean energy tops pretty much every list of what we can do to stop climate change. And most experts agree, that switch has three major parts: energy generation, energy storage, and green transportation. So here, in our examination of the solutions to the biggest threats we now face, we’ll start with energy generation—where the news is good.
