
Wind and solar power have been riding exponential growth curves for decades, dropping in price and rising in performance on an incredibly consistent basis. For comparison purposes, coal, which has long been the cheapest energy available, now costs about 6 cents a kilowatt-hour (kwh). But already there’s no comparison.

In the 1980s, the energy produced by a new wind plant cost 57 cents a kilowatt-hour. Today, in windy locations, it’s 2.1 cents (if you remove all subsidies, it’s 4 cents). That’s a 94 percent decrease in price. Over the next decade, experts predict that number will be sliced in half, bringing us “one cent wind” by 2030.

Solar is an even bigger story. Over the past forty years, there has been a three hundredfold reduction in the cost of making a solar panel. Forget kilowatt-hours for a moment. In 1977, generating one watt of power from a solar panel cost $77. Today, it’s 30 cents, or a 250-fold reduction in price. “This price-performance curve is like nothing we’ve ever seen in energy,” explains Ramez Naam, the head of Energy, Climate and Innovation for Singularity University. “The explosion of solar is almost like a digital transformation in the most fundamental category of infrastructure.”
This upsurge helps explain why Peabody Coal, the largest private coal company in the world, recently filed for bankruptcy. It’s par for the course. Over the past decade, coal stocks have dropped 75 to 90 percent as eight of America’s largest coal companies have filed Chapter 11. Asia has also joined America in this anti-coal rampage. In 2016 alone, China canceled the construction of 160 plants. India did something similar the following year, killing $9 billion in ongoing projects in a single month.

As coal dies, renewables take their place. The largest coal plant in North America, Nanticoke Generating Station in Ontario, Canada, recently became a solar farm. The United Kingdom now generates more energy from zero-carbon sources than coal, which is saying something because it was coal that helped unite that kingdom in the first place. According to research conducted by the Carbon Disclosure Project, over a hundred major cities got 70 percent of their energy from renewables in 2017. The same year, Costa Rica spent 300 days running entirely off renewables, and other countries aren’t that far behind. In total, 8 percent of the world’s electricity now comes from solar and wind, and it costs less to build a new wind farm or solar plant than it does to operate an existing coal plant.

The upshot? Very cheap energy.

And cheap everywhere. In sunny parts of the US, solar costs 4.5 cents a kilowatt-hour. In India, where coal was supposed to dominate for most of this century, it’s 3.8 cents. Abu Dhabi: 2.4 cents—which, when this contract was signed, was the lowest energy cost in history. Then Chile beat it with 2.1, and Brazil beat that with 1.75. In equatorial countries, essentially the places where the majority of people without electricity live, solar has become the cheapest form of energy available. More importantly, the poorest countries in the world are also the sunniest, which is going to completely invert the traditional power paradigm.

And there’s more to come. Materials science is now merging with solar, changing the way we build panels and the way those panels perform. Take “quantum dots,” essentially nanoscale chunks of semiconductor material that are starting to show up in solar cells. The big deal is energy conversion. A typical solar cell turns one photon of sunlight into a single electron of energy, meaning, today, in a very high-end panel, around 21 percent of incoming sunlight becomes outgoing energy. Quantum dots, meanwhile, triple this output, turning a solo photon into a trilogy of electrons, raising that conversion rate to 66 percent.

Technology is not only making solar more powerful, it’s also making it more affordable. Right now, two-thirds of solar’s price comes from soft costs—land, maintenance, sun tracking, effectively everything that’s not the panel. Already, companies are using drones to monitor solar and wind farms and built-in sensors to track panel trouble before it starts. But we’re not long from deploying robot technicians for solar and wind farm installation and maintenance, and using AI to supervise those technicians.

Finally, the reason we’ve been discussing solar and wind together is because these technologies too are converging—and with a huge upside. “The wind tends to blow when the sun doesn’t shine, and vice-versa,” says Naam. “That’s true on an hour-by-hour basis, and on a season-by-season basis. Combining wind and solar on the same energy grid is a bit like adding 1 plus 1 and getting 3. If this existed in the US, we could, right now, meet 80 percent of our power needs.”
But the most important point is also the most obvious one: Sunlight is free. And abundant. Every 88 minutes, 470 exajoules of solar energy hit our planet, which is as much as humanity consumes in a year. In 112 hours—or just less than five days—we get 36 zettajoules of energy, or what’s contained in all proven oil, coal, and natural gas reserves on Earth. If we could capture just one-one-thousandth of that bounty, we’d have six times as much energy as we use today. And while the numbers are different, the same is true for wind. When it comes to energy, it’s not about scarcity, it’s about accessibility—which is the exact kind of problem that exponential technology has a history of solving.

The Story of Storage
If we’re going to bring renewables to scale, we’ll need to store energy. For emergencies, for peace of mind, for times when the wind won’t blow and the sun won’t shine, batteries are critical. But we’re gonna need a lot of batteries.

Recently, California decided to source 100 percent of its electricity from renewables by 2045. To hit this goal, according to the Clean Air Task Force, the state needs 36.3 million megawatt-hours of energy storage. How much does it have today? About 150,000 megawatt-hours. In other words, California is .4 percent on their way.

Lithium-ion batteries have been everybody’s initial solution to this problem. An exponential technology, these batteries have been dropping in price for three decades, plummeting 90 percent between 1990 and 2010, and 80 percent since. Concurrently, they’ve seen an elevenfold increase in capacity. But producing enough of them to meet demand has been an ongoing problem.

Enter the Gigafactory—Tesla’s attempt to double global lithium-ion battery production. Located outside of Reno, the Gigafactory churns out twenty gigawatts of energy storage per year, marking the first time we’ve seen lithium-ion batteries produced at scale. A second Gigafactory has been built in Buffalo, a third in Shanghai, and a European location is under consideration. While it remains to be seen, Elon Musk has calculated that one hundred Gigafactories could manufacture enough storage for our planet’s needs.

Tesla has also shown their batteries work at scale. In a 2018 project to upgrade a solar/wind farm in Australia, Tesla built the largest battery facility ever—one hundred megawatts of storage—in fewer than a hundred days. What’s the big deal? First, we can now build fully integrated solar/wind/battery plants that produce energy at a price cheaper than coal. Second, we can do this over the course of a summer.

These developments caught the attention of other automobile companies. Renault started building home energy storage based on their Zoe batteries, BMW’s 500 i3 battery packs are being integrated into the United Kingdom’s national energy grid, and Toyota, Nissan, and Audi have all announced pilot projects. Despite this double-down, lithium-ion batteries are only part of our story.

Flow batteries are the next part. While lithium-ion batteries store energy in solids like metal, flow batteries store energy in liquids like molten salt. As lithium is a scarce resource found in dry climates—and mining it requires a half-a-million tons of water for every ton of lithium—replacing it with cheap and abundant salt is a useful substitution.

Flow batteries also serve different needs. Because lithium-ion batteries are lightweight and portable, they’re perfect for mobile technology. The downside is durability. A typical lithium-ion battery can handle a thousand charge cycles. Flow batteries are the opposite. They’re big and bulky, but can hold a charge for five thousand to ten thousand cycles, lasting decades without need for replacement. This makes them perfect for large utilities, data centers, and microgrids. San Diego, for example, as part of California’s effort to scale up renewables, recently installed a flow battery that stores two megawatts of electricity, or enough to power a thousand homes for four hours.

Cost remains an issue. Flow batteries are currently more expensive than lithium-ion batteries, yet they’re about to get a lot cheaper. Form Energy, with funding from Bill Gates’s Breakthrough Energy Ventures, is working on an aqueous sulfur flow battery that costs one-fifth of its lithium-ion equivalent.

Dozens of different storage options are hitting the market as well. Companies such as Hydrostor are pumping compressed air into tanks and underground holding facilities, creating batteries that cost about half of traditional systems and last for over thirty years. There are also flywheel, thermal energy, and pumped hydroelectric storage systems coming online.

Materials science is further aiding the cause. Researchers at MIT are using carbon nanotubes to create “ultra-capacitors” that increase battery capacity by as much as 50 percent. And there’s much more to come.

So the challenge isn’t generating energy from renewables or storing the energy that gets generated, it’s doing all this worldwide. This isn’t just about building Ramez Naam’s continent-wide smart grid, it’s about building one of them on every continent. It’s resource management on a global level, because, like it or not, when it comes to the environment, we really are in this together.

Electric Cars Are Gaining Speed
The final piece in the energy puzzle is transportation. In America, fueling our cars and trucks accounts for one-fifth of our total energy budget. Adding in planes, trains, and ships produces 30 percent of US greenhouse gas emissions. Globally, it’s a slightly smaller 20 percent. While self-driving cars—which are predominantly electric—will lessen this burden, most experts feel this transition won’t happen fast enough to keep global warming beneath two degrees.

To bring those numbers down, regulators everywhere have been pressuring the auto industry, announcing future bans on the sale of gas and diesel engines. Germany, the fourth largest carmaker in the world, was first down this road. In 2016, they announced the phaseout of the internal combustion engine by 2030. The following year, Norway sped past Germany, with their ban taking hold in 2025. Norwegians really got behind the idea, making 52 percent of their 2017 new car purchases electric. By comparison, it was 2.1 percent in the US in 2018.
