
India is also on board, aiming to be fossil fuel free by 2030. China, the biggest car market on the planet, is also considering a ban, with China’s Volvo spearheading the effort, having already stopped production on everything but electric vehicles. Meanwhile, France, Germany, Denmark, Sweden, Japan, the Netherlands, Portugal, South Korea, Costa Rica, and Spain have all set official targets for electric car sales.

And where there’s green there’s green—which is to say, sensing a major market shift, pretty much every major car company now has an electric vehicle in production and/or for sale. The number of models available has grown from a paltry two in 2010 to a consumer-friendly forty-one in 2019. Ford alone is spending over $11 billion to electrify 40 vehicles by 2022. Daimler is outspending Ford, shelling out $11.7 billion on ten pure electric cars and forty hybrid models. But the largest single investor is Volkswagen, dropping $40 billion to electrify 40 vehicles by 2030. In total, global automakers have already plunked down more than $300 billion in investments.

A lot of this cash has been spent on batteries. Beyond teaming up with Tesla on the Gigafactory, Panasonic has also teamed up with Toyota to develop new battery technology, while Porsche and BMW are collaborating on ultra-fast charging stations. Volkswagen has invested in the startup QuantumScape, whose next generation solid state batteries are cheap, light, and—unlike their lithium-ion cousins (and much to the TSA’s relief)—unable to catch fire. Plus, their energy density should provide a threefold improvement, putting the range of an electric vehicle very close to that of a gas-powered car.

Range, though, remains an issue. Today, most electric vehicles get about 200 miles a battery, but that number is trending upward. Range has been increasing by 15 percent a year for almost a decade. By 2022, your average mid-range model will get 275 miles on a full charge, while higher-end models will be closer to 350–400, which is the average range of a gasoline-powered car. By 2025, the year solid state batteries are supposed to hit the market, vehicles will push into the 500-mile range, or what many feel is required for widespread adoption.

The next piece in the electric puzzle: charging times. Your average gas station fill up takes less than ten minutes. The average EV fill up, depending on charger type, can stretch on for hours. But market forces and converging technology have sped things up considerably. That aforementioned Porsche and BMW collaboration, for example, has produced a four-hundred-megawatt charger that works twenty-five thousand times faster than the average smartphone charger. It pushes one hundred kilometers (sixty-two miles) of charge into a car battery in three minutes, and can take that same battery 10 percent charged to 80 percent charged in less than fifteen minutes.

The Tel-Aviv startup StoreDot has taken things even further. They’ve leveraged new materials to develop a lithium-ion “flash battery” that charges as fast as a super-capacitor, but discharges as slowly as a normal battery. A five-minute charge gives you three hundred miles of range. That’s sixty miles a minute, or the rough equivalent of older model gas pumps.

Charging station availability is the final piece. Estimates vary, but most figure there are about 150,000 gas stations in America. Each averages eight pumps, for a national total of 1.2 million. By comparison, there are only sixty-eight thousand EV charging units in the US today. But these numbers are misleading.

They don’t include residential charging, which is the number one charging location for EVs. Nor do they account for ChargePoint, a company that has raised over $500 million to build 2.5 million charging ports by 2025, half in Europe, half in the US. If successful, ChargePoint could put charge port availability on par with gas pump availability.

Which brings us to another of the World Economic Forum’s top five dangers: extreme weather. In 2017, the average American home ran on 29.5 kilowatt-hours a day, while the average Tesla Model-S has an 85 kilowatt-hour battery pack. In a pinch, this means a fully charged Model-S could power three American homes for almost twenty-four hours. So if a hurricane takes out South Florida, a fleet of Teslas can be the emergency backup system. With an AI-driven smart grid, electric vehicles become nodes in a national network, a mobile fleet of backup generators to prepare for the extreme weather to come.

Biodiversity and Ecosystem Services
To round out our look at the more significant environmental threats we now face, we have to investigate species extinction and ecosystem collapse. The combination of climate change, deforestation, pollution, overfishing, and more, have created a giant biodiversity crisis. On a bad day, according to the UN, two hundred species go extinct. Forty percent of all insect species are in decline. Our closest relatives—chimps, apes, really all the members of the primate family—are now endangered. By century’s end, at the current rate, 50 percent of all the large mammals will be gone.

The story might be worse in the ocean, where three-quarters of all the coral reefs are already in jeopardy. These reefs are home to 25 percent of the world’s biodiversity, which both supports the livelihood of over 500 million people and produces 70 percent of the oxygen in the atmosphere. Yet, by 2050, if nothing changes, 90 percent of those reefs will be gone. And the picture isn’t any brighter if you move out into the rest of the ocean. By 2100, a staggering 50 percent of all marine life will have disappeared.

Biodiversity is foundational to the health of our ecosystems and to the health of ecosystem services, which are all of the things that the planet does for us that we cannot do for ourselves. This includes oxygen production, food production, wood production, pollination services, flood protection, climate stabilization—thirty-six in total. And due to the loss of biodiversity, 60 percent of these services are critically degraded and unsustainable in the long term.

So how do we protect biodiversity and preserve ecosystem services? There is no simple solution, but we want to highlight five developments that are helping turn the tide.

Drone Reforestation:On land, forests are biodiversity hotspots, which is also why deforestation is one the largest drivers of extinction. The scale of destruction is vast. Every year, we lose 18.7 million acres of forest, or a swatch as big as Panama. Since trees are a major carbon sink, deforestation also accounts for 15 percent of total annual greenhouse gas emissions. So how do you combat industrial-scale deforestation? With industrial-scale reforestation.

Enter BioCarbon Engineering, a British company founded by ex-NASA employees that has developed AI-guided tree-planting drones. These drones first map an area to identify prime planting locations, then fire seed pods tucked inside of biodegradable missiles into the ground. The pods contain a custom-designed gelatinous growth medium that acts as a shock absorber to cushion impact, then a nutrient-dispenser to speed plant growth. A single pilot can fly six drones at once, planting a staggering one hundred thousand trees a day. A global army of ten thousand drones, which is what BioCarbon intends to build, could replant a billion trees a year.

Reef Restoration:Coral reefs are the forests of the ocean, so if we want to restore ocean health, we have to fix our reefs. There are around a half-dozen coral-regrowth technologies under development, but Dr. David Vaughan, a marine biologist with the Mote Tropical Research Laboratory, is pioneering some of the most exciting work. Borrowing tissue engineering techniques, Vaughan has figured out how to regrow one hundred years’ worth of coral in under two years. And while normal coral will only spawn once it reaches maturity—something that can take twenty-five to a hundred years—Vaughan’s corals reproduce at age two, giving us, for the first time, a way to radically replenish our reefs.

Aquaculture Reinvention:Fishing is one of the largest drivers of ocean wildlife decline, Right now, one-third of all global fisheries are stretched beyond their limits. Better fishery management is critical—but why manage when you can grow. The same tissue engineering techniques that allow us to produce steak from stem cells allows us to grow mahi-mahi, bluefin tuna, etc. In fact, there are now six different companies pursuing exactly this goal, with everything from cultured salmon to lab-grown shrimp heading for our menus.

Agricultural Reinvention:Plants and animals need room to roam, enormous stretches of pristine, uninterrupted habitat, both terrestrial and aquatic. Right now, 15 percent of the Earth is protected wildlands. To stave off what’s now known as “the Sixth Great Extinction,” Harvard’s E. O. Wilson and other experts believe that half the planet might be required. Which raises a critical question: Where do we find that land?
In a nutshell, by coupling reforestation and restoration with the reinvention of agriculture. Roughly 37 percent of the globe’s landmass and 75 percent of its freshwater resources are devoted to farming: 11 percent for crops, the rest for beef and dairy. However, these totals are shrinking. Not only are farmers abandoning their land in record numbers, but all of the innovations described in the Future of Food chapter—cultured beef, vertical farming, genetically engineered crops, etc.—allow us to harvest much more from far less. So, simple idea, let’s give this extra land back to nature.

Closed-Loop Economies:Pollution is another top five threat we now face. A 2017 study conducted by the medical journal the Lancetestimates that pollution kills 9 million people a year and costs almost $5 trillion. The impact might be worse on nature. Obviously, greenhouse gas pollution is the biggest danger, but chemicals in our rivers, plastic in our oceans, and particulates in our air, are choking the life out of our planet.

So what can be done? Shifting from a petroleum-based economy to one powered by renewables will help, but more is needed. Arguably the biggest bat is zero-to-zero manufacturing. This process allows companies to completely remove waste rather than managing it via landfill. The list of companies now going this route is growing: Toyota, Google, Microsoft, Procter & Gamble, and more. Not only is this good for the environment, it’s good for the bottom line. GM recently reported they’ve saved $1 billion over the past few years with their 152 zero waste facilities.

When we started this chapter, we highlighted the World Economic Forum’s top five threats—water crises, climate change, biodiversity loss, extreme weather, and pollution. We’ve addressed all five individually, yet they’re not individual problems
Extreme weather results from climate change, but its effects are magnified by other issues. Consider Myanmar’s Irrawaddy River Delta, once a biodiversity hotspot that was home to one of the largest mangrove forests on Earth. Over the past few decades, nearly 75 percent of that delta has been deforested, shutting down basic ecosystem services such as flood protection. When a cyclone hit the area in 2008, over 138,000 people died—with much of that devastation due to the loss of mangroves as a barrier.

But just as these are overlapping problems, there are overlapping solutions. Right now, Biocarbon Engineering’s drones are replanting a portion of the Irrawaddy Delta that is double the size of New York’s Central Park. Not only will this provide much needed habitat for wildlife, it will reboot ecosystem services such as flood protection. Plus, as mangrove forests store three times the amount of carbon as regular forests, this reforested delta becomes an invaluable tool in the fight against global warming.

In other words, the web of life is not a metaphor. Everything impacts everything impacts everything. The solutions we’ve highlighted all solve multiple problems at once. But we must be all in and right now. Stanford researchers give us three generations to halt species die-off before ecosystem services shut down in earnest. The Intergovernmental Panel on Climate Change estimates we have twelve years to halt global warming at 1.5 degrees. Yet we already have the technology required to meet these challenges, and thanks to convergences, it will only continue to improve. Our innovations may have caught up with our problems. Collaboration is the missing piece of the puzzle. If we’re going to make the shift to sustainable at the speed required, then we the people are both the obstacle and the opportunity.

