By the numbers, the 12 million Africans uprooted by the slave trade, the 18 million people rerouted by the division of India and Pakistan, and the 20 million rearranged on Europe’s chessboard in the years following World War II were history’s three biggest forced relocations. Each was propelled by a familiar driver: economics (and depersonalization), religion, and politics, respectively. Each reshuffled the world. Yet their combined impact will soon be dwarfed by a new exodus, the first to be triggered solely by technology.

Our next migration begins with the flick of a switch.

Sometime over the next few years, someone, somewhere, will jack themselves into the Matrix and never look back. Welcome to the strangest mass exit yet encountered: our migration from normal reality into virtual reality.

Our bags are already packed. Globally, video games consume three billion hours a week. In America, digital media devours eleven hours a day. Internet gaming disorder is a recognized mental health condition, and tales of excess are myriad. In 2005, the BBC reported that a South Korean man died after spending fifty consecutive hours playing an online video game. His demise was the first of many. In 2014, the Guardianbroke news of a couple who left their three-month-old baby to starve to death while they raised a virtual baby online at a local internet café. In Japan, there’s even a word for it: hikikomori, the lost generation, the invisible youth, the nearly 1 million teenagers who have locked themselves in their rooms and only venture out online.

These people are migratory pioneers. They’re setting up beachheads for virtual exploration. But over the next few decades, two factors will amplify this influx. Let’s call them psychology and opportunity.

We’ll start with psychology. While all previous migrations have been triggered by external drivers, or things happening in the world, this next one will be triggered by internal drivers, psychological drivers, or things happening in our brains. This next migration begins with our own addictive neurochemistry, against which there is no known defense
Video games are addictive. At the root of this addiction is the thrill ride known as dopamine, one of the brain’s primary pleasure drugs. We feel dopamine as engagement, excitement, a desire to investigate and make meaning out of the world. It’s released whenever we take a risk, expect a reward, or encounter novelty. Once hardwired into a reward loop—meaning, once our brain establishes a link between an activity and dopamine—the desire to get more of this chemical becomes our overarching preoccupation. Cocaine, by way of comparison, is one of the most addictive substances on Earth, yet much of what it does is flood the brain with dopamine.

Video games are chock-full of risk, reward, and novelty—they’re dopamine dispensers dressed up like joysticks. But it’s not just video games. When your phone buzzes with a message, that urge to see what it says, that’s dopamine too. The little rush of pleasure you get from checking that message, dopamine as well. Nearly all the major uses of the internet—gaming, surfing, social media, texting, sexting, and porn—are dopamine drivers. Yet none of these drive dopamine like VR.

Research shows that the immersive nature of the virtual environment spikes dopamine to heights typically unattainable by traditional video games or any other kind of digital media. While numbers vary slightly, most researchers believe that video games are truly addictive to about 10 percent of the population. Virtual reality will significantly increase that percentage. “Facebook is an addictive technological drug that, like every drug, gives people temporary pleasure and, ultimately, causes people to become psychiatrically ill,” psychiatrist Keith Ablow recently explained in an article for Fox News. “Oculus Rift will make matters worse.”
Yet dopamine is merely one of the brain’s major reward chemicals. There’s also norepinephrine, endorphins, serotonin, anandamide, and oxytocin to consider. All are massively pleasurable. Digital media isn’t incredibly effective at producing any beyond dopamine, but the immersive nature of VR makes it able to trigger all six. It’s the full cocktail of feel-good neurochemistry, hard drugs delivered by headset—and only the start of this story.

The next part emerges out of research into flow states. For those unfamiliar, flow is technically defined as “an optimal state of consciousness where we feel our best and perform our best.” It’s a state of peak performance, and part of what produces this state are all six of the brain’s pleasure chemicals. This is why researchers consider flow to be one of the most addictive experiences available. Yet it’s also one of the most meaningful. In over fifty years of research, the people who score off the charts for deep meaning and overall life satisfaction are the people with the most flow in their lives.

While video games can drive users into flow, the immersive nature of VR makes the technology significantly better suited for it. This means, as flow science and virtual reality continue to converge, we’ll soon gain the ability to create an alternative reality that is both more pleasurable and more meaningful than regular reality. Now hold on to this idea for a moment, as we explore the opportunity side of this story. Three opportunities in particular: jobs, education, and sex.

On the jobs front, we already know there’s economic possibility tucked inside of virtual reality. Second Life was the first virtual world. Back in 2006, BusinessWeekput on the cover real estate tycoon Anshe Chung, who, through deal-making withinSecond Life, became the first real-world millionaire to earn her fortune entirely in the virtual. We’ve seen similar profiteering inside of video games and social media, and virtual reality will bring more of the same. Which is to say, if robots and AI start to take a lot of our jobs over the next few decades, then the one-two punch of a shrinking job market in regular reality and an exploding job market in virtual reality makes for a potent migratory impetus.

The second trend is education. VR lets us create distributed, customized, accelerated learning environments. Whether it’s our burgeoning global population looking for an education or our suddenly techno-unemployed population looking for retraining, we’re seeing a force in the making. VR’s ability to drive people into flow makes this even more potent, as the state amplifies our ability to take in and retain new information. Research conducted by the Department of Defense, for example, found soldiers in flow could learn 230 percent faster than normal. This is also why, in Ernest Cline’s bestselling novel Ready Player One—where much of the world has already moved into VR—education was the primary driver of that migration.

Our final opportunity is sex. From VCRs to the internet, nearly every major communication technology has been driven forward by pornography. VR is clearly the next wave. Yet VR, augmented by haptics, makes pornography a multi-sensory experience. For the first time ever, you can look and you can touch—which brings with it a much bigger cocktail of addictive neurochemistry.

Plus, it’s more than porn. It’s also social media. Imagine VR Tinder, or the ability to sext your partner actual sensations. Stanford emeritus professor of psychiatry Al Cooper, who conducted one of the largest and most detailed studies of cybersex, described the Web as “the crack cocaine of sexual compulsivity.” According to his research, two hundred thousand Americans are already digital sex addicts. Globally, that number creeps into the millions. If you consider that VR sex is better at producing dopamine than digital sex, then you begin to understand that there’s another migratory driver here—one that mega-taps a primal evolutionary impulse.

Added together, our three largest migrations—the slave trade, the bifurcation of India and Pakistan, and the diaspora of post–WWII Europe—produced a combined 44.5 million exiles. Yet 321 million Americans already spend eleven hours a day online, and VR’s neurochemical cocktail will definitely increase that figure. Now toss in serious human motivators like meaning, mastery, money, and sex, and the pull becomes much stronger. It adds up into another great migration, an exodus of consciousness, and one only now just beginning to get under way.

Space Migration
“[The] Earth is the cradle of humanity, but one cannot remain in the cradle forever,” said Konstantin Tsiolkovsky in the late 1800s. Tsiolkovsky was a true visionary. Considered the father of space flight, he’s the Russian scientist credited with first dreaming up airlocks, steering thrusters, multistage boosters, space stations, the closed-cycle biological systems needed to provide food and oxygen for space colonies, and much more. Over the course of his career, he published over ninety papers on these topics, envisioning nearly every aspect of what it would take to conquer this final frontier except, of course, what it actually took to conquer this final frontier: competition.

In the 1960s, what first drove us off-world was the messy showdown between ideologies and ideologues known as “United States v. Soviet Union.” And it’s competition that’s still driving us today. Only now, while a handful of governments remain in this game—the US v. China, for example—the real story is a rivalry of tech titans: Jeff Bezos v. Elon Musk.

Each of these men has a deep desire to move us out of our cradle and into the stars, to open the space frontier and “back up the biosphere,” creating a second human civilization in space in case things don’t go so well here on Earth. And it’s these dreams and this competition that has become a force of its own, both a great big push off-world and the only migration in history that comes with its own Twitter battle.

@JeffBezos, Nov. 24, 2015: The rarest of beasts—a used rocket. Controlled landing not easy, but done right, can look easy. Check out video: bit.ly/OpyW5N
@elonmusk, Nov. 24, 2015: Not quite “rarest.” SpaceX Grasshopper did 6 suborbital flights 3 years ago & is still around.

We’ll start with Bezos, whose passion for space began in high school. Both a child of the Apollo era and a serious Star Trekfan, Bezos’s valedictorian speech focused on “a future where millions of people are living and working [off-world],” and closed with the line “Space, the final frontier, meet me there.” In college at Princeton, Bezos was the chapter president of Students for the Exploration and Development of Space (SEDS). His time there overlapped with the late physicist Gerard K. O’Neill, the founder of the Space Studies Institute. In the early 1980s, O’Neill asked a key question of his students: “Is a planetary surface the best place for humans to live while they expand into the solar system?” Eventually determining that the answer was no, O’Neill instead proposed we build massive rotating cylinders, now known as “O’Neill colonies,” manufactured from resources already outside the deep gravity of planets like Earth or Mars, manufactured, specifically, with materials gathered from the surface of the Moon.

These space lessons never left Bezos. After college, they helped carry him from Wall Street to Amazon as the first step in what he’s jokingly called “a simple two-step plan. First make billions, then open the space frontier.”
Once he did make billions, Bezos plunged them back into space. In 2000, he founded Blue Origin, committing a billion dollars a year to the project. His initial goal, then announced, was the construction of rockets capable of shooting people and payloads off Earth, into space, and, eventually, to the Moon—which he still believes is the best launch spot for our colonization of the cosmos.

“We were given a gift,” said Bezos at a 2019 event in Washington, DC, “this nearby body called the Moon. It is a good place to begin manufacturing in space due to its lower gravity.… Getting resources from the Moon takes 24 times less energy to get it off the surface compared to the Earth. That is a huge lever.”
As the next step, Bezos announced the Blue Moon Lunar Lander, which would travel to the Moon aboard his reusable New Glenn rocket, depositing 3.6 metric tons of rovers, cargo, and humans on the lunar surface. He also argued that we have no choice in this matter. “There is no Plan B. We have to save this planet. [Yet] we shouldn’t give up a future for our grandchildren’s grandchildren of dynamism and growth. [In space], we can have both.”
Bezos then resurfaced O’Neill’s work, proclaiming that Blue Origin’s post–lunar landing vision was the development of O’Neill colonies, each supporting an independent population of 1 million, or one of the big drivers of our next great migration. “The Earth is the gem of our solar system,” he explained. “It should be zoned residential and light industry. Heavy industry should be moved into space… where there’s unimaginable room.… The solar system can support a trillion humans, and then we’d have a thousand Mozarts and a thousand Einsteins. Think how incredible and dynamic that civilization will be.”
