And even though there’s a heathy rivalry here, Elon Musk doesn’t disagree: “History is going to bifurcate along two directions: One path is we stay on Earth forever, and then there will be some eventual extinction event… the alternative is to become a spacefaring civilization and a multiplanetary species. I think the future is vastly more exciting and interesting if we’re a spacefaring civilization and a multi-planet species, than if we’re not.”
Born in Pretoria, South Africa, Musk sold his first computer company at age twelve. After earning a degree from Wharton, then dropping out of Stanford’s PhD program, he repeated his software success with first a $307 million sale of Zip2, next a $1.5 billion sale of PayPal. Finally, with what he considered sufficient resources to make a difference, Musk set out to pursue what he considered the two missions most critical to our survival: breaking our fossil fuel addiction with a thriving solar economy—i.e., his work with Tesla and Solar Cities—and making humanity a multiplanetary species. But unlike Bezos’s lunar launch point for this migration, Musk’s obsession has always been Mars.

In 2001, a year before the sale of PayPal, Musk came up with the idea of sending a plant—plant seeds, really—to Mars. In his “Mars Oasis” project, his spaceship would include a sealed chamber with an Earth-like atmosphere, a healthy collection of seeds, and a nutrient gel to speed their growth. “When you’d land,” explained Musk, “you hydrate the gel and you have a little greenhouse on Mars.”
Musk wanted to take photos of the plant growing on the surface of the red planet, an image so impactful he felt sure it would inspire the US government to fund missions to Mars and establish a permanent human colony there. But when he investigated the cost of buying the rockets required to send his greenhouse up, up, and away, he realized the available launch options were way too primitive and expensive to ever facilitate a human colonization of the stars.

To solve these problems, Musk founded SpaceX in 2002. In June 2008, after several spectacular failures and a close brush with bankruptcy, Falcon 1 got off the ground and into orbit. This success was followed by dozens more, each cheaper than the last. Next came reusability, a rocket that could take off and land without destroying itself and a longtime dream of the airspace industry. Finally came Falcon Heavy, the largest rocket on the planet, which, in early 2018, launched Musk’s cherry-red Tesla roadster past Mars and on a trajectory toward the asteroid belt. Finally, SpaceX announced they would soon stop production of the Falcon vehicles—which lacked the oomph to send humans to Mars—and instead began work on “Starship.”
Musk views the establishment of a Mars colony as a contingency plan for humanity and a problem to be solved this decade. Starship test flights are already under way and his stated goal is to have humans on the planet’s surface before 2030, with a full city up and running by 2050. To achieve this, SpaceX has scheduled ten major launches between 2027 and 2050, one every twenty-two to twenty-four months, when the distance between the Earth and Mars is at its shortest.

The current plan goes like this: A Starship gets launched into orbit around Earth, then several tanker Starships would launch as well, meeting up with the first one to top up its fuel. From there, these rockets would head straight toward Mars, ferrying a crew and roughly a hundred passengers at a time. The cost per person for a one-way ticket? Musk thinks about $500,000, or, as he said: “low enough that most people in advanced economies could sell their home on Earth and move to Mars.”
One thing for sure, whether it’s Musk or Bezos who wins this particular space race, as Konstantin Tsiolkovsky also pointed out, a great many of the things that humanity has come to prize here on Earth—metals, minerals, energy, fresh water, prime real estate, endless adventure, lust, love, meaning, and purpose—they’re all in near infinite quantities in space. And it is the quest to claim this treasure—today being played out by battling billionaires—that is blasting us out of our cradle and into the stars, on the front end of another of this century’s great migrations, our first real foray across this, the final frontier.

Meta-Intelligence: Into the Borg
In 2015, Harvard chemist Charles Lieber was trying to solve a difficult problem in the new field of neuro-modulation. Over the past few decades, deep brain stimulators had been developed to help sufferers of Parkinson’s disease. While the patient remains awake, a hole is drilled through the skull and a device that sends electrical pulses to areas of the brain responsible for movement is inserted. It’s become almost a routine procedure. Over a hundred thousand devices have been implanted, and for patients who have exhausted all other medical options, deep brain stimulation remains the only way to improve motor control and lessen tremors.

Unfortunately, there are side effects. Weird side effects. The tendency to develop a compulsive gambling problem is the most frequent issue. Workaholics becoming couch potatoes overnight is another. Chronic depression is a third. The reason? Size.

If they had their way, neurosurgeons would like to impact the brain at a single neuron level, but today’s deep brain stimulators are too big for this precision. Trying to target individual neurons with today’s implants is, as MIT professor of materials science and engineering Polina Anikeeva pointed out in her 2015 TED Talk, “akin to trying to play Tchaikovsky’s first piano concerto with fingers the size of a pickup truck.”
Making matters more complicated, these devices require surgery to install and, as the brain treats them like foreign invaders, serious medicine afterward. There’s also the issue of design. The body is a flexible 3-D environment, but most of today’s brain implants—be they deep brain stimulators or otherwise—are inflexible 2D devices that have more in common with traditional silicon chips than anything that exists naturally in the body. In the squishy, hot, and wet of the brain, it’s no wonder signals get crossed and side effects occur.

Charles Lieber, though, took a very different approach. To help regenerate bone, doctors often implant a “bioscaffold” into damaged areas to provide a support structure for new tissue to grow around. About five years ago, Lieber decided to try to build a microscopic bioscaffold made from electronics. He used photolithography to etch a four-layered probe one layer at a time, creating a nanoscale metal mesh with sensors capable of recording brain activity.

After rolling that mesh into a tight cylinder, Lieber sucked it up into a syringe, then injected it into the hippocampus of a mouse. Within an hour, the mesh had unfurled into its original shape, doing no damage to tissue along the way. The result: Mouse-Brain TV. Lieber could monitor the activity of the mouse’s brain, in real time, in a living animal. The mouse’s immune system treated the implant as friend not foe. Instead of attacking the mesh as a foreign invader, neurons attached themselves to it and began multiplying.

In a separate experiment, Lieber injected the mesh into the retina of a mouse, where it once again unfurled, doing no damage to the eye along the way. The result is a device that neither impairs sight nor blocks light, yet remains capable of recording mouse vision, at a single neuron level, across sixteen channels at once, for years on end. The work brought accolades to the Lieber Group and helped the technique spread like wildfire. How-to tutorials are available online. As are plenty of videos of Elon Musk describing the next step in the evolution of the idea, what he’s termed “a neural lace,” an injectable brain-computer interface, an “ultra-high bandwidth brain-machine interface to connect humans to computers.”
Brain-computer interfaces (or BCIs) are the ultimate tale of convergence. They sit at the intersection of nearly everything in this book, including biotechnology, nanotechnology, and materials science—which, as we’ve seen, are rapidly becoming all the same industry. There’s also quantum computing, which gives us the ability to model complex environments like the human brain, and artificial intelligence, which allows us to interpret what we’ve modeled. And high-bandwidth networks that allow us to upload neurological signals into the cloud. In fact, packed into this single advancement, we find most of our advancements.

If we consider our development of exponential technologies to be among the leading examples of human intelligence, then BCIs are the crowning achievement of those examples. They might also be a way to survive our own success, as, in the minds of many, BCIs are the upgrade we desperately need to fully participate in an AI-dominated world.

The leading proponents of this view are Elon Musk and Bryan Johnson, who have both created companies, Neuralink and Kernel respectively, to speed development along. But everyone from Facebook to DARPA has gotten involved. Facebook wants neurotech that allows you to think instead of type, replacing the keyboard with the mind as the ultimate social media interface. DARPA sees BCIs as a next-generation battlefield technology, and wants one that can record 1 million neurons simultaneously while stimulating a hundred thousand. There are also a multitude of startups crowding into the space, from health and wellness to education and entertainment.

And progress has been made.

Over the past decade, utilizing EEG-based brain-computer interfaces—which require no surgery to install and instead just sit atop the head like a crown of electrodes—researchers have performed real miracles. BCIs have allowed paraplegics to walk again. Stroke victims, paralyzed for years, are regaining the use of their limbs. Epileptics have been cured of seizures. Quadriplegics can now control cursors with their mind. And, piling atop Dracula, flying cars, and personal robots in our list of childhood fantasies turned into realities, telepathy is also now possible.

Back in 2014, a team of Harvard researchers sent words from mind to mind via the internet. Technically known as “brain-to-brain communication,” this was an example of the long-distance version—with one subject in France, the other in India. The researchers used a wireless, internet-connected EEG headset as their transceiver and a transcranial magnetic stimulator—which sends weak magnetic pulses into the brain—as a receiver. The subjects didn’t exactly get thoughts, but rather could accurately read flashes of light that corresponded to the message.

And that was then. By 2016, we were using EEG headsets to play video games telepathically, and by 2018, we were piloting drones with our thoughts. The next step is figuring out how to seamlessly link our brains to the internet via the cloud—which is why Lieber’s injectable mesh matters so much. The general thinking is that neurotech sitting atop the head won’t be able to capture signals at any useful resolution, while devices that require surgery to implant—however minor the procedure becomes—remain too risky for widespread adoption. But an injectable neural-lace, to borrow Musk’s term, solves these problems and then some.

And this brings us to our final migration, a sojourn out of our normal brain-based singular consciousness and into a cloud-based collective consciousness, both a hive mind and a reminder that the greatest journeys are often inward toward our psyche, rather than outward toward the stars. Economic considerations alone, as both Elon Musk and Bryan Johnson have argued, necessitate this shift. In a world where humans are competing with artificial intelligence, the ancient motivator of “paying the bills” comes into play.

But there are other motivators at work.

Connecting our brains to the cloud provides us with a massive boost in processing power and memory, and, at least theoretically, can give us access to all the other minds online. Think of it this way: Computers, on their own, are interesting. But connect a bunch of those computers together, wire up a network, and you get the beginnings of the World Wide Web. Now imagine what happens when those computers are actually brains, which are already the most complicated machines in the known universe. And imagine that we don’t just get to transmit thoughts, but feelings, experiences, and maybe, just maybe, meaning. If this were possible, would we hang on to our singular consciousness for long, or would we start to migrate into the collective mind that’s evolving online?
Before you answer, consider three more details. First, we humans are an extremely social species. Loneliness, according to too many studies, is one of the great and deadly terrors of the modern era. The desire for connection is a foundational human driver, an intrinsic motivator in the psychological parlance. But it’s not the only one in play.

The closest humans have come to a hive mind is the experience known as “group flow,” the shared, collective version of a flow state. Group flow is a team performing at its very best: an incredible brainstorming session, a fantastic fourth-quarter comeback, a band coming together and blowing the roof off the auditorium. It’s also considered the most pleasurable state on Earth. When psychologists ask people to rank their favorite experiences, group flow always tops that list. So the opportunity to have this experience essentially on demand will be a potent migratory driver as well.

Finally, there’s evolution to consider.

