Since the origin of life on this planet, the trajectory of evolution has always been from the individual to the collective. We went from single-celled organisms to multi-celled organisms to the massive multi-cellular organisms known as human beings. This is the typical thrust of natural selection, and why should today’s selections be any different? There’s little reason to believe that humanity has reached the pinnacle of intelligence, of development, of possibility, that reality television, that our megacities of tangled steel and endless asphalt, represent the best that life on Earth has to offer. Rather, we are merely a point on a spectrum, the ultimate “You are here” arrow.

There is, however, strong evidence that we won’t be here for long. Neuralink has a plan for a two-gigabit-per-second wireless connection from the brain to the cloud and wants to begin human trials by the end of 2021. More and more—as this, and so many of the discoveries discussed in this book illustrate—the once slow and passive process of natural selection is being transformed into one rapid and proactive: evolution by human direction. This means, over the next century, technological acceleration may do more than just disrupt industries and institutions, it may actually disrupt the progress of biologically based intelligence on Earth. This break will birth a new species, one progressing at exponential speeds, both a mass migration and a meta-intelligence, and, ultimately, here at the tail end of our tale, yet another reason the future is faster than we think.

A meta-intelligence would be quite the innovation accelerant. If solitary minds working in collectivist organizations—aka, business, culture, and society—produced converging exponential technologies—aka, the fastest innovation accelerant the world has yet seen—imagine what a hive-minded planet—aka, a kinder, gentler Borg—might be capable of creating. Put differently: How fast is our future if we’re all thinking together?
And if you’ve come out the other side of all this thinking or feeling a little unsettled, there’s actually a technical term for this as well: loss aversion. One of our most potent cognitive biases, loss aversion is the evolutionarily programmed suspicion that if I take away whatever you have today, whatever I replace it with tomorrow will be a whole lot worse. This is why people stay stuck in ruts, it’s among the main reasons companies have such difficulty innovating, and why cultural change is so molasses slow.

Yet, who knows, maybe our hive mind will get us past this particular blind spot, but, until then, that sense of converging exponentials meets five great migrations meets holy-shit vertigo that you might be feeling is perfectly natural. As is the trepidation, the excitement, the unlocking of imagination. We feel it too. And all we can really say is what we’ve been saying to each other along the way: Take a deep breath and don’t blink, because, ready or not, here comes tomorrow.AFTERWORDAbundance Revisited
One way to view the acceleration of technology described in this book is as part of a continuous march toward abundance. This was a theme we first introduced in our 2012 book, appropriately named: Abundance: The Future Is Better Than You Think. Since publication, this trend has only continued. There is no doubt that the cost of an ever-increasing number of goods and services has all but disappeared. Nor is there much doubt about the positive downstream effects of demonetization. Abundant cheap energy leads to abundant clean water. Autonomous electric cars lead to cheaper, greener transportation options and lower-cost access to housing. The combination of AI, 5G and AR/VR will provide low-cost education, entertainment, and healthcare to nearly every human on Earth, independent of geography or socioeconomic status.

There are, of course, plenty of reasons to disagree with this idea. The gap between the wealthy and poor grows ever wider, and the notion that there’s an easy solution tucked inside our technology has been criticized as techno-utopian. But exponential technologies continue to march onward, and with them the ongoing process of demonetization and democratization.

In January 2019, for example, a Wall Street Journalheadline reported: “The world is quietly getting better.” The story that followed examined the latest World Bank numbers, which showed a continued decline in the number of individuals living below $2 per day, aka extreme poverty. And while it is true that the rich are getting richer, the poor are becoming much more enabled, with ever-increasing access to tools and technologies not measured by today’s economic systems.

These two scenarios nearly always follow each other. The first mobile phones of the 1980s were slow and glitchy and served only the wealthy few. Today, however, while our phones are fast, flawless, and chock-full of capabilities, they are now cheap enough to be in the hands of even the poorest people on Earth. So, while we will see a future in which the rich may be living on Mars and accessing the latest in longevity treatments, this goes hand-in-hand with a future where everyone on Earth has increasingly low-cost access to food, energy, water, education, healthcare, and entertainment.

Our point is that, as Abundancereaches its tenth anniversary (2022), this concept is no longer simply a concept. Certainly, there’s still a long way to go. A great many existing solutions are not yet globally distributed, and critical issues like water scarcity, climate change, and global hunger are heading in the wrong direction. Yet, as the Wall Street Journalpointed out, dozens of other indicators are trending up. In The Better Angels of Our Nature, to offer a different example, Harvard’s Steven Pinker eloquently demonstrates that war and strife have reached all-time lows, and we are living in the most peaceful time in human history. Also the healthiest. Whether you’re measuring by decreasing infant mortality and teenage birthrates, the number of deaths from malaria, the death toll from famine, or our ever-expanding life spans, here too the indicators show incredible progress. Meanwhile, the cost of unsubsidized renewable energy continues to plummet, while both high-speed digital connectivity and the availability of cheap, capable devices are both exploding. And with these devices and connectivity in place, a world of possibility has begun materializing before our eyes.

Today, a child in Tanzania has access to AI-enabled education tech, as well as the sum total of the world’s available information via Google or Baidu. That same child, connected to the bandwidth explosion heading her way, will soon be able to spin up thousands of processor cores belonging to any number of cloud-based services, and tap into everything from the billions of hours of free entertainment on YouTube to our ever-thriving gig economy. Conveniently, the poorest nations on Earth are also the sunniest and with that sun—and the ever-increasing spread of solar—comes the opportunity for abundant energy. With energy comes the power to provide clean water and with clean water comes massive increases in health and wellness, which together with increased education and lower birth rates, can help stem the tide of overpopulation.

To be clear, there will still be terrorism, war, and murder. Dictatorship and disease won’t go away. But the world will quietly continue to get better. And, as we described in Abundance, the goal here isn’t about creating a life of luxury, but rather a life of possibility. Thanks to the forces of convergence, the technological advances needed for that world of abundance are coming at an ever-increasing pace. Of course, creating that world won’t happen automatically. It will still require the largest cooperative effort in history. And this brings us to our final question: What, exactly, are you waiting for?
Which Way Next?
If you’re tired of waiting, if the concepts and capabilities outlined in the book are of further interest, whether you’re a CEO trying to steer your company through accelerating technological change or a garage-based entrepreneur looking to capitalize on these same changes, we’ve got you covered. Now, for certain, trying to grope with a century’s worth of technological change unfolding over the next decade is a tall order, and trying to do this with our local and linear brains makes it ever more complicated.

The only way that your authors have found to navigate these waters, at least today, is through constant and continuous education.

We feel there are two critical components to this education, one mental, one physical. On the mental side, the significant performance upgrades that come from learning how to tap into the state of consciousness known as flow—amplified productivity, learning, creativity, collaboration, cooperation (this list goes on)—gives us the ability to keep pace. Flow augments all the brain’s foundational information processing machinery, giving us the ability to think at speed and at scale—which are the two key cognitive requirements for thriving in an exponential world.

Simultaneously, there’s a physical side to this equation—built out of actual, physical technology. Today’s exponential entrepreneur and leader must diligently and continuously update their understanding of what technology now exists, and what that technology makes possible, moment to moment. While this kind of continuous learning is possible, it’s not easy, which is perhaps one of the reasons for the increased popularity of Singularity University, Abundance360, and Abundance Digital—programs that constantly refresh participants on the state of the “exponentially possible.”
Below, for both sides of this equation, you’ll find a great list of options and opportunities.

Zero-to-Dangerous: The World’s Leading Flow-Hacking Training:Zero to Dangerous is a research-backed peak-performance training designed to help entrepreneurs and leaders access the peak performance state known as flow. It is specifically focused on teaching people how to perform at speed and think at scale—which are the two keys to thriving in an exponential world. Zero to Dangerous blends cutting-edge science with one-on-one peak-performance coaching from licensed clinical psychologists and provides access to a network of high-performing individuals from across the globe. The training is led by Steven Kotler and leverages the same tools that he has used to train Google, US Navy SEALs, and Accenture. To learn more go to: ZerotoDangerous.com. To learn more about Flow Research Collective, go to FlowResearchCollective.com.

Abundance360:A360 is a year-long membership (curated and run by Peter Diamandis) designed to help entrepreneurs navigate exponential technological change. Each year kicks off with a three-day mastermind in Beverly Hills, where members gather to learn about the latest breakthroughs in AI, networks, robotics, 3-D printing, AR/VR, biotech, and blockchain, and how these technologies are immediately applicable in their businesses and lives. Our mission is to provide members with the information, insights, and implementation tools they need to stay ahead of the curve.

Understanding how to navigate accelerating technology is essential for every entrepreneur. A360’s mission is to give you the insights and tools to multiply by 10x your team’s abilities, and to connect with other abundance and exponentially minded leaders. To apply for A360 go to www.A360.com
Abundance Digital: Abundance Digital is the digitized, demonetized, and democratized version of Abundance360. The program services more than 2,000 entrepreneurs around the world at a 10x lower cost. The Abundance Digital community is your one-stop-shop for collaborating with other abundance and exponentially minded doers from around the world—including Peter Diamandis himself. Other benefits include:
Dailey Coaching and Insights from the Abundance Digital APP and 100-plus hours of video content, teachings, and coaching by Dr. Diamandis.

Livestream access to Peter’s annual 3-Day Abundance360 Executive Summit, as well as Singularity University’s Global Summit and Exponential Medicine program.

Monthly Webinars: Live access to ~4 monthly video webinars featuring leading CEOs and entrepreneurs.


To apply go to www.Abundance.Digital
Singularity University:Singularity offers programs and events around the world focused on exponential-related teaching for graduate students, executives, and leaders. For a detailed list of the program offerings, go to www.SU.org
XPRIZE Foundation:The XPRIZE Foundation uses large-scale global incentive competitions to crowdsource solutions to the world’s grand challenges. XPRIZE believes that solutions can come from anyone, anywhere. Scientists, engineers, academics, entrepreneurs, and other innovators with new ideas from all over the world are invited to form teams and compete to win the prize. Rather than throw money at a problem, we incentivize the solution and challenge the world to solve it. The XPRIZE has designed and launched more than $200 million in prize purses across a range of subjects from space and oceans to education, food, water, energy, and environment just to name a few. To learn more about getting involved and/or competing go to www.XPRIZE.org

Bold Capital Partners:Bold Capital Partners (BCP) manages a family of funds targeting investments in early-stage and growth technology companies, many of which are mentioned in this book. BCP is particularly interested in entrepreneurial leaders who leverage exponential technologies to transform the world and create innovative solutions to humanity’s grand challenges. BCP was born from the convergence of three key forces: a leading vision of the future; a unique and valuable network of experts and practitioners supporting that vision; and a seasoned team of investment professionals capable of executing investments around that vision. Bold was named after Peter’s second book (by the same name). For more information on the fund and the BCP portfolio of companies, go to: www.BoldCapitalPartners.com
Human Longevity Inc.’s HEALTH NUCLEUS:In this book, we mention the potential breakthroughs racing our way in the field of longevity. One of the most important tools is made possible by HLI’s Health Nucleus program, which uses the latest technological advancements to provide a new standard for personal health. By integrating full-body imaging with whole-genome sequencing, Health Nucleus CORE is the first personalized assessment to reveal a more complete picture of your past, present, and future health status. You benefit from our highly experienced team of board certified and licensed physicians, geneticists, and expert scientists who use innovative technology to bring about the next big shift in quality of life. For more information, go to www.HumanLongevity.com
