
Keynotes: Hiring Peter Diamandis and/or Steven Kotler

Both Peter and Steven enjoy speaking about their work in Abundance, BOLD, and The Future Is Faster Than You Think.They both do a limited number of select keynote speaking engagements ever year.

For more information on hiring Peter Diamandis, go to:
www.diamandis.com/speaking
For more information on hiring Steven Kotler, go to:
www.stevenkotler.com/speaking

ACKNOWLEDGMENTS

The Future Is Faster Than You Think has benefited greatly from the generous wisdom of a great many people. First off, the authors would like to express deep gratitude to their families—Jet, Dax, and Kristen Diamandis, and Joy Nicholson—for their incredible love, patience, and support. We’d also like to thank our agent, John Brockman; our editor; Stephanie Frerich, and everyone at Simon & Schuster who worked so doggedly on this project.

Also on the editing front, the always incredible Michael Wharton has been there every step of the way, and we owe him huge thanks for his insight, feedback, and incredible stamina. Gratitude to Max Goldberg for the staggering task of helping track down and organize our references, and to Jarom Longhurst for the book’s flawless marketing campaign.

Special thanks also goes to Steven’s team at the Flow Research Collective (especially Rian Doris) and Peter’s team at PHD Ventures (Esther Count, Claire Adair, Max Goldberg, Derek Dolin, Kelley Lujan, Jarom Longhurst, Bri Lempesis, Greg O’Brien, Tom Compere, Sue Glanzrock, Joe Mosely, and Connie Fox) for their incredible support in doing research, crowdsourcing content, and blog creation, and for providing 24-7 support. And last but not least, special recognition to Esther Count and Connie Fox for the herculean task of coordinating Peter’s schedule and life.

On the research and inspiration front, we are grateful to the Singularity University family of alumni, faculty, and staff under the leadership of cofounder and chancellor Ray Kurzweil, associate founder Rob Nail, chief growth officer Carin Watson, and executive chairman Erik Anderson. Thank you also to the XPRIZE family under the leadership of Anousheh Ansari for the offices we occupied and the inspiring stories of innovation we were able to tell in this book.

Finally, Peter wants to say thank-you to Dan Sullivan and the Strategic Coach team for the encouragement, wisdom and support on creating a 10x impact on the world.More from this Series
Bold
Abundance

ABOUT THE AUTHORS
© MATTHEW RUTHERFORD
Peter H. Diamandisis a New York Times bestselling author and the founder of more than fifteen high-tech companies. He is the CEO of the XPRIZE and executive chairman of Singularity University, a Silicon Valley–based institution backed by Google, 3-D Systems, and NASA. He is cochairman of Planetary Resources, Inc., and the cofounder of Human Longevity, Inc. Diamandis attended MIT, where he received his degrees in molecular genetics and aerospace engineering, and Harvard Medical School, where he received his MD. In 2014 he was named one of “The World’s 50 Greatest Leaders” by Fortunemagazine.

© RYAN HEFFERNAN
Steven Kotleris a New York Timesbestselling author, award-winning journalist, and the founder and executive director of the Flow Research Collective. He is considered one of the world’s leading experts in peak performance. His books include Stealing Fire, BOLD, The Rise of Superman, Abundance, A Small Furry Prayer, West of Jesus, and Last Tango in Cyberspace. His work has been nominated for two Pulitzer Prizes, has been translated into more than forty languages, and has appeared in over a hundred publications, including the New York Times Magazine, Atlantic Monthly, Wired, Forbes, and Time
