So excited to have you here and have a chance to talk about some of this stuff. I'll let
us go first and then I have a bunch of questions to ask you.
Yeah, Mike, feel free to just jump in and ask questions as well. Yeah, okay, perfect. Yeah,
so Rich, I know you started talking about the history of it, but let's just take it back.
Maybe you can get started by telling us a bit about your background and how you got interested
in bioelectricity in the first place. Sure, yeah, my background, I started out in physics
and I got my bachelor's degree in physics and then went to graduate school at Purdue.
And in the physics department, they had professors give us a lecture about their work.
It was a rotating thing, so we'd be able to hear all the professors what they're up to and
decide if we want to work with them. And one of the professors they came on to do that was Lionel
Jaffe. And he was actually in the Department of Biological Sciences, but he liked to go to the
physics department because he found the students there were better and more appropriate for his
interests. He told us about his work in measuring electrical currents in germinating seaweed eggs.
And I found that fascinating. At that point, I had never taken any biology in my career.
And to think that you can actually measure currents in living cells, I thought was fascinating.
So I went and did a rotation with him, fell in love with the whole idea of measuring
these currents and I did my PhD under his guidance. And that really was a turning point in my life
because instead of studying solids and solid state physics, I was studying living cells
and we're measuring currents in those cells. It was actually fascinating. So we developed a
whole new technique which we called at the time we called the vibrating probe. It was basically
an electrode that vibrated back and forth and we used a lock and amplifier to measure the voltage
between the two points. And if current is flowing in a medium, that will generate a voltage in the
medium and it's very small because you're in seawater. It's very conductive. So the voltage
you generate is really in the nano volt, 10 to the minus ninth volt range, very small. But with
some fancy electronics and averaging many, many measurements, you can get down into those regions
and we did. We measured currents around the single fucoid egg, a pelvicia egg, and that's how I got
into it. It was ever since then, I've been looking at those kinds of things, fields and currents,
in cells and their response to imposed fields because that's so critical for development
of our organisms. So it's really been a fun. So when you first got into this research, you
developed a vibrating probe with Lyme and Jaffe as well. What was the next step? What was the
significance of bioelectrics back then? And one, I guess, was it even called bioelectrics the field?
Not really. Bioelectric was a term that was coined much later. There it was simply called
ionic currents in development. We had a whole book that we wrote called Ionic Currents in Development
and that was about, we just referred to it. See, when people talked about currents,
they thought about electron movement in wires. And, you know, of course, we aren't talking about
that. We're talking about sodium, potassium, chloride movements through cells. So that's why
we emphasize the ionic current aspect because that's a whole new way of thinking of current
with ions carrying it. And, yeah, that's the whole way we started describing it. And it was
kind of new. I think it was fairly new. People didn't quite know what to make of it at the time
because of, you know, they didn't think of cells as driving currents through themselves. It was a
whole new way of thinking. And, you know, as Mike will attest, it still is somewhat difficult to get
people to realize that's what's going on. I think it's largely because it never quite made it into
the biology literature, into the biology textbooks. You know, they teach all kinds of things about
genetics and physical chemistry and all kinds of biochemistry, but you don't get much biophysics
taught in the biology realm. So even doctors growing up, they don't learn about this stuff until
they get into cardiology and they realize that their heart is controlled by electrical voltages
and currents. And they start realizing how important it is then. But before that, in their basic training,
they just don't hear much about it. And that's unfortunate because I think it's the basis of
life is bioelectric. And it's just not completely understood and taught that way. But when you
think about it, every single aspect, every organ in your body has a voltage across it, across the
outer boundary, the epidermis or the outer layer of the organ that the kidney does. It has an outer
envelope, the liver. And there's a voltage across each one. And that voltage is important for the
function of that organ. So we are electric beings, that's for sure. And it's something that's
very, very slow to be realized by the medical community or anybody else, really.
So this is one, go on, Mike. Well, I was just going to say that I came across the first paper
on the vibrating probe. I first read it in 1987. And I was like, oh, my God, it was obvious that
this was a breakthrough technology because for the first time, we were able to see this living
pattern of electrical activity around and spatialized too, around all of these things.
Just can you just mention real quick the range of things that it's since been applied to? I mean,
it's been applied to a million different things, right? Oh, absolutely. Yeah, it's been picked up
by about 20 to 30 scientists around the world. And they've used it to measure the currents
through germinating pollen tubes, through the gastrolysis stage of many embryos. We used it to
measure the current through a blastomere. You know, just a mouse blastomere has current going in
apricot land and out the basal land, a constant steady current. We measured that many years ago,
but it's been shown that in the chick embryo and in the frog embryo, during gastrulation, the
currents are coming out of the neural tube region. And those currents are generating a voltage within
the embryo itself that's very important for its polarity. And if you disrupt those voltages,
literally change the voltage inside the embryo, you completely mess up development. They don't
they don't develop properly. You get all kinds of monsters created. And that's one of the things
that Mike's been working on as well, looking at the molecular aspects of those pumps and leaks
to see how that's involved in pattern formation. And it's critical, absolutely critical. So,
yeah, the probe is used quite a bit. It's not currently being used by many people. I don't
know of any current labs that are using it every day. But there's, oh, there's about 100 or so
papers out there showing different different organisms that is used to probe to determine
the current patterns. Yeah. When you first got into bioelectricity and started recognizing that
ourselves are electric, what was the the thinking in the field around what the significance of this
was? What was the main research interest around what's going to happen with
understanding that ourselves are electric? Well, the first thing we did when we actually measured
the current in this fucoid egg, it's a seaweed egg that germinates a rhizoid at one end. So,
it starts out perfectly symmetrical sphere. And it has the capability of growing anywhere on its
surface. And it grows by secreting material that then softens the wall. So, it grows by pressure,
you see. It builds up pressure on the wall. And as the wall gets softer, it expands. And that's
how it elongates. So, it turns out that with this particular organism, it looks at the cues around
it, mainly light and temperature. And it grows to the dark. So, it goes to form a hold fast to
it sticks to a rock. And it can grow up from that. It turns out that that current is critical
for determining the axis of growth. And you can actually change that by changing the current flow.
So, normally it controls the current by the light being absorbed by photoreceptors, which then
change the permeability of channels in that area and open up a calcium channel that lets calcium
in and that stimulates secretion. But if you then take that same cell and you put an electric field
in a different direction, it'll grow towards that electric field. So, it listens to what's out there.
And if it's light, as the main factor, it'll listen to that. But if it's an electric field,
that's the main factor, it'll listen to that. So, it depends on the different environmental
variables that it cares about to make its decision. And I think that's the case with many cells in
the body. When they are developing, they're in an environment. They're surrounded by other cells
and they get information from that. And often that information is electrical, so that they have a
current nearby or a voltage gradient nearby that affects the way that their ion channels and pumps
are oriented or localized on that on their plasma membrane. And that will then in turn
generate a little current in there through them that'll polarize them. So, basically the electric
fields that any cell experiences will certainly influence the way it grows in both direction
and its differentiation. The genes that are turned on, that's one of the things that Mike has been
finding, that genetics is listening to the electrical signals and basically making decisions
based on these external inputs. Another thing that's not in the literature. So, not yet.
So, this is a question I have for both you and Mike then. Mike, when you said when you first
read about the vibrating probe, your head was just like, oh my gosh. And obviously this field
clearly still remains underrated, even though there's a bunch of fascinating research happening.
Why do you think biophysics or bioelectricity has not made its way into the textbook or still
remains so underrated? Rich, you want to go first? No, I think you should answer this one.
Okay. Well, so here are my thoughts. One of the things that make biochemistry and genetics a lot
easier is that you can study them in the dead state. So, you can fractionate your cell, you've
got your, you can isolate the DNA, the RNA, the proteins, the lipids, the sugars, spread this
stuff out and then you can analyze them. And so, the amazing thing about bioelectricity is that
it's fundamentally, I mean, as a number of people have said, it's the spark of life. It's only there
when the system is alive and functional. So, that means that it had to really wait for technologies
like what Rich created and various things since then, the fluorescent dyes that we've used and so
on, before you could actually get these data. Molecular biologists and biochemists have been
at this for how many decades, for long before that because you can break up your cell and that's
good enough. So, that's the first thing is I think it's more difficult than the technology needed
more time to catch up. Also, I think as Rich said, you kind of need a different mindset for this. It's
not as simple as the kinds of things that you normally would learn in a biology and chemistry
kind of to really comprehend it. And I don't know if Rich agrees, but to me, not only do you
need physics, but you also need a lot of what's now basically neuroscience, you need a lot of
computation to really understand what's going on, you need to understand computations. It's a very
sort of fundamentally interdisciplinary field and I think that's harder.
Yeah, definitely. I agree with you completely. And again, I think that a lot of the problem
is that our classical education divides things up and a biology student doesn't get enough physics
to really understand electricity and magnetism to a depth that makes them comfortable with it.
Although they typically get one, maybe one semester at the most two semesters of physics
and it's just enough to hate it and not to enjoy it and really have it become a tool.
So, they're afraid of it and because of that, they don't really go beyond it into the biophysics
needed to really appreciate the ion currents and those kinds of things. I think that's a
large part of it. And I don't know how to fix that other than having that be changed in the
mindset of our education system to get more physics to all the biologists out there and
all the pre-med. Yeah, but you know, it's in the Gilbert Developmental Biology textbook,
has two bioelectric stories in it now. So, it's getting there. Yeah. Yeah, that's great to hear.
Have you noticed then that most of the scientists were looking into the field? Do they also have
a bit of a physics background? Yes, in general, that's the case. When thinking of the ones that I
know of that have used the vibrating probe, for example, those guys all had to have
some pretty good feeling about physics to understand how to interpret the data and that sort of thing.
I think that is true. I mean, there's another way in which people get dragged kicking and
screaming into this field, which is that somebody who does regular genetics will do a screen of
some sort and they'll get their mutant and they say, oh, this is fantastic. This is the thing I
need to study. And then they find out it's an ion channel. And so now there's been like this amazing
work by Emily Bates and in the Harris lab at Harvard where they do these purely genetic screens
where nobody was out to find anything bioelectric, but then you find that, oh my god, it's a channel.
And so now I need to understand how this voltage change gives rise to an altered wing or size
control or whatever. And there's been, there's probably almost three dozen good developmental
channelopathies now that people have studied that bring them into the field even though they weren't
really trying to study that. Exactly. That's a great way to get in, to be pulled in unsuspectingly.
Yeah, I love that. I love it. Yeah, I mean, I would often, when I, when I give talks to those
kind of audiences, I would say at the beginning, how many of you have done, well, either a micro
array or an RNA seek for your, and they said, well, so how many of you have found ion channels in
your top list? Oh, absolutely. You know, the first 10 things, they said, well, what did you do? Oh,
well, we skipped them and went to the factors. Exactly. Right. And so because, because the
tools were there. And so like, that's one of the things that, that we worked on pretty hard is to
develop tools and protocols that we would share. And then I would say, okay, so, so everybody who
had that, here's the, here's a how to manual and here's some reagents and whatnot. Now that you
can, you know, now that we can, we can study these things. Yeah, fantastic. Now, is the reason
to skip from the ion channels to say the transcription factors or the factors, is that
because they don't recognize the significance of the ion channels? Like they don't, they don't,
at that point, recognize that it's doing much or they just don't have any knowledge of it?
Exactly. That's, that's the bottom line is they aren't, they don't have that basis of every cell
has a trans cellular current. They don't think about that. They aren't taught that. It's far
this from their mind. But it's absolutely true. We haven't found a cell yet, who doesn't have
a trans cellular current, which is intimately involved in its function. You know, thank you,
your epithelial cells and your gut, I mean, they're, they're polarized. They have sodium channels on
the apical side, potassium in the basal, they have current, they're generating a voltage across
themselves. That voltage is integrally important, involved in the digestion for crying out loud.
So things, it's basic as eating and digesting requires these trans cellular currents. But
they don't know about that. It's not part of their education.
Well, and there's, and there's also a subtlety here, which is that when you have a trans
transcription factor, you can tell a story about a gene that does a particular thing. And that's a
very popular story. But what you find is a popular kind of story. But what you find with these ion
channels is that it isn't actually the ion channel gene or protein that's doing it. It's
the physiological state that ends up being the critical factor. And you can get the same state
by different channels, and you can get multiple states from the same channel, depending on whether
it's open or closed. So, so seeing physiological patterns as a causal factor is not what people
are used to, you know, right? And then, and then it goes back to what Rich was saying before about
these different fields. So, so I remember in 2007, we had this, we had this paper on, there was a
particular proton pump that was required for tail regeneration and tadpoles. And then we showed
that if you get rid of that pump, you can rescue it back with a yeast proton pump that basically
has no sequence homology, but does the same physiological job, right? So we send, we send
this paper out, and we get two reviewers. And the first, the first reviewer says, oh,
and, you know, and of course, we had image of the voltage and all the stuff this was,
you know, Danny Adams was doing this, right? And so, so the first reviewer says, oh, good,
you found the gene for tail regeneration, get rid of all this voltage stuff, you don't need it,
you got the gene for tail regeneration, this other stuff is junk. And then, and then guess what the
other, the other reviewers says, oh, well, clearly the gene doesn't matter because you've
replaced it by this thing from yeast. So get rid of all of that stuff and just
unbelievable. Right. Yes. And, you know, and we wrote to the editor saying, so what,
so what do we do? And the editor said, I don't know, but, but to make it shorter. So
make it shorter. That's terrible. Yeah. So, so that's, you know, that's the thing, right? You
have to, you have to think a little bit differently, like it's not the gene, it's the, and then, and
then it gets progressively worse after that, because then you end up with patterns. It's
actually the voltage patterns that make, that determine what happens next.
Exactly. Yeah. Even more difficult to explain.
Fascinating. Okay. So I'd love to understand a bit of the progression of the field and the
research interest from say the 1970s up till now. Maybe a good way to do this would be a
comparison or you could just, the one way it could be, maybe you can talk about what was the
predominant thinking in the field in the 1970s and 80s and 90s, or you could also tell me how,
how it compares to today and well, how the thinking was different back then.
Wow. You're asking a lot there. Well, and if you don't mind, I actually want to make it even,
even harder because I was going to, and you can answer that later or separately or whatever,
but I'm even interested in going back further before that, right? Because there was some great
work in the 20s and 30s and 40s. And so anything you want to say about kind of all of that stuff
and growing, you know, going forward, we'd love to hear it. Oh, that's absolutely right. Yeah.
If you go back to the early 1900s, where people like Burr and, oh gosh, there's a variety of very
well-known biologists who are actually looking at these kinds of things,
measuring voltages with cotton wicks soaked in saline and putting it on different regions
of embryos. And that work was almost lost. It was, you know, it was really groundbreaking
and so unique that I think that it was just not quite appreciated. And the main reason,
I believe, is that in the 1950s, you know, the whole DNA story came out. So the molecular biology
took over and the 1930s, 1920s, the whole work that was a body of work measuring electric voltages
and showing that there are fields in these embryos was sort of forgotten in many, many respects.
But that was sad because, you know, certainly the molecular revolution, the DNA revolution,
was huge. And we thought that it would explain everything. We now know that it doesn't. But it
certainly made us believe that we could understand life by knowing the sequence of our DNA. And I
think even molecular biologists now agree that that doesn't tell you how things work, that it gives us
some idea of how proteins are made and what the structure of proteins are. But it doesn't really,
doesn't help us understand life completely. And that's where Mike's stuff is really much more
important. But in looking at the evolution, the molecular revolution pretty much, in my opinion,
completely overshadowed all the physiology. The developmental physiology that was going on just
went away and was not even looked at anymore. I think when Lionel's generation came in,
he was fairly unique. I don't really know of a lot of comrades for him that really
he could work with. He was a very unique person. And he started looking again at these
electrical currents in developing embryos and plants mainly in these pelvicia. And he sort of
erased the awareness again of this, but never really took off to a huge extent. He didn't have
that many followers. His students all followed him. Ken Robinson and Bill Rich Borgans and
and myself all continued doing his work. And we had a few other, maybe a dozen other scientists
who started using the vibrating probe in Germany and France in Italy and made some progress in
the field in Canada. But when that's sort of in the 70s and 80s and in the 90s and 2000 or so
is when I sort of found the role of ultra high voltage, ultra short fields in cell signaling.
So that's a whole different area of bio electricity that I've been exploring for the past decade
or so, two decades really. And that's another aspect of bio electricity that is just fascinating
that you know, we so I started out measuring nano volts, you know, 10 to the minus ninth volts.
And now I'm applying a 10 million times larger field of 50 kilovolts or 20 kilovolts. So, but
you know, in a way that's still physiological. So it's a way that still is very no heat that is
fractions of a jewel, but it communicates to the cell in a way that gives it a message. The message
is to undergo regulated cell death and to start doing something that it would normally do at the
end of its useful life, but start doing it now. So it's a fascinating area that I've been exploring
and really enjoying. Can you talk a bit about a bit more about that, about the ultra high voltage
field? Sure. Yeah, that that's what's called these nanosecond voltage pulses. So the whole idea
is that you, you know, basically something that was found back in the 50s actually,
yeah, 1954 was when the first discovery of a pulsed electric field could permeabilize cells.
It was called electroporation, still is called that. And what happens is you make electric field
that's strong enough to push water molecules, which are waters in normal, normal out in reality,
nor water is a dipole. It's H2O, two protons and one oxygen. And that has a net charge,
net positive charge. So when you put a voltage, it feels the voltage and it moves along the field.
And if you put us up to about 400 millivolts, maybe half, half a volt across of a bilayer,
a lipid bilayer, which all of our membranes are made of, if you put a voltage across that
of about half a volt, it's strong enough to push water into that lipid and form a water filled
pore. And that is permeabilization. So now this lipid bilayer, which normally separates inside
from out, has a little leak. And that leak would let ions pass through it if there's a gradient of
force. So what we're finding is that normally if you put a typical cell as maybe 10 microns,
between 10 and 100 microns, and if you put about 1000 volts per centimeter, 1 kV per centimeter
across that, that gives enough voltage across the membrane to permeabilize.
But we found with higher fields, if you want to permeabilize the organelles,
like the mitochondria, the ER, now that 1 kV is not enough, because now you're looking at a much
smaller distance across that organelle, so you need a larger field to generate the same
half a volt across that membrane, because their membranes are much closer together.
So now we have to have 20 or 30 kV per centimeter. And that's possible only with ultra short pulses.
So 1 kV per centimeter, you can use with a microsecond, it's no problem. It doesn't generate
enough joules or heat to cause too much heating. But if you go up 10-fold, up to 20 kV per centimeter,
or 20-fold, now that one microsecond pulse, that would be way too much heat. It would boil the cell.
So the joules that you're introducing is too much. So you have to shorten it. So instead of a
microsecond, you can do a nanosecond, which is one thousandth of that, or even 10 nanoseconds
or 100 nanoseconds, as long as you're less than a microsecond. You can get down and introduce it.
And now the trick now is not only do you permeabilize the plasma membrane, but you're
permeabilized to mitochondria. And that's important because mitochondria function by generating
200 millivolts inside negative across their inner membrane. That voltage is critical for making ATP
from ADP. So it adds a phosphate onto ADP, and that phosphate is added in part with the electric
field. It's also a proton gradient. That's important. So it's a combination of a proton gradient,
pH, and electric field that make that ATP. But if you permeabilize the mitochondria,
make it leaky so it can no longer generate a voltage gradient, you don't make any ATP.
That's been shown. And that's the magic of our energy is that we not only permeabilize the outer
membrane, we permeabilize mitochondria. The water pores in the mitochondria make it swell.
Water moves in because of the gradient. It moves in, and the mitochondria swell, and they stop
producing ATP. Did you lose Rich as well, Mike?
I did. Yes. Sorry, Rich. Hang on a second. Your sound is off. Rich?
I don't think he can hear us either, huh? Yeah, I don't think so. Rich, can you hear us?
We can't hear you. Yeah, I think he...
Say something? That's better. Now I can hear you.
You're back. Yeah, we lost about maybe 15 seconds or so.
Oh, I'm sorry about that. It must have been my headphones. Yeah. So where did I stop coming across?
You were talking about how the mitochondria would basically lose the energy in the ATP.
Yes. You can permeabilize it. Right. And so that when that happens,
not only does the cell lose its energy source of ATP, but now messages typically are released
by the mitochondria, for example, cytochrome C, which is one of the messages required to initiate
regulated cell death. So it starts the pathway that all cells have when they find that they're
not functioning well. They become leaky or they had been damaged. And that pathway is what normally
occurs. They release the cytochrome C. They make a message go from the ER to the plasma membrane,
cal reticuline. And then when the cal reticuline is expressed on the surface of the cell,
dendritic cells that are always looking around for problems, they bind to that. And that's a message
to phagocytose that cell. So it's a way for our body to go after cells that are damaged,
clean them up, and rescue any problems that are happening. Interesting. So does this have
significance for maybe cancer research and killing off cancer cells as well? Exactly. We've
been using it to treat different cancers. So in a mouse, for example, we're able to make mouse
models of all sorts of cancer, from pancreatic cancer to basal cell carcinoma, too, of a whole
variety. And in a mouse, if you can make a tumor, we treat it with the putting our electrodes around
the tumor. We simply give it a few pulses and it dries up and goes away. In literally a couple
of weeks, the tumor is completely gone and it never reoccurs. And when I found that with these
nanosecond pulses, I was absolutely blown away. And that happened in 2007. And ever since that
I've been working on that. And we now have pulse biosciences where I'm working. It has generated
a machine, a pulse generator for this. It's been approved for use now for treating benign
skin lesions. And also now we've just had an electrode, a percutaneous electrode approved
that we're using to treat thyroid nodules by putting the electrode into that. And it causes
nodule to shrink and completely go away. So we're starting to use it to go after
problems in our medical field. Wow. And is there any damage to the good cells
like in chemotherapy you might have? Yes, there can be. You just have to be careful
because every cell will respond to these fields for sure. That's what it's a good thing and it's a
bad thing because it's a biophysical phenomenon. You can't prevent getting holes in membranes when
you pulse with these fields. It's its physical property of the lipid bilayer. So when we apply
it we're always careful to try to limit the energy to the tumor so we don't damage other cells.
But the fact is that in the skin, for example, we've done a lot of treatment of skin lesions
and skin cells are pretty good about recovering. For example, when we treat a wart, which is embedded,
we'll typically get a few of the skin cells damaged as well. But skin is amazing for regeneration.
As you know, when you cut yourself, it heals so beautifully and recovers. So that skin can
regenerate and we damage a few of those skin cells and it's not a problem. But the main thing is we
get rid of the wart. So that's typically how it works. Going back a little bit to the progression
you mentioned. So early 1900s there were people doing some experiments with cotton wigs and
realized that okay, there might be electrical forces in our body, but a lot of that research was
lost. Then 1950s, you said, because of the whole DNA research, the entire field, everyone was focused
on that. And then Lionel Jaffe came along and you and Ken Robinson and you had the vibrating probe,
which made it much easier for people to detect these electrical signals on the body.
Around that time, when people started detecting electrical signals, I'm curious when did they
start realizing that these electrical signals play a very significant role beyond the DNA?
In other words, first you discover that okay, our body is electric, but when did they start
realizing what the significance of the electrical signals in the body could be?
Well, that's a great question. As I think about it, the field really was concentrated for a
long time on a technique called patch clamp. And this is what electrophysiologists use to
study ion channels and the way the channels operate, the gating of channels and that sort
of thing. And I think when the patch clamp technique was invented, that was again around,
when was that? I would say that was in the 1980s, between 75 and 80.
That really made electrophysiology all concentrate on that technique. And that's how they
decide how they were able to explore ion channel opening and closing the timing of it and that
sort of thing. But when you think about the polarity or development of the asymmetry in
channel activity, it's really hard to put your finger on that as a phenomenon that people really
appreciate. I think it's really the work that Mike has done that has made more progress in
people understanding the importance of that. One of the things that we showed over the years in
the 1980s and 90s were currents leaving growing limb bud stumps in regenerating limb buds and
tails and those things. Those currents were certainly published and people recognized that
they were happening. But I still think that the sole phenomenon of developmental currents and
voltages is something that people are still trying to get their head around. Would you agree, Mike?
Yeah. I mean, so there's a few. I was just looking up. The earliest paper that I have,
I mean, you could go back to Volta and so on, but the earliest developmental paper I have is
1892 from Wilhelm Ruh. Right. And it's 1892 and he's writing in German about the
effect of the electric fields on chicken embryos and things like that. Exactly. Yeah.
And then, you know, and then you had, well, like one of my old favorites is Burr, so Harold Burr.
So this is like 30s and 40s. And this guy just, right? I mean, he basically had a good voltmeter.
That's all he had. And he went around measuring everything from embryos to maple trees to various
psychiatric patients. I mean, just dozens and dozens of papers. And in his book, he
extremely prescient. I mean, he said things that he had no way of being certain of,
but then in the end turned out to be quite, quite correct. You know, he saw a lot of it,
you know, these pre-patterns and these like subtle voltage pre-patterns for, and then another guy
really, like his work is Cone, you know, Clarence Cone in the 70s. So he showed that if you depolarize
neurons, they reenter mitosis. And right. And so he was really pushing the volt, the resting
potential. You know, this is this idea of resting. Absolutely. Yeah. Right. And yeah.
Yeah. And then, and then, you know, in, in, in 2000s, what, what we started doing was
really tying this stuff to the molecular genetic downstream consequences. So like our first, our
first paper with, with Ken Robinson was on, was on left, right asymmetry in the, in the chicken.
And the deal there was that there was this very important gene, Sonic Hedgehog, and everybody
wanted to know about Sonic Hedgehog. Well, it turns out if you want to know why Sonic Hedgehog is,
is turned on on the left side and not on the right side, you have to know about the voltage gradient
that precedes it. Otherwise, you know, otherwise it's a, it's a big mystery. Exactly. Yeah. Now,
that's fascinating. So really, it's all coming together. When you look at, at the way you've
integrated the, the molecular biology with the electrical field understanding, pH gradients,
that sort of thing, potassium ion currents, potassium pump location, so critical. It's amazing.
Yeah. Rich, do you want to talk a little bit about what was it like working with Lionel? Because,
because I, you know, I knew him a little bit. And I always thought he was a very interesting
character. And you obviously knew him much better. What was that like in his lab in those days?
You know, it was amazing. Yeah, he was quite a character. I'd say not only had incredible
physical intuition, where he can just, he just had a way of thinking about these things that,
I hadn't encountered before him. But he'd also was very much into politics and very strong in his
political beliefs. Very, he was very liberal. And almost every afternoon when we had our coffee or
any time to sit and chat, it would be about politics. It was amazing. So, so he, and luckily,
Ken Robinson and myself were also very liberal. So we were able to get along pretty well.
But I'd say the thing about being in his lab is that he worked very hard. He was there typically
around eight in the morning and would often stay till eight or nine at night. Had no problem staying
late hours overnight to when we have an experiment that had to go 24 hours. He would share the
night time with me. So I would take the first shift and he would come to take the second shift.
He was a very hard worker and very fastidious. So when he started doing his work, the first thing
he does is clean everything. Everything gets removed. That's not necessary. You only have
the instruments you need. And he was very particular about that. And it was important
because the stuff that we're doing, the developing the vibrating probe required a very fine work
making the probe itself, which was a very fine needle. That's what the platinum ball on the end
of about 30 microns in diameter, which you make under a microscope. So you watch it grow
in front of your eyes with electric field, you know, to attract the platinum to the surface.
So that is all pretty fine work. We typically would have Bach in the background, his piano,
concertos, his music to keep us calm while we're doing this fine work. But it was really a fun
place to be, to tell you the truth. Everyone that was in the lab really enjoyed being there.
Would you say that it's always interesting to me, the motivation that that great scientists
have. And would you say that you, you know, he and you and, you know, I guess the rest of you,
were you motivated by a specific outcome or capability or kind of an end point that you
wanted to get to? Or was it more just the curiosity of whatever showed up in the kind of the in the
moment more sort of joy of the experiment? How did you guys see that? Yeah, I think that's,
I think that it was the joy of the moment there. You know, none of us knew, didn't have an expectation
to where we're going. This is all new. This whole thing of currents around cells, it was
completely a new concept. We didn't know where it would take us. So that's why one person in the lab
would put a field across the cell. Another person would try to measure the normal current. Ken was
trying to figure out what ions were carrying the current. So he actually put the eggs in a metal
screen separating one side from the other, and he used radioactive tracers to determine what's
going in and what's coming out. So we had all these different approaches to understand the
mechanism. It was a fascinating place to be. It was all discovery of new, completely new things
that no one had heard of before. So yeah, it was, it was, it was an exciting time, but we were there
just trying to understand how it worked. You know, what was carrying the current, why there was a
current at all, you know, what, you know, what was driving that, what was, and that was fascinating.
So we can actually show that the electric field could change the current direction,
and that would actually polarize the cells. So you can actually make the cells grow in a
certain direction by the electric field. And how does that work, you know, what was going on there?
And that we showed that it was affecting the chloride, the calcium permeability, which then
affected the chloride permeability. So it was remarkable, a remarkable time and still, still
have great memories of it. Mike, what was your impression of Lionel? You said you interacted
with him briefly. Yeah, yeah, yeah, I met him a few times. Also, when he was at Woods Hole,
you know, I would go up there and meet with him. Yeah, definitely, definitely a, you know, kind of
an iconic class, you know, he was always thinking in new directions and, you know, wasn't particularly
concerned with what anybody thought at all kinds of, all kinds of wild, wild ideas. Yeah, you know,
played tennis. He was, he was quite advanced in years, and he was still, you know, he was still
playing tennis. He complained to me about not being able to find enough partners at that point.
That's true. Yeah, yeah. I played tennis with him. I remember that. That was great. Yeah.
Yeah. Mike, when you first entered the research and entered the field, what was your understanding
of bioelectrics? Well, I mean, I, I, first of all, by the time, you know, I went through,
I went through, by the time I had gone through undergrad and grad school, I had been reading
what, you know, Rich and Lionel and Ken and Richard Borgans and those guys, you know, they were my
heroes. Okay. All you guys were my heroes. And I've been reading those things. I ate and slept
and dreamt all of this stuff. But I also knew it was pretty clear that at a certain early stage
of the game, I better keep my mouth shut about all this. And so, you know, I kind of, I got my
degree in genetics and not saying anything about any of this straight up, just learning the kind of
the molecular genetics of chick development with cliff, taven and so on. But then, then during
my postdoc, I started sliding into it because I figured that, you know, pretty soon if I, you know,
if I had my own lab, I would be able to really, really get at, you know, really get at this. And
around that time is when I started being able to meet you guys in person. And I would go to, you
know, I went to the Gordon conference. And then especially eventually I had some actual data to
show. I was just so thrilled. I was so thrilled to meet everybody. They were helpful and they were
excited. And which I found amazing because all the years, I mean, you guys did not have it easy,
you know, to do all that work against the kind of the mainstream of the genetics and the molecular
biology. And to hold on to that, that's the one, that's what I remember. I remember the
excitement about the field, like not at all diminished by all the years of hard work and
arguing with people and, you know, and having to break through with this stuff. And I just remember
thinking that this is great, that if I was able to ever do this, the key thing to hold on to is
that sense of wonder and that sense of excitement about the work and not let all the difficulties
of it, you know, sort of get you down. You know, that's, I was amazed. I was amazed at how welcoming
they were to, you know, to this new, you know, new, new young kid who didn't know anything and was,
but was also excited about the field. Yeah, I had really good experiences there.
Yeah. And it was, it was, we were excited to see a molecular person come in with interest in our
stuff because we had just not seen much of that. So you were the first one to come along and show
an interest and understanding the rope, the connection between the ion currents
and the molecular biology. And that was fantastic. We were so happy to see that.
Yeah, I couldn't believe I, I mean, you know, I just couldn't believe I got to,
that I got to meet all you guys in person. I would spend from, you know, I first, I first,
I first ran into this field in 1986. And then from there, I spent the next, and this was now
before the internet. Okay. So there's no searching that you can do online. This is like,
in a dusty, in a dusty basement of a library somewhere, you know, Boston Public Library,
trying to find these things, the catalog barely, you know, was functional, trying to, trying to,
and, and just finding all of these papers. And each one of these papers had citations
to other papers, and you got to go chase them down, right? And so, and then you make photo
copies, and then you sit there and, you know, you read all of it. So, so this is just,
yeah, that's literature that I was, I was, you know, eating and dreaming of for years.
Phenomenal. That's just so amazing to hear. Rich, maybe you can talk a bit about the criticism
that the field received when you, Lionel, Ken, were coming up with all this research.
Well, let me say criticism. I'm not sure that we had much problem getting it published.
We always did experiments with good controls and a large data set, so that we published in
good journals, Journal of Cell Biology, Development of Biology, without very much problem. So,
I don't think that there was any criticism in that regard. I think the main question is why
more people weren't excited by it, and why they, we didn't have a lot more followers than we did.
And again, that was a molecular biology aspect. I think the molecular, the most, most of the
biologists out there found our, our stuff kind of intriguing, but didn't get excited by it,
as we were, and didn't quite appreciate the importance of it. And I think that's still the
case. I really don't think that the importance, the role of these ion gradients and currents
in development and in physiology is really appreciated by the bulk of the community of
biology. Would you agree with that, Mike? Yeah, I mean, I think it's, I think it's gotten a lot
better. I think, I think once again, you know, we're, we're in, I mean, people, people publish
the stuff now in cell and development and whatnot. So, I think, I think we're sort of back there,
but still, a lot of people have never heard of it. So, that's always an issue. Right. And, and
there's kind of a, you know, there's kind of a sister field to this, which has had a similar
journey, which is, which is biomechanics, you know, all the physical forces, the stresses, the
strains. So, there were all these people in the, you know, in the past decades, you know,
left Baloozov and all these other people that were talking about the importance of all these things
and, and writing these papers and completely ignored until some of the technology came along.
And, you know, and people like Donningbur and other folks who made molecular tools,
where you can now make high resolution, quantitative models of what the actual physical
forces are doing, not the, not necessarily the genes, but the actual physical forces,
you know, and, and the fact that if you write the fact that if you culture cells on a square peg
versus a triangular peg, you get different genes turned on and this kind of thing. So,
so I think, I think they went through the same sort of thing. And again, very difficult time
until the technology showed up. And I think, you know, technology in these, in these cases. So,
so two things make a huge difference, the technology. And then, and then what you might
call killer apps, right, in the, in the computer science field, you know, something that, okay,
now, now you can see, you can do something now that you couldn't see do before. And, and that,
and that gets people's attention. And then the young people sort of, you know, come, come up with,
with knowing, knowing what it's about. What's the technology that you think is missing now or
would be helpful to advance the research further? Question for both of you, Mike, maybe you can
go first. Okay, well, I think the biggest thing that's missing, there's a few things, but, but
one of the biggest things that's missing now is the physiomics data sets. So we have these massive,
I mean, just think about trying to do molecular biology before we had genomic data and transcriptomic
data and all that stuff. What we still don't know is, if you wanted to know in some model system,
some organ under some disease state or at some stage of development, what is the bioelectric
pattern? We only have like a tiny number of these things mapped out. And I mean, you know,
Rich has done a ton of it with a vibrating probe, we've done some with the voltage dies.
But in the grand scheme of things, there's very little bulk data available. And that's pretty
critical because, you know, modern tools like AI and other other techniques require a lot of data
to really, to really extract the signatures and functional target endpoints and so on.
So, so that's one of the things that we're focused on now is trying to develop technologies where
in some sort of high throughput way, we can actually generate these data sets so that we
actually know what the native states are for these things. What do you think, Rich? What's the
Yeah, no, I think you're absolutely right. The I remember that beautiful paper that you guys
came out with when you labeled the frog embryo with the dye that measured membrane potential
in the different regions of the embryo and showed that actually got a picture, a visual picture of
the gradient of potential in the blast, you know, blastomere stage of the frog embryo. And that
is what we need. We need to have a visualization of the electrical properties that we're seeing.
And it's so hard to do because the organisms that we want to study are multicellular,
thousands and thousands of cells. And but those cells are working together in a very intricate way.
The ideal would be to be able to image the field, the whole electric field everywhere in
that organism. And that would be a dream. It's not obvious to me how to do that. But I'm sure that
one day we will have some molecules that will show the gradient in a way that we can image them.
And there's quite a few different tools that are working towards that, this whole optogenetics
business where you control gene activity with light. It'd be nice to be able to reverse that and show
have light come out with the bioelectric activity. That would be fantastic. I hope that that happens
someday. I don't see it on the horizon yet, but I wouldn't be surprised. Well, we and others have
now are generating transgenic mice where every cell is expressing one of these optogenetic
voltage reporter proteins. So I think in the next couple of years we're going to have model
systems where every cell is advertising its electric state and then we'll be able to
start. I mean, again, you still have the issue of, you know, it's hard to see through tissue,
right? And so you still have all that. But but at least the cells will be sort of,
you know, trying to tell you what their what their voltage is as much as you can see them.
Exactly. That would be fabulous if we can get that to work. I love it.
Now, maybe this is a stupid question, but do different humans have different electrical
states around the cells? Different humans. You and me and my electrical states around
tissues and organs themselves going to be different or do all cells like normal cells
have the same type? I think it would be generally be the same. I guess it depends on
the disease state. So clearly, if I would say that as you get older, the I know for a fact that
the patterns and the voltages get lower. So I've shown that, you know, skin wound, for example,
as you age, the amount of current flowing, the wound current goes down. You just don't have
quite as much energy, so to speak, to drive the drive the current. So I think you would find a
difference as a function of age and any kind of disease state, for sure. In general, a healthy
individual will have very similar patterns than than, you know, than not. It really depends on
what you're looking at. But typically, you'll you'll find a voltage across every epithelium,
every organ, and that voltage will drive currents in depending on what that organ is doing.
Yeah. I mean, there's also there have been stories in the cancer field about sodium versus
potassium rich diets. And yes, right. And so and so one can hypothesize that if what we're talking
about is this kind of like change in resting potential due to sodium and so on, you might
expect, right, people with with different diets to actually have shifted VMMs that would predispose
you to different, you know, different conditions like cancer and so on. Absolutely. I mean, it's
been shown pretty well that depolarization is required for a cancer cell to be very active.
They're typically when you look at their member potential, they're more depolarized than a healthy
cell. So that obviously you want to avoid that to avoid cancer state. So that's that's absolutely
right. Yeah. Last question for you, Regina, we are over time. What do you what would you like to
see developed in the field going forward? Well, that I think we just answered that. I think this
whole idea of getting cells to tell us what's going on in their electrical activity would be
fantastic. So this thing that Mike just mentioned showing having a reporter gene that expressing
a a signal such as such as a light emission or a fluorescence that we can detect that would tell us
if that cell is depolarized or hyperpolarized or if there's actually a current going through it.
That would be fabulous. Then we can have an image of the whole electrical
property of the organism in different areas of the organism. That would be fantastic.
Okay. Well, thank you so much, Mike. Do you want to add anything? Any last questions?
No, this was great, Rich. I just want to say thank you so much for taking this time with us.
It was awesome to get your thoughts on everything. Yeah, thank you. My pleasure. It was fun to talk
about. I'll be glad to talk anytime. Thank you so much. Yeah, this was wonderful. All right, guys.
Thanks, Rich. I'll see you in the Bioelectricity Journal. Plenty more. Oh yeah, absolutely. Okay,
good to meet you. Bye bye, Astro.
