The following is a conversation with Judea Pearl, a professor at UCLA and a winner of the Touring
Award that's generally recognized as the Nobel Prize of Computing. He's one of the seminal
figures in the field of artificial intelligence, computer science, and statistics. He has developed
and championed probabilistic approaches to AI, including Beijing networks, and profound ideas
in causality in general. These ideas are important not just to AI, but to our understanding and
practice of science. But in the field of AI, the idea of causality, cause and effect, to many,
lie at the core of what is currently missing and what must be developed in order to build
truly intelligent systems. For this reason, and many others, his work is worth returning to often.
I recommend his most recent book, called Book of Why, that presents key ideas from a lifetime
of work in a way that is accessible to the general public. This is the Artificial Intelligence Podcast.
If you enjoy it, subscribe on YouTube, give it 5 stars on Apple Podcasts, support it on Patreon,
or simply connect with me on Twitter. Alex Friedman, spelled F-R-I-D-M-A-N. If you leave a
review on Apple Podcasts especially, but also Cast Box or comment on YouTube, consider mentioning
topics, people, ideas, questions, quotes, and science, tech, and philosophy that you find interesting,
and I'll read them on this podcast. I won't call out names, but I love comments with kindness
and thoughtfulness in them, so I thought I'd share them with you. Someone on YouTube highlighted a
quote from the conversation with Noam Chomsky, where he said that the significance of your life
is something you create. I like this line as well. On most days, the existentialist approach to life
is one I find liberating and fulfilling. I recently started doing ads at the end of the
introduction. I'll do one or two minutes after introducing the episode and never any ads in
the middle that break the flow of the conversation. I hope that works for you and doesn't hurt the
listening experience. This show is presented by Cash App, the number one finance app in the App Store.
I personally use Cash App to send money to friends, but you can also use it to buy, sell,
and deposit Bitcoin in just seconds. Cash App also has a new investing feature. You can buy
fractions of a stock, say $1 worth, no matter what the stock price is. Broker services are
provided by Cash App investing, a subsidiary of Square, and member SIPC. I'm excited to be working
with Cash App to support one of my favorite organizations called the FIRST, best known for
their FIRST robotics and Lego competitions. They educate and inspire hundreds of thousands of
students in over 110 countries and have a perfect rating on charity navigator, which means the
donated money is used to the maximum effectiveness. When you get Cash App from the App Store or Google
Play and use code lexpodcast, you'll get $10 and Cash App will also donate $10 to FIRST,
which again is an organization that I've personally seen inspire girls and boys
to dream of engineering a better world. And now, here's my conversation with Judea Pearl.
You mentioned in an interview that science is not a collection of facts by constant human struggle
with the mysteries of nature. What was the first mystery that you can recall that hooked you?
Oh, the first mystery. That's a good one. Yeah, I remember that. I had a fever for three days
when I learned about the cart analytic geometry. And I found out that you can do all the construction
geometry using algebra. And I couldn't get over it. I simply couldn't get out of bed.
What kind of world does analytic geometry unlock?
Well, it connects algebra with geometry. Okay, so the cart had the idea that
geometrical construction and geometrical theorems and assumptions can be articulated in the language
of algebra, which means that all the proof that we did in high school is trying to prove that the
three bisectors meet at one point and that all these can be proven by just shuffling around
notation. Yeah, that was a traumatic experience. For me, it was. So it's the connection between
the different mathematical disciplines that they all... Not between two different languages.
Languages. Yeah. So which mathematic discipline is most beautiful? Is geometry it for you? Both
are beautiful. They have almost the same power. But there's a visual element to geometry being...
Visually, it's more transparent. But once you get over to algebra, then the linear equation is a
straight line. This translation is easily absorbed. And to pass a tangent to a circle,
you have the basic theorems and you can do it with algebra. But the transition from one to
another was really... I thought that the cart was the greatest mathematician of all times.
So you have been at the... If you think of engineering and mathematics as a spectrum.
Yes. You have been... You have walked casually along this spectrum throughout your life.
A little bit of engineering and then done a little bit of mathematics here and there.
Not a little bit. I mean, we got a very solid background in mathematics because our teachers
were geniuses. Our teachers came from Germany in the 1930s running away from Hitler.
They left their careers in Heidelberg and Berlin and came to teach high school in Israel.
And we were the beneficiary of that experiment. So I... When they taught us math, the good way.
What's a good way to teach math? Chronologically.
The people. The people behind the theorems. Yeah. Their cousins and their nieces and their faces.
And how they jumped from the bathtub when they screamed Eureka and ran naked in town.
So you're almost educated as a historian of math?
No. We just got a glimpse of that history together with the theorem. So every exercise
in math was connected with the person and the time of the person. The period.
Period also mathematically speaking? Mathematically speaking, yes. Not the politics.
So and then in university, you have gone on to do engineering.
Yeah. I got a B.S. in engineering and a Technion. And then I moved here for graduate work
and I did engineering in addition to physics in Rutgers. And it would combine very nicely with my
thesis, which I did in LCA laboratories in superconductivity.
And then somehow thought to switch to almost computer science, software, even...
Not switch, but long to become... To get into software engineering a little bit.
Programming, if you can call that in the 70s. So there's all these disciplines.
If you were to pick a favor, in terms of engineering and mathematics,
which path do you think has more beauty? Which path has more power?
It's hard to choose now. I enjoy doing physics and even have a vortex named on my name.
So I have investment in immortality.
So what is a vortex? Vortex is in superconductivity.
In the superconductivity. If you have permanent current swirling around,
one way or the other, you can have a store one or zero for computer. That's what we worked on
in the 1960s in LCA. And I discovered a few nice phenomena with the vortices.
It pushed current and they moved. Pearl vortex, right? You can google it.
I didn't know about it, but the physicists picked up on my thesis, on my PhD thesis.
It becomes popular when thin film superconductors became important
for high temperature superconductors. So they call it pearl vortex without my knowledge.
I discovered it only about 15 years ago. You have footprints in all of the sciences.
So let's talk about the universe a little bit. Is the universe at the lowest level deterministic
or stochastic in your amateur philosophy view? Put another way, does God play dice?
We know it is stochastic. Today we think it is stochastic.
Yes. We think because we have the Heisenberg uncertainty principle and we have some
experiments to confirm that. All we have is experiments to confirm it. We don't understand why.
You wrote a book about why. Yeah, it's a puzzle. It's a puzzle that you have a dice
flipping machine or God and the result of the flipping propagate with the speed faster than
the speed of light. We can't explain it. But it only governs microscopic phenomena.
So you don't think of quantum mechanics as useful for understanding the nature of reality?
No, diversionary. So in your thinking, the world might as well be deterministic?
The world is deterministic. And as far as the new one firing is concerned,
it is deterministic to first approximation. What about free will? Free will is also a nice
exercise. Free will is an illusion that we AI people are going to solve.
So what do you think once we solve it, that solution will look like once we put it in the
page? First of all, it will look like a machine. A machine that acts as though it has free will.
It communicates with other machines as though they have free will. And you wouldn't be able to
tell the difference between a machine that does that machine that does not have free will.
So the illusion, it propagates the illusion of free will amongst the other machines?
And faking it is having it. Okay, that's what Turing tells us all about. Faking intelligence
is intelligent because it's not easy to fake. It's very hard to fake. And you can only fake if you
have it. That's such a beautiful statement. You can't fake it if you don't have it.
So let's begin at the beginning with the probability both philosophically and mathematically.
What does it mean to say the probability of something happening is 50%? What is probability?
It's a degree of uncertainty that an agent has about the world.
You're still expressing some knowledge in that statement?
Of course. If the probability is 90%, it's absolutely different kind of knowledge. And
if it is 10%. But it's still not solid knowledge?
It's still solid knowledge. But if you tell me that 90% assurance smoking will
give you lung cancer in five years versus 10%, it's a piece of useful knowledge.
So the statistical view of the universe, why is it useful? So we're swimming in complete uncertainty.
Most of everything around us. It allows you to predict things with a certain probability.
And computing those probabilities are very useful. That's the whole idea of
prediction. And you need prediction to be able to survive. If you can't predict the future,
then you're just crossing the street will be extremely fearful.
And so you've done a lot of work in causation. And so let's think about correlation.
I started with the probability. You started with probability. You've
invented the Bayesian networks. And so we'll dance back and forth between these levels
of uncertainty. But what is correlation? So probability is something happening,
is something. But then there's a bunch of things happening. And sometimes they happen
together, sometimes not, they're independent or not. So how do you think about correlation of things?
Correlation occurs when two things vary together over a very long time. It's one way
of measuring it. Or when you have a bunch of variables that they all vary
cohesively, then we have a correlation here. And usually when we think about correlation,
we really think causally. Things that cannot be correlated unless there is a reason for them
to vary together. Why should they vary together? If they don't see each other, why should they vary
together? So underlying it somewhere is causation. Yes. Hidden in our intuition, there is a notion
causation because we cannot grasp any other logic, accept causation.
And how does conditional probability differ from causation? So what is conditional probability?
Conditional probability, how things vary when one of them stays the same. Now staying the same
means that I have chosen to look only at those incidents where the guy has the same value
as previous one. It's my choice as an experimenter. So things that are not correlated before
could become correlated. Like for instance, if I have two coins which are uncorrelated,
and I choose only those flippings experiments in which a bell rings and a bell rings when at least
one of them is a tail, then suddenly I see correlation between the two coins. Because I only
look at the cases where the bell rang. You see, it's my design, with my ignorance essentially,
with my audacity to ignore certain incidents. I suddenly create a correlation where it doesn't
exist physically. Right. So you just outlined one of the flaws of observing the world and trying
to infer something from the myth about the world from looking at the correlation. I don't look
at it as a flaw. The world works like that. But the flaws come if we try to impose
causal logic on correlation. It doesn't work too well. I mean, but that's exactly what we do.
That's what has been the majority of science. The majority of naive science. The decisions
know it. The decisions know it. If you condition on a third variable, then you can destroy or create
correlations among two other variables. They know it. It's in the data.
Right. It's nothing surprising. That's why they all dismiss the Simpson paradox.
Ah, we know it. It's not anything about it. Well, there's disciplines like psychology where
all the variables are hard to account for. And so oftentimes there's a leap between correlation
to causation. You're imposing. What do you mean a leap? Who is trying to get causation from correlation?
Not you're not proving causation, but you're sort of discussing it, implying
sort of hypothesizing without ability to prove. Which discipline do you have in mind? I'll tell
you if they are obsolete or if they are outdated or they are about to get outdated. Yes. Yes.
Tell me which one do you have in mind. Well, psychology, you know.
Psychology, what is it? SEM, structural equation? No, no, no. I was thinking of
applied psychology studying. For example, we work with human behavior and semi-autonomous vehicles,
how people behave. And you have to conduct these studies of people driving cars.
Everything starts with the question. What is the research question?
What is the research question? The research question, do people fall asleep
when the car is driving itself? Do they fall asleep or do they tend to fall asleep more
frequently? More frequently. Then the car not driving itself. No, it's not driving itself.
That's a good question. Okay. And so you measure, you put people in the car because it's real world.
You can't conduct an experiment where you can control everything. Why can't you can?
You could. Turn the automatic module on and off. Because it's on road public. I mean,
there's aspects to it that's unethical because it's testing on public roads. So you can only use
vehicles. They have to, the people, the drivers themselves have to make that choice themselves.
And so they regulate that. And so you just observe when they drive it autonomously and when
they don't. But maybe they turn it off when they were very tired. Yeah, that's kind of thing.
But you don't know those variables. Okay. So that you have now uncontrolled experiments.
Uncontrolled experiments. We call it observational study. And we formed the correlation
detected that we have to infer causal relationship, whether it was the automatic
piece that caused them to fall asleep. Oh, okay. So that is an issue that is about 120 years old.
Yeah. I should only go 100 years old. Okay. And oh, maybe it's not. Actually,
I should say it's 2000 years old because we have this experiment by Daniel. But the Babylonian king
that wanted the exile, the people from Israel that were taken in exile to Babylon to serve the king.
He wanted to serve them king's food, which was meat. And Daniel as a good Jew couldn't eat a
non-kosher food. So he asked them to eat vegetarian food. But the king overseers said, I'm sorry,
but if the king sees that your performance falls below that of other kids, he's going to kill me.
Daniel said, let's make an experiment. Let's take four of us from Jerusalem. Okay. Give us
vegetarian food. Let's take the other guys to eat the king's food and in about a week's time
we'll test our performance. And you know the answer? Of course, he did the experiment. And they were
so much better than the others. And the kings nominated them to super position in his king.
So it was the first experiment. So there was a very simple, it's also the same
research questions. We want to know vegetarian food, assist or obstruct your mental ability.
And the question is very old. Even a democrat said, if I could discover one cause
of things, I would rather discuss one cause and be a king of Persia. The task of discovering causes
was in the mind of ancient people from many, many years ago. But the mathematics of doing this
was only developed in the 1920s. So science has left us often. Science has not provided us
with the mathematics to capture the idea of X causes Y and Y does not cause X.
Because all the questions of physics are symmetrical algebraic. The equality sign goes both ways.
Okay, let's look at machine learning. Machine learning today, if you look at deep neural networks,
you can think of it as a kind of conditional probability as the nators.
Beautiful. So where did you say that? Conditional probability estimators?
None of the machine learning people clubbed you, attacked you?
Most people, and this is why this today's conversation I think is interesting, is
most people would agree with you. There are certain aspects that are just effective today,
but we're going to hit a wall and there's a lot of ideas. I think you're very right that we're
going to have to return to about causality. Let's try to explore it. Let's even take a step back.
You've invented Bayesian networks that look awfully a lot like they express something like
causation, but they don't, not necessarily. So how do we turn Bayesian networks into
expressing causation? How do we build causal networks? A causes B, B causes C. How do we
start to infer that kind of thing? We start asking ourselves a question. What are the factors
that would determine the value of X? X could be blood pressure, death, hungry, hunger.
But these are hypotheses that we propose first. Hypothesis, everything which has to do with
causality comes from a theory. The difference is only how you interrogate the theory that you have
in your mind. So it still needs the human expert to propose. Right. You need the human expert to
specify the initial model. Initial model could be very qualitative. Just who listens to whom?
By whom listen to I mean one variable, listen to the other. So I say, okay, the tide is listening
to the moon and not to the rooster crow. And so far this is our understanding of the world in
which we live. Scientific understanding of reality. We have to start there because if we
don't know how to handle cause and effect relationship, when we do have a model and we
certainly do not know how to handle it when we don't have a model. So let's start first.
In AI, slogan is representation first, discovery second. But if I give you all the information
that you need, can you do anything useful with it? That is the first representation. How do you
represent it? I give you all the knowledge in the world. How do you represent it? When you
represent it, I ask you, can you infer X or Y or Z? Can you answer certain queries? Is it complex?
Is it polynomial? All the computer science exercises we do once you give me a representation
for my knowledge. Then you can ask me, now I understand how to represent things. How do I
discover them? That's the second thing. So first of all, I should echo the statement that
mathematics and the current, much of the machine learning world has not considered
causation that A causes B just in anything. So that seems like a not obvious thing that you
think we would have really acknowledged it, but we haven't. So we have to put that on the table.
Knowledge, how hard is it to create a knowledge from which to work?
In certain area, it's easy because we have only four or five major variables.
And an epidemiologist or an economist can put them down,
what minimum wage, unemployment, policy, X, Y, Z, and start collecting data and quantify the
parameters that were left unquantified with the initial knowledge. That's the routine work
that you find in experimental psychology, in economics, everywhere, in the health science,
that's a routine thing. But I should emphasize, you should start with the research question,
what do you want to estimate? Once you have that, you have to have a language of expressing
what you want to estimate. You think it's easy? No. So we can talk about two things. I think
one is how the science of causation is very useful for answering certain questions.
And then the other is, how do we create intelligent systems that need to reason with causation?
So if my research question is, how do I pick up this water bottle from the table?
All the knowledge is required to be able to do that. How do we construct that knowledge base?
Do we return back to the problem that we didn't solve in the 80s with expert systems? Do we have
to solve that problem of automated construction of knowledge? You're talking about the task of
eliciting knowledge from an expert. Task of eliciting knowledge from an expert or the self-discovery
of more knowledge, more and more knowledge. So automating the building of knowledge as much as
possible. It's a different game in the causal domain because it's essentially the same thing.
You have to start with some knowledge and you're trying to enrich it. But you don't enrich it
by asking for more rules. You enrich it by asking for the data, to look at the data
and quantifying and ask queries that you couldn't answer when you started.
You couldn't because the question is quite complex and it's not within the capability
of ordinary cognition, of ordinary person or ordinary expert even, to answer.
So what kind of questions do you think we can start to answer?
Even a simple one. I start with easy one.
Let's do it.
What's the effect of a drug on recovery? What are the aspirin that caused my headache to
be cured or what is the television program or the good news I received?
This is already a difficult question because it's find the cause from effect. The easy one is find
the effect from cause. That's right. So first you construct a model saying that this is an
important research question. This is an important question. I didn't construct a model yet. I just
said it's an important question. And the first exercise is express it mathematically. What do
you want to do? Like if I tell you what will be the effect of taking this drug? You have to
say that in mathematics. How do you say that? Can you write down the question? Not the answer.
I want to find the effect of the drug on my headache. Write down. Write it down.
That's where the do calculus comes in. Yes. Do operator. What do you do operator?
Do operator. Yeah. Which is nice. It's the difference in association and intervention. Very
beautifully sort of constructed. Yeah. So we have a do operator. So do calculus connected on the
operator itself connects the operation of doing to something that we can see.
Right. So as opposed to the purely observing you're making the choice to change a variable.
That's what it expresses. And then the way that we interpret it and the mechanism by which we
take your query and we translate it into something that we can work with is by giving it semantics.
Saying that you have a model of the world and you cut off all the incoming error into X
and you're looking now in the modified mutilated model you ask for the probability of Y.
That is interpretation of doing X because by doing things you liberate them from all
influences that acted upon them earlier and you subject them to the tyranny of your muscles.
So you remove all the questions about causality by doing them.
So there's one level of questions. Yeah. Answer questions about what will happen if you do things.
If you do. If you drink the coffee. If you take the asthma. Right. So how do we get the
once how do we get the doing data? Ha. Now the question is if we cannot one experiment.
Right. Then we have to rely on observational study. So first we could start to interrupt.
We could run an experiment where we do something where we drink the coffee and don't and this
the the do operator allows you to sort of be systematic about expressing to imagine
how the experiment will look like even though we cannot physically and technologically conducted.
I'll give you an example. What is the effect of blood pressure on mortality?
I cannot go down into your vein and change your blood pressure. But I can ask the question
which means I can even have a model of your body. I can imagine the effect of your how the
blood pressure change will affect your mortality. How I go into the model and I conduct this
surgery about the blood pressure. Even though physically I can do I cannot do it.
Let me ask the quantum mechanics question. Does the doing change the observation?
Meaning the surgery of changing the blood pressure is I mean no the surgery is
very delicate. It's very infinitely delicate. Incisive and delicate. Which means do means
do X means I'm going to touch only X directly into X. So that means that I change only things
which depends on X by virtue of X changing. But I don't depend things which are not depends
on X. Like I wouldn't change your sex or your age I just change your blood pressure.
So in the case of blood pressure it may be difficult or impossible to construct such an
experiment. No physically yes but hypothetically no. Hypothetically no. If we have a model that
is what the model is for. So you conduct surgeries on a model you take it apart put it back that's
the idea of a model. It's the idea of thinking counter factually imagining and that's the idea
of creativity. So by constructing that model you can start to infer if the higher the
blood pressure leads to mortality which increases or decreases. I construct the model I can still
not answer it. I have to see if I have enough information in the model that would allow me
to find out the effects of intervention from a non-interventional study from observation
hence of study. So what's needed? You need to have assumptions about who affects whom.
If the if the graph had a certain property the answer is yes you can get it from
observational study. If the graph is too messy bushy bushy the answer is no you cannot. Then you
need to find either different kind of observation that you haven't considered or one experiment.
So basically does that put that puts a lot of pressure on you to encode wisdom into that graph?
Correct but you don't have to encode more than what you know. God forbid if you put the like
economists are doing that they call identifying assumptions they put assumptions even they don't
prevail in the world they put assumptions so they can identify things. But the problem is yes
beautifully put but the problem is you don't know what you don't know. So you know what you
don't know because if you don't know you say it's possible it's possible that x affect the traffic
tomorrow. It's possible you put down an arrow which says every arrow in the graph says it's possible.
So there's not a significant cost to adding arrows that the more arrow you add the better the less
like you are to identify things from purely observational data. So if the whole world is bushy
and everybody affects everybody else the answer is you can answer it ahead of time. I cannot
answer my query from observational data. I have to go to experiments.
So you talk about machine learning is essentially learning by association or reasoning by association
and this due calculus is allowing for intervention like that word like action. So you also talk
about counterfactuals and trying to sort of understand the difference in counterfactuals
intervention. First of all what is counterfactuals and why are they useful?
Why are they especially useful as opposed to just reasoning what affect actions have?
Counterfactual contains what we normally call explanations. Can you give an example?
If I tell you that acting one way affects something I didn't explain anything yet
but if I ask you was it the aspirin that cured my headache I'm asking for explanation what cured
my headache and putting a finger on aspirin provided explanation. It was aspirin that was
responsible for your headache going away. If you didn't take the aspirin you would still have a headache.
So by saying if I didn't take aspirin I would have a headache you're thereby saying that aspirin is
the thing that removes the headache. Yes but you have to have another important information.
I took the aspirin and my headache is gone. It's very important information now I'm reasoning
backward and I said what is the aspirin? Yeah by considering what would have happened if everything
else is the same but I didn't take aspirin. That's right so you know that things took place you know
Joe killed Schmo and Schmo would would be alive had John not used his gun.
So that is the counterfactual it had a conflict here or clash between observed fact
that he did shoot and the hypothetical predicate which says had he not shot you have a clash
logical clash they cannot exist together that's the counterfactual and that is the source of our
explanation of our the idea of responsibility regret and free will.
Yes it certainly seems that's the highest level of reasoning right yes and physicists do it all the
time. Who does it all the time? Physicists. Physicists. In every equation of physics
let's say you have a Hooke's law and you put one kilogram on the spring and the spring is
one meter and you say had this weight been two kilogram the spring would have been twice as long.
It's no problem for physicists to say that except that mathematics is only in the form of equation
okay equating the weight proportionality constant and the length of the string.
So you don't have the asymmetry in the equation of physics although every physicist thinks
counterfactually. Ask high school kids had the weight been three kilograms what will be the
length of the spring they can answer it immediately because they do the counterfactual processing
in their mind and then they put it into equation algebraic equation and they solve it okay but
the robot cannot do that. How do you make a robot learn these relationships? Why do you
put learn? Suppose you tell him can you do it? So before you go learning yeah you have to ask
yourself suppose I give him all the information okay can the robot perform a task that I ask him
to perform? Can he reason and say no it wasn't the aspirin it was the good news you received on the
phone. Right because well unless the robot had a model a causal model of the world.
Right right. I'm sorry I have to linger on this. But now we have to linger and we have to say how
do we do it? How do we build? Yes. How do we build a causal model without a team of human experts?
No running around. Why don't you go to learning right away? You're too much involved with learning.
Because I like babies babies learn fast I'm trying to figure out how they do it. Good.
That's another question how do the babies come out with the counterfactual model of the world
and babies do that. They know how to play with in the crib they know which balls hits another one
and so they learn it by playful manipulation of the world. Yes. There's a simple world
involved only toys and balls and chimes but it's a if you think about it's a complex world.
We take for granted how complicated. And the kids do it by playful manipulation plus
parents guidance, pure wisdom and he'll say they meet each other and they say you
shouldn't have taken my toy. Right. But and they these multiple sources of information they're
able to integrate. So the challenge is about how to integrate how to form these causal
relationships from different sources of data. Correct. So how much information is it to play
how much causal information is required to be able to play in the crib with different objects?
I don't know. I haven't experimented with the crib. Okay not a crib picking up manipulating
physical objects on this very opening the pages of a book all the tasks physical manipulation
tasks. Do you have a sense because my sense is the world is extremely complicated. It's
extremely complicated. I agree and I don't know how to organize it because I've been spoiled by easy
problems such as cancer and death. First we have to start. No but it's easy the easy sense that you
have only 20 variables and they are just variables are not mechanics. It's easy. You just put them
on the graph and they speak to you. And you you're providing a methodology for letting them speak.
Yeah. I'm working only in the abstract. The abstract knowledge in knowledge out data in between.
Now can we take a leap to trying to learn in this very when it's not 20 variables but 20 million
variables trying to learn causation in this world not learn but somehow construct models. I mean it
seems like you would only have to be able to learn because constructing it manually would be too
difficult. Do you have ideas of I think it's a matter of combining simple models from many many
sources from many many disciplines and many metaphors. Metaphors are the basics of human
intelligence and basis. Yeah. So how do you think of about a metaphor in terms of its use in human
intelligence? Metaphors is an expert system. An expert it's mapping problem
with which you are not familiar to a problem with which you are familiar. Like I give a good
example the Greek believed that the sky is an opaque shell. It's not really an infinite space.
It's an opaque shell and the stars are holes poked in the shells through which you see the eternal
light. It was a metaphor. Why? Because they understand how you poke holes in the shells.
They're not they were not familiar with infinite space. And so and we are walking on a
shell of a turtle and if you get too close to the edge you're going to fall down to Hades or
whatever. Yeah. Yeah. And there's a metaphor. It's not true but this kind of metaphor enables
Aristoteles to measure the radius of the earth because he said come on. If we are walking on
a turtle shell then the ray of light coming to this angle will be different. This place
will be different angle that's coming to this place. I know the distance. I'll measure the two
angles and then I have the radius of the shell of the of the turtle and he did and he found his
measurements were very close to the measurements we have today through the year
what six thousand and seven hundred seven hundred kilometers of the earth. That's something that
would not occur to Babylonian astronomer even though the Babylonian experiments were the
machine learning people of the time. They fit curves and they could predict the eclipse of the
moon much more accurately than the Greek because they fit curve. That's a different metaphor.
Something that you're familiar with a game a turtle shell.
What does it mean if you are familiar? Familiar means that answers to certain questions are
explicit. You don't have to derive them. And they were made explicit because somewhere in the past
you've constructed a model of that. You're familiar with so the child is familiar with
billiard balls. So the child could predict that if you let loose of one ball the other one will
bounce off. You obtain that by familiarity. Familiarity is answering questions and you store
the answer explicitly. You don't have to derive them. So this is idea of a metaphor. All our life
all our intelligence is built around metaphors mapping from the unfamiliar to the familiar.
But the marriage between the two is a tough thing which we haven't yet been able to
algorithmatize. So you think of that process of using metaphor to leap from one place to another
we can call it reasoning. Is it a kind of reasoning? It is reasoning by metaphor metaphor.
Do you think of that as learning? So learning is a popular terminology today in a narrow sense.
It is. It is. It is definitely. So you may not. Okay. Right. One of the most important learnings
taking something which theoretically is derivable and store it in accessible format. I'll give you
an example. Chess. Okay. Finding winning starting moving chess is hard. But there is an answer.
Either the user will move for white or there isn't or the user will draw. Okay. So it is.
The answer to that is available through the rule of the games. But we don't know the answer. So
what does the chess master have that we don't have? He has stored explicitly an evaluation of
certain complex pattern of the board. We don't have it ordinary people like me. I don't know about
you. I'm not a chess master. So for me, I have to derive things that for him is explicit. He has
seen it before or you've seen the pattern before or similar pattern using metaphor. Yeah. And he
generalized and said, don't move. It's a dangerous move.
It's just that not in the game of chess, but in the game of billiard balls, we humans are able to
initially derive very effectively and then reason by metaphor very effectively and make it look so
easy and it makes one wonder how hard is it to build it in a machine. So in your sense,
how far away are we to be able to construct? I don't know. I'm not a futurist. I can all I can
tell you is that we are making tremendous progress in the causal reasoning domain. Something that I
even dare to call it revolution, the causal revolution, because what we have achieved in
the past three decades is something that dwarf everything that was derived in the entire history.
So there's an excitement about current machine learning methodologies and there's really important
good work you're doing in causal inference. Where do the what is the future? Where do these
worlds collide and what does that look like? First, they're going to work without collisions.
It's going to work in harmony. Harmony is not the human is going to jumpstart
in the exercise by providing qualitative non-committing
models of how the universe works. How in reality the domain of discourse works. The machine is
going to take over from that point of view and derive whatever the calculus says can be derived,
namely quantitative answer to our questions. These are complex questions. I'll give you some
example of complex questions that will bugle your mind if you think about it. You take result of
studies in diverse populations under diverse conditions and you may infer the cause effect
of a new population which doesn't even resemble any of the one studied. You do that by do calculus,
you do that by generalizing from one study to another. See what's common with Beato? What is
different? Let's ignore the differences and pull out the commonality and you do it over maybe 100
hospitals around the world. From that you can get really mileage from big data. It's not only
you have many samples, you have many sources of data. So that's a really powerful thing I think
for especially for medical applications. I mean cure cancer, right? That's how from data you can
cure cancer. So we're talking about causation which is the temporal relationship between things.
Not only temporal, it was structural and temporal. Temporal presence by itself cannot replace causation.
Is temporal precedence the error of time in physics? It's important and necessary. It's
important. But it's efficient, yes. Is it? Yes, I never see the cause propagate backward.
But if we use the word cause, but there's relationships that are timeless, I suppose that's
still forward in the era of time. But are there relationships, logical relationships
that fit into the structure? Sure, do calculus is logical relationship.
That doesn't require a temporal. It has just the condition that
you're not traveling back in time. Yes, correct. So it's really a generalization of
a powerful generalization of what? Bullion logic. Bullion logic. Yes.
That is simply put and allows us to reason about the order of events, the source.
It's not about between but not deriving the order of events. We are given cause-effect relationship.
They ought to be obeying the time precedence relationship. We are given that and now that
we ask questions about other cause relationship that could be derived from the initial ones,
but were not given to us explicitly. Like the case of the firing squad I gave you
in the first chapter. And I asked what if rifleman A declined to shoot? Would the prisoner still be
dead? Declined to shoot, it means that he disobeyed order. And the rule of the games were that he is
obedient and marksman. That's how you start. That's the initial order. But now you ask
questions about breaking the rules. What if he decided not to pull the trigger? He just became
a pacifist. You and I can answer that. The other rifleman would have killed him.
Okay? I want the machine to do that. Is it so hard to ask the machine to do that?
It's such a simple task. They have a calculus for that. Yes. But the curiosity and the natural
curiosity for me is that yes, you're absolutely correct and important and it's hard to believe
that we haven't done this seriously extensively already a long time ago. So this is really important
work. But I also want to know, maybe you can philosophize about how hard is it to learn.
Okay, let's assume we're learning. We want to learn it. Okay? We want to learn. So what are we doing?
We put a learning machine that watches execution trials in many countries and many locations.
Okay? All the machine can learn is to see shot or not shot. Dead, not dead.
Court issued an order or didn't. Okay? Just the facts. From the fact you don't know who listens to
whom. You don't know that the condemned person listened to the bullets, that the bullets are
listening to the captain. Okay? All we hear is one command, two shots dead. Okay? A triple of
variable. Yes, no. Yes, no. Okay. From that you can learn who listens to whom and you can answer
the question. No. Definitively no. But don't you think you can start proposing ideas for humans to
review? You want machine to learn, right? You want a robot. So robot is watching trials like that.
200 trials. And then he has to answer the question, what if rifleman A, he framed from shooting?
Yeah. So how to do that? That's exactly my point. That looking at the facts don't give you the
strings behind the facts. Absolutely. But do you think of machine learning as is currently defined
as only something that looks at the facts and tries to... Right now they only look at the facts.
Yeah. So is there a way to modify in your sense? Playful manipulation. Playful manipulation.
Yes. Once in a while. Doing the interventionist kind of thing. Yes. Intervention. But it could
be at random. For instance, the rifleman is sick that day or he just vomits or whatever. So machine
can observe this unexpected event which introduced noise. The noise still has to be random to be able
to relate it to randomized experiment. And then you have observational studies from which to
infer the strings behind the facts. It's doable to a certain extent. But now that we expert in what
you can do once you have a model, we can reason back and say what kind of data you need to build a
model. Got it. So I know you're not a futurist, but are you excited? Have you, when you look back at
your life, long for the idea of creating a human level intelligence system? Yeah. I'm driven by that.
All my life, I'm driven just by one thing.
But I go slowly. I go from what I know to the next step incrementally.
So without imagining what the end goal looks like, do you imagine
what an end goal is going to be a machine that can answer sophisticated questions,
counterfactuals of regret, compassion, responsibility, and free will.
So what is a good test? Is a touring test a reasonable test? Free will doesn't exist yet.
How would you test free will? So far we know only one thing.
If robots can communicate with reward and punishment among themselves,
and hitting each other on the wrist and say you shouldn't have done that,
playing better soccer because they can do that. What do you mean because they can do that?
Because they can communicate among themselves. Because of the communication they can do? Because
they communicate like us. Reward and punishment. Yes, you didn't pass the ball the right time.
And so therefore you're going to sit on the bench for the next two. If they start communicating
like that, the question is, will they play better soccer? As opposed to what? As opposed to what
they do now, without this ability to reason about reward and punishment, responsibility.
And how far I can only think about communication. Communication is
not necessarily natural language, but just communication. Just communication. And that's
important to have a quick and effective means of communicating knowledge. If the coach tells
you you should have passed the ball, ping, he conveys so much knowledge to you as opposed to what?
Go down and change your software. That's the alternative. But the coach doesn't know your
software. So how can the coach tell you you should have passed the ball? But our language
is very effective. You should have passed the ball. You know your software. You tweak the right
module. Okay. And next time you don't do it. Now that's for playing soccer or the rules are well
defined. No, they're not well defined. When you should pass the ball is not well defined. No, it's
very soft. Very noisy. Yes, you have to do it under pressure. It's art. But in terms of aligning
values between computers and humans, do you think this cause and effect
type of thinking is important to align the values, values, morals, ethics under which
the machines make decisions? Is the cause effect where the two can come together?
Cause effect is necessary component to build a ethical machine. Because the machine has to
empathize to understand what's good for you to build a model of your of you as a recipient,
which should be very much what what is compassion. They imagine that you
suffer pain as much as me as much as me. I do have already a model of myself.
Right. So it's very easy for me to map you to mine. I don't have to rebuild the model.
It's much easier to say, oh, you're like me. Okay. Therefore, I would not hate you.
And the machine has to imagine it has to try to fake to be human essentially. So you can imagine
that you're that you're like me. Right. And moreover, who is me? That's the fact that that's
consciousness. They have a model of yourself. Where do you get this model? You look at yourself
as if you are a part of the environment. If you build a model of yourself versus the environment,
then you can say, I need to have a model of myself. I have abilities. I have desires and so
forth. Okay. I have a blueprint of myself. Not the full detail because I cannot get the halting
problem. But I have a blueprint. So on that level of a blueprint, I can modify things.
I can look at myself in the mirror and say, hmm, if I change this, tweak this model,
I'm going to perform differently. That is what we mean by free will.
And consciousness. What do you think is consciousness? Is it simply self-awareness?
So including yourself into the model of the world? That's right. Some people tell me,
no, this is only part of consciousness. And then they start telling me what they really
mean by consciousness and I lose them. For me, consciousness is having a blueprint of your
software. Do you have concerns about the future of AI? All the different trajectories of all
of our research? Yes. Where's your hope? Where the movement heads? Where are your concerns?
I'm concerned because I know we are building a new species that has the capability of exceeding
our, exceeding our capabilities and can breed itself and take over the world. Absolutely.
It's a new species that is uncontrolled. We don't know the degree to which we control it. We don't
even understand what it means to be able to control this new species. So I'm concerned.
I don't have anything to add to that because it's such a gray area, that unknown. It never
happened in history. The only, the only time it happened in history was evolution with human
being. It wasn't very successful, was it? Some people say it was a great success.
For us it was, but a few people along the way, a few creatures along the way would not agree.
So it's just because it's such a gray area, there's nothing else to say.
We have a sample of one. Sample of one. It's us. But some people would look at you and say
yeah, but we were looking to you to help us make sure that sample two works out okay.
Actually, we have more than a sample of one. We have theories and that's good. We don't need to
be statisticians. So sample of one doesn't mean poverty of knowledge. It's not. Sample of one
plus theory, conjectural theory of what could happen. That we do have. But I really feel helpless
in contributing to this argument because I know so little and my imagination is limited
and I know how much I don't know and I, but I'm concerned.
You're born and raised in Israel. Born and raised in Israel, yes.
And later served in Israel military, Defense Forces. In the Israel Defense Force.
What did you learn from that experience? From this experience?
There's a kibbutz in there as well. Yes, because I was in the Nakhal, which is
a combination of agricultural work and military service.
We were supposed, I was really idealist. I wanted to be a member of the kibbutz throughout my life
and to live a communal life. And so I prepared myself for that. Slowly, slowly, I wanted a greater
challenge. So that's a far world away. But I learned from that. It was a miracle.
It was a miracle that I served in the 1950s. I don't know how we survived.
The country was under austerity. It tripled its population from 600,000 to a million point eight
when I finished college. No one went hungry. Austerity, yes. When you wanted to buy, to make an
omelette in a restaurant, you had to bring your own egg. And the imprisoned people from bringing
food from the farming here, from the villages to the city. But no one went hungry. And I always
add to it. And higher education did not suffer any budget cuts. They still invested in me,
in my wife, in our generation to get the best education that they could. So I'm really
grateful for the opportunity. And I'm trying to pay back now. It's a miracle that we survived
the war of 1948. They were so close to a second genocide. It was all in plant. But we survived
it by miracle. And then the second miracle that not many people talk about, the next phase,
how no one went hungry. And the country managed to triple its population. You know what it means
to imagine the United States going from 350 million to a million. And believe.
That's a really tense part of the world. It's a complicated part of the world. Israel and all
around. So religion is at the core of that complexity. One of the components. Religion is a
strong motivating course to many, many people in the Middle East. Yes.
In your view, looking back, is religion good for society?
That's a good question for robotic, you know. There's echoes of that question.
A quick robot with a religious belief. Suppose we find out or we agree that religion is good to
you to keep you in line. Should we give the robot the metaphor of a god? The metaphor of the robot
will get it without us also. Why? The robot will reason by metaphor. And what is the most primitive
metaphor a child grows with? Mother smile, father teaching, father image, and mother image. That's
God. So whether you want it or not, the robot will, assuming that the robot is going to have a
mother and a father, it may only have a programmer who doesn't supply warmth and discipline.
Well, discipline it does. So the robot will have this, a model of the trainer. And everything
that happens in the world, cosmology and so on, is going to be mapped into the programmer.
That's God. Man. The thing that represents the origin of everything for that robot.
That's the most primitive relationship. So it's going to arrive there by metaphor.
And so the question is if overall that metaphor has served us well as humans.
I really don't know. I think it did. But as long as you keep in mind, it's only a metaphor.
So if you think we can, can we talk about your son? Yes, yes. Can you tell his story?
A story? Well, Daniel. The story is known. He was abducted in Pakistan by al-Qaeda driven
sect and under various pretenses. I don't even pay attention to what the pretence will.
Originally, they wanted to have the United States deliver some promised airplanes.
It was all made up and all this demands were bogus. I don't know really, but eventually he was
executed in front of a camera. At the core of that is hate and intolerance.
At the core? Yes, absolutely. We don't really appreciate the depth of the hate at which
billions of peoples are educated. We don't understand it. I just listened recently
to what they teach you in Mogadishu.
When the water stopped in the tap, we knew exactly who did it, the Jews.
We didn't know how, but we knew who did it. We don't appreciate what it means to us.
The depth is unbelievable. Do you think all of us are capable of evil?
And the education, the indoctrination is really what creates evil? Absolutely,
we are capable of evil. If you are indoctrinated sufficiently long and in depth, we are capable of
ISIS, we are capable of Nazism. Yes, we are, but the question is whether we, after we have
gone through some Western education and we learned that everything is really relative.
It is no absolute God. It is only a belief in God. Whether we are capable now of being
transformed under certain circumstances to become brutal. I'm worried about it because
some people say, yes, given the right circumstances, given bad economical crisis,
you are capable of doing it too. That worries me. I want to believe it. I'm not capable.
Seven years after Daniel's death, he wrote an article at the Wall Street Journal titled
Daniel Perot and the Normalization of Evil. What was your message back then and how did it change
today over the years? I lost. What was the message? The message was that we are not treating
terrorism as a taboo. We are treating it as a bargaining device that is accepted. People have
grievance and they go and bomb restaurants. It's normal. You're even not surprised when I tell you
that. 20 years ago you said, what? For grievance you go and blow a restaurant? Today it's becoming
normalized. The banalization of evil. We have created that to ourselves by normalizing, by
by making it part of political life. It's a political debate. Every terrorist
yesterday becomes a freedom fighter today and tomorrow it becomes a terrorist again. It's
switchable. And so we should call out evil when there's evil? If we don't want to be part of it.
If we want to separate good from evil, that's one of the first things that
in the Garden of Eden, remember the first thing that God tells him was, hey,
he wants some knowledge. Here's a tree of good and evil. So this evil touched your life personally.
Does your heart have anger, sadness, or is it hope?
Okay, I see some beautiful people coming from Pakistan. I see beautiful people everywhere,
but I see horrible propagation of evil in this country too. It shows you how populistic slogans
can catch the mind of the best intellectuals. Today is Father's Day. I didn't know that.
What's a fond memory you have of Daniel?
Oh, many good memories. He was my mentor. He had a sense of balance that I didn't have.
He saw the beauty in every person. He was not as emotional as I am, more
looking at things in perspective. He really liked every person. He really grew up with the idea that
a foreigner is a reason for curiosity, not for fear.
At one time, we went in Berkeley and a homeless came out from some dark alley and said, hey,
man, can you spare a dime? I retreated back, two feet back, and then he just hugged him and said,
here's a dime. Enjoy yourself. Maybe you want some money to take a bus or whatever. Where did
he get it? Not for me. Do you have advice for young minds today dreaming about creating,
as you have dreamt, creating intelligent systems? What is the best way to arrive at new breakthrough
ideas and carry them through the fire of criticism and past conventional ideas?
Ask your questions. Really, your questions are never dumb. And solve them your own way.
And don't take no for an answer. If they are really dumb, you will find out quickly
by trying an arrow to see that they're not leading any place. But follow them and
try to understand things your way. That is my advice. I don't know if it's going to help anyone.
No, that's brilliantly. There is a lot of
inertia in science, in academia. It is slowing down science.
Yeah, those two words, your way, that's a powerful thing. It's against inertia,
potentially, against the flow. Against your professor.
I wrote the book of why in order to democratize common sense.
In order to instill a rebellious spirit in students. So they wouldn't wait until the
professor gets things right.
So you wrote the manifesto of the rebellion against the professor.
Against the professor, yes.
So looking back at your life of research, what ideas do you hope ripple through the
next many decades? What do you hope your legacy will be?
I already have a tombstone carved.
Oh boy.
The fundamental law of counterfactuals. That's what it's a simple equation.
What a counterfactual in terms of a model surgery.
That's it, because everything follows from that.
If you get that, all the rest, I can die in peace and my student can derive all my knowledge,
my mathematical means.
The rest follows.
Yeah.
Thank you so much for talking today. I really appreciate it.
Thank you for being so attentive and instigating.
We did it.
We did it.
The coffee helped.
Thanks for listening to this conversation with Judea Pearl.
And thank you to our presenting sponsor, Cash App.
Download it, use code LEX Podcast.
You'll get $10 and $10 will go to FIRST, a STEM education nonprofit that inspires hundreds
of thousands of young minds to learn and to dream of engineering our future.
If you enjoy this podcast, subscribe on YouTube, give it five stars on Apple Podcasts,
support on Patreon, or simply connect with me on Twitter.
And now, let me leave you with some words of wisdom from Judea Pearl.
You cannot answer a question that you cannot ask, and you cannot ask a question that you have no
words for.
Thank you for listening and hope to see you next time.
