Alright, today I want to return to this question of the empirical criterion of meaning before
we move on and look at systematically misleading expressions.
So remember that key idea of the logical empiricists is that we can divide the meaningful from
the meaningless by drawing distinction between those things that are valid in some sense
verifiable in Ayer's way of thinking about this anyway and in some sense not.
Let's put the analytic statements over on one side so we don't have to worry about them
and just focus on those that are non-analytic, that are synthetic, that have some kind of
content that you might think relates in some way to the world.
Well then, he considers criterion and the first criterion, which isn't actually in
the book, but is Schlicht's criterion and at some point he comes very, very closely
because he says, what is it to understand a statement and to assign it a meaning?
Well, it's basically to know how to verify it.
He says, the criterion which we use to test the genuineness of apparent statements of
fact is the criterion of verifiability.
We say that a sentence is factually significant at a given person if and only if he knows
how to verify the proposition, which it reports to express.
That is, if he knows what observations would lead him under certain conditions to accept
the proposition as being true or rejected as being false.
So he's saying here that something has a meaning for you if you know how to verify
it.
In other words, if you know that there are some, well, you know what observations might
lead you to conclude that it's true or conclude that it's false.
So get rid of the person here.
We might say, well then something is meaningful empirically if there are observations that
would lead you to conclude that it's true or that it's false.
And so here is a first criterion of meaning.
It really is schlicks.
And he's, although not officially endorsing it, what he says here comes very close to
stating this.
And it's normally called the verification principle.
And what is that principle?
Well, really in the end it's just this.
There is some way of verifying this.
So there are, we'll just call them observation statements that would lead you to conclude
that it's true or that it's false, right?
That, I would say imply it's true or false.
Now we saw last time that actually this gets abandoned and this is not Ayer's official
position.
Now what's wrong with this?
We're going to talk about this in more detail later.
But the idea would be there are observation statements that imply that this thing is true
or that it's false.
Now that is true or that it's false.
Think about for a moment what kinds of things would fulfill this easily.
What is a statement where you could have an observation statement, a statement about direct
observation.
Remember, he denies there are some things as protocol sentences.
So what counts as an observation statement here is going to be a little bit.
It's clear and slick.
It's one of those protocol sentences.
Not so clear and air.
But now what's exactly, well what would be an example of something that you could verify?
You could observe something and you'd say, so it's true.
Mountains on the other side of the moon.
Ah, there are mountains on the other side of the moon.
You could think, well that's a puzzling thing, we don't know how to verify that.
But then a spaceship goes and circles the moon and observes them and you say, aha, there
they are.
Another example.
Can I put it?
Well here we're putting, yeah, I'm putting aside the analytic questions or statements
and just treating those as separate categories.
So think of this as just operating within the realm of the synthetic.
Why are you taking hard cases?
Okay, I want you to say something dumb like there are people in the room.
It's like, hey look, yeah, there are people in the room, okay?
Yeah, I mean math, math, it all depends, right, whether we're millions and we think that
that's really empirical in some sense, in which case we should be going around and looking
for observations like, yeah, what plus what is two?
Or whether we think that's analytic and so up on the side.
But yeah, something like there are people in the room, you know, I could say there are
people in the next room and you could think, well I don't know if that's true or false,
but I know how to find out.
I'll go over and take a look and you'd say, yes, there are people in that room or no,
there aren't.
Okay, so those things are things that clearly satisfy this.
Now, why might you get unhappy with this as a general criteria?
Are there meaningful statements that actually aren't such that there are observation statements
that would imply they're true or false?
And are there, well, we might think of it this way, right, here we're trying to characterize
the meaningful sentences.
The meaningful, and since we're putting the analog off on the side, we'll say the meaningful
empirical sentences.
And here are the things that are fitting our definition.
So we want to think, well, okay, is this something that actually allows for meaningful empirical
statements that aren't like that, that don't have observation statements that imply they're
true or false, but also are there things that are not meaningful that satisfy your criteria?
Well, think of something that seems meaningful, that you couldn't actually verify or refute
by means of some of these observations.
Yeah?
Like meaningful, like God exists?
Ah, God exists, well, yes, if that's meaningful, that would be one that is like this, of course,
they are denies that that's meaningful.
Are you talking about like all men are mortal, those kind of statements?
Ah, yes, okay, good.
What about a universal statement?
All men are mortal, or all ravens are black.
I go around and observe ravens, and this one's black, that one's black, that one's black.
Does that ever imply that all ravens are black?
No, because there are always additional ravens, right?
And so that's a problem.
Now, maybe one could convince me that that's false.
After all, I could go and find an albino raven or something.
Maybe you've seen on campus the albino squirrel one day, actually, just last year I was giving
an exam, and the albino squirrel was out on the East Mall as everyone was walking over
to the final exam book.
So all my students were so happy, they rock, they went, yeah, we saw the squirrel.
And so if somebody said, hey, all squirrels are either gray or brown, they could have
said, ah, refuted, right?
On the other hand, could you ever have observations that would verify the claim that all squirrels
are either gray or brown?
Well, no.
So, that's a potential problem.
Can you think of other sorts of problems here?
Yeah, I have a question.
So it says that observation statements imply truth or falsity, not that they confirm truth
or falsity.
So if you look at 10,000 ravens and they're all black, why wouldn't that at least imply
the truth of the statement, even if it doesn't confirm?
All right, good.
It depends what we mean by implied, right?
And at some points, he says, would allow us to deduce.
That implies that the relationship he has is deductive.
But you're right.
We could try to defend this by weakening this.
And in the end, that's really just what he does.
Okay?
Anyway, we'll talk more about the failures of this.
Since this is sort of in the background here, I'm not going to spend a lot of time on it.
But you might worry about what happens with not only universal statements, but conjunctions
and disjunctions.
Suppose, I say, for example, that either there are people in the next room or the absolute
is lazy.
So as I say, there are people in the next room and the absolute is lazy.
What happens to combined statements like that?
You've got us that were part that's meaningful and part that's not meaningful.
It's hard to give us a criterion that's actually going to be sensible.
Also, there's kind of ambiguity here is the idea that if it's true, then there are observations
that will imply that.
And if it's false, there are observations, statements that will imply that.
Or is it enough that it could imply either it's true or falsity, in which case maybe
the universal ones are okay because there could be observations that would imply falsity.
We've also got the do him problem that we mentioned last time, which is that most statements
are really not, maybe all statements are really not such that we could verify or refute them
one on one.
We're going to have to make auxiliary hypotheses.
I say there are people in the next room.
You go, look, you say, I don't see anybody.
Have you refuted my statement?
Is there any circumstance where you might say, well, actually there are people in that room.
It's just that you can't see them.
What would such a science fiction scenario be like?
People under an invisibility cloak?
Good.
They're all hiding under an invisibility cloak, right?
So, you know, Snake, is there any student in the Halloween piece about?
But Harry's under the invisibility cloak, so we can't see it.
So, there's that kind of thing.
We're assuming that, hey, there are people there.
I could see them.
But maybe that's not true.
Or maybe they're invisible people, as in that episode of Buffy the Vampire Slayer, where
nobody notices the poor girl in the back of the class, and gradually she becomes invisible
and then she starts murdering people.
Well, anyway, there are all sorts of things that we might assume to try to save this.
And so, there's an dependence on additional hypotheses.
Well, whatever we say about that, Ayer ends up saying, yeah, let's move to
what he refers to as a modified verification principle.
And this one is a bit more complicated.
Now, his initial statement of it actually isn't that complicated.
He basically says, we just want observations to be relevant.
Some possible sense experience should be relevant to the determination of its truth or falsehood.
So, that seems easy enough.
Some sense experience, we could turn that into observation statement we want, is relevant
to the determination of its truth or falsehood.
Now, what do we mean by is relevant to?
He admits, this is rather vague.
So, could we make that somehow precise?
Here, we've got something applied to implication.
And in the initial form of this, they really do mean deductive implication.
But you might think, well, that's the problem.
And so, if this were inductive, then actually seeing lots of black ravens would be inductive
confirmation of the claim that all ravens are black.
And here, we could say, well, yeah.
So, observing this raven being black or that raven not being black and so on, that would
be highly relevant to the truth or falsehood.
But now, what would we mean by relevant here?
We want something weaker than deductively entails.
So, what could we mean by relevance?
It allows for induction.
We could mean allows for induction.
And if you think about what happens when we get an additional piece of inductive evidence,
you see some more ravens and you say, well, they're black too.
What's happened to our judgment about that claim that all ravens are black?
It makes it more probable.
It makes it more probable.
So, in the end, what this really means, he says, is it's capable of increasing or decreasing
the probability.
There is some extensive experience that would lead me to think that this claim is more likely
or less likely.
And then, if somebody says, hey, there are albino ravens and I search and search and search
and can't find them, the probability I assign to that keeps going down, right?
And so, my failure to find one does seem to be relevant.
It's decreasing the probability.
Yeah.
So, is this basically strong and weak verification?
Yes.
Yes, exactly.
Now, you might think this is happy.
And actually, in the end, Carnap endorses something very much like this modified verification
principle.
But Ayer says, well, even though he doesn't know if you have to mention probability and
treat it this way, he really leaves this aside as if this is too vague.
And I think part of the reason for that is that he's worried about this duhemian possibility
that there are other auxiliary hypotheses that are functioning in the background and
he's worried about being able to test probabilities of statements one on one.
And so, he ends up proposing, and I'll just call this the more modified, maybe it's really
less modified verification principle.
It seems to me anyway a rather different principle.
And it goes like this.
Some observation statement can be deduced from this plus other premises.
So, in short, the statement plus other premises implies some observation statement.
Now, that has nothing to do with probability.
And Moro, so we're back, he says deduce it.
He actually means now deductive implication here.
So, it really doesn't go in the direction of that at all.
It's weird that he seems to say, oh, this is what I need, more precisely this.
I was like, yeah, that's not more precisely that.
That's just a totally different claim.
But, okay, so that's the idea.
We're trying to test a statement like A.
And so, is it meaningful or not?
Well, the thought is that A plus then some other set of premises is going to imply this thing.
So, A plus some set X will imply some observation set and so on.
Now, that's the version he officially endorses in the first edition of the book.
But then he sees that's open to a devastating objection.
And so, in 1936, he's all in favor of this.
By 1946, with the second edition, he says, oh, yeah, this doesn't work at all.
Now, why doesn't it work?
So, suppose we have A being something like the absolute is lazy.
One of these statements that's supposed to be meaningless, right?
Can you think of anything you could supplement the absolute is lazy with
that would imply some observation statement?
Almost anything.
Just so you get that your X could be a pillar is fall, and then you could see a pillar fall.
So, A would be kind of equally confirmed.
Oh, good.
It could be something that just implies some observation statement and has nothing to do with A at all.
So, that's one way in which this could fail.
Like, pillows fall.
So, we drop a pillow, it falls.
Okay, so the absolute is lazy and pillows fall implies an observation statement here, right?
And you think, yeah, wait a minute.
No, that's not the kind of thing we have in mind.
So, the first thing we might do to try to fix this is to say, well, yeah.
I don't want X to follow or to imply O of Y itself.
So, maybe we should say this where, you know, X of Y itself doesn't imply that, oh.
To try to solve that problem.
But you're right.
That's a real problem.
If these other premises just comply with observation statements on their own,
maybe one of them is an observation statement.
Like, the chalk looks white or I'm being appeared too white for you.
What if you take to be an observation statement?
Then the absolute is lazy and I'm being appeared too white for you.
It implies I'm being appeared too white.
So, what if we do this?
Well, that solved the problem.
So, this by itself doesn't imply this observation statement, but add A to it and that's it.
Can you think of anything we can add to A that would imply O?
And A is the absolute is lazy.
Yeah.
How about if A, hello.
Okay.
So, here's the claim.
The absolute is lazy is in fact verifiable in this modified way.
Why?
Because if you take the claim that the absolute is lazy and supplement it with the auxiliary premise
that if the absolute is lazy, I'm being appeared too white, then I'm being appeared too white.
How can you make those claims, though?
Well, no, I didn't say this had to be true.
Right?
And so, you might think, oh, wait a minute, the absolute is white.
That has no connection to anything like this.
And so, maybe the outrageousness of that offends you.
But suppose, but you know, we didn't say there's a true sense that this could be added to.
Secondly, you might think, well, look, take something that's a little bit less preposterous.
For example, the absolute is lazy.
Now, if that has any meaning at all, it presumably means that the whole world, this one that encompasses everything else, right, isn't doing a whole lot.
And so, you might say, all right, so that have any observational consequences.
Well, sure, some things in the world go slow.
In fact, lots of things in the world don't seem to move at all.
I mean, I'm looking at that door.
It's just sitting there, right?
It's not doing anything.
If the absolute were energetic, that should be moving around.
It's not moving around.
Look how boring that is.
Or what about this chalkboard?
It's just there in the wall, right?
Just stay stationary.
Why isn't it moving?
See, the absolute is lazy.
Now, that's a little bit silly.
But on the other hand, it's only a little bit silly.
There, it's like, well, if this has any meaning at all, then maybe it should mean that actually, you know, gosh, lots of things that aren't happening could be happening.
And here's an observation that actually would seem to follow that some things don't move much.
And indeed, some things don't move much.
Actually, that's not an observation sentence, because it's got to quantify some things.
But I could say, what?
Then the wall doesn't move much.
And indeed, the wall doesn't move much.
So in short, this seemed an air events look.
It looks like actually everything there is satisfied.
This doesn't rule out anything at all.
So in the end, he comes up with yet another possibility.
So we'll call this four.
And it's a mess.
This is what he puts into the second edition.
And it is very hard to say what it means.
I propose to say that a statement is directly verifiable.
If it's either itself an observation statement or is such that in conjunction with one or more observation statements,
it entails at least one observation statement, which is not to do some more from these other premises alone.
And I propose to say that a statement is indirectly verifiable if it satisfies the following conditions.
First, that in conjunction with certain other premises, it entails one or more directly verifiable statements,
which are not to do so from those other premises alone.
And secondly, that these other premises do not include any statement that is not either analytic or verifiable
or capable of being independently established as indirectly verifiable.
Now, you read that paragraph, you think.
Especially since he seems to define indirectly verifiable in terms of being indirectly verifiable.
And so this is a little bit freaky.
However, suppose you say, okay, I mean, you might read that paragraph and just have your eyes glazed over and give up.
And I totally sympathize.
That's your reaction.
But what if we wanted to try to make this more precise?
We could say, well, all right, really what he's giving us here without putting it in these terms is an inductive definition.
He's giving us a recursive characterization of what it is to be verifiable.
And so how does it go?
Well, here's the base case.
This is the direct verifiability.
And it goes like this, okay?
Either it's an observation statement.
So suppose we're testing, well, let's continue to call the statement A.
So A is an observation statement or what?
Well, in conjunction with one or more observation statements, it entails at least one observation statement,
which is not deducible from those other premises alone.
So, or A plus now some set of observation statements.
It'd be nice to have a way of indicating something that means a set of observation statements.
Since I used O for a single one, let's use like omega, capital omega as something that indicates a set of those guys.
So there's a set of those observation statements, which is such that it implies an observation statement,
but where that gamma, sorry, that omega does not by itself imply that O.
So it's not that we just snuck O in among that set of observation statements, okay?
So either A is a member of a set of observation statements.
Once it's one itself or it combines with some observation statements to imply an observation statement.
Yeah.
Can you give an example of an A that follows that criterion?
Yeah.
Yeah.
Yeah, there are at least two pieces of chocolate in the room, okay?
And it's like, okay, here is...
Well, actually, yeah.
That's going to imply an observation statement that I can find at least one, for example.
And so I can say, yes, take that.
Actually, it won't by itself.
It won't imply I have one.
So it's not interestingly dependent on this.
What's one that would be all pieces of chocolate in the room are white.
That should imply that each piece of chocolate I find is white.
And so I could clarify that.
That would be an observation statement.
Each piece of chocolate is white is the same as saying all pieces of chocolate are white.
Right.
So why is that dependent on omega?
Yeah, that doesn't depend on omega.
So can I...
How can I get that?
That depends on the way.
Just make it pretty...
Okay, so...
If you find one piece of chalk in a room...
Well, no, that's not...
Yeah, shoot.
This is embarrassing.
Wait.
Why is this hard?
What about A is...
This is a philosophy course.
Omega is...
This class is filled with students.
And the observation is every student here is taking a philosophy course.
Ooh, okay.
Does that work?
So this is a philosophy course.
And this was...
They're students...
They're students here.
Yeah, they're students here.
So every student is taking a philosophy course.
Yeah.
Does that work?
I hope so.
Yeah, that seems right actually.
Assuming that is an observation statement, I'm not sure it is.
But if it is, then yeah, that would be a nice example.
It's going to help here if A is not just by itself an observation statement,
but something that connects them.
So one might be if you've seen some white pieces of chalk in a room,
you'll find others, let's say.
Or make it just...
If you've found at least one white piece of chalk,
you'll find other white pieces of chalk.
And here, aha, we found at least one piece of chalk.
So this will imply there are others.
You should be able to observe additional white pieces of chalk.
So that would be another example.
But yeah, good.
It's going to be something that will be something that takes some observation statements
and then generates another one.
And a simple way to do that is to have it be pointed toward the future
and have it involve prediction.
I think that's the main case he has in mind.
Yeah.
But in the last case you said, pointing to the future with prediction,
isn't that in the same form as of A implies O in the last case?
Like if you see a chalk, if you see white chalk,
you'll see another white chalk.
That's the same form as your previous case in three.
Oh yeah.
Well, right.
Right.
So why doesn't it suffer the same problem?
Because something like if A then O, wouldn't itself be an observation statement, right?
If the absolute is lazy, then you'll find white pieces of chalk is not itself an observation statement.
But you kind of swapped them.
You said, as you're A, you just said A.
I had a conditional.
Yeah.
Right.
But that's okay.
I mean, this is going to be something that allows certain conditionals to be okay.
Now you might worry, well, what about something like if the absolute is lazy,
you'll see white pieces of chalk.
Then I do see white pieces of chalk.
That doesn't imply anything.
What if I move it around and do it the other way?
If you find white pieces of chalk, the absolute is lazy.
I do find white pieces of chalk.
So the absolute is lazy.
But that's not an observation statement.
So I don't think, yeah, I mean, the typical case here that makes this work will be one.
The typical case is his wasn't like this.
But a lot of them will have the form where this is a conditional statement,
linking past observations to future observations, for example.
This will be the past observations.
That will be a future observation.
But that's okay.
That's not going to give us, I think, the same problem.
Because we're not saying any additional statements.
Those have to be observation statements themselves.
Yeah.
What do you think?
He doesn't change it instead to some actual observation statement.
Oh, combined with some set of hypothetical observations.
Omega implies A.
Ah, right.
That's more like, actually, what Schwick had in mind.
Something that follows, right?
In other words, denial follows from observation statements.
And here he's turning it around and saying, well, maybe it implies them.
I think what's bothering him are things like scientific laws.
And if all ravens are black, is already a little bit of an issue,
think about something like Newton's law forces mass times acceleration.
Or even more abstract laws where you're thinking about what's a good example of this.
Maybe Maxwell's equations involving electromagnetism or something,
where the connection to direct observation is rather indirect.
And then you're thinking, oh, wait a minute.
That's abstract enough.
It's not going to follow from any finite set of observations anyway.
But on the other hand, you might start thinking,
but it's something that will imply certain observations if you give it some inputs.
Right?
The theory might tell you, look, if you perform this experiment,
here is what you will see on the screen.
This is what you will observe on the meters and so forth.
And so in that sense, it will have empirical implications that you can test.
So partly what's happening here is the influence of Karl Popper.
Popper, as we'll talk more about this next week,
but Popper came along and said, look, don't think about verification.
That is going to be hopeless when you start thinking about abstract scientific laws.
Think instead about falsification.
Will they have implications that you could actually falsify in principle?
And I think that's what he'd say or to think.
He should think about the thing implying something about observation
rather than following from observation.
But didn't he criticize Popper's falsifiability in the first edition, though?
Yeah, he does.
So he doesn't think Popper gets it right either.
But I think that's part of what's in the background.
He's worried about these scientific laws.
And in general, lurking in the background, too,
is a picture of science developed by people associated with the Berlin School,
Reichenbach and Hempel, where the idea is you have an abstract set of axioms
as part of the scientific theory.
And then you have things that are known as bridge principles.
And then those actually have some implications for observation.
And if you think that's the kind of thing that's typically involved in science,
you have some axioms,
and then you have these bridge principles that link those to actual instruments
and observations and so forth.
And then you have the observations.
You're going to think, oh, wait a minute.
These aren't the kinds of things that follow from observations.
It's not like all the observations of all the physics in the universe
could actually just imply Einstein's theory of special relativity, for example.
But it's the kind of thing that combined with certain other principles
will actually entail observations.
So it's this sort of Reichenbach-Hempel picture in the background
that I think is partly due to this.
He doesn't want to endorse Popper's fossil viability criterion,
but he does want to say, yeah, the key to science are really in these very abstract principles.
And if you think about something like special relativity, what would these look like?
I mean, these axioms are going to look like things that don't directly involve observation.
They're going to be used in things like this.
Inertial mass is rest mass plus kinetic energy over the square of the speed of light,
or momentum is inertial mass times velocity,
or the derivative of kinetic energy is equal to momentum times the derivative of velocity,
or, yeah, let's say the derivative of rest mass is zero.
So rest mass is a constant.
That's an axiomatization of relativistic mechanics.
And notice it's not like you're going to expect that to follow from.
What observations would verify that rest mass is constant, for example?
What would actually imply that momentum is inertial mass times velocity?
You're going to end up thinking, oh, wow, yeah, I want those to be meaningful,
but I don't want to say they follow from observations.
So I think that's really the motive in the background.
Maybe more than proper directly.
This picture of science, which both stresses the importance of these additional principles,
and implies that it goes in this direction about the other.
Yeah?
I have a broader question about these verification principles.
Why isn't it that on a year's definition of meaningful, all of these are meaningless?
Like the verification principles...
Oh, the verification principle itself?
Yeah.
Yeah, what is the status of that?
It's a very quick refutation that some people have tried against logical empiricism.
But really, it's much broader.
It's a challenge to any kind of empiricism.
Remember that the empiricist denies that there are any synthetic apriori truths.
And so you can say, look, either the empiricist principle itself,
that there are no synthetic apriori truths, has to be synthetic and aposteriori,
or it has to be analytic and apriori.
And then you can say, wait a minute, is it really true by definition?
Is empiricism true by definition?
Well, if not, that doesn't work.
Go to the other side, ask, is it synthetic apriori?
Is it itself an empirical principle?
You might say no.
And so in short, this isn't something that just addresses the verification principle.
It's in a sense an objection to every kind of empiricism.
Now, you could imagine this, for example, with respect to David Hume's book,
Inquiry Concerning Human Understanding, and say, all right, Hume, you say,
take in hand any volume of divinity or school metaphysics, for example,
does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning quantity or number?
No.
Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact or existence?
No.
Commit it then to the flames, for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion.
Well, you could say exactly the same thing about Hume's book.
You could say, does this contain any abstract reasoning concerning
number, quantity?
No.
Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact or existence?
No.
Well, then commit it to the flames.
Now, Hume is aware of this objection, and so what is he saying?
He says, look, my own view is a kind of broad psychological view.
In fact, in many ways, Hume thinks of himself as the first psychologist.
He thinks of himself as the Newton of the mind.
And so what he's doing is saying, look, I'm giving you a broad empirical theory
of how the mind works, of what knowledge is.
And so, yes, the empirical theory is something that is fully empirical.
On the other hand, it's very broad.
It's not very directly connected to experience, but it's nevertheless
synthetic and posteriori.
It is a theory of the mind and its operations.
Well, when you turn to the verification principle, it's not so easy to make that argument,
because after all, you've got verifiabilities or criteria.
And now, can you verify the principle of verification itself?
It depends how broad or narrow that principle is.
But you can see it's a serious problem, and it's not so easy to say,
I'm giving you a broad theory of the mind or of knowledge or something else.
Instead, you have to say, look, I've got to be able to have the right kind of
relationship to observation sentences.
And you might not be able to fill in such an argument for the principle of verification itself.
Now, A or 2 is aware of this objection.
And he says, he takes the other horn of the dilemma from Hume.
He says, my view is analytic and apriori.
That is to say, I'm just giving you, by definition, what meaning comes down to,
what truth comes down to, what knowledge comes down to.
And so, just think about what it is to have meaning,
and you realize that it comes down to something like being verifiable.
Just think about what it is to be meaningless,
and you see it's to have no way of determining whether this sort of thing
would be true or false, and so no way of verifying it.
So in short, he thinks you can get this just by thinking about these terms
that really he's giving you an analysis of what knowledge is, what meaning is,
and it's to be justified in those terms.
So it's not that he's unaware of this objection that the verification criterion
fails itself as it were, fails its own test.
He says, no, it does pass, because really it's just analytic and apriori.
Now is that plausible?
When you turn to the version that he advocates in this 1946 preface to the 2nd edition,
you start thinking, wait a minute, this is really complicated.
Start with the idea that meaning is verification,
and so meaningfulness is question of verifiability,
and you've got some plausibility to saying that's just our definition of the term.
It might be wrong, but in any case, it's easy to understand.
When you turn to something as complicated as the definition we looked at a moment ago
and started out finding here, it can seem really implausible.
But let's continue with that, because actually it can be radically simplified,
and when you simplify Ayer's criterion, it no longer seems strange.
I mean, when you look at his actual definitions and say, wait, that's just what it means,
it's pretty frightening.
But actually, if you start simplifying it and recognizing its structure, it's much less bad.
So notice we saw a base case.
We said, all right, he's giving you an inductive definition,
and the base case is that something is an observation statement,
or together with a collection of observation statements,
implies an observation statement where that didn't follow from the observation sentences themselves.
So it gives you a new observational consequence, is the idea.
Now we turn to the inductive step.
And when we look at the inductive step and want to characterize things differently,
well, this is where we get the real complication,
because he says a statement is indirectly verifiable,
so this, in other words, is the indirect part of the criterion.
The indirect part is this.
If it satisfies the following conditions.
First, in conjunction with certain other premises,
it entails one or more directly verifiable statements,
which are not to do so from those other premises alone.
So that's the type of thing we were considering here,
where instead of an observation sentence,
we get something directly verifiable.
So we get that condition.
So we might say, all right, step one.
We get sort of A plus some set of other premises.
Well, what other premises?
The other premises don't include any statement
that is not either analytic or directly verifiable
or capable of being independently established as indirect verifiable.
Now that involves several negations, first of all,
and so it's quite complicated.
Also, you might say it looks at first glance circular.
He's defining indirect verifiability in terms of indirect verifiability.
But it's not circular.
He's giving us an inductive definition.
And so what's going on here is this.
We take certain other premises.
So we've got A plus some set.
And what is this set like?
Well, it doesn't include anything that is neither analytic
nor directly verifiable nor independently indirectly verifiable.
In other words, everything in this set
is either analytic or directly verifiable
or verifiable at some earlier level.
So we might say, okay, plus some other set.
Let's call it sigma.
It tells now what?
Well, not necessarily an observation statement,
but something that is directly verifiable.
So let's call that D, okay,
where sigma itself does not imply that D.
And now everything in sigma is analytic,
directly verifiable,
or verifiable now.
Well, independently, indirectly verifiable.
But here's what we might do.
We could say, well, really here we're characterizing
indirectly verifiable in stage N, for example.
And we say, is verifiable at any rate
at a stage M less than N?
Okay, so the idea is this gives us a new consequence,
a directly verifiable consequence,
when supplemented with some premises
that are either analytic or verifiable more simply.
Already established as verifiable.
So the picture is this.
We've got some initial statements
that are directly verifiable,
and among those are the observation statements.
And then we can extend that by stages
and take the union of all of those,
and that gives us verifiability overall.
That's the strategy of any inductive definition,
and that's what this one's doing.
Well, once you realize that,
you realize, wait a minute,
it's easy to simplify this one pretty radically.
After all, what's going on here, you might say,
there's directly verifiable,
that's just a stage of getting beyond the observation sentences.
So instead of setting it up the way he does,
why don't we do it in the following way?
We could say, okay, this is really the base case,
the base case of the observation sentences.
So let's take the base to be this.
Stage A is an observation statement.
That's what it is, in other words,
to be verifiable subzero.
That's our base case.
And now we say, all right,
now what is it to be verifiable in stage A?
So we get the inductive part.
So we say A is verifiable at stage N,
let's say, if what?
Well, if A plus sigma
yields some B, let's say,
where sigma
does not by itself imply B,
where B is analytic
or verifiable at stage M
for M less than M.
So in other words, we can say this much more simply.
We can say, what is it to be verifiable?
The answer is, it's to either be an observation statement
or it's to be verifiable in the sense
of producing a new consequence that is verifiable.
And again, that sounds circular, but it's not.
It's really a simple case of starting
with the observation sentences
and then saying, once I've got observation sentences,
I can put them together with things that are analytic
or observation sentences
to get new consequences that are observational.
And then once I've got that additional level,
now with verifiability sub one,
now I can take anything there
and add it to something, to an A,
get some new consequence that is verifiable in that sense,
and that extends me to verifiable sub two
and someone I can keep going
and take the union of all those
and that gives me verifiability.
Now, if I say this in slightly different words,
I can just say, look, to be verifiable
is to be the sort of thing
that is either an observation sentence itself
or gives you new verifiable consequences
and understood in this sort of recursive way,
there's nothing problematic about that.
What it comes down to is to be verifiable
as well to produce a new consequence
that is verifiable independently,
more simply verifiable.
And so once we think of it in those terms,
we've got something that isn't so implausible.
So in short, to get back to the objection
that the verifiability criterion fails its own test,
Ayer's response would be,
no, no, no, I'm just giving you a theory
of what verifiability means,
that in turn is a theory of what meaningfulness is,
what meaningfulness means,
and I'm doing that in terms that in the end
aren't so wildly implausible,
it's just in effect to be productive
of new observational consequences
or things that can be verified
ultimately in terms of these new observational consequences.
So there is a tie here,
a tie of meaning between meaning and observational consequences.
Now is he right about that?
Well, that's a separate question,
but at least it's not obvious or crazy to think
that that's what it means to be meaningful.
We're going to look later at an argument
based on meanings that that's exactly
what we should be looking for.
It's an argument given right at the beginning
of Rudolf Karnapp's paper Testability and Meaning.
So we're going to come back to that question.
In Ayer, there isn't really any elaborate defense
of this claim except to say,
what is it to have meaning?
Well, really in the end,
it's to make some observational difference,
to make a difference in experience.
And that's the core idea
that this definition is trying to make more precise.
