I want to return to our discussion of AIR's language truthfulness, and to attempt to understand logical empiricism.
Last time we were discussing the general sort of question of what logical empiricism is, and examining the kinds of distinctions that AIR is drawing,
the fact that it takes four distinctions and basically identifies them.
Well, what we're going to do today is look at one of the key, most famous parts of logical empiricism.
Something that distinguishes it from certain kinds of empiricism, though puts it very much in the spirit of Hubert, who in the inquiry at one point says,
So, you know, if all of this is right, what should we do? Well, take in hand any book of divinity or school metaphysics, for example,
and act. Does it contain any abstract reasoning concerning what are your numbers? No.
Does it contain any experimental reasoning concerning matter of fact? No.
Commit it then with the flames for it can contain nothing but sophistry and illusion, and AIR is saying very much the same type of thing.
So, we've seen that he draws a distinction between the analytic and the synthetic, the analytic statements, true by virtue of meanings alone,
and then synthetic things that are not true just by virtue of meanings alone, but actually seem to be of some kind of claim about the world.
Let's screen off the analytic, not really worry about them, and focus on the things that we can understand as synthetic purely in the negative sense,
that the meanings of the terms don't determine the truth value. Now we can ask, well, which of these are actually meaningful and which are?
Which are really empirical propositions that are making claims about anything we can observe, and which of these are nonsense?
So, there are two ways of thinking about the distinction he starts to draw, putting again the analytic off to the side.
Some of these are, you might say, legitimately empirical. They really do have content. Others, he says, are just meaningless, senseless.
So, at the end of last time, we were talking about distinctions being drawn here, and certainly one of them is to clean these claims that really have empirical content,
and then that don't have any empirical content. Another way to think about this is to think some of these are really scientific statements,
and others are unscientific. There's a kind of boundary in my place on what is science, and the things that are outside the role of science.
You could, as he does, in a strong sense, they are meaningless. You can also say they're really something else.
Maybe they're a waste of time. Maybe they're fulfilling some other function.
And so, in any case, we could call this either the distinction between the meaningful and the meaningless.
We could call it the distinction between the scientific and the unscientific.
But the question becomes, really drawing a line here, within the things that are non-analytic, and this is known as the demarcation problem.
Is there some way of drawing a line of demarcation between the things that are meaningful and the things that are meaningless,
between the things that are scientific and non-scientific?
So, let's, before we think about that question of how we might draw that line, and it's something we're going to come back to next week
when we look at Cardab and Hemble, because it's a hard problem in a way to try to draw this line.
In fact, I took an entire graduate course on the question of how one might try to draw that line.
But let's think about, in general, some examples of things, well, let's start with the meaningless.
Give me some examples of things that you would say are meaningless.
I shouldn't say things. I mean, propositions or pseudo-propositions.
Like, personally or according to this view?
No, personally, personally.
Yeah, I mean, according to this view, a whole bunch of things are going to end up being meaningless, right?
Talking ethics and aesthetics and religion and most of traditional metaphysics and so on.
So, lots and lots of things are going to get categorized as meaningless and unscientific here.
But just intuitively, if I said, yeah, have you ever heard anybody make an assertion that you consider meaningless?
I will say all these guys have some favorite examples.
They think of the absolute idealists, the people who think there is one world soul and so on, this talking nonsense.
And so, the favorite example tends to be this.
The absolute, which is another name for this one world soul type thing, the absolute is lazy.
Okay, so that's one thing they take to be absolutely meaningless.
And I take it that even an absolute idealist who accepts talking to the absolute would find it very strange to call it lazy.
It's like saying the world is lazy.
What would that mean?
But what are some other examples of things that might say that would be just meaningless?
It is a little harder because, you know, if it's meaningless, you wouldn't say it, right?
Yeah?
The king of Francis Bald.
Ah, let's take that example, the king of Francis Bald.
Meaningful or meaningless?
It means the king of Francis Bald.
Okay, so we say it's meaningful.
It's just false, right?
Or if you have Russell's analysis or if you have Fraga's, it doesn't have a truth value.
You say, wait, what? There is no king of France.
And in fact, a test that Lee was used for that sort of thing is to ask it in the form of a question.
Is the present king of France bald?
What would you say if I actually asked you that?
Is the present king of France bald?
Well, you can't really say yes to that, right?
Oh, you definitely can't say yes, right?
It would be very strange to say, oh, yeah.
Every king of Francis Bald.
I had a teacher once who used to say stuff like, if you asked him how he was doing,
he would say, I've been better, I've been worse.
Or he would say, none of us, his dad died and I was like, I'm sorry for your loss.
And he said, none of us make it out alive.
I found that to be not only a strange thing to say, but meaningless.
I mean, obviously.
All right.
Well, yeah, let's take that second example.
None of us make it out alive.
Meaningful or meaningless?
Meaningful.
Yeah, meaningful, isn't it?
I mean, it's making a claim.
Something like all men are mortal is the claim.
And so it might be an obvious thing to say.
Now, admittedly, there's something weird about saying something that's utterly obvious.
And so in that respect, we're not really going to read Grice,
but later in the course we'll make reference to H.B. Grice,
who has a view of conversational maxims.
And one of these maxims is that you are expected to be informative.
And so if you're not informative, you're violating one of these conversational maxims.
And what you're saying is in some sense implicit.
So for example, if you say, do we have to write a final paper for this course?
And I say, well, if you do, you do.
Okay?
Now, that's not meaningless.
It's actually analytic, according to Ayer.
But on the other hand, it's really uninformative.
And so it is something of a violation of conversational norms,
of giving you no information.
And similarly, if you say, oh, I'm sorry, but your father died.
And the response is, none of us make it out alive.
You might think, that's a really uninformative response.
It's a violation of a conversational maxim.
That generally doesn't make things meaningless.
It just means that's a weird thing to say in that sense, right?
And similarly, with the first thing you mentioned,
that strikes me as a sort of analytic statement,
which again, wouldn't be meaningless, but is utterly unhelpful in conversation.
Like, isn't it literally always true that you've been better or worse
than how you feel currently?
Is it always true?
I've been better and I've been worse?
I mean, maybe not always true, but it's a meaningless...
Like, it doesn't tell me anything about how you're doing it.
Right.
It gives way for confusing denotation.
I mean, okay, are you saying better means worse and worse means better?
And there's two conflicting meanings in that statement.
What, conflicting?
Gosh, I think if I say, I've been better and I've been worse.
I mean, think of it this way.
I'm mapping the quality of my life as I go along,
and so I've got a function.
I was born, let's say, yeah, you know, first when you're born,
kind of unhappy, Dr. Smaxley in the butt gave you breathing.
I was pretty bad.
But then, you know, things improve.
Your life is one of these types of things and so on.
And you might think, okay, there is some content to the claim
I've been better and I've been worse.
Namely, I'm not at the maximum all-time point,
but neither am I at the worst all-time point.
And part of what's unhelpful about that is that,
okay, except for two moments in my life, they're all like this, right?
So it's not exactly completely uninformative.
It could be like, this is the best moment in my life,
or this is the worst moment in my life.
But all I'm telling you is one is neither of those.
And so I'm giving you some information there,
but extremely little information.
A better example is those people who are always like,
oh, well, it is what it is.
Yes, exactly. That's right.
It is what it is. That feels like an analytics thing.
Now, notice we often, actually, if somebody says something
that's analytic, or for that matter,
if they say something that sounds contradictory,
we want to interpret them as being helpful in Bryce's sense.
And so we try to reassign a meaning for that.
For example, suppose somebody says, it is what it is.
What are they trying to communicate?
Accept a situation.
Ooh, maybe accept the situation.
So maybe they're exhorting you to say,
yeah, don't worry about it. It is what it is.
Or kind of like that, that Vonnegut quote,
so it goes, and like that, just like...
Yeah, so it goes. Yeah, but it's the song,
kisarasara, what will be will be, right?
And you might take that as an expression of determinism.
You could also just take it as an analytic proposition.
What will happen will happen.
Well, yes, thank you very much.
Okay, but usually what we do is then try to assign
some sort of other meaning.
And the same thing is true.
I think of statements that seem contradictory.
You know, hey, happy today?
Say yes and no.
I say, contradiction.
I can see you're pretty badly off,
because you're not even obeying the rules of logic.
That's not what you're trying to communicate, right?
You're trying to say, well, in some respects, yes,
in some respects, no, maybe, and so on.
And so in short, yeah, we tend to want to interpret people
as making meaningful statements,
as making statements that convey information
that's helpful in the context.
And if they don't, or if they say something
that seems cartologous or contradictory,
then we don't know what to do,
and we're searching for other interpretations.
Now, are there things that just would not be
meaningful in any situation?
Yeah.
Morality is orange.
Oh, good.
We could have violations of categories.
And so this is something that Ryle is going to talk about
when we look at systematically misleading expressions.
He'll talk about things that are category mistakes.
And so if we say morality is orange,
you might think we've said something
that is utterly nonsense, right?
A, we're saying that morality is nonsense.
G.E. Moore thinks that morality is very important
and founded on personal affections
and aesthetic judgments.
And if somebody says, well, my view is morality is an organ.
In fact, I mean, you see, morality is burnt orange.
Right?
We'd say, oh, I have no idea what that means.
That's nonsense.
In fact, an example that was one of Karnab's favorites
is this, green ideas sleep furiously.
And if you think about that, yeah,
that just screws up in all sorts of ways, right?
I mean, ideas can't be green.
Ideas can't sleep.
Is it possible to sleep furiously?
Actually, sometimes somebody will ask me,
so how did you sleep?
I say, oh, I slept furiously.
That's a Karnab joke.
It's funny.
But actually, part of the reason I say that is
there are times when you do feel like you slept furiously.
Right?
You had a really restless night or something.
Yeah.
Well, speaking furiously is kind of difficult to imagine.
What about like center-state?
Does that sense that it's perceived like numbers?
It looks like an idea, and they think it's green,
and they like colors?
Oh, there are people who perceive sounds as having color.
And so you might have some strange,
what do they call it?
That?
Center-state.
Yeah.
Center-state.
Wait a minute.
No.
I'm thinking right now about Robert Nose exterior justice.
And that's just green, man.
Rawls.
Rawls is just, you know, mauve.
I mean, somebody could do that, I guess.
And I don't do that.
Ideas are utterly colorless free,
unless maybe they're ideas of colors,
that even those I wouldn't want to say.
My idea of green is not a green idea.
In any case, it seems to me that some examples like this,
or I could just, actually, I had a student once
who could speak perfect English.
He turned in a paper that was absolute nonsense.
I could not understand a single sentence of his paper.
And at first I thought,
oh, he must not be a native speaker of English.
He must be somebody who speaks a language
very, very remote from English.
And he had an odd-sounding name.
Well, he came in and was clearly a native English speaker.
I mean, it wasn't a language problem.
It's just that none of his sentences made any sense, whatever.
They were just, you know, completely ungrammatical.
I wish I had a paper in front of me so I could read you one.
It was about Kant.
I do remember that.
I could tell what it was about,
even though I had no idea what it was saying about that thing.
It was about a manual Kant.
But it was something like, you know,
to think Kant,
Yeah, right.
Ideas of universal
ought to be.
It's like, wait, what?
That makes no sense, whatever.
And when I started talking about it,
he said, well, you at one point said,
don't do what your English teacher said.
And I said, well, what followed that was,
don't write me a fluffy introductory paragraph
like a manual Kant was a great German philosopher.
I just get to the point of answering the question.
And he said, well, I thought you meant don't, like,
follow any rules of grammar.
So none of his sentences made any sense at all.
And he apparently thought that's what I wanted.
I ended up going through the whole paper with him,
saying, what did that mean to say?
And he said, oh, I have to be saying this.
I said, the next paper, as you write the paper,
imagine that I'm there with every sentence saying,
what did you mean to say by writing that?
And then say out loud what you would say to me.
And then write that down.
And then trash the first sentence and substitute that.
Anyway, his second paper was a lot better.
Maybe he actually followed that advice.
In any case, yeah, there are things like that
that are meaningless.
So in a way, more ever, it's characterized
that group of sentences.
Yeah.
When people do those category mistakes all the time,
it seems to have meaning.
People talk about different music,
or one key will have a blue feeling or something like that,
or even tastes.
Wine tastes will assign colors to different flavors.
Right.
Ah, good, yes.
Discourse on wine.
I've never figured out whether it actually has any meaning
or not.
Me neither.
Right?
Because it's like, ah, yes, this white wine is crisp
with notes of cilantro and lemongrass.
And then I taste it.
And I think, oh, it tastes like white wine.
And I think, OK, am I just a dunce when it comes to wine?
Or is all of this a bit of poetry
that is meant to suggest something that really
isn't describing the wine at all?
And actually, with musical keys, it's interesting because now
we have, we tend to use most of the time anyway,
well-tempered tunings, which mean, really, it shouldn't matter
whether you're playing this in C or A flat or E or whatever.
Things go up or down.
That may affect the brightness and the feel of the piece.
But otherwise, it shouldn't really matter.
All the notes are in the same relationship to one another.
Whereas in older tunings, it really did make a difference.
I mean, in a Pythagorean tune or a meantone or something,
something played in one key may be very different
from a played in the other key.
And in fact, some keys are just unplayable with a lot of those things.
We had a harpsichord tuned to meantone one time,
and Rich Arnie, jazz pianist, came in and said,
oh, they were playing a harpsichord before.
Sat down and started playing something in A flat,
which is the worst possible key for meantone
because the gap between A flat and E flat
is called the Wolf Interpol.
It's radically out of tune.
And so he hits, you know, an A flat major knife
that just sounded horrendous,
and the rest of us just laughed at him.
Because, well, anyway, never mind.
I know way too much about these alternative tunings.
But anyway, yeah, I mean, in a contemporary setting,
you might say, wait, it shouldn't really make any difference.
It used to be that certain keys did have certain characters
because the relationships among the notes in that key were different.
But that's not really true anymore.
In fact, now we, you never hear a real major chord in modern music.
You just never hear one.
And the first time you ever do, if you go to a concert
where they're playing something in Pythagorean or something,
it will blow your mind.
You will say, my whole life has been a waste.
There, my speech on tunings.
It is worth investigating, by the way,
because when you hear a pure tone like that,
pure major third or something,
anyway, never mind, let me get back to this.
Let's notice, I'm saying, oh, was that meaningful or meaningless?
I said, yeah, pure major third.
Yeah, so it's sort of meaningful, right?
But what am I saying?
What am I actually thinking?
You're just expressing your appreciation, right?
Ah, okay, yes, you could say,
ah, I'm communicating the proposition that it's beautiful.
But air will say, wait a minute, what exactly does that mean?
In the end, it means nothing other than,
I'm expressing my appreciation for it.
I'm saying a pure major third.
Yay.
Okay, and that's, or, you know,
that wolf interval between A flat and E flat,
air, I'm just expressing an emotional reaction to it.
So if I say that's awful,
I'm not actually attributing something,
I'm just saying wolf intervals, boo, boo.
Okay, and that in general is what ethical
and aesthetic propositions are like,
according to that painter, they belong over here,
they're unscientific.
So he's gonna end up saying, yeah, ethics goes over here,
but the most, I mean, there are ethical propositions
that are legitimate.
Things that are purely definitional,
or things that are empirical.
But actual propositions of ethics like murder is wrong,
and so on are all over here, he thinks.
Aesthetics is like this, you say,
ah, that tuning is beautiful,
that tuning is nicer than this tuning.
That's a beautiful piece of music,
or I love that work, oh well, I love that work of art.
That's an empirical claim,
but that work of art is beautiful.
Those are all things that end up being meaningless.
And if they have any significance at all,
they are just expressions of emotion.
And so he ends up having an emotive theory of all of these.
Emotivism in general becomes very, very influential
for several decades in the mid-century.
For this reason, people can't figure out what to do with ethics,
or aesthetics, or other type of value judgments.
And so in the end, they interpret these as expressions of emotion.
Suppose you're hurt, and you shout out, true or false,
meaningful or meaningless, right?
It's not a proposition, you're just emumping.
And basically the claim is,
yeah, that's what aesthetics and ethics are.
Somebody says, oh, this wine is beautiful,
I've done it with hits of raspberries.
And it's very likely,
either that's an empirical claim about its taste,
or it's really, certainly speaking meaningless.
Yeah, I once heard, whatever they call it,
Somalia, or Somalia.
Somalia, yeah, yeah, yeah, yeah.
They said the red wine, it had an ochre finish.
Ochre?
I don't know if that...
Ochre?
No, ochre, like O-C-A-D, exactly.
Yeah, yeah, like the color?
Yeah, and I had...
Oh, that's really wild.
I thought that can't possibly help anyone understand,
predict what this is going to taste like.
Okay, good.
This wine tastes like raspberries,
I can at least interpret that empirically,
saying there's a similarity between this sensation
and that sensation, right?
But if somebody says this wine tastes ochre,
whereas this one is a little bit of a light green,
and they're not describing the color of the wine with the taste,
yeah, I don't know what to do with that either,
so good, let's list that here.
The wine is ochre.
Yeah.
To be fair, if you have a New Zealand Sauvignon Blanc,
it literally tastes like grass.
I shouldn't say it tastes like grass,
it smells like green, vegetile grasslands,
so when you taste that,
and you can taste it without even a wine tasting,
you could definitely pick one out,
but I think that you could associate the grasslands with the green,
and you'd be like, well, this tastes green to me,
and that would be borderline empirical,
because where the vineyards are,
it's like grasslands, that's the New Zealand.
No, that's right, so there are certain things.
If somebody says, ah, I detect some chocolate notes,
and so on, yeah, I mean,
the wine really might, in some respect,
taste like grass, or taste like chocolate,
or taste like raspberries, or whatever,
so in fact, one way of training yourself to do this
is to amplify certain tastes,
to actually take a bit of wine and add a bit of oaky flavor,
or grassy flavor, or a raspberry flavor,
or a chocolate flavor, or something,
and then taste what that's like,
and it's like, oh, that's what it tastes like,
but it's really like that,
and then you start learning to detect those more suddenly.
And so, yeah, I think something that says something like that,
and indeed, if you say, ah, if I say the wine is green,
I mean it's grassy, or maybe,
I mean it has a little bit of a hint of a flavor
of a green apple or something,
and I can interpret that,
but I don't know what's ochre that you would be comparing one to,
right, it's like, wait, you say it tastes like mustard,
or, yeah, that would be a very weird one.
How could you possibly inform anyone of anything?
Yeah, I don't know.
I think that those things can inform people
that I'm not sure where the boundary is
on these categorical switches that you were talking about,
because people do talk about colors
inassociated with emotions or something like that,
like you're in a blue mood.
That has a well-defined meaning,
but to these wine people,
I think colors have a well-defined meaning.
You can look up a little color wheel of wine,
and it says green tastes like grass and forests and stuff,
so maybe ochre or something.
This is a different language than maybe.
Yeah, that's what I would say.
Right.
Yeah, that might be the case,
and in fact, you might actually develop a vocabulary like this.
I don't know if there still are such things,
but at one point when I was growing up,
people had mood rings.
It was kind of a fan, right?
And so right now, if somebody said,
well, how are you feeling today?
I'm kind of magenta.
I wouldn't know what that meant,
but back in the days of mood rings, I would.
It's like, I'm kind of feeling that the magenta
on the mood ring is supposed to indicate, right?
Which would mean kind of like, I don't know,
vaguely expected, or a little bit happy,
anticipating something good.
I don't really remember how it went,
but you might think, okay,
in the context of that language game,
that actually makes a certain kind of sense.
Yeah.
So it seems like you would want most category confusions
to come out false, like morality is orange,
but then would you want the same for ethics and aesthetics?
It doesn't seem like you would want murder is wrong to come out false.
You just might not say it's true or false.
Ah, very good.
Some of these things you might think are just meaningless,
but others you might want to say, no, they're just false.
And in fact, one of the things that Ryo considers is,
look, a lot of these categories of space,
we're sort of torn, because on the one hand,
it does seem some kind of violation of linguistic rules,
which would push you in the direction of saying,
this isn't really meaningful.
But you can also respond by saying it's false.
And in fact, maybe necessarily false.
Green ideas sleep furiously.
If somebody makes that claim.
Or let's put it in the form of a question.
Do green ideas sleep furiously?
You know, it seems very plausible to just think,
no, no, an idea is not the kind of thing that could be green.
It couldn't sleep, et cetera.
And so similarly, is morality orange?
No, morality doesn't have color.
Morality is a system of thought.
It's a set of propositions, maybe.
It's whatever you want to say about it.
It's not the kind of thing that has color.
And so with a lot of these things,
you're going to be tempted to say, gosh, it's just false.
Think about what Russell would do with the absolute.
It's lazy.
There is one and only one absolute head.
It's lazy.
And he would just say, false.
Yeah.
Yeah.
I was just wondering, where do things like jargon sort of fit?
You know, if you watch a football game,
you hear Peyton Manning say a lot of crap that you don't,
it means nothing to 99.99999% of human beings.
But there are some people that that is really,
it's really informative to yell a bunch of numbers
with a color after it or something.
Yeah, I just wonder where that fits in.
Okay, good.
If, you know, quarterbacks there,
and suddenly calling a model and saying, green 52, green 52.
That doesn't mean anything to me or you,
but it presumably has a meaning
within the context of that particular thing.
And actually, that's part of the reason, I think,
it's very dangerous to start applying this to philosophy.
Because a lot of it really is jargon that is special
to that particular way of thinking about things.
And a lot of scientific theories are like that too, right?
Somebody says, wait, what kind of bond is this?
Is it an ionic, is it covalent, and so on?
If you don't know anything about chemistry,
you can say, well, what a meaningless question.
But it's not meaningless at all
within the context of chemical theory.
And similarly, if Heidegger says,
truth is the unconcealment of being,
does that have meaning or not?
I mean, A are, and Karnapp and others are going to say,
no, this is a paradigm example of the kind of stuff
that has no meaning.
But a defender of Heidegger will say,
look, it's just jargon.
You have to get into the theory and see how these terms are defined
and see what's being claimed here.
And within the context of theory, it's not meaningless.
You just have to know a bunch of stuff.
And so I think it's a good question here.
What do we do about jargon and things like that?
It's not in general meaningless.
And yet sometimes you really do get the sense
that in the end this is just jargon.
In other words, it's really informative.
If you, like on the other end of the spectrum,
it's not only has a meaning,
but it has a covalent,
or that's a really consequential meaning
if it's ionic versus covalent.
So the jargon stuff is weird
because it can go from one end of meaninglessness
to one really consequential kind of meaning
on the other end of the spectrum.
Good, good.
So sometimes this jargon is very important.
You know, if the doctor is diagnosing you
and starts saying,
well, I see a bunch of medical terminology
you don't understand,
you say, what a bunch of meaningless jargon.
It's, let's hope, not meaningless at all.
But then you wander into some, I don't know,
post-modern English class
where you're discussing Thomas Pinchin or something.
And the professor gets up there and says,
well, this is all a matter of the dissolution of
blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah, blah.
And you end up thinking,
what a bunch of nonsense, this doesn't mean anything at all.
Okay?
And sometimes it really doesn't.
And the intuition behind all of these people is,
yeah, sometimes it really doesn't.
And so what in the end
allows you to draw this line of demarcation?
Now you said something really interesting there,
which is, look, the distinction between ionic and covalent bonds,
that's really consequential.
And other things might not be consequential at all.
You might have a big debate going on in philosophy classroom
about some question you think in the end,
what difference does it possibly make?
What we end up saying about this.
So let's think about it in this way.
We could try to have a criterion
for meaningfulness or for scientific status
or something like that.
And that criterion is something that would demarcate
the empirical from the meaningless,
the scientific from the unscientific.
So we're looking for a criterion,
a criterion of meaningfulness,
and you've just given us one hint of what that might be like.
Now, Ayer is writing this in 1936,
after visiting Vienna in 32 and 33.
So he's already giving you a sort of reflect
of the initial logical empiricist proposal.
The initial proposal is in,
I guess it's purest form in Schlick.
And so let's think for a moment about what Schlick does.
And then we can try to see how Ayer is differing from that.
And then as we'll see, he doesn't really quite like
what happens in the first edition.
So he's like, well, I can't be right.
But indeed, his criterion in this book comes down to
is it consequential, really?
Does it have empirical consequences?
So before we get to that, let's think about Schlick.
Schlick ends up saying this.
A non-analytic proposition
is meaningful
if and only if
it is empirically
verifiable.
And what does he mean by verifiable?
Well, really in the end his view comes down to this.
There are certain statements we make
about experience itself.
Those are directly linked to experience
and those are absolutely certain.
So there's a class of things here
known as protocol sentences.
Ayer calls these ostensive sentences.
And they are about immediate experience.
He thinks moreover
that those things are absolutely foundational.
So these are the foundation of knowledge.
Schlick is giving you a foundational epistemology.
He's saying, in the end,
how do we know various things?
We know them on the basis of other things by inference.
And then in the end, we come down to things
that we do not infer from other things,
but we just know directly.
So he's a foundationalist.
He has a sort of layer K view of knowledge,
if you want to think of it that way,
where inference is how we get from there to anything else.
And the inference can be deductive,
where the conclusions are guaranteed,
but it's also often inductive.
It's a matter of probabilities
and generalizations and so forth.
But the idea is this.
We know some things here.
He says, these things are absolutely certain.
And then we infer other things from them.
Now, on the basis of these things,
these inferences and so on,
we in effect get arguments
in favor of certain propositions.
And in the end, the meaningful is just what
can be verified in terms of these sentences.
So one way of looking at it is to say,
take the whole cake,
and that gives you the class of meaningful sentences.
The things that are either protocol sentences
or inferrable from protocol sentences
on the basis of inference.
Now, what do you mean by verifiable?
If you really mean conclusively established,
then you're really only allowing deductive inferences
out of this.
But if you weaken it a bit,
you can have the inductive as well.
So verifiable, we end up saying,
yeah, what does that mean exactly?
Really provable in the sense
that they couldn't be false,
given this that they're absolutely certain,
or are we allowing probabilities?
So that's one way of drawing this picture.
And that's the way that Schlick starts out drawing it.
That's sort of the official logical
positive is lying in the 20s.
Well, what are these protocols
sentences like?
What would be an example of something
that is about immediate experience?
You couldn't be wrong about that.
You're describing your own experience.
The wall is gray.
The wall is gray.
Okay.
Could you be wrong about that?
Yeah, yeah.
Yeah, actually, last time I said it was green.
You all disagree.
It still looks pretty nice to me,
but never mind that.
I've been known to fight with my wife
over colors like this.
Sometimes quite radically.
Yeah, we went and looked at that apartment
in the building that was Brown Brick.
He said, no, it was Yellow Brick.
No, it was Brown Brick.
Yellow Brick.
We went back to see it just to settle the argument.
And in the end, it had columns
of Brown and Yellow Brick.
So I was on the right looking at the Brown Brick.
She was on the left looking at the Yellow Brick.
We were both right.
Well, anyway, it's good for our beverage
that we were both right to settle that one
quickly and easily.
Now, this is something...
Could you be wrong about that?
The wall is gray.
Sorry, the wall is gray.
Yes.
Yeah, you could be wrong, right?
Now, how could you be wrong about that?
Well, go ahead.
Somebody could use some microscope
or, I don't know, some color,
something or other to prove
that it isn't or that you're colorblind,
or there are a million different ways
it could be the wrong thing, I guess.
Well, good, good.
You might be dividing up colors in non-standard ways.
You might be colorblind.
It might be there's some kind of strange lighting,
erotic illusion.
It could be as sort of like these walls,
that it's actually rather vague.
I think what color they are.
And so, you and I might divide the boundaries
of certain colors in slightly different ways
because we're in this vague boundary.
That's the question of when you call somebody bold
or when you call a pile of sand a heap.
You might end up thinking,
yeah, people draw those boundaries
in different places.
So, there are various reasons why you might think
in the end you might be wrong
or you might disagree with somebody else.
So, the walls are gray.
It's not a great example of a protocol sense.
Could we make it somehow more secure,
more tied to your immediate experience?
Yeah.
You could say, to me, the wall appears gray.
Or the wall has a color.
Well, that's true.
I could weaken my claim.
The wall has a color.
But now I'm in danger a little bit of,
well, am I in danger?
I guess the walls are all glass.
I wouldn't say they have a color.
So, that's not analytic.
The walls could be colorless.
I looked at a house once that was all glass.
I'd heard that, you know,
saying people in glass houses shouldn't throw stones.
And then I went house shopping
and it's like, wow, this is a glass house.
Not just the outside walls.
All the inside walls were glass.
So, you were in some bedroom
and it was just long glass.
It was all the way through the house.
It was pretty weird.
Were there two stories and you could see...
No, but that would have been really cool.
It was all one story.
Yeah, looking back,
maybe I should have bought it.
I mean, it was very strange,
but it was in Westlake
and it's probably worth a million dollars now.
Or maybe somebody threw stones.
Whatever.
Anyway,
yeah, so back...
The wall looks green to me now.
I am being appeared too greenly is what
actually
Robert Chisholm retreats to.
Why? Because if I say the wall
looks gray,
sorry, to me,
I'm actually
thinking that there's a wall there.
And I could be wrong about that.
But if I say I am being appeared too
grayly as I look at the wall,
you might think, how could I be wrong about that?
And so,
there's a series of,
you might say, retreats from something like
the wall is gray to the wall appears
gray to me. The wall appears gray to me now.
I am being appeared
to wally and gray
in the house.
In search of something
that really would be certain
and directly tied to a media experience.
Yeah.
I don't know if this really follows,
but there are certain things where
you can have an emotion
that you could be wrong about.
Like, you could say
I'm
I guess I'm sad might be bad.
I've had the situation where someone says
you're being a jerk, let's say.
And I say, no I'm not. But really
it's up to them sort of to decide
I'm being a jerk. So I'm wrong
maybe about that emotion I'm having.
But I'm sad
or something like that. That's something
that I would think is similar
to saying, to me
it appears gray or gray.
Alright, good. What about emotions
and feelings and things like that?
Could you be wrong that you are sad?
You say, I'm sad.
Or at least I think I'm sad.
Could you be wrong about that?
Or how about this? I'm in pain.
Could you be wrong about that?
I mean, you could be lying, of course.
But if you're sincerely saying I'm in pain,
could you think you're in pain without being in pain?
Yeah.
How?
Like, if that goes
sensing.
There's no getting those feelings though,
so I still think you're in pain without
actually being in pain.
Do you ever feel like that?
Yeah, yeah. For somebody who's lost
and they feel pain in the arm that isn't there.
Yeah.
Anyway, these discussions
go on for several decades about cases
like I am in pain,
I am sad, I am being appeared to
grayly, etc, etc.
of people trying to find things
that really fulfill this role
of protocol sentences.
Now in the end, Ayer ends up saying
there is no such thing. He thinks this sort of thing
can't work and when we get to Hemphill's
article we'll see some of the objections
raised against it, but his chief objection
here is that there's nothing like this.
So Ayer is going to be
saying, look, there are
no ostensive sentences
in the
sense of something
immediately tied to experience
that is absolutely certain.
He says there's nothing like that.
You can search for I'm sad, I'm in pain,
I'm being appeared to
grayly, there appears
to be a gray wall in front of me, etc.
All of those things he says in the end
are things that you could be wrong
with. And so he gives a little argument
that in the end there are no
ostensive sentences.
Now
let me see
where it is.
I was supposed to have put a
bookmark there. Wait, why can't
ostensive sentences be facts
like in Russell's
theory?
It's on page 91.
Oh, thank you. Why can't
they be facts?
Well, a fact is
something in the world, right? There is the fact
that, let's say, the wall
is gray. But here we're talking
about
not the thing in the world,
but something that would be a proposition,
something I could know.
And so you might say
Ayer is sharing
Russell's thought that in the end
it's a matter of sense data.
In fact, I don't have direct contact
with the wall. I don't have direct contact
with the color of the wall.
But I do have sort of direct access
to my own sense experiences.
And so Russell talks of sense data.
Here he tends to talk about sensations.
But
it's a similar kind of thing. What's
before my mind is what I seem to have
immediate access to. I mean, I thought we're
hypothesizing that there is a wall there.
And that this is not an hallucination.
So what I'm directly associated with
is actually
that sensation.
But then is there a proposition about the
fact or the sensation
that I can actually articulate that would be
certain? And it's at that point that Ayer
says no. I mean, he says, look,
I don't want to deny the sensation, or
to put it in your terms, I'm not denying the fact.
Of course, there's a fact. But
is there a proposition? Is there an assertion
I can make that is certain to be true?
And he says, no.
Now, why not
exactly?
Well, he's
basically, he says, yeah,
they really shlick in his followers,
maintain that these propositions, which we
may call extensive propositions, they
tend to call them protocol sentences, are
not mere hypotheses, but are
absolutely certain. For they're supposed to be purely
demonstrative in character, so incapable
of being refuted by any subsequent
experience. But they are, on this view,
the only empirical propositions which are
further. The rest
derive whatever validity they have from
these, as in this sort of layer,
they're all inferred from those.
But he says, wait, there is
no synthetic proposition which is not purely
extensive.
That can be logically indubitable.
That may be granted. What we can't
admit is that any synthetic proposition
can be purely extensive.
For, now
I think he really gives us two arguments.
For the notion of an extensive proposition
involved a contradiction in terms.
It implies that there could be a sentence which
consisted of purely demonstrative symbols
and was at the same time intelligible.
And this is not even a logical possibility.
So he's sort of thinking, what
he means by this purely demonstrative thing
and be like, oh, that looks
like this, or something like that.
But in the end, he says, that
doesn't really have any content.
I would just have to have pure demonstratives.
In fact, he acts as if it would really be just
that, that, that, or something.
Nothing could tie them together.
And even if we think, well, really
I'm talking about appearances here, right?
I'm a sensation. So I am
being appeared to
blankly.
Thisly, thatly.
In the end, I have to classify
them, right? You have to classify
the appearance to you as gray.
But look, if we could be
wrong about whether this is gray
or green, for example, either
due to vagueness or because of differences
in color perception or something else,
couldn't you be wrong about whether or not
the sensation you're having is
of green or of gray?
He ends up saying, of course, you're still classifying
that sensation, the moment you put it into
words beyond this or that.
And so, if I say, you know,
what's it like to look at a gray
wall? You say, well, it's like this.
That actually doesn't
help me at all.
You've got to say something like,
here's my experience. It's not just like
this. It's
an experience as of gray.
It's an experience as of a wall.
An experience as a pain.
And you're classifying this experience
when you say that. You could be wrong
about the classification.
But other people can check you on
that, whereas things that are like
in your mind,
so to speak,
I'm in pain.
I'm blank.
Let's say you don't have a phantom
limb or you don't have the phantom limb syndrome.
That can't be checked.
How can that be checked, really, by somebody else?
You know what I'm saying?
No, good.
Well, as I see it,
Ayer is giving us a couple of arguments
here, and one of them is this classification
argument. Really,
as soon as we put this into
words, we have to say something
beyond, oh, I'm being appeared to
thisly. And the moment
I go beyond that, I'm classifying
my experience, and I can be wrong about
the classification. Now, admittedly,
yeah, one way of putting this
is I have to check with other people.
Now, I can't check my own sensation
with other people, because I can't let you see
the wall as exactly I see it. You don't have to
somehow be inside my head to do that,
so that's impossible. So there's that sort of
problem. But there's also the problem
that I am taking classifications that I've learned
through our public language,
and I'm now using them to classify my own
inner experiences. And you're right,
nobody can check that. There's no guarantee
that my classification
is actually matching everybody else's.
So we've got a classification problem.
And that, you know,
I might later think, yeah, that really
wasn't pain. That was something else.
Now, how could that
be? Well, think again about the vagueness
problem. Occasionally,
suppose you're at the doctor's
office, and the doctor says,
so are you feeling pain when
I press here? And
you end up thinking, well,
kind of. You might say,
I'm feeling some
discomfort. I don't know if I'd call it
pain, right? I don't like your pressing
there, but it's not exactly pain. It's not like,
oh, it's fine.
And so in the end of my classifying that
correctly is pain. There is an
active classification involved. The other
argument he gives here
is really that, not only
are we classifying,
and in that way we have to go beyond
what's just immediately present,
but he ends up
saying, I am really making a certain
kind of hypothesis. I
am basically,
you might say always
inferring things using other
principles. I'm classifying using other
principles. So often this is known
as the Duhem argument
after the person who first thought
it up, which is that I always
infer things
from
others
using what Duhem refers to
as auxiliary
hypotheses.
So there are always other things
that I'm assuming, like my
sense organs are working correctly. Like my
own perceptions of my interstates are
working correctly. And I might end up
doubting those for some reason. So
we're out of time. I will just say that
Ayer shifts this
criterion around instead of thinking
aha, it's a matter of deriving things
from protocol sentences. He ends up saying
it's a matter of having empirical
consequences. So it
really is reverse the direction
and say, something really
empirical ought to follow.
There ought to be a prediction about further
inference.
