In any case, let's back up a little bit and try to understand what's going on in, on what there is and in this last section of order of knowledge.
We've looked at one criteria of ontological commitment and he puts it in a logistical approach to the ontological problem by saying that to be is to be a value of a variable.
Well, he says it more explicitly or at least maybe less dramatically, but nevertheless more intelligently.
But I think it's the same criteria in some of the way it works.
And he then says, well, I'm not telling you what there is.
I'm not trying to give you a theory of being of what there is directly.
I'm telling you what a theory says there is.
And so we might say, here's the idea.
A theory says there are a's if and only if it asserts there are a's.
Or in logical terms, there is an x subject a holds true of x.
Now, when you put it that way, it's almost trivial, right?
When does a theory tell you there are certain objects?
Well, when it says there are those objects.
And so when he puts it that way, it should be clear.
He's meaning to say something that's kind of obvious.
Okay, when does my theory imply the existence of sense data when it says there are sense data?
When does it imply the existence of unicorns when it says there are unicorns?
When does it imply the existence of attributes when it says there are attributes?
And so we look to things that we are willing to, well, quantify over in this sense, say there are such things.
Now, put that way, it sounds like a very obvious point, right?
But then the question is, well, okay, suppose that is the criterion.
Notice it splits the ontological question in two.
And that's something that isn't very obvious in the earlier work.
It's something brought out by this reformulation.
Because if we just say to be is to be a value of a variable, we think we're getting a theory of what there is, a theory of being.
But if we say it this way, we realize there are really two questions.
The first question is, okay, what does?
Well, actually, this is telling you what a theory says there is.
So why don't we start with a prior question?
It's really, look, what theory about the world should we adopt.
And then secondly, what does it say there is?
In other words, he's really telling us what a theory claims about reality.
What does a theory say there is in the world?
And so if we're asking what is there in the world, really trying to address the fundamental question of ontology,
we have to ask, well, first of all, what theory should we adopt?
And then secondly, all right, what does it say there is?
Now, let's look at that first question.
What theory should we adopt?
We're trying to describe the world, right?
Well, a project of metaphysics is in a way to talk about the structure of the world.
It's structure in the sense of what ultimately exists, how we talk about other things in terms of what ultimately exists,
how the mind relates to all of that.
All of that is, broadly speaking, metaphysics.
At the bottom, we've got this ontological question of what theory is.
Well, in thinking about the world in this way, what sort of theory should we adopt?
Where do we start in thinking about this?
There are really only two options in Quine's scheme.
Really maybe three, I guess I should say.
But what are options for this question of what theory we should adopt?
Well, we could adopt specific metaphysical theories, like non-helism and realism.
But in a sense, he's asking a question that's even prior to metaphysics,
prior to this question of what is real, like our attributes, universal, for, is real or not.
He's saying, look, I'm just trying to get a metaphysical theory of the world.
And to do that, I just need to start with some theory of the world.
I need to start with something that talks about the way the world is.
And forget philosophy for a moment.
It's not a question of starting with a philosophical theory.
It's a question of just what are we, when we describe the world, what are we doing?
He says science.
Yeah, okay, one option here is science.
And indeed, that's his preferred option.
He says, yeah, we start with our best scientific theory.
And then we ask what that scientific theory says there is.
Well, that's one option.
Say, yeah, look, when we're really about a project describing the world, we do science.
And so we think science describes the world.
And in his way of thinking about it, science is really, it's an old Aristotelian idea in a way.
Science is like a layer page.
So this picture of science he's working with, and it's a very common picture,
is to say the most fundamental science, the one on which all the others rest, is physics.
Physics, exactly.
So physics is the thing that ultimately tells us what there is in the world.
And then on top of physics, we build chemistry.
And then on top of chemistry, we build biology.
And on top of biology, we build psychology.
And then on top of psychology, we build all the rest of the social sciences,
things like economics, sociology, and so forth.
And so if you have that picture of science, you're going to say, well, all right, yes,
we talk about, for example, income trends and social groups and things like that.
But in the end, those come down to questions of psychology.
Those reduce to questions of biology, which in turn reduce to questions of chemistry,
which ultimately reduce to physics.
And so in the end, the way he talks about science, really,
it becomes a question of what his physics state is.
So as Quine's thinking about this question,
we really start broadly speaking with the language of science
and pretty quickly the language of physics.
I have a question about scientific language philosophers in general.
When you read someone like Stephen Hawking,
he explicitly admits that all these things he's talking about
don't necessarily really exist.
They're mathematical models.
When you're talking about Einstein radiation or something like that,
it's not like there's some entity there.
Just this ground state fluctuations are a model to describe a phenomenon.
How do these scientific language philosophers square their theories with that?
Great question.
When we look at science, notice it's doing something,
well, at the higher levels, it may just be much of the time anyway,
systematizing things that we already think are there.
But when we get down to these levels,
science is postulating a realm of hypothetical entities,
theoretical entities that we don't have any access to in observation.
Things like microparticles, things like fields of certain kinds,
or in string theory, strings,
maybe in theories of additional dimensions and things like that,
hyperspace.
And so in the end, we've got certain objects,
and indeed physics is quantifying over certain objects.
Well, what sort of objects?
And what do we say about those?
There are going to be entities here,
but now there are two attitudes you might have about them.
You might be a realist who says,
look, science says there are quarks, for example,
and that's our best scientific theory of the world.
It asserts that there are quarks,
so I have reason to believe there are quarks.
And so the realist says the real objects,
especially if you go to the path of flying here,
the real objects are just the objects postulated by science.
So in the end, what is there in the world?
Well, there are things like quarks and electromagnetic fields
and positrons and neutrons and so forth.
On the other hand, there's another attitude you might have
towards science, an instrumentalist attitude,
which says, wait a minute,
I'm postulating entities like quarks and fields and so on.
But do those things really exist?
I'm saying they're useful, calculated objects.
So one way of looking at it is the realist says,
look, these basic objects of science,
let's call them theoretical objects.
The theoretical objects exist,
and the scientific theory explains what it explains
if those things exist.
But if they don't exist, there's something weird going on.
You've got something that's really just a calculating device.
The instrumentalist says, well, yeah, that's all it is.
It is a calculated device.
And so the instrumentalist says, wait a minute,
this whole idea of answering science
is not going to give us the right answer.
What science does is hypothesize various things
that might be behind the curtain
to explain the appearances we have in the world.
But don't think those things being postulated
as being behind the curtain are the real things.
They're just ways of calculating
about the things we actually experience.
So the instrumentalist is going to say,
look, don't take physics or science in general
as the right way to do this.
It's not telling you what they're all about.
Yeah, it seems like the realist would run into
like immediate problems with no light.
Science says it's a particle and a wave,
and those things are mutually exclusive
if you take it in a realistic way.
You have to kind of view it as a mathematical,
as an instrumentalist view.
And I think most physicists I've read
seem to be more instrumentalists.
Right, lots of physicists are instrumentalists.
Partly because it's a way of avoiding carbon problems.
Like, are you saying that light is really a particle?
Or is it a wave?
Is it some kind of weird combination of the two?
Some people have introduced this sort of a waveical for it.
And the realist has to grapple with those questions
and says roughly after quantum chemistry,
yeah, this is what really is in the world.
You know what? The world is weird, man.
The world is unbelievably weird.
And indeed, the realist often says,
yes, physics is describing the way the world is.
Also, quantum mechanics is describing
what the possible is in the world.
It turns out it's weird.
It doesn't fit our ordinary comic words at all.
So it's very easy to go from this claim,
a theoretical object, so that the ones that really exist to say,
look, the world is weird.
And a lot of physicists want to say,
hmm, I don't know if the world is really that weird.
We've got a theory here that works really well.
But it might be.
And indeed, if we think it's just a calculating device,
does it have to give us a picture of what light really is?
It doesn't have to answer that question.
It can say in certain respects it's like a particle.
In certain other respects it's like a wave.
We've got the famous two-slit experiments,
and it's very hard to make sense of the intuitive terms.
But from this point of view,
good, we don't have to make sense of the intuitive terms.
It's a mathematical theory.
And it explains the appearances.
And the appearances are kind of strange and surprising.
But nevertheless, we don't take the object seriously.
Now, if we have this attitude,
we're not going to say science is the path to this.
And that's the theory, not the theory we're going to be interested in.
What will we be interested in?
I mean, if we're instrumentalists about the objects introduced
by science, hypothetically and theoretically,
then what are we taking as fundamental?
What we see.
What we see, yeah.
So science is one option.
But there are other options.
One option would be, well, experience.
The objects of immediate experience.
So we've seen some philosophers who do that.
Okay, Russell, for example, talking about sense data.
We're actually carving in the logical structure of the world
and arguing that you can reduce all talk of physical objects
to objects of immediate sensation, something like sense data.
What's right before your senses at any given moment?
He also argues in that book, you can do it the other way around.
You can reduce talk of sense data to talk of physical objects.
And then he says, which should we take as primary?
Should we really think what there is in the world are physical objects?
Or should we think, no, it's a matter of the contents of immediate experience.
It's sensations.
And he ends up saying, you can do it either way, which is a little surprising.
But he says, what's directly before the mind,
and so what's epistemologically prior, are the sensations.
So he favors actually going in the direction of the sensations.
But he admits it goes both ways.
And part of what's in the background, in object decision,
that last section of word and object, is that Klein assumes you know Karnap.
And Klein is basically saying, yes, you can go in either direction.
But I favor, he says, going in the direction of taking physical objects as primary.
But not ordinary physical objects like tables and chairs,
necessarily in the end, the objects hypothesized by science.
But he's aware that Karnap and Russell and others would say,
no, no, no, go in this more instrumentalist direction.
And that's going to lead me to say it's experience that's the fundamental
theory that I don't worry about.
And my reports of sensations.
And he says, we could do it that way.
But he thinks that our theory of objects in the world is just so well confirmed
and so explanatory.
Then he says, look, I know how to get through a day without referring to my own sensations.
I don't know how to get through a day without referring to people and tables
and chairs and other ordinary objects I've experienced.
And so he ends up saying, I'd much rather trust talk of objects
than talk of sensations.
But there's yet another option.
What other option could there be?
When you talk about the world, sometimes you do science.
Sometimes you might be talking about your own experiences.
But I say, tell me about this room.
Do you immediately start saying, well, all right, let's introduce the wave function.
Our observations?
Well, you could be talking about our observations.
I mean, you could say, ah, tell me about the room.
Well, I'm sensing grayly and greenly and clockly and camera-ly and people-ly.
But you probably don't, right?
What do you?
Yeah, perceptible holes.
Yeah, exactly.
In other words, the objects of ordinary perception, right?
I look around saying, oh, what's in the room?
Sure, I'll describe the room for you.
It's got tile on the floor and a bunch of desks and there are people in the desks
and it's got clock at the back and blackboards all around and so forth and so on.
And I tell you about the ordinary objects of experience.
And so you might say, well, look, one place to look is science.
One place to look is the contents of experience in the sense of these sensations themselves.
But another place to look is just our everyday language, right?
So we can say, just look at natural language and our everyday uses of it.
Because after all, we ordinarily confront the world,
not just by talking about our own sensations, not by doing science,
but just by talking about stuff.
Go to lunch with somebody after class.
But what are you going to talk about?
I mean, maybe you're going to talk about physics.
Except you said, whoa, check out that electron.
Maybe you're going to talk about your own sensations.
I mean, I suppose that's actually plausible in certain settings.
People talk about their feelings and all that.
But often, you're not talking about your feelings or other sensations.
You're not talking about physics.
You're talking about things and people around you.
And so that might be a place to start.
Now, the reason I mentioned that is that a lot of clients' effort in Word and Object
is to actually say, yeah, but don't worry about that.
We can explain the kinds of things we talk about there.
And if pushed to the wall, he ends up saying,
well, anyway, they're not part of science, so I don't have to worry about them.
But he doesn't start there.
If he really started there, he'd just say, here's the language of physics.
And here's what it's telling us.
After that, he talks about attributes and propositions and facts and miles and glids
and all these other things.
And why is he doing that?
Because we talk about the natural language.
And he feels compelled to say something about what we really have to be committed to.
Because he doesn't want to say that much of what we say is just false.
I say, well, you know, I didn't see the light.
There was this glint of a mirror in a neighboring car.
And we don't want to be lying.
The officer might not believe you, but the officer isn't going to say,
yeah, listen, I've written word and object.
There are no such things as glints.
He's always saying it's false.
It's going to be in the very subset of that kind of talk.
OK, so those are the options that are in front of us.
And then why, now, he doesn't really, although that's his ultimate position,
he doesn't just jump there.
He tries to actually say, look, most of the time,
we don't have to worry about the things that natural language introduces
in addition to the language of science.
So what does science really commit us to in his view?
Two things again, right?
Well, two very broad categories of things.
What are they?
What does science talk about?
See, be brave.
Good, physical objects.
Exactly.
Yeah, I'm not looking for something deep like, oh, man, I forgot my hyperspace theory.
Yeah, physical objects.
OK, good.
So, yes, it talks about physical objects.
And what else does it use in talking about physical objects?
Abstract objects.
Abstract objects, exactly.
It introduces specifically mathematics.
And in the end, what does mathematics commit us to?
Mathematics?
Well, you might say all sorts of things, right?
Mathematical facts, numbers, functions, relations,
spaces, metric spaces, product spaces, et cetera.
You can give all those sorts of answers.
Groups, rings, fields, matrices.
Well, he just says it all comes down to what?
One logical set.
Exactly.
It comes down to a theory of classes to use Russell's language
or in more modern language sets.
Actually, there are some set theories that distinguish sets from classes.
But for the moment, let's not worry about that.
So, in the end, we can build all of mathematics from that.
Now, in his early work, he is a novelist.
He thinks he'd love to get rid of this.
And just have physical objects.
That's the things that are there in the world.
But he can't figure out how to do it.
In 1948, he is a novelist.
And in fact, he publishes a paper with Nelson Goodman
called Steps Toward a Constructive Nominalism.
And it starts with a ringing declaration of nominalism
that there are no abstract objects.
And indeed, throughout much of his work,
he's trying to get rid of abstract objects like propositions
and attributes and various other things.
But in the end, he says, look,
I don't know how to do without mathematics in science.
And mathematics seems to commit me to classes.
And I don't know how to get rid of it.
Now, Russell, in 1908, was convinced that classes were just
a logical fiction that he could get rid of them.
That's part of the project of Principia Mathematica.
But in the end, he couldn't do it.
Why does it turn out to be hard?
Why can't you just say, ah, come on.
Classes of objects, sets of objects.
We're just talking about the objects.
I could say, yes, consider the set of people in this room.
You might think, I'm just talking about the people in the room, right?
It's not like how many things are in the room.
Oh, there are these people.
And then, oh, I forgot the set of people in the room, too.
And so there's a powerful intuition that, look,
sets are just ways of talking about the things in them.
And Frege and Russell start with that idea.
But it turns out to be harder to make sense of that than you might think.
Here's why.
We could say, all right, suppose we're talking about the set of A's.
We think there are such things, maybe.
And so I want to talk about the set of all the X's such that A is true of X.
You might think, look, it's very easy to explain my talk that way.
What does it mean to talk about the set of objects that are A's?
This is just the set of A's, right?
Well, I've introduced that term.
And it turns out to be a very useful thing to do in math and in various other contexts.
What could I mean by that?
Well, you might think, oh, it's very easy.
I just have to worry about elementhood.
In fact, in the end, in mathematics, all I really need is this one symbol,
in addition to logic, is a member of.
And so you might think, I can explain this very easily.
Y is a member of this set of X's such that A of X if and only if A holds true of Y.
So let's say I'm talking about the set of people in the room.
Y belongs to the set of people in the room if and only if Y is a person in the room.
Y belongs to the set of green things if and only if Y is green.
Okay?
Y belongs to the set of novelists if and only if Y is a novelist, et cetera.
And so you might think, great, here I'm talking about sets, right?
I seem to be committed to sets.
But over here, I'm not.
I'm just talking about the Y's, whatever they are.
And I'm not talking about sets anymore.
And so if I could make that work, I could just say, see,
look, classes are just logical fictions.
They're just constructions out of the objects they're classes of.
And so actually, I could just get by with the physical objects.
Well, this is in fact the way we explain that notation.
And so can't we be happy and say, oh, there it is.
We can get rid of this talk of classes.
Silly quine.
We don't need.
We don't need those stinking classes.
No fans of the treasure of the Sierra Madre here.
Well, it was on TV the other night.
Forgive me.
Anyway, now now I feel we need to explain this.
These banditos come up and Humphrey Bogart and the others are, you know,
trying to fight them off.
And they claim to be federales.
And, you know, they don't believe them.
And Humphrey Bogart says, if you're federales, show me your badges.
They said, badges?
We don't need those stinking badges.
I think the Mel Brooks version of that are blazing saddles.
Oh.
Yeah.
All right.
Explain how that goes.
Yeah.
Now they're recruiting all the bandits to raid the town.
And the banditos come up and they're like, all right, you know,
here are your badges.
And they laugh at you.
We don't need those stinking badges.
Very good.
So yes, you have the normalist's sets.
The normalist's sets.
I don't need those stinking sets.
And now here's the way to get rid of them.
But what's wrong with this?
Why does it fail?
Oh, come on.
Yeah.
This is called Russell's Paradox.
It devastated poor Frank.
Frank was all excited about his theory.
Here it is.
And then Russell writes him like a two page letter in which he says,
oh, you know, wonderful work.
There's one problem.
It's all inconsistent.
And here's the problem.
Consider the class of all classes that are not members themselves.
So in other words, just take AX as X is not a member of X.
Then what happens?
Oh, breaks my heart.
Because we end up saying, great.
Y belongs to the set of all X, such that X is not a member of X,
given only if, now what?
A is true of Y, so Y is not a member of Y.
Y belongs to the set of sets that are not members themselves,
if and only if Y is a member of itself, right?
But now, wait a minute.
We said, what about that set itself?
OK.
Does that set belong to itself or not?
It's a paradox.
Because now we plug that set in.
And so we can actually, let me give that set a name.
It'll make it easier to see what's going on.
Let's call this set just, well, R for Russell's set.
Then we can say, OK, Y belongs to R, if and only if Y doesn't belong to Y.
But now, plug in R for Y.
Ask, does that set belong to itself or not?
And then we say, well, R belongs to R if and only if, oh yeah,
R doesn't belong to R.
And that's pretty bad.
That's just not pretty bad.
It's really bad.
And so it turns out this simple way of doing things,
which now is called naive set theory, doesn't work out.
So what do we do?
Well, there are various ways of trying to respond to this paradox.
And they were really the chief obsession of mathematical logicians
for the first several decades of the 20th century.
Russell discovered this and published it in 1902.
I think the letter to Frager was 1902.
He published the result in 1903.
And right away, people realized this is a fundamental problem
in the foundations of mathematics.
To explain why, I have to go back a little bit.
I won't say much about this.
But the calculus had been developed by Newton and by Leibniz in the 17th century.
It turned out to be immensely useful in science.
We use the calculus in all sorts of ways.
In many, many different branches of science,
but definitely in physics.
And it turned out that it talked about infinitesimal quantities.
If you think about the definition of a derivative,
it's really, well, now we do it in terms of limits.
But then it was just done as really something that came to zero over zero.
And zero over zero doesn't make any sense.
And so it was kind of like, ah, yes, f y minus f x over y minus x,
as we would now say, as y approaches x.
But then we think, well, wait a minute.
In the end, that is just zero over zero.
What do we do?
Leibniz and Newton talked about infinitesimal quantities.
We'll divide this one infinitesimal quantity by this other infinitesimal quantity.
What do you mean infinitesimal quantity?
Now, Abraham Robinson did find a way in the later 20th century
to make sense of that talk.
But throughout the 19th century, people realized what we're using the calculus,
but it's all based on kind of something unintelligible
that we don't really understand.
And in fact, certain contradictions began emerging in the foundations of the calculus.
So people thought it was very important to try and construct it on a rigorous foundation.
And Koshy, Dedekind and a variety of other people throughout the 19th century did that.
The great achievement, in a way, of 19th century mathematics
was the regularization of mathematics and setting it on a firm foundation
developing theories of limits, of infinite sequences, of convergence, and so on.
And so all of that was a great achievement.
And Frege was basically saying, and so you can do it all with classes,
but oh, there's an inconsistency in the way you've been thinking about this.
So it was as if people jumped out of the frying pan into the fire.
They had solved the problems in the foundations of the calculus
by using set theory and then realized, oh, crap.
Set theory as we've been using it is inconsistent.
What do we do?
Well, they addressed this in a variety of ways.
Russell developed the theory of types, talking about objects and then classes of objects
and classes of classes of objects and classes of classes of classes of objects and so on.
And that's one way of approaching it.
Frege declined himself to develop something called new foundations
that tried to prevent any circularities and thought the problem was really the
x belonging to or not belonging to x, ruling such things out as illegitimate.
The most standard way of doing this is Zermelo-Frankl set theory.
These days called ZFC.
Zermelo, Frankl, and then the axiom of choice.
C isn't a person, but an additional axiom.
And the reason I mention it is not only is it the way that mathematics is now
standardly done, but it replaces this one principle with a bunch of other principles.
It restricts this to say you can only do this within a certain background set.
So you can define a new set inside another set, but not just out of thin air.
It says pairs of things.
You can basically, if you have two objects, x and y, you can have the pair set x, y.
You can take the power set of a set, the set of all the subsets and so on.
All of these are ways of building sets out of other sets.
But there's one axiom that's scary.
There is an axiom called the axiom of infinity.
And what it essentially says is there is an infinite set.
Now, why is that scary?
Well, because it just makes that bold claim.
It just says there is such a thing.
And there's no way to get rid of that.
It's foundational in the theory.
And what is a set?
What is this infinite set?
Well, the way it's usually done, it turns out it's an all set together with a set containing an all set
and the set containing that, and the set containing that.
It's the set containing all those things.
And it's like, wait, I'm just coming out and saying that.
That's a pretty frightening thing to say.
But however you do it, what you're really claiming is that.
And now you can see, wait a minute, okay, the math part.
That just commits me to the claim there is an infinite set, the way that's now done.
And there's no way to get rid of that.
In fact, if I try to replace that with some physical object, what could it possibly be?
It would have to be an infinite object.
And it would have to contain infinitely many other objects.
You could maybe guess at what Frege thought near the end of his life about this.
And actually, what I tried to do in my dissertation, which was to say,
what could a physical object that's infinite
contain infinitely many other physical objects be?
Be a region of space time.
And so in the end, maybe,
Frege thought we could reduce set theory to geometry
and think of it as a theory of spatiotemporal regions.
But that seems like the only hope.
In any event, it looks like math really does commit us to abstract objects.
It commits us to at least one infinite set.
There's no obvious way of getting rid of that in favor of just talking about physical objects.
So anyway, this whole story has been why Klein transformed from anomalous to a flatness.
Because, Klein said in the end, yes, physics commits me to all this,
and I don't see how to get rid of it.
Yeah?
How could a region be infinite?
Well, think of all the points inside that region.
Well, it's not a closed curve.
Think of the points inside that region.
There would be uncouplingly many points.
But is that infinite?
Oh, yeah.
Yeah.
But that assumes the continuity of space time for one thing.
One of the great reasons I sort of gave up on this is not so much technically that I couldn't do it.
It's that, first of all, the structure of space time didn't seem to be necessary
in the way that mathematical truths are necessary.
It feels as if the actual structure of space time is something that's contingent.
Right?
Is it Euclidean?
Is it non-Euclidean?
What's the curvature of space?
Is it discreet, ultimately, or continuous?
It feels like those questions could go either way, right?
You want to say, all right, kids, one plus one is two.
Provided that space time is continuous, you know, the curvature of space is blah, blah, blah.
So it's like, no, that's crazy.
So it introduces a contingency, which is part of what bothered me about it.
But the other thing that bothered me about it is that I see how to actually make sense
of the idea of an uncountable infinity.
But actually, so I've got something the size of the real numbers there.
But wait a minute, what I need are higher levels of infinity.
How do I get the idea of, like, now, the cardinality of the power set of that,
of all the subsets of this?
It looks like, wait a minute, the power set of all the subsets of that region is just the region, right?
So it's not clear how you ever get above the cardinality of the real numbers.
And I didn't know how to solve that problem either.
And I want more than the real numbers.
I want to be able to talk about functions on the real numbers,
which requires me to talk about sets of real numbers.
And so it requires something fancier than regions of spacetime.
And so then I had various tricks, technically.
But in the end, I thought philosophically, it made no sense.
So in any event, that's why I, too, stopped being a novelist at a little confession time.
But anyway, Kwan didn't really take that detour.
He just said, yeah, it seems to me what we've learned from the paradoxes.
And the way of reformulating mathematics and life of paradoxes is you can't get rid of a commitment to abstract objects.
You end up having to commit yourself to sets.
Now, I see that excited a few of you and bored to tears the rest of you.
So let's go back to the objects that might be introduced, not by science, but by, for example, natural language.
So he's worried about these things.
And in the end, he says, yes, these things we have to be committed to before to do science.
So he thinks those really do answer the question, what is there?
What is there in the end of the physical objects as described by physics and sets?
But now, what else might we worry about?
Well, one thing that he's concerned about is actual use, right?
In other words, proverbs, or more broadly, relations, et cetera.
Do we have to think that those things exist?
Well, last time we looked at some examples, like the clock has rattles.
We could existentially quantify it, so the clock has something.
Remember that inference?
Actually, I think we talked about pebbles, which is an example of what there is.
What should we do about that?
Doesn't it follow that, therefore, the clock has something?
In which case, we're committed to attributes.
If you're already committed to abstract objects, why just committing to attributes as abstract objects extend your anthropology?
That's a great question.
You might think, look, there are places to man the barricades philosophically, and places not.
You might think, indeed, the nominalists think, typically, abstract objects are the place to do it.
Universals.
By the way, Kwan conflates those two issues.
There really are separate issues.
The abstract concrete distinction and the universal particular distinction are not the same distinction.
He recognizes that in word and object.
He says, oh, yeah, there are these abstract particulars like the equator.
Whatever.
Let's go on to typical cases.
But anyway, that aside, you might think, yeah, look, abstract and concrete, that's a big place to draw the fighting line.
After all, concrete objects are ones I can come into contact with.
Maybe I can experience them.
At any rate, I can come into some kind of causal contact with them, even some micro-particle, but I can never directly experience.
Causally interacts with me, and I can have a theory of that causal interaction.
So concrete objects, I'm happy to admit into my ontology because I'm interacting with them all the time.
And I explain how, therefore, I could know about them.
But an abstract object isn't the kind of thing I can causally interact with.
It's not just that I can't experience it.
I don't see roundness in the way that I see the clock, for example.
But also, and I don't see the number three, for example, I might see three birds on a wire.
And so you might think, yeah, look, I don't experience these.
I don't have causal contact with them, and so this is a place to fight.
But once I've lost that fight, once I have to recognize sense, you might say,
now, why not just, you know, in for a penny, in for a pound?
I've already got sense.
I've already made that purchase.
Why don't I go ahead and buy the full package and get HBO and Cinemax 2 as a word?
You know, might as well get attributes.
It might as well sign on for, you know, propositions and facts and all the rest of it.
Because after all, you know, they're a small additional cost.
Not true in the case of movie packages.
But you might think it is true.
Here, philosophical, why not?
Now, I think that's a great question.
Why does Quine spend a lot of time worrying about these?
Two parts to the question, really.
If science is what tells us what there is,
who cares what we say in natural language?
And second part of the question is, once you've, in effect, admitted these,
now, why should it matter to you whether there are additional kinds of abstract objects,
like attributes and relations and propositions and meanings and so on?
Because they're different, right?
They are different.
Now, how are they different?
Why does he really resist them?
Because we love the dog.
Okay, good.
Like, doghood is completely different from saying that this is a dog,
an individual dog, and then you have another individual dog, right?
Right.
Okay, good.
Part of it is that he's looking for something that's explanatory.
And he says, are physical explanations involve physical objects?
They involve mathematics.
But I don't think this explains anything, okay?
In other words, he said, and in part is a willingness to say,
I'm happy to recognize ontological commitments where something is introduced
to explain the experiences I have, to explain the appearances, to explain the world.
But I don't think introducing a form like roundness does any explaining at all.
You say, aha, the clock is round.
Why is the clock round?
Answer is whether it has roundness.
Do I learn anything from that?
Does it explain anything?
I think his answer is no.
And so the way he sees it, it's like this.
I've got two ways of putting things.
I can say the clock is round, or I can say the clock has roundness.
And now he's saying, which one of those is explanatory prime?
Does the clock have roundness because it's round?
Or is the clock round because it has roundness?
What should I say?
Which of those is more fundamental?
Which gives me an explanation.
The clock is round.
Yeah, exactly.
He says, look, the clock is round.
That's the thing that explains this other thing, right?
Why do I say it has roundness because it's round?
That's the fundamental thing.
And saying it has roundness doesn't explain anything at all.
In fact, there's a sort of paradox you can keep going.
Why does it have roundness?
Because it has the property of having roundness.
Or it and roundness are in the participation margin.
And so if you start making this move,
this is something called the Bradley Regress.
You might worry it keeps going.
And a lot of novelists have been motivated
by that Bradley Regress thinking,
I don't know where it stops, OK?
If the clock is round, something like rc is explained
by c having r-ness, then it seems like now
I've got the relation of having, linking c and roundness.
And then you might say, oh, now I've got some other special
relation linking having and c and roundness.
And well, you can see I can just keep doing this forever.
But even if you say, well, maybe I can stop this regress here,
it's not clear what that's accomplished.
So I think that's part of his reason.
He thinks this isn't doing any explaining.
It's really derivative.
And there are other reasons, too.
How do I know how to talk about roundness?
It's epistemologically by virtue of interacting with round things.
So the explanatory priority of this
is mirrored by its epistemic priority.
I encounter a clock, and I see that it's round.
I don't encounter roundness in the same way.
It seems indirect by virtue of encountering round things.
And so you might say, I say this after learning
the talk of properties and attributes and so on,
because I think that's not the other way around.
The little baby doesn't start speaking as a Platonist.
Oh, Mama exemplified here.
But instead talks about Mama, OK?
And we'll learn to say, you know, green or something.
And so anyway, he's motivated in part by that.
Well, he thinks we can get rid of talk of meanings,
of propositions of attributes.
And here's one way to do it, right?
The clock has roundness.
Oh, very easy.
Just translate that into the clock is round.
Now, what about this?
Roundness is an attribute.
How do we get rid of that?
After all, roundness in that sort of having roundness position,
that's easy to replace with a predicate.
But here we've got a subject position.
If Klein's right, we can rephrase all of these things.
And notice in the logic decision chapter,
he really, for that matter, on what there is,
he gives you a few examples,
but he doesn't give you any programmatic way of doing this.
So we've got to be creative here.
It's not like he tells us how to do most of this stuff.
He just gives us a couple of examples and says, see?
But now here, what could we do?
Yeah.
Is this maybe a good example of you turning roundness into a verb?
Like roundness is kind of doing a certain work,
like theoretically, and trying to explain it.
Yes.
Yes.
That's true.
And so one way to do it would be to say,
well, here our strategy was to replace talk of roundness
with talk of round things.
So maybe we could say round things.
Ooh, we don't want to say have an attribute.
We could say round things are blank, for some blank.
Or another way to do it.
What Karnap does, actually, in the logical syntax of language,
is to go into what he calls the formal mode
by what Quine later calls semantic ascent.
So this is just saying round is an adjective.
Which is a little weird,
because there we replace it with round things,
and here we replace it with round.
But that might be less strange if we think here we're really saying,
well, the word round is true of a talk.
Well, in the closing moment here,
let me just say something about how he gets rid of meanings.
Because this ends up being a major strategy for Quine.
How do we get rid of meanings?
Instead of talking about the meaning of a sentence,
he says we can just replace that with, first of all,
the talk of a sentence being meaningful.
So first of all, you draw a distinction between the meaningful
and the insignificant, the meaningless, I suppose.
That's one way.
But the other thing we need talk of meanings for
is to say when things have the same meaning.
And so it's that.
And then we have identity, basically,
which is a matter here of saying when things have the same meaning,
we can talk about synonymy.
And so in general, this becomes his strategy.
We say, first there's the existence question,
whether something has a meaning or not.
And secondly, the identity question,
when does this have the same meaning as that?
And he's going to do that with all sorts of things, propositions.
It'll just be when does something express a proposition?
And then when does it express the same proposition?
And so it will not be essentially equivalent to talking about meanings.
And in the end, all we have to do is talk about
significant or insignificant sentences,
and then sentences meaning the same as other sentences.
So that's the general recipe he's going to use
for a lot of these abstract objects.
Just introduce a way of talking about the existence of such a thing,
and then what it is, that's the same one of those,
and there's no need any longer to talk about the propositions
or the facts or the attributes of the meanings.
