Thank you so much for coming, Monon.
I put out a call on math Twitter and that's how we have interacted with each other in the past.
Monon comes up with so many interesting things and math comics and interesting blog posts that I've been following him for quite a time now.
But he was willing to come on and talk about kind of computational approach to derivatives.
So would you be willing to introduce yourselves?
Yeah, my students.
Yeah, yeah. Hello.
My name is Monon Shah.
I, as John mentioned, I mean, how we know each other is through math Twitter and it's been a fun way to meet other mathematicians.
I, outside of, you know, my blog and general piano and random drawings I may do, I do work in the industry as a mathematician.
I had up an analytics team and in the past I've run data science teams and have been in various industries from gaming and gambling to video ad tech to just video technology.
And we're here to talk about derivatives.
Excellent. And so we should be on Twitter, some code that he whipped up and he's going to show that to us now.
Cool. All right, we're on a separate screen for that.
So the bulk of my job, my day job, if you would, often involves writing code and computing things.
So that's kind of outside of that. So we do have to use our mathematics and the calculus that we learn in various ways, but often in a computational way.
So that what you're seeing here is what's called a Python notebook.
So it's in, it's in something called Jupiter, and that's just a good visual aid for you to run Python code, sort of seamlessly in real time, and you can sort of interact with it as much as possible.
And on the various libraries you have, you have installed the interactions can can be more dynamic or more static but you can still sort of play with your variables if you would.
Yeah, and if my students keep on with math.
They'll definitely see this in some of their courses as as it comes. They use Sage notebooks and Google collab to do to.
Yeah.
Or if they're kind of going into computer science, we have mathematics courses specifically to support that discrete structures and things like that.
Yeah, it's pretty much a hiring requirement for anyone at this point. If they're looking to start analyst roles or data science roles in industry that have at least a background in our Python.
Yeah.
Okay, so what is this program there.
All right, so here what I'd set up for us was just a Python notebook that will help us compute derivatives, numerically, and we can take a look at what some of the pitfalls are with numerical computation but the idea here is,
there's sort of like a calculus approach to computing derivatives and, you know, that is the way the course progress is in a in a theoretical way.
But that theory is based on how, how, how we take our, our, our slopes from from say like an algebra class where, you know, you had that line that equation of a line y equals mx plus B, and your M was your slope.
And when, when you had just a line y equals mx plus B, you could always read off that slope as a number.
But here what, what we want to do is when we have functions that are not just simple lines, but maybe they're, they have some curves in them or they have some change in, in, in direction.
We still are interested in, in slope at various points on that curve. And the idea here is, how would we find those, how would we find that slope on that curve, as we traverse over the curve.
So what we have here, you know, these first two lines basically are importing a bunch of libraries that I might need.
And this function here is, is just a way for me to call a function that I would want to write so in this particular case I wrote function of x and it would just give me back x cubed if I wanted to, and to demonstrate kind of how that works is, if I did function of three, we should get 27.
So function of 123. If you can do that in your head that's great, but you'll get something like this.
My mental computation.
And the nice thing about Python is, we can go a little nuts if we wanted to.
And, and kind of get these big numbers, but.
But anyway, that's, that's the point of this function here. Now, our next function is is dydx.
John, feel free to stop me whenever it makes sense. But what we're trying to do is basically compute slopes at different points on a curve of our choosing.
And the way this function works here is, you have this value f, which is whatever function we want to send in.
And that function could be my x cubed function, it could be sine of x, it could be just plain old x.
We want to know how, how much we should increment the function by, and we want to know over what interval we're interested in looking at the function.
Okay, so you're, so this is just working it's not working globally.
Right, we're kind of picking a range we want it to work on.
And for the step size, you're thinking about like, when we write these slope formulas, that's like the difference in extra values.
Yeah, yeah, so the way this will work is, if we just read through the code, we'll start at the left endpoint of the interval.
And we're going to continue to step forward in the interval until we have exceeded the right endpoint of the interval right so what this is saying is, as a simple example if my interval were 01 s begins at zero.
If my step sizes were 0.25, it would say, well, the first point in my interval is zero, the next point in my interval is going to be zero plus 0.25, and then 0.25 plus 0.25 then 0.5 plus 0.25 and then 0.75 plus 0.25.
Put it in as many of those step sizes as possible into the interval that you have chosen. And then, from there, all we do is compute our depending on what vocabulary we might have come across in the past.
This is our slope right it's the change in why, which is these two, this difference, divided by the change in X, and since the change in X is always this constant step size.
That's your slope, wherever you move across X.
So this is an analogous to kind of that f of X plus H minus f of X over.
Yes, that that would have seen in their calculus book.
Yeah, that's right. That's right. So this part over here is just your f of X part. And then this is your f of X plus H part.
So what this function then does is, it returns back to me, the user, all the X's that I used, and all the slopes that I'm getting at the various X points.
Okay, so it's really, it's like a collection for every point in samples you're getting the slope of one of these secants and it's returning to you, kind of a list of slopes.
Yeah, so we can see run here. And so I can pass in, let's just say a very simple function like X squared.
And let's just say that I wanted to move in quarter style size increments over the interval zero to four.
And so what it will give back to me, and I will put this into two variables, X's and we'll call these slopes.
And so now we'll take a look at what our X's are. So our X's basically are the zero, the quarter, the half, three quarters, so on and so forth.
And we'll see what our slopes are.
So the slopes here. And this is sort of the thing that we can do by hand, just to verify if we wanted to, where this slope here of a quarter is basically saying, Okay, well, I was at f of zero.
And my delta H. So if we think about our formula, right, it might be easier to simply see this as our derivative formula, right, we can do f of X plus H minus f of X divided by H.
Right, that's our without the limits, we haven't talked about limits. So this is just
So if you if we take a look at where this 0.25 comes from. Well, that should be a matter of my doubt my age here is 0.25 everywhere I went. So the first thing I'm going to do is I'm going to say, Well,
I've got X plus a quarter squared minus X squared. And then all of this is divided by H.
And so if I set my X to be equal zero to zero, this first point here, and I set my H to equal the zero to 0.25.
We haven't done this so we'll see if all the conditions are correct.
We get 0.25 very nice. And then what we can do is we can just change where our starting location was so let's just say that our starting location is this half.
So if the starting location is a half, then what I'm going to have here is 0.75 squared minus 0.5 squared but still divided by 0.25. And here, I get my one and a quarter.
It's nice, even though you put in a function like x squared so it's this parabola.
The slopes have this, you know, really pleasing pattern they're going up by five tenths every time right from 0.25 to 0.75 to right so they're, they're increasing linearly.
Yeah, that's right.
And I can just do one more thing just to make sure that let's see.
So what we'll do here is we'll do a simple plot of my exes against my slopes, just to see what that looks like to your point right like, if these are always moving up by 0.5 that shows up right here in our function.
So that is a graph because at every, so at every x we're associating a number. Really, we made a new function.
That's right. Yeah. Yeah, we basically said that our, our initial function x squared wherever it was.
When, when we were looking at this type of difference divided by this age, and we did it everywhere along its graph, we find, interestingly, a very simple and pleasing and easy to understand function.
Yeah, yeah. Excellent. So, so what would you want to play with next right so you started out with a pretty simple function. Yeah, so we started with a simple one. Now, what I would do want to do is, I'm going to go ahead and, and also just put a little plug in for having all of this stuff done in one step.
Right, so now that we've seen like how this mechanically works step by step, we'll just skip ahead to a general way of looking at this where what I do here is I name my function that I'm that my function of interest so what function would you like John about that.
So x times cosine of x. All right, x times cosine of x. So there's x times cosine of x and then for display purposes, we'll, we'll just write that guy. Okay. And maybe we can go over what the full period of cosine.
Sure.
From zero to two pi.
Or maybe four pi could we do kind of.
Yeah.
The interval zero to four pi. So that'll give us to, or maybe, well, who knows, it's x times cosine.
It's going to look a little bit different. And so what we're going to do is, you know, to make this look smooth and nice, we have to actually sample this interval in enough spots, just to show what the function looks like.
But we're going to, you know, the way we did it earlier here was we picked us a fixed step size of a quarter.
And what I do want to show us is what happens when how much this derivative or this difference that we're talking about this difference quotient that we're talking about depends and what it looks like when we change our step size.
And it's not just a quarter, but it could be a varying length. So I chose step sizes of two units, a unit of one, a half, a 10th, and then 10 to the negative fifth.
Excellent. So for me, that feels like it really duplicates kind of the thought process of Newton and Leibniz.
Yeah, kind of going from these different quotients that people have been computing for hundreds of years to this their imagination of the kind of this infinite test model.
That's right. Yeah, so we can make that that delta H smaller and smaller and smaller. And so here what we'll do is, we're just going to run this everything else after this part is just plotting.
And you'll notice that I am calling my function dy dx. That's the function that we made up earlier, where it will take in x times cosine of x, it'll take in the step sizes that we chose, and then it'll take in the interval that we decided on.
Excellent. And here we go, let's take a look and see what happens to do to do. All right.
So, we've got a bunch of things and should I zoom in a little bit.
Maybe see, it gets a little finicky with the zoom. All right.
So what the heck are we looking at.
Yeah, so that initial step size.
It looks almost like it just kind of a piecewise linear.
Yeah, yeah. So that's this orange, right? It's, it's, in some sense, it's poor sampling, if we were thinking in terms of this derivative that we haven't yet talked about.
But in another sense, it's actually, it's, there's nothing wrong with it. It is, it is our secant line. It is telling me that x times cosine of x from zero to two kind of changes like this orange line here.
Fairly flat.
And then from two to four.
Well, it's saying that just because of the way it got sampled.
It's changing like this and then there's another change like that.
This is positive. Right. So, and then, or this is increasing and then it goes to positive and this is decreasing and goes to negative eventually.
Yeah, that's actually a little surprising you would have thought.
Yeah, yeah. So thinking about where the zero line is, we can kind of see where it's crossing over. Yeah.
Yeah. And I mean, part of this is just, just an issue with sampling. And also maybe just the fact that these are fairly large movements.
But who knows what it's actually getting because it, it had to look at this point, and then this point, and then it took a look at this point.
And I guess this point and maybe it should have been decreasing but it isn't. But yeah, something something's happening here for sure, in terms of how it got sampled.
Although the other thing that strikes me is kind of how quickly it converges.
Yeah, so this isn't too bad right like we don't need really need to get very very fine. But you do notice that there are some differences between even a step size of one or a step size of a half.
It's right around a 10th where you can't tell the visual difference and it's only because this function is fairly smooth. It doesn't have these steep movements.
That steep movements than a 10th just still might not be enough.
I imagine the kind of data that you come across could be seriously chaotic.
I would say that it's hard to even put a function to it.
So, you know, there you do have to always either worry about where you're sampling the data or how you're sampling it or how you're conditioned and also the data tends to be very high dimensional so you're almost never working with f of x, you're
working with f of x1 x2 x3 x4 x5 up to like x500 and then you're trying to make sense of what a derivative in any one direction even means.
So it makes but there's so much stuff about it that makes sense right like that it, it has kind of this periodic feel like the original function did, which it feels like the slope should be doing but the slopes are kind of increasing an amplitude as the function kind of changes
more rapidly.
Yep.
So I feel like it kind of gets it to feel really quickly.
Yeah, it does and if you notice, you know, if we ignore the orange to the whatever color this is, but we look at, you know, the, the sharper brown or purple, depending on how it shows up on the screen, you'll notice, you know, right here.
It's about zero the derivative is about zero. And that kind of makes sense because the function has peaked over here.
Right.
So this is where we're going next we're going to be using this idea about trying to find the zeros of the derivative.
Right. Right.
And so you'll also notice here where the function has reached some type of minimum, or it's about to change direction.
The orange curve, you know, is sitting on zero.
It's decreasing slopes negative changes to increasing and has to cross zero in between.
Yeah, that's right.
So why I like this is because it allows you to, you know, when your first when I remember when I was first learning calculus.
This was before the Python even existed, I think.
So, so the challenge there was you had to do it on paper.
You had to write out inputs and outputs, and do the delta calculations by yourself and if you wanted to actually see what a derivative look like.
You really had to do maybe 50 of these by hand, punching it into the calculator of point one steps point one steps point one steps because these steps were too course and you couldn't get a sense of what the derivative ought to look like.
Oh, interesting. Well, is there a function you'd like to see in this?
Well, you know what I always like to do is I like taking a look at trig functions, but with a little bit of a twist sometimes like we can do cosine of two times e to the x.
Wow.
And what's fun about these guys is, let's see if it renders correctly.
We'll see if this works. Again, this is all on the fly demos. We'll see what happens here.
Oh dear.
Whoa.
Because, and so now this is kind of fun for at least the way I think about it.
On the one hand, did I, did I screw up the function?
Cosine of two times e to the x.
Yeah, cosine of two times e to the x.
Does this make sense?
Oh, well, the, what we're seeing are the slopes, right? So that's not showing it up because that's right. It's going up to 200,000.
That's right.
So the slopes are getting crazy.
Yeah.
The function itself would be down so close to the x axis that we can't even see it.
Yeah. And this is why it's kind of fun.
Because we know that cosine of blah should be bound between negative one and one.
But even this like benign interval that we chose zero to, to four pi has proven to be problematic because
we're going through so many different oscillations.
Yeah.
And it doesn't know anymore.
This function is just changing up and down so quickly, even though it's just bound between zero and one.
So what would it, what do you think would happen if we did the interval from just like zero to one or 0.5.
Yeah, yeah, yeah, that's great.
So zero to one.
Let's try that one.
All right.
We're in somewhat sane land, but this doesn't capture a cosine.
Yeah.
Well, but it sort of makes sense that it shouldn't because you have that e to the x in there.
That's just allowing this oscillation. You're just running through periods very quickly.
But what's also nice though is, you know, it doesn't even matter if you didn't know that this was, that this was a cosine of, of 2x.
What you do know is that it's a cosine function and at the end of the day, you're given this blue curve.
And we're trying to figure out, well, how is this blue curve changing.
We know it's decreasing.
Then it flattens out.
And then it starts increasing again.
And, and so if we look at this, this brown curve, we'll see that.
Well, that difference quotient, right, is negative.
But it starts to increase away towards zero because this rate is slowing down.
And where this function bottoms out is where this difference quotient goes to zero.
And now the function is increasing again. And that's what these positive values here mean.
Oh, so I was, I was, at first I was surprised how high, like the, it doesn't look like the slope should be four at that point.
Right.
Then I noticed that like an only kind of changing two 10s, like from 0.6 to 0.8, it went up almost a whole value.
Yeah.
Right. So it's actually, if we think about that as a rate, right, so it went up one and 0.2 that would be like five and one.
That's right. That's right.
Yeah, so it does capture like, I mean, that is the purpose of these different quotients is to capture that, that rate of change.
Yeah.
All right, so if I'm being too, too needy, let me know, but yeah, I would love to see it on a slightly bigger interval.
Yeah, yeah, no, not needy doll that this is sort of the nice thing about having like a program that you can just kind of fiddle around with so we can go to zero to two if that helps and see what happens.
Oh, nice.
So yeah, now this is interesting, because I mean, it's the function is decreasing. Therefore, these rates are negative. And then here's where it flattened out so this rate is zero.
Instantaneously so the function isn't changing right at that moment.
And then from wherever this is maybe three eighths, all the way out to here, one and I don't know an eighth.
The function is increasing but we can see that the rate at which it's increasing starts to slow down and then eventually the function turns away and and starts to decrease.
Yeah, very, very interesting.
But because because there's a cosine in here there's this periodicity that the e to the x argument inside is making things go faster and faster.
So this behavior is starting to become more and more wild.
Because even though it's just going back and forth between one and negative one. It's doing it in a shorter and shorter time.
Yeah, yeah.
So if we were to take a look at something like even just the interval from three to four. And for the time being, let's just let's just actually not take a look at what these difference quotients look like.
Let's just take a look at what this function looks like.
So this is I took away the derivatives and just looking at our function of interest.
Yeah, yeah, I was just trying to think what must those folks be like so in like in 200s that's going from negative one to one.
So even even by that point.
Right. So, right.
That's got to be like a slope of almost 100.
Yep.
Yep.
Yeah.
So this is yeah maybe. Yeah, that's right. Like there are multiple movements from negative one to one, just within 3.8 to four. So, if you imagine, and which it's not true, but if you just imagine that we have three periods in here.
Within 0.2 that's 0.06 width per period.
Yeah, and it's moving a distance of two so two divided by 0.06 is we're hitting what 200 over six so 3035 something.
And just as quickly as it went up 35 and dropped by 35, a rate of 35 so that's why before we saw this cone that
which is a really interesting shape.
All right.
Well I want to be respectful of your time, but but I know you mentioned that you also wrote a tangent line finding program.
Yeah, so yeah we can we can certainly do this. Let's take a look at what that looks like. So there are some classical questions that are often asked in a calculus course right and one of these questions is given a function f and an x coordinate, which will
call this guy point x. We often are the question is, what's the equation of the line tangent to my function at that particular point. So, if we if we come back to this guy here.
Let's just take a look at something a little bit more tame in an interval that's a little bit more tame.
Just for a moment. This is, and it's clearly not cosine of it is
it's x squared.
So, here, often we're interested in, you know, if I picked a point here and tried to draw a line that was parallel to the curve in some way whatever parallel means, this is often what we're interested in terms of a tangent line.
So there is a line that we call tangent, and we'd be interested in saying like, okay, I know that at this point, the slope the instantaneous rate of change at this point to some value.
And if I know at some value, can I make a line that is tangent.
Having that slope that is equal to
the, the rate of change instantaneously at that on the curve there.
And so, to do this.
You know, the standard setup here is that we have
minus the point of interest equals m times x minus the point of interest that's our equation of a line.
I forget what this is called in classes is point slope form slope for me. Yeah. Yeah. So, in point slope form, you're given x zero, which means if you know x zero and you know the function, you can always find y zero by substituting x zero into the function.
If you have those, then all we have to do is figure out what m is. And in, in the world of calculus m is the slope and the slope here is the derivative.
So, this function here doesn't necessarily compute a derivative the way we would do in a calculus course which is by hand and saying like okay x squared to become two x's and then what have you.
I simply reuse that derivative function that I wrote above dy dx and take in the function taken the step size, and then I will give it the points of interest, or the interval of interest and then from this I, I get back my slope, the two points, my x zero and y zero and then for convenience I just
give myself what the equation of the line is automatically.
So this is finding a tangent line. And so we can do the same here, where we can pick a function like x squared.
Maybe we want to know what the slope of the tangent line is at the value of x equals two. And for convenience and simplicity I'll just make an interval around that point, one point, one unit before one unit after.
We'll have to sample that interval enough so that we can actually visualize the function well. And then over here is me running my find the tangent line function.
But again at various step sizes, just to get a sense of at what point do I get to my tangent line.
So doing this, let's make sure that I've got it right. Again demo runs. Here we go.
So what we can see here is, you know, we've got a thick blue line that I made just to show what x squared looks like.
This black dot is the point of interest where I want to know what my equation of the tangent line is. And then we have various lines that were drawn, depending on the step size that we chose.
When I had a step size of two. Well, it had to sample the function at x equals two and then at x equals four. And then it said well okay at x equals two my value is two and at x equals four my value is 16.
So 16 minus four is 12 and then 12 divided by two is my slope of six. That's what the six here means.
Nice. And so again we see kind of that increasing accuracy.
Interesting. Even jumping from one tenth to what would that be 100,000. Yeah, right. We really only gain an extra 10th of accuracy in the slow.
Yeah.
The result here is, you know, dependent on the type of function that we have x squared is nicely enough behaved that going from a 10th to 100,000.
You know, you get that one place of accuracy but if you had a function that changed very steeply very quickly, then even that movement of a 10th could be horribly inaccurate.
I'm sure that cosine of e to the x function, right. Yeah, that'd be a disastrous. Yeah. And that's actually like why I like to look at some of those really fast changing functions because one thing I remember when I was taking my calculus courses.
We never encountered those types of functions in a calculus course, because they're very hard to work with hard to visualize.
Yeah, it's a disaster. But now you have this, you know, you have tools at your disposal, I think you use Desmos and Geo Geo Geo and Wolfram Alpha, all of these things I didn't have.
You can muck around with this stuff and really get a sense of like, Oh, wow, that's step size.
Really, you have to think about it from a computational standpoint from an analytic standpoint. Yes, it's a limit and what have you that I understand you haven't gotten to yet but
the idea is kind of out there, right, because we have that idea we want to kind of get good small but we we just haven't formalized it.
Yeah.
So yeah, so we can see that. Okay, well at exactly this point.
Right. I, you know, we have our slope at exactly this point, which is four.
And the equation of the line, you can effectively say is y minus four equals four times x minus two. But all of these others, I mean, the truth is, even this is a secant line.
It's just a very, very, very short secant line.
Depending on how big your step is, the estimate for the rate of change at exactly this point varies and, you know, what we think is a tangent line, given a step size of two is going to be a little bit different when that step size changes to
something appropriately small. Yeah, yeah.
That's the right way to say appropriately small.
Well, I just can't thank you enough this was so cool to kind of see to be able to see the computation happening, right for for things that we've been talking about and we can kind of see the results of these computations when we're using Desmos, but that's
different than kind of being able to see inside the code.
Yeah, it's fun. Yeah, I really appreciate that.
Can I show you one more thing? Is that okay? Oh yeah. Yeah, so the other nice thing here is if we come back to this derivative calculation or this dy dx thing.
We can also have fun functions like absolute value of x right.
Now this is kind of fun in a lot of other ways. And I'm going to go over the interval negative two to two.
Because we know absolute value of x should look like a V of sorts. And when we do this computationally something fun happens in terms of why that step size matters.
Right.
This is right here. If we if we were able to zoom in even more we would see that even this is not just a pure vertical line as we would expect it to be.
But this is transitioning from a negative slope to a positive slope. And at exactly this point, we don't know what the slope is, because it depends on which way we're looking at it.
Because on the one side it's positive and on the other side, it's negative, but that's that's different than that usual like zero we'd expect in between.
Yeah, and I like this because it helps understand the smoothness constraint, or the smoothness quality that a derivative tells us about the function.
Yeah.
Super cool. And it's a very dramatic illustration of the step size.
Yeah, yeah, it's fun.
So then when you throw this in with like, you know, you put in something like
x raised to the absolute value of cosine of x over an interval that would be from negative two to two.
This starts to become fun because
you have like, you have these sudden changes that happen in the function.
Yeah, it's really interesting. And even after we learn some rules, right, that that kind of thing is going to be tricky to evaluate.
Yes.
So yeah, you have to pay attention to the domain you have to make sure that
you're looking at it from the left or you're looking at it from the right or you're looking at it from both directions. And I think this is all the stuff that you're going to get to eventually right.
Yeah.
Yeah.
Anyway, that was the last fun, fun thing.
Well, that was good. What a great note to end on.
Thank you again. I'll include links to your blog and
other materials so that the students are interested. They can see kind of some of the other stuff you do for fun on the side.
Yeah, your serious work.
Yeah, sounds good. Thanks for having me.
Oh, again, just thank you a ton.
