So, just a quick video to talk about how we can go from a visual pattern to finding the
answer by writing it as a sum.
So if we want to think about later on how many penguins in, say, step 43, one way to
solve that problem, it'd be to find a direct rule that tells us, okay, how many are going
to be in step two, and step three, and step X.
But the kind of calculus way to think about it is to think about how is it changing.
So here we have two new penguins.
Here we have three new penguins.
So if I think about that next one, I think the bottom line is going to have five penguins,
and then three, two, one.
So in this case, these are the old penguins, and we're going to have four new penguins.
Okay, well, that's a pretty clear pattern, right?
So in step, we can work out how many new.
So in step two, we had two new, and step three, we had three new, and step four, we have four new.
Oh, that's just exactly how much we're, whatever the step number is.
Okay, so it's the easiest possible one to work out.
So we're going to add up, starting from the second step, we're going to add on as many
as the step number, and then we're going to go up to, like, say, we wanted to know the
43rd, that would be how many steps we add up, and how many did we start with?
We started with two.
So that would tell us how many penguins there were in step 43.
Okay, well, that was a little too easy, so let's try another one just quickly to see.
All right, let's look at this example with how many stars.
So this one is interesting, because I think it would be pretty easy to find a direct rule
for this one, because here in step one, we have two by two grid of stars, an array, right?
We call that in math education, a four by four array of stars, a six by six array of
stars in step three.
So I'm guessing in step n, we'll have a two n by two n, and if we're trying to think about
how many stars that is, that's four n squared, okay?
But maybe it's a good problem with a little more to think about from the sum perspective.
All right, so we want to think about how is it changing, right?
So in the step, how many new stars do we have?
In step two, we've got 12 new stars, and in step three, here was our old one.
We have eight, eight more, 16, 20 new stars.
In step four, we're going to add on two more rows out here.
So we're going to have 12 more, and then 12 more, and then four more in the corner.
So 28, so it goes up eight, it goes up eight, oh, well that would make it pretty easy, right?
So the next time I'm predicting it'll go up 36, right?
Because it will have kind of an eight by two block, so it'll go up 16, 16, and the four.
So that's where the eight's coming from, from 12 to 16, it's going up four, and then those
four new, and then the four new in the corner, okay?
So if I want to find a rule for this, it's going to be eight times something, right?
So if I think about the eight times the step number, that would be 16, I would have to
subtract four.
Eight times the step number, that would be 24, I have to subtract four.
Eight times the step number, 32.
So this is our pattern, which means the new blocks in step n are going to be eight times
n minus four.
So to write our sum, we've got four blocks in that first step, and then we want to add
from n equals two up to whatever we're adding to, eight times our step number minus the four.
And that would be another way of writing down the total number of blocks, okay?
So one thing I notice is that when n is equal to one, this would be eight minus four, which
is the four.
So in this case, step zero would have zero blocks, and we could write the whole thing
n equals one to whatever we want to add it up to of eight n minus four, and then that
gives us our sum to find the total number of stars.
Thanks very much.
