Hello everybody, David Shapiro here with another video. So today's video is by popular demand
as we talk more and more about artificial intelligence and the potential of
UBI and AI displacing a lot of jobs.
For some people it seems like it's a foregone conclusion that a lot of people are going to be out of work real soon probably for good.
There's more and more universal basic income experiments going on around the world.
And if you didn't see it, I have another video called post-labor economics, which kind of talks about more of the
macroeconomic aspects of that. But in this case, people really wanted to learn about
UBI on an individual level. So let's get right in.
Just a real quick plug from my Patreon before we get in.
I do have a Patreon and
all the tiers get you into the private discord
where I am often available to chat with people.
There's two Patreon Discord, so there's the premium Patreon Discord
which I prioritize, make sure that I answer all questions that people send me on Patreon if you're in the premium tier.
And I also do have occasional office hours
where we just all kind of get in a voice chat together. And then I do have a higher tier for one-on-one sessions.
All right, back to the show.
So first let's set the stage.
Imagine this future scenario.
Every American gets $2,000 a month, no questions asked, starting at age 18.
Let's also, for the sake of this thought experiment, assume that health care is either heavily subsidized or
for all intents and purposes free. If you check out my post-labor economics video,
I talk about how AI could lower the cost of lots of things, including health care, by a factor of
100x or 1,000x in the long run.
Let's also assume that the unemployment rate will be about 70%. There are some people calling for more,
some people calling for less,
but just looking at the number of jobs that are
vulnerable to being automated away with AI today,
my personal estimate is that it's around 70%.
Let's also assume, for the sake of argument that parents get a little bit of UBI per child, but it also tapers per child.
So basically, you don't want to necessarily hand out
as much UBI for every child because that incentivizes some people to just keep having more children.
But on the other hand, you also want to ensure that
you incentivize the behaviors that you want to see. And so one thing that people are concerned about, some people
are concerned about, is population collapse, actually. This is what we're seeing in places like Italy, Japan, North Korea,
and other places where the population is actually already slowly contracting.
And so you basically need to incentivize people to have children. You need to reward them. Right now,
you get tax breaks in the form of dependent tax credit.
So basically, this is kind of like a reverse, or not a reverse tax credit,
but a tax credit in the form of increased income on a monthly basis to help pay for children.
Let's also assume that GDP growth is going to be something like 15%
due to AI automation. So the idea is that
most people aren't working, but the GDP is still growing like crazy. The stock market is growing like crazy.
So corporations and politicians, there's plenty of wealth to go around.
So we're basically assuming that a state exists of economic abundance,
and then also some redistribution. Oh, and there was a question. Someone was asking,
what's the difference between this and socialism? So the difference between this and socialism is
that socialism is about collective ownership or state ownership. So in this case, UBI actually
fits within capitalism and neoliberalism because the state isn't owning anything. The state is just
taxing and redistributing within the existing framework. Another assumption that we're going
to make, and I talked about this again in the post-labor economics video, is we're basically
going to assume that inflation and deflation are going to be modulated by some of these market forces
with things like quantitative easing, tax rates, and that sort of stuff. So we're not going to
address that further in this video. Just assume that prices are stable-ish. Okay, so
absolute just right off the bat. Let's talk about budgeting. You get $2,000 a month. No further
questions asked. The first thing that everyone's thinking is the rent is still way too damn high
for this. My mortgage payment, which is, I bought this house almost 10 years ago, so before things
went absolutely insane, my mortgage payment is about $1,200 a month, which is pretty good.
But that being said, the lowest mortgage payment I ever had was $325 a month for a $65,000 apartment.
So it can be done, obviously, as demand goes up in certain areas, the prices also go up.
But point being is that for most people, these numbers probably sound completely
ridiculous. It's not going to happen again because, again, 10 years ago, the economy
has changed a lot. Inflation, supply and demand has changed. We're facing housing crunches and
recessions and all that kind of stuff. So again, it's like, oh, everyone's heard someone from our
parents or grandparents age like, oh, I put a family through college on a cashier's salary.
Believe me, I am aware that economics change over time. We will address the housing thing in
just a minute. I'm just kind of setting the stage as to saying, OK, we need to figure out a way to
get housing into $600 a month or so for everyone. Cars are another huge, huge expense for Americans.
So these are the two biggest expenses for most people. So, for instance, I have friends that
their car payment is $600 or $700 a month. That's insane. So you combine that with,
let's say I had a $600 car payment on top of a $1,200 mortgage, that's $1,800 a month,
leaving $200 a month for everything else. That's not going to fly. That's not going to work.
Now, that being said, if we can get rent or mortgages back down to $600 a month for most
people, and if we can get rid of cars, that leaves about $1,400 a month for everything else. And
also remember, in this hypothetical scenario, health care is highly subsidized or functionally free
for most people. OK, so housing, biggest expense. Let's talk about housing first, because if we
can get that under control, the whole UBI thing looks a lot more sustainable and feasible for
most people. So the first thing is downsizing. A lot of people are already downsizing. Tiny houses
are all the rage right now. Katrina cottages, that kind of kickstarted it because after Hurricane
Katrina, actually what happened was a few celebrities got together and paid for architects to design
cottages, small houses that were very cheap and easy to build so that people that were affected by
Katrina could recover more quickly. That didn't start the tiny house trend, but that certainly
put it on the map. And people are like, oh, Katrina houses, they're pretty cute. Because again,
they paid for professional architects to make something that was sustainable and appealing,
not just cheap and efficient. So demand for smaller houses is creating new markets. There's
last time I looked up at tiny houses a few years ago, there were not a whole lot of options.
Now there are tiny house kits, there are prefabs, there are all kinds of stuff.
Some of the some of the cheapest DIY like livable tiny houses that I could find were around $4,000,
which is much, much more efficient than a $200,000 house or a $400,000 house.
You can also get prebuilt for around $12,000, and that's, you know, starting price, you can spend
up to $200,000 on a prefab tiny house, which is still cheaper than, you know, a half a million
dollar suburban house. One thing, one of the biggest problems with tiny houses is that
regulations and zoning laws need to be updated. In many municipalities and jurisdictions,
a tiny house is not allowed to be the primary residence. You can have what's called an auxiliary
dwelling unit in many places, which is basically you can put a tiny house in your backyard,
but then you need a regular full-sized house. So my wife and I were about to downsize,
but even in the countryside, the minimum house size that we're allowed to build is 1200 square feet.
So it's smaller than my current house, but it still doesn't qualify as a tiny house. We would
love to have built something smaller, but because of the, because of the county zoning laws,
we're not allowed to build anything smaller. So in order to accommodate a shift to a UBI,
we're going to need different zoning laws or areas that are zoned for tiny houses.
Another option is portable tiny houses such as trailers or van dwelling. Now, lots of people,
you know, there's the van dwelling subreddit. There's plenty of influencers on TikTok and
YouTube and Instagram and everywhere else that either travel or live in a van full-time or whatever.
This is, this is good for some people. It can be very cheap. You can also spend a lot of money
pimping out a van or a bus or whatever. There are challenges associated with this,
such as safety, where do you stay, permanent address. It also requires a vehicle,
which again, vehicles can be really expensive. The last thing is micro apartments. So
not everyone wants to own their own home or their own land. So micro apartments are something that
is an option. They're increasingly popular. But again, there's a lot of regulations,
particularly in America, that prevent us from even building tiny apartments. Usually the smallest
studio apartment you can get is around 400 to 500 square feet, which, you know, there's nothing
wrong with that. But those are often in trendy areas. And so even though it's a small apartment,
they're often very, very expensive. So they're not really optimized for being economical. That
being said, as I mentioned, as the market demand for these things goes up, the pressure for cities
to accommodate that and for the capitalist class, for the corporations to accommodate that will go
up. And again, there's lots of experiments going on, but there hasn't been a new establishment.
And so one thing that I want to talk about is in the context of history, the American suburbs,
those were intentionally designed about 80 years ago. After World War II, as the
nation was beginning to urbanize very quickly, all the regulations and patterns and architectural
designs and municipal layouts, that didn't exist. The modern suburb, the subdivision,
was a new invention. And so the fact that we invented a new way of living within the last
century tells me that we can invent a new way of living again, and it probably won't take that long.
Because where there's a will, there's a way. And certainly, necessity is the mother of all
invention. And we will need to figure out alternative ways of living that are not centered on the
American suburb. Another option other than downsizing is combining households. So this is
called co-living or co-housing. There are successful co-housing and co-living things
around the world. In America, they're usually actually more expensive because of construction
costs, regulations, red tape, and so on and so forth. In many cases, particularly if you look on
Reddit under the co-housing and co-living subreddits, there are plenty of horror stories of very,
very dangerous manipulative people building these communities. So I want to urge caution
before you get involved in any of those kinds of things. Now that being said, there are successful
examples in America, but there are more successful examples around the world, particularly in Europe,
in various places. There's eco villages which are focused on sustainability. They're basically like
co-op farms, essentially. Now that being said, there's a lot of rising trends around
co-living in conventional houses. You don't necessarily need a special village or a special
structure, right? Because that's where the red tape and regulation and excess cost comes in.
What a lot of people do is actually just combine finances and live in a larger house.
So there's a trend that started a few years ago called mom-munes, and there's actually
services that can help single moms find each other to join forces, band together, and combine
households. Obviously, not everyone is a single mother, so that model doesn't work for everyone,
but put it this way. Some of my friends in my 20s, they got together and rented a large house,
and so having two or three couples living together, or even just a few friends, you know,
three, four, five friends living together, if you combine those incomes and you end up with
eight or $12,000 per month guaranteed income from universal-based income from combining households,
you can afford a pretty nice house for that. And so this is a pretty simple model,
but what I will say is that finding the right people can be challenging. Certainly,
there are plenty of cases of people having gotten stuck with toxic roommates or destructive
partners or whatever and getting trapped in those situations, so we will need to keep in mind that
some people are going to be better and safer living on their own. Certainly, plenty of people want
to live that way, but that being said, the social advantages that come from joining forces and
banding together, of course, we're on the tail end of the pandemic, in which case a lot of people
actually were kind of forced into that situation. You know, we created our little survival groups,
right? It was like the walking dead, you know, you band together. So anyways, whether you downsize
or join forces or a little bit of both, those are ways that you can drastically reduce housing costs
here in America. Again, the biggest thing is that particularly on the downsizing, we need to update
our zoning laws and regulations to accommodate this, but I have no doubt that the pressure from
people to do this will kind of force the government's hand. All right, so transportation. I mentioned,
you know, cars are really expensive and America is a car culture, so how do we reduce transportation
costs? The first thing is walkable cities. So most cities, I don't know about most, but many
cities in Europe were designed and built and founded long before cars. And so because of that,
walkability is kind of intrinsic to a lot of European cities. However, whoops, come back,
a lot of American cities were designed and built with cars in mind. And so because of that, a lot
of American cities are designed around the car. They actually prioritize and privilege cars over
pedestrians, which is super, super problematic. Now, that being said, there are literally dozens
of major projects going on around the world to experiment with new walkable cities. And then,
of course, there are, you know, hundreds, if not thousands of smaller experiments,
you know, of like urban revitalization. The cities near where I live, all up and down the
east coast in the south, they're building walkable areas, maybe not the entire city is walkable,
but some of it is walkable. And so this focus on green spaces and walkability is rising.
There's a couple of YouTube channels I want to recommend. One is City Beautiful, and the other
is not just bikes. These are really great channels. They're really informative, and they will point
out all of the things wrong with American cities, the things that some American cities get right,
that'll compare American cities with European and Asian cities as well. But for instance,
I've been to Paris, and I was surprised at such a sprawling city. I was at the cathedral on the
hill, Sacre-Cour, which means Sacred Heart, and I know I didn't say it with the right accent.
But it's literally Paris to the horizon. You cannot see outside of the city from the middle of the
city, but you don't need a car in Paris. It's wild. And like as an American, that was the first
time I'd been one in a city that big, but two in a fully walkable city. Some of the metros were
fully automated, which was really cool, because you could go all the way up to the front and look
out the front windows. There's buses, there's light rail, and then of course they have the
TGV, which is the high-speed rail to get outside of the city. Anyways, point being is that there
are lots of these experiments going on. And so for people that want to stay living inside of a city,
if you combine those micro apartments or those co-living situations with walkability,
that will drastically, drastically reduce cost of living for many people. It will take some time
to build this up, especially since we've got so much invested in being a car culture. But ride
sharing and fully automated cars are coming, and I actually forgot to create a slide for this.
But one of the things that a lot of the big auto manufacturers want to do is actually have
fleets of robo taxis. And so rather than owning a car, you'll just use an app to summon a Ford or
a Chevy or a Toyota or whatever. And as competition drives down the price, I think I did a calculation
once that the total annual cost for me, if I were able to switch to a robo taxi based on the
hypothetical rider mile cost, would probably be about $600 a year. And I'm someone who drives
20,000 miles per year. So the possibility of doing ride shares and robo taxis could drastically,
drastically reduce the cost of ownership for automobiles. Or rather, you get rid of the ownership
cost and you just rent in real time. Another thing is if you don't want to live in the city,
because I sure as heck don't want to live in the city, I am not a city boy, I'm a country
boy, is what I call coaster villages. And these are starting to pop up. They're often just called
like tiny house communities or RV communities or whatever. But again, this is one of the things
where zoning laws need to be updated. But fortunately, these experiments are going.
But basically, think of the Shire, think of Hobbiton, but instead of underground houses,
it's tiny houses and Katrina cottages and tag along kind of trailers. Basically, what I anticipate
is going to happen is that in cheap rural land, a lot of that land is going to end up being used
for very, very small, planned, nearly self sufficient, not necessarily fully self sufficient.
I'm not saying an eco village, but rather than having these things planned around cars and
subdivisions, it'll be planned around sustainability. And so what I mean by coaster is someone who
decides, you know what, I'm just going to coast on UBI. I'm going to be happy with that. But I also
want to live in the countryside. You will need things like HOAs because good regulations and
good agreements make good neighbors. And so you will need stuff like HOAs still in some of these
places, but the total cost of living there is going to be much, much lower. Because imagine
if your plot of land and your tiny house is about $40,000 total, right, the mortgage payment on that
is going to be like 80 bucks a month or something like that. Maybe maybe, well, let's say 200 bucks
a month, you can afford that. That's going to be a 10th of your monthly $2,000 income. So between
these two possibilities, walkable cities for those who want the urban living and tiny house
villages out in the countryside, we can probably accommodate a lot of people very efficiently
and very cheaply. Okay, cool. So I think, oh, and also another advantage of these coaster villages
is you don't necessarily need a car. You know, if you live like Bilbo Baggins and Frodo, you just
walk to your neighbors, it's a tiny little village. All right, now one thing that a lot of people ask
is, okay, yeah, but what, you know, what if I still want more money? What if I'm willing to work?
What if I'm able to work? What is, what are the options going to be so that I can still, you know,
make some money and get by? So after doing a lot of research, one thing that I found is that local
goods and services, there's going to be a lot of these that are going to stick around. And this
is because even if a robot can do it, these are these are things that you still prefer a human to
do, and that most humans will be willing to pay another human to do. So the first category is
the health and wellness stuff. So this includes fitness coaches, personal trainers, massage therapists,
that sort of stuff. These are the, these are the kind of things that require a human touch
or human empathy, or at least those are highly preferable. So this will be things like
barbers and dentists and massage therapists, that sort of thing. Education, tutoring,
mentoring and coaching. These are also things that that could be pretty durable against being
automated away. Certainly, some online learning is going to be fully replaced by things like chat
GPT. Excuse me, many students are already using chat GPT for learning and mentoring and tutoring.
And certainly, I mean, even I use that if there's something that I want to learn about, it is one
of the best teaching resources out there, because it's interactive. Now that being said, there are
still going to be plenty of classes and skills that are going to be better taught by a human,
because a human has the same abilities and capacities that you do. So say, for instance,
you go to a painting class or a cooking class, or a carpentry class. Those are the kinds of things
that that you will, you will prefer to pay for a human just for the experience of being with
other people, right? Another thing is going to be experiences such as performances and entertainment,
local music, stage performances, busking, you know, those sorts of things are going to be
pretty resilient, because again, we are a social species. And so we want that connection with
other people. Renfairs, I think, are going to be really popular. And so, you know, you can go set
up your booth and do face painting at a renfair or whatever kind of festival or convention you
want to go to. Caregiving, grooming, and hygiene, these are other things. So whether it is child care
or elder care, or pet care, those kinds of jobs are going to be very resilient against being fully
automated away. Because again, even if you do have a robot that can take care of grandma,
grandma probably would want to see you rather than a robot, unless you don't get along. Maybe
it's better that way. But also like your dog, right? Like my dog hates machines, right? So he
would freak out if a robot showed up to take him for a walk. So, you know, granted, I work at home
all day every day, so I don't need walkers. But some people would. Other domestic services like
gardening, lawn care, cooking, cleaning, growing and sharing food, these are things that will probably
persist as well. Because again, local economies, circular economies, these are rising in popularity.
And then finally, artisan and craftsmen, handmade goods, arts and crafts, these are the kinds of
things that people will really value and cherish. And it's also something that a machine intrinsically
cannot do. In the age where machines can make all kinds of furniture and mass produce it,
we still already have Etsy where you can buy handmade clothing and handmade furniture and
handmade tools. And so the demand is already there. And one thing that can happen of, and yes,
they're more expensive, but these are much higher quality goods. And they're also much more durable.
So again, even if those, even if mass produced goods become cheaper due to AI, there's still
going to be a demand for those high quality handmade, unique goods and arts and crafts.
Now, okay, so that's local goods and services. There's also still going to be online and remote.
So content creators like me, probably going to stick around influencers, streamers, whether it's a
lifestyle blog or travel blog or whatever, I follow, I started following lots of lifestyle
bloggers. Usually they're attractive women, because you know, that's just the pattern.
But I also follow plenty of plenty of guys who like build stuff, or go on adventures, that kind
of thing. And the reason that I think that these are going to stick around is because even if you
have a fully digital avatar, your brain knows that it's fake, right? Some people, of course,
will be plenty entertained by, you know, a digital avatar. But really, as a human,
I want to see another human's experience. I want to learn from that human. I want to empathize
with that person. And so content influence streamers, you know, it's the personality,
it's the realness, the authenticity. Even if there is some performance associated with it,
that's what people really want to connect with. Crowdfunding platforms like Patreon only fans,
plenty of other alternatives are out there. Those are going to stick around. And so basically,
the two ways that you can make money online in the future, I think, are going to be ads and
crowdfunding. There's also white label services like subscription based services. But that's
essentially crowdfunding, right? Like you pay to get in, and then you get access to exclusive
content. Game hosts, coaches, and trainers of various kinds. So one of my Patreon supporters
is actually a professional online coach, and she teaches other coaches. And this is actually a
really, really huge market segment. I had no idea how big it was. But again, having that one on one
time with someone where you can say, Hey, this is what I'm struggling with, because we're humans,
we're always going to be struggling with something, right? But then like game hosts,
there's paid dungeon masters that can host that can run D&D campaigns for you. All kinds of stuff
is possible online that are intrinsically better done if it's a human. That being said, there are
plenty of people working on using GPT technologies to automate, you know, game hosts and that sort
of stuff. So some of this is going to be is going to change. But a lot of these things,
again, people are willing are the demand for the human is high enough that people are going to be
willing to pay for it. Now, on top of making more money on with the UBI, there is also a lot that
you can do to reduce to further reduce costs. Obviously, the biggest things are housing and
transportation, we already talked about how to reduce the cost there. There's a lot of other
stuff that we can do to keep reducing costs in order to make better use of the free time that
we have. So for instance, tool sharing, tool libraries, there's actually, I didn't realize
this, but many county libraries or, you know, city libraries already have tools that you can check out.
And then of course, if the demand for that goes up, then libraries, you know, will continue to do
that. There's also maker spaces that you can join usually with a small fee that give you a space to
build stuff and borrow tools, circular economics, which is, you know, reusing as much as you can,
refurbishing stuff. We're going to talk about refurbishing more in a future slide.
Clothing exchanges, clothing swaps, other good swaps, like one thing that I do is that every
now and then I just, I have a folding card table and I'll put it out by the road and I just will
give stuff away, right? And so by just giving stuff away and sharing, right, you don't even have to
worry about, you know, bartering or exchanging or buying stuff, just giving stuff away and making
use of those essentially community-based donations. Sharing services as well. So say for instance,
you know, you might provide childcare for people in your community, not necessarily for pay,
but in exchange they give you food or something, right? So that goes back to bartering and trading.
DIY skills, repairing things, fixing things, cleaning up, whatever. There's lots and lots
of value that you can get by learning more skills and thus further reducing costs. Caregiving,
domestic stuff, I already mentioned that. Okay, so let's talk about the psychology of this. One
thing that people are concerned about is, yeah, but what do you do for fun? What do you do for
sense of mastery? What do you do for challenge? If I lose my job, you know, how do I have any
sense of self-esteem? So let's talk about the psychology of living under UBI. First, we're
going to talk about what we're going to use frameworks for this. So first, one of the most
famous ones is Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. So if you're not familiar with Maslow's Hierarchy of
Needs, it is basically just this pyramid, which is color-coded like the food pyramid if you're in
America, but it says you need to satisfy these needs starting from bottom to top. So physiological
needs include air, water, food, shelter, sleep, that sort of stuff. Safety needs, which is about,
are you in physical danger? Do you feel safe at home? Is your environment quiet enough?
Are there any dangerous smells or chemicals or whatever?
Above that, once you have those needs met, the next most fundamental need is love and belonging. So
you need friends, you need family, you need to feel that human connection. And of course, we're
in a loneliness crisis. I think something like 30% of young people today don't have a single
best friend, which is really horrible. And I'm hoping that UBI gives us more free time to connect
with people. Above love and belonging, you need esteem, self-esteem, which is self-respect, status,
recognition, that sort of stuff. And then finally, self-actualization. So this is what a lot of
people are referring to when they worry about, okay, well, if I lose my job, what am I going to do?
I need some kind of self-actualization. And so self-actualization is the impulse to become the
best version of yourself. That is the version to reach your highest level. And so these are
things that are still going to need to be there. And we'll talk about this in future slides in
terms of how can you achieve the best version of yourself? Another framework that I'm a big
fan of is what's called TLC or therapeutic lifestyle changes. This is a model that was
developed by Roger Walsh. And it is an eight-point framework that talks about how do you make a
better life for yourself? So the framework is pretty simple, pretty straightforward. One,
and this is in no particular order, by the way, one spirituality. So being involved in some kind
of spirituality doesn't have to be a megachurch or anything like that. You know, paganism, witchcraft,
neo-hellenism, all kinds of stuff, Norse reconstructionists, lots and lots of spiritual
frameworks are kind of becoming popular, as certainly a lot of us younger people are more
pagan. Giving back, so volunteering and community service is one of the things that, you know,
again, we kind of alluded to this already in terms of cost reduction. But giving back, volunteering,
giving your time is actually a really good way to build up self-esteem. It's deeply satisfying.
Like I said, one thing that I love is just giving stuff away. And if I had more free time and energy,
I would probably volunteer more because I have certain skills. And, you know, honestly, a lot
of the code that I give away, because I publish all of my code under open-source standards,
to me, that is kind of like giving back. And it's very satisfying. I love seeing the little
stars and forks on my GitHub repos. Time and nature, hiking, walking, going to the lake,
whatever. This is really important for your physical and mental health. I go for a walk
pretty much every day, unless the weather is bad or unless I'm sick or too tired.
Recreational activities, we're going to talk a lot about recreational activities
in upcoming slides. Rest and relaxation. If you don't have to go to work, you can spend a lot
more time resting and relaxing. Diet and nutrition. We've talked a lot about how, or we will talk more
about how all the free time that you get from UBI will allow you to do things like gardening,
but also allow you to learn to cook and spend more time cooking. Because a lot of people don't have
time to cook good meals because they're too busy working and resting. And so UBI with additional
free time will help people really improve their diet and nutrition. Seven, exercise and activity.
So this is like exercising for the sake of exercise, which for me, I get that with time and nature
because I go for walks. And I also like to do other things, although I haven't done it as much
lately, hiking, climbing, that sort of stuff, kayaking. Relationships and connection. We already
talked about relationships and connection in Maslow's Hierarchy of Needs. And also you will see
that relationships and connections, spending time with friends and family is common for all
psychological well-being frameworks. Self-determination theory. This is one of my favorite frameworks
because it is so simple. And it kind of encapsulates a lot, but it's also not a hierarchy. You need
all three of these at all times. And so the idea is that self-determination theory is,
this is what people are intrinsically motivated by. These are the intrinsic psychological needs
of all humans. So first is autonomy or individual liberty. We need to feel like we are in control
of our lives and our fate. This is absolutely critical for all humans. Even humans in
collectivist societies, there's always a tension between individual needs and group needs.
But that's intrinsic to all social species. It's about balancing the self versus the group.
Desire for competence and mastery. So this has to do with Maslow's top hierarchy of needs,
which is self-esteem and self-actualization. So competence and mastery, basically feeling
like you're good at something. One way to measure this is that we thrive with what's called optimal
stress. So optimal stress means that you need some kind of challenge. For instance, people play Elden
Ring. People play Dark Souls. These really frustrating, impossible games that I personally
don't like. But the idea is that you try and fail, and then when you finally succeed,
you feel a sense of mastery. And of course, video games are not the only way to get mastery,
but video games are a good way to get a sense of mastery. And as we'll talk about,
once we talk about hobbies, there are lots and lots of other ways to get that sense of mastery.
Finally, desire for relatedness and connection. As a social species, we are intrinsically
motivated to seek out connection with others. And so by keeping in mind what our intrinsic
base needs are and building a life around that, we can still maintain our psychological well-being
even if we don't have a career, at least a conventional career that we're familiar with.
Okay, as I promised, hobbies, this is the last section of the video. And this is honestly where
I had the most fun. And it made me really realize, I'm looking forward to this. So I'm going to do
everything that I can to help make this future state come to fruition with my YouTube channel
and my open source research. So the first thing, obviously gaming, a lot of you tell me how excited
you are for the possibility of FDVR, which means full dive virtual reality. Everyone knows what
FDVR is, you saw it in the matrix. The idea is that you plug your head in. And as far as you can
tell, it is 100% real. We also explored this with Ready Player One, which had like haptic suits.
I don't know if it's possible, a haptic suit seems like it's probably more possible in the near
term. Full dive VR, such as what you see in the matrix, might not be possible. But you never know.
People are working on brain computer interfaces. So if you can just plug in all the sensory
information directly into your head, maybe it's possible. Anyways, whatever you want to do,
whatever experience you want to have, should hypothetically be possible with FDVR.
Part of gaming is that it can be social, right? Game with friends, whether you're competing online
with friends, or you got a guild or a clan that you've built. You can also do parallel play in
person. So this is what I do with my wife. We heckle each other. While she's playing Assassin's
Creed, I'll be like, Hey, did you know that you're on fire? And she's like, Yes, Dave, I know that I'm
on fire. You know, parallel play is a great thing to do with friends. You can sit around, you know,
I used to do this back in my college days with my buddies, drinking a couple beers, playing Call of
Duty, trolling each other. It can be a really great thing. And I'm glad to see that the younger
generations do this still. My nephew and all of his friends, they play Minecraft together and other
things. There are what I will say is there are some potential downsides. Screen time can be detrimental
to your health. But if you balance it with some of the other things, like in the therapeutic
lifestyle changes, make sure that you go outside, touch grasses, kids are saying these days.
It can also be addictive and isolation is possible. I do suspect that we will see legislation coming
that kind of at least provides warnings for how addictive things are. There's a book that I refer
to often called Liquid Rain, where they talk about how full dive VR could actually be
programmatically addictive, like where it could just stimulate your dopamine. And so you feel
like you're having more fun than you actually are. And then when you're not in the full dive VR,
you could physically crave it and get sick if you don't have it. So we do need to be careful
with creating gaming as a central lifestyle. And another thing is that a gaming world is not
necessarily the real world and most people's brains will keep track of that difference.
And so it might not be good for self actualization. For instance, if you're a gamer,
you might not get the sense that you're reaching your full potential. That being said,
if you're a competitive gamer, maybe that is the way that you reach your full potential.
Making and fixing things. We humans evolved to use our hands. That is why we have so much
dexterity in our hands. We are the tool users. And so one of my best friends from back in the day
is working on rebuilding a thistle. So this is a thistle. It's a small racing boat.
We would be doing this all day every day if we had UBI and no need to work for money.
And because the shop where he's rebuilding his, there's two other ones that are just waiting
for someone to come and fix. And if I had the time, that's what I'd be doing. Why? Because it's
something that my friend does and you can then race it and do competitive stuff. But there's also
skill building, right? The sense of mastery that you get from building something from fixing it
and having that thing that you can show off and use. This is a really great way to get a sense of
mastery. There's plenty of other things that people do. Lots of guys like rebuild mustangs or
corvettes, fixing up old houses and other things. So reusing, refurbishing, fixing, building things.
These are really great ways that also tap into really primal needs for humans.
Some of the things that are really popular today, particularly with young people,
forging, leatherworking, sewing, other carpentry, all of these things revolve around tool use.
And so whatever hobby you pick up, if it uses tools, chances are there's a lot of skills involved,
which can also lead to that sense of mastery. Cooking, I mentioned this earlier. Cooking is one
of the oldest trades, one of the oldest professions out there, and everyone needs to eat. Plus cooking
is a good social activity. My wife and I cook together pretty much every day or at least we
take turns. Some people compulsively cook and feed other people. My sister-in-law is like that.
She loves cooking for people. Point being is that there are a lot of hobbies out there
that center around making or fixing things. Outdoor stuff, hiking, climbing, canoeing, boating,
whatever. There's all kinds of stuff that we could stand to do more of if you had more free time
because you didn't have to work, because you didn't have to be at a desk or at an office
or at the store or whatever. And it's not just fishing. Obviously that's the prototypical example
where a guy gets to retirement age and he decides he's going to go fishing every day.
Not everyone wants to do that. I get it. You could do competitive fishing, but there's also other
kinds of competitive outdoor stuff like cross-country challenges. I ran Tough Mudder almost 10 years
ago, and I was hungover as heck when I ran it. I was not hungover by the end of it. I burned all
that toxins off. Skiing, kayaking, all kinds of really challenging stuff that you can do outside.
A lot of my friends picked up mountain biking, which you could do practically anywhere
during the pandemic. So one thing that I realized when I was making this video is that if we got
UBI tomorrow, I would probably go hike the Appalachian Trail. I love being outside. I love
being in the mountains, and that is something that I want to do. But right now, my brain is like,
well, I'm still got to make YouTube. I still got to do AI stuff. I still have meetings with my
Patreon supporters. So doing the Appalachian Trail is not really an option for me right now,
unless I were to take like three months off, which maybe I should. Anyways, fitness. Fitness is the
most familiar model that a lot of people use to get mastery, whether it's yoga or Pilates or
running or cycling, martial arts, strength training. These are all things that people,
many, many people do, and it can be a little cultish for some people. There's also fitness-based
competitions like Iron Man, American Ninja, that sort of stuff. That being said, there are many,
many, many additional benefits other than just it's something to do.
Better fitness leads to reduced pain, increased health, cognitive benefits, emotional benefits,
plus you get to show off your body. There's lots of people that love being fit just for the sake
of feeling sexy. There are so many people that I knew and have met and where they decided to get fit,
started climbing, started going to the gym, and the transformation that they felt as they felt
better about themselves, about their body, the sense of accomplishment that they get from that
is incredible. It's still not for everyone. So I want to say, okay, even if you have all the options
in the world and you decide that exercise isn't for you, that's fine. Or fitness, exercises for
everyone. Fitness might not be for you. Meetups. So I am a huge fan of meetup.com. I actually
met my now wife at a meetup. We're both writers. So the kinds of tools that are out there. So
meetup.com is there specifically for finding people with the same interests, challenges, or
whatever. So meetup.com, it's free to join. I tell people about it all the time. I think more
people should be on meetup, whether you have a special interest or if you've got something
that you're coping with. There's support groups on meetup. I host a local AI meetup. I'm actually
going to that later today. Let's see. There's intellectual kinds of things. There's chess
clubs. There's spirituality clubs, arts, crafts, photography, all kinds of stuff. Whatever your
interest is, especially if you live in a city, you can find other people that have that same
interest, which is a really great way to get that social connection. But then also,
some of these things can lead to senses of mastery, for instance. All right. So this is life under UBI.
I hope that you got a lot out of this. Like I said, making this video, actually, I kind of
clarified a lot for myself. And it makes me personally a lot more excited for the future.
And personally, this was probably the most fun that I've had in making a video yet. So anyways, cheers.
