Postmodernism presents a threat not only to liberal democracy, but to modernity itself.
That may sound like a bold or even a hyperbolic claim, but the reality is that the cluster of
ideas and values at the root of postmodernism have broken the bounds of academia and gained great
cultural power in western society. The irrational and identitarian symptoms of postmodernism
are easily recognizable and much criticized, but the ethos underlying them is not well understood.
This is partly because postmodernists rarely explain themselves clearly and partly because
of the inherent contradictions and inconsistencies of a way of thought that denies that a stable
reality or reliable knowledge exists. However, there are consistent ideas at the root of postmodernism
and understanding them is essential if we intend to counter them. They underlie the problems we
see today in social justice activism, undermine the credibility of the left and threaten to return
us to an irrational and tribal pre-modern culture. Postmodernism, most simply, is an artistic and
philosophical movement which began in France in the 1960s and produced bewildering art and even
more bewildering theory. It drew on avant-garde and surrealist art and earlier philosophical ideas,
particularly those of Nietzsche and Heidegger, for its anti-realism and rejection of the concept of
the unified and coherent individual. It reacted against the liberal humanism of modernist,
artistic and intellectual movements which its proponents saw as naively universalizing a western,
middle class and male experience. It rejected philosophy which valued ethics, reason and
clarity with the same accusation. Structuralism, a movement which, often over confidently,
attempted to analyze human culture and psychology according to consistent structures of relationships,
came under attack. Marxism, with its understanding of society through class and economic structures,
was regarded as equally rigid and simplistic. Above all, postmodernists attacked science and
its goal of obtaining objective knowledge about a reality that exists independently of human
perceptions, which they saw as merely another form of constructed ideology dominated by bourgeois
western assumptions. Decidedly left wing, postmodernism had both a nihilistic and a revolutionary
ethos which resonated with a post-war post-empire zeitgeist in the west, as postmodernism continued
to develop and diversify, its initially stronger nihilistic deconstructive phase became secondary,
but still fundamental to its revolutionary identity politics phase. It has been a matter
of contention whether postmodernism is a reaction against modernity. The modern era is the period
of history which saw Renaissance humanism, the Enlightenment, the Scientific Revolution and
the development of liberal values and human rights. The period when western societies gradually came
to value reason and science over faith and superstition as roots to knowledge and developed a
concept of the person as an individual member of the human race deserving of rights and freedoms
rather than as part of various collectives subject to rigid hierarchical roles in society.
The Encyclopedia Britannica says postmodernism, quote, is largely a reaction against the
philosophical assumptions and values of the modern period of western, specifically European
history. Whilst the Stanford Encyclopedia of Philosophy denies this and says,
rather its differences lie within modernity itself, and postmodernism is a continuation
of modern thinking in another mode. I'd suggest that the difference lies in whether we see modernity
in terms of what was produced or what was destroyed. If we see the essence of modernity as the development
of science and reason, as well as humanism and universal liberalism, postmodernists are opposed
to it. If we see modernity as the tearing down of structures of power, including feudalism,
the church, patriarchy and empire, postmodernists are attempting to continue it, but their targets
are now science, reason, humanism and liberalism. Consequently, the roots of postmodernism are
inherently political and revolutionary, albeit in a destructive, or as they would term it,
deconstructive, way. Jean-François Lyotard
The term postmodern was coined by Jean-François Lyotard in his 1979 book The Postmodern Condition.
He defined the postmodern condition as, quote, an incredulity towards meta-narratives.
A meta-narrative is a wide-ranging and cohesive explanation for large phenomena. Religions and
other totalizing ideologies are meta-narratives in their attempts to explain the meaning of life
or all of society's ills. Lyotard advocated replacing these with, quote, mini-narratives,
to get at smaller and more personal truths. He addressed Christianity and Marxism in this way,
but also science. In his view, quote, there is a strict interlinkage between the kind of language
called science and the kind called ethics and politics. By telling science the knowledge it
produces to government and power, he rejects its claim to objectivity. Lyotard describes this
incredulous postmodern condition as a general one and argues that from the end of the 19th century,
quote, an internal erosion of the legitimacy principle of knowledge began to cause a change
in the status of knowledge. By the 1960s, the resulting doubt and demoralization of scientists
in Lyotard's words, had, quote, made an impact on the central problem of legitimization. No
number of scientists telling him they are not demoralized nor any more doubtful than befits
the practitioner's own method whose results are always provisional and whose hypotheses are never
proven could sway him from this. We see in Lyotard an explicit epistemic relativism,
belief in personal or culturally specific truths or facts, and the advocacy of privileging, quote,
lived experience over empirical evidence. We see, too, the promotion of a version of pluralism
that privileges the views of minority groups over the general consensus of scientists or liberal
democratic ethics, which are presented as authoritarian and dogmatic. This is consistent
in postmodern thought. Michel Foucault. Michel Foucault's work is also centered on language
and relativism, although he applied this to history and culture. We call this approach archaeology
because he saw himself as, quote, uncovering aspects of historical culture through recorded
discourses, speech that promotes or assumes a particular view. For Foucault, discourses control
what can be known, and in different periods and places, different systems of institutional power
control discourses. Therefore, knowledge is a direct product of power, quote. In any given
culture and at any given moment, there is always only one episteme that defines the conditions
of possibility of all knowledge, whether expressed in theory or silently invested in a practice.
Furthermore, people themselves were culturally constructed, quote. The individual with his
identity and characteristics is the product of a relation of power exercised over bodies,
multiplicities, movements, desires, forces. He leaves almost no room for individual agency
or autonomy. As Christopher Butler says, Foucault, quote, relies on beliefs about the inherent evil
of the individual's class position or professional position seen as discourse, regardless of the
morality of his or her individual conduct. He presents medieval feudalism and modern liberal
democracies equally oppressive and advocates criticizing and attacking institutions to unmask
the, quote, political violence that has always exercised itself obscurely through them. We see
in Foucault the most extreme expression of cultural relativism, read through structures of power in which
shared humanity and individuality are almost entirely absent. Instead, people are constructed
by their position in relation to dominant cultural ideas, either as oppressors or oppressed. Judith
Butler drew on Foucault for her foundational role in queer theory, focusing on the culturally
constructed nature of gender, as did Edward Said in his similar role in postcolonialism
and orientalism, and Kimberly Crenshaw in her development of intersectionality and
advocacy of identity politics. We see, too, the equation of language with violence and coercion
and the equation of reason and universal liberalism with oppression. Jacques Derrida. It was Jacques
Derrida who introduced the concept of deconstruction, and he, too, argued for cultural constructivism
and cultural and personal relativism. He focuses even more explicitly on language.
Derrida's best-known pronouncement, there is no outside text, relates to his rejection of the
idea that words refer to anything straightforwardly. Rather, quote, there are only contexts without any
center of absolute anchoring. Therefore, the author of a text is not the authority on its meaning.
The reader or listener makes their own equally valid meaning, and every text, quote, engenders
infinitely new contexts in an absolutely non-saturable fashion. Derrida coined the
term Difference, which he derived from the verb Differer, which means both to defer and to differ.
This was to indicate that not only is meaning never final, but it is constructed by differences,
specifically by oppositions. The word young only makes sense in its relation with the word old,
and he argued, following so-soor, that meaning is constructed by the conflict of these elemental
oppositions, which to him always form a positive and negative. Man is positive, and woman negative.
Occident is positive, and Orient negative. He insisted that we are not dealing with a peaceful
coexistence with visa v, but rather with a violent hierarchy. One of the two terms governs the other,
axiologically, logically, etc., or has the upper hand. To deconstruct the opposition, first of all,
is to overturn the hierarchy at a given moment. Deconstruction, therefore, involves inverting
these perceived hierarchies, making woman and Orient positive, and man and Occident negative.
This is to be done ironically, to reveal the culturally constructed and arbitrary nature
of these perceived oppositions in unequal conflict. We see in Derrida further relativism,
both cultural and epistemic, and further justification for identity politics.
There is an explicit denial that differences can be other than oppositional, and therefore a
rejection of Enlightenment liberalism's values of overcoming differences, and focusing on universal
human rights and individual freedom and empowerment. We see here the basis of quote,
ironic misundry, and the mantra, reverse racism isn't real, and the idea that identity dictates
what can be understood. We see too a rejection of the need for clarity in speech and argument,
and to understand the other's point of view and avoid misinterpretation.
The intention of the speaker is irrelevant. What matters is the impact of speech. This,
along with Foucaultian ideas, underlies the current belief in the deeply damaging nature of
microaggressions, and misuse of terminology related to gender, race, or sexuality.
Lyotard, Foucault, and Derrida are just three of the founding fathers of post-modernism,
but their ideas share common themes with other influential theorists, and will taken up later
by post-modernists who apply them to an increasingly diverse range of disciplines
within the social sciences and humanities. We've seen that this includes an intense
sensitivity to language on the level of the word, and a feeling that what the speaker means is less
important than how it is received, no matter how radical the interpretation. Shared humanity and
individuality are essentially illusions, and people are propagators or victims of discourses
depending on their social position, a position that is dependent on identity, far more than on
their individual engagement with society. Morality is culturally relative, as is reality itself.
Empirical evidence is suspect, and so are any culturally dominant ideas, including science,
reason, and universal liberalism. Far more important are the lived experience, narratives,
and beliefs of marginalised groups, all of which are equally quote-unquote true, but must now be
privileged over enlightenment values, to reverse an oppressive, unjust, and entirely arbitrary
social construction of reality, morality, and knowledge. The desire to smash the status quo,
challenge widely held values in institutions, and champion the marginalised is absolutely
liberal in ethos. Opposing it is resolutely conservative. This is the historical reality.
But we are at a unique point in history, where the status quo is fairly consistently liberal,
with a liberalism that upholds the values of freedom, equal rights, and opportunities for
everyone, regardless of gender, race, or sexuality. The result is confusion, in which lifelong liberals
wishing to conserve this kind of liberal status quo, find themselves considered conservative,
and those wishing to avoid conservatism at all costs, find themselves defending irrationalism
and illiberalism. Whilst the first post-modernists mostly challenge discourse with discourse,
the activists motivated by their ideas are becoming more authoritarian, and following
those ideas to their logical conclusion. Freedom of speech is under threat, because
speech is now dangerous. So dangerous that people considering themselves liberal can now justify
responding to it with violence. The need to argue a case persuasively using reasoned argument is now
often replaced with references to identity and pure rage. Despite all the evidence that racism,
sexism, homophobia, transphobia, and xenophobia are at an all-time low in western societies,
leftist academics and social justice activists display a fatalistic pessimism enabled by post-modern
interpretative reading practices that valorize confirmation bias. The authoritarian power of
the post-modern academics and activists seems to be invisible to them whilst being apparent to
everyone else, as Andrew Sullivan says of intersectionality. It posits a classic orthodoxy,
through which all of human experience is explained, and through which all speech must
be filtered. Like the puritanism once familiar in New England, intersectionality controls language
and the very terms of discourse. Post-modernism has become a leotardian metanarrative,
a Foucaudian system of discursive power, and a deridian oppressive hierarchy. The logical problem
of self-referentiality has been pointed out to post-modernists by philosophers fairly constantly,
but it is one they have yet to address convincingly. As Christopher Butler points out,
the plausibility of Leotard's claim for the decline of metanarratives in the late 20th century
ultimately depends upon an appeal to the cultural condition of an intellectual minority. In other
words, Leotard's claim comes directly from the discourses surrounding him in his bourgeois
academic bubble, and is in fact a metanarrative towards which he is not remotely incredulous.
Equally, Foucaud's argument that knowledge is historically contingent must itself be
historically contingent, and one wonders why Derridaugh bothered to explain the infinite
malleability of texts at such lengths if I could read his entire body of work and claim it to be
a story about bunny rabbits with the same degree of authority. Post-modernism in the academy,
this is of course not the only criticism commonly made of post-modernism. The most glaring problem
of epistemic cultural relativism has been addressed by philosophers and scientists.
The philosopher David Detmer in Challenging Post-Modernism says,
Consider this example provided by Erezim Kohak. When I try unsuccessfully to squeeze a tennis
ball into a wine bottle, I need not try several wine bottles and several tennis balls before,
using Mills' Cannons of Induction. I arrive inductively at the hypothesis that tennis balls
do not fit into wine bottles. We are now in a position to turn the tables on post-modernist
claims of cultural relativism and ask, If I judge the tennis balls do not fit into wine bottles,
can you show precisely how it is that my gender, historical and spatial location,
class, ethnicity, etc. undermine the objectivity of this judgment? However, he has not found
post-modernists committed to explaining their reasoning and describes a bewildering conversation
with post-modern philosopher Laurie Calhoun. When I had occasion to ask her whether or not
it was a fact that giraffes are taller than ants, she replied that it was not a fact,
but rather an article of religious faith in our culture. Physicist Alan Sokolot and Jean-Brigment
addressed the same problem from the perspective of science in fashionable nonsense, post-modern
intellectuals abuse of science. Who could now seriously deny the grand narrative of evolution,
except someone in the grip of a far less plausible master narrative such as creationism,
and who would wish to deny the truth of basic physics? The answer was some post-modernists,
and quote, There is something very odd indeed in the belief that in looking, say, for causal laws
or a unified theory or in asking whether atoms really do obey the laws of quantum mechanics,
the activities of scientists are somehow inherently bourgeois or Eurocentric or masculinist or even
militarist. How much of a threat is post-modernism to science? There are certainly some external
attacks. In the 2017 protests against a talk given by Charles Murray at Middlebury, the protesters
chanted as one, quote, Science has always been used to legitimize racism, sexism, classism,
transphobia, ableism and homophobia, all veiled as rational and fact and supported by the government
and state. In this world today, there is little that is true fact. When the organizers of the
March for Science tweeted, colonization, racism, immigration, native rights, sexism, ableism,
queer, trans, intersexphobia and econ justice are scientific issues. Many scientists immediately
criticizes politicization of science and derailment of the focus on preservation of science to
intersectional ideology. In South Africa, the hashtag science must fall and hashtag decolonize
science, progressive student movement announced that science was only one way of knowing that
people have been taught to accept. They suggested witchcraft as one alternative. Despite this,
science as a methodology is not going anywhere. It cannot be adapted to include epistemic
relativism and alternative ways of knowing. It can, however, lose public confidence and thereby
state funding and this is a threat not to be underestimated. Also, at a time in which world
rulers doubt climate change, parents believe false claims that vaccines cause autism and people turn
to homopaths and naturopaths for solutions to serious medical conditions. It is dangerous to
the degree of an existential threat to further damage people's confidence in the empirical
sciences. The social sciences and humanities, however, are in danger of changing out of all
recognition. Some disciplines within the social sciences already have, cultural anthropology,
sociology, cultural studies and gender studies, for example, have succumbed almost entirely not
only to moral relativism but epistemic relativism. English literature too, in my experience, is
teaching a thoroughly postmodern orthodoxy. Philosophy, as we have seen, is divided. So is
history. Empirical historians are often criticized by the postmodernists among us for claiming to
know what really happened in the past. Christopher Butler recalls Diane Perkus' accusation that
Keith Thomas was enabling a myth that grounded men's historical identity in the powerlessness
and speechlessness of women when he provided evidence that accused witches were usually powerless
beggar women. Resumably, he should have claimed against the evidence that they were wealthy women
or better still, men. As Butler says, it seems as though Thomas' empirical claims here simply run
foul of Perkus' rival organizing principle for historical narrative that it should be used to
support contemporary notions of female empowerment. I account to the same problem when trying to write
about race and gender at the turn of the 17th century. I'd argue that Shakespeare's audiences
would not have found Desdemona's attraction to Black Othello, who is Christian and a soldier for
Venice, so difficult to understand. Because prejudice against skin colour did not become
prevalent until little later in the 17th century, when the Atlantic slave trade gained steam,
and that religious and national differences were far more profound before that. I was told this was
problematic by an eminent professor and asked how Black communities in contemporary America would
feel about my claim. If today's African Americans felt badly about it, it was implied it either could
not have been true in the 17th century or it is morally wrong to mention it. As Christopher Butler
says, postmodernist thought sees the culture as containing a number of perpetually competing
stories whose effectiveness depends not so much on an appeal to an independent standard of judgment,
as upon their appeal to the communities in which they circulate. I fear for the future of the
humanities. Postmodernism beyond the Academy. The dangers of postmodernism are not limited to
pockets of society which center on academia and social justice, however. Relativist ideas,
sensitivity to language, and focus on identity over humanity or individuality have gained dominance
in wider society. It is much easier to say what you feel than rigorously examine the evidence.
The freedom to interpret reality according to one's own values feeds into the very human tendency
towards confirmation bias and motivated reasoning. It has become commonplace to note that the far
right is now using identity politics and epistemic relativism in a very similar way to the postmodern
left. Of course, elements of the far right have always been divisive on the grounds of race,
gender, and sexuality, and prone to irrational and anti-science views. But postmodernism has
produced a culture more widely receptive to this. Kenan Malik describes this shift, quote,
when I suggested earlier that the idea of alternative facts draws upon, quote,
a set of concepts that in recent decades have been used by radicals. I was not suggesting
that Kellyanne Conway or Steve Bannon, still less Donald Trump, have been reading up on Foucault
or Baudrillard. It is rather that sections of academia on the left have in recent decades helped
create a culture in which relativized views, effects, and knowledge seem untroubling and hence
made it easier for the reaction right not just to reappropriate but also to promote reactionary
ideas. This set of concepts threatens to take us back to a time before the Enlightenment when
reason was regarded as not only inferior to faith but as a sin. James K. A. Smith, Reformed Theologian
and Professor of Philosophy, has been quick to see the advantages for Christianity and regards
postmodernism as, quote, a fresh wind of the spirit sent to revitalize the dry bones of the
church. In Who's Afraid of Postmodernism, taking Derrida, Leotard, and Foucault to church, he says,
a thoughtful engagement with postmodernism will encourage us to look backward. We will see that
much that goes under the banner of postmodern philosophy has one eye on ancient and medieval
sources and constitutes a significant recovery of pre-modern ways of knowing, being, and doing.
And postmodernism can be a catalyst for the church to reclaim its faith, not as a system of truth
dictated by mutual reason, but rather as a story that requires eyes to see and ears to hear. We on
the left should be very afraid of what our side has produced. Of course, not every problem in
society today is the fault of postmodern thinking and it is not helpful to suggest that it is.
The rise of populism and nationalism in the US and across Europe are also due to a strong
existing far right and the fear of Islamism produced by the refugee crisis. Taking a rigidly
anti-SJW stance and blaming everything on this element of the left is itself rife with motivated
reasoning and confirmation bias. The left is not responsible for the far right or the religious
right or secular nationalism, but it is responsible for not engaging with reasonable concerns reasonably
and thereby making itself harder for reasonable people to support. It is responsible for its own
fragmentation, purity demands, and divisiveness, which make even the far right appear comparatively
coherent and cohesive. In order to regain credibility, the left needs to recover a strong,
coherent, and reasonable liberalism. To do this, we need to out-discourse the postmodern left.
We need to meet their oppositions, divisions, and hierarchies with universal principles of
freedom, equality, and justice. There must be a consistency of liberal principles in opposition
to all attempts to evaluate or limit people by race, gender, or sexuality. We must address
concerns about immigration, globalism, and authoritarian identity politics, currently
empowering the far right, rather than calling people who express them racist, sexist, or homophobic,
and accusing them of wanting to commit verbal violence. We can do this whilst continuing to
oppose authoritarian factions the right, who genuinely are racist, sexist, and homophobic,
but can now hide behind a facade of reasonable opposition to the postmodern left. Our current
crisis is not one of left versus right, but of consistency, reason, humility, and universal
liberalism versus inconsistency, irrationalism, zealous certainty, and tribal authoritarianism.
The future of freedom, equality, and justice looks equally bleak, whether the postmodern left
or the post-truth right wins this current war. Those of us who value liberal democracy and the
fruits of the Enlightenment and Scientific Revolution and modernity itself must provide
a better option. Thank you for listening.
you
