We've been working on capabilities now for about three years, and we've gone to and
fro on how we want to understand capabilities.
I now believe that we have a stable view, which works for all the counter examples that
people had been bringing forward, provided we accept certain caveats about how we're
understanding capability.
And the idea is that there are many words like capacity, ability, power, which have
similar meanings to the word capability.
We just want to standardize on one meaning of the word capability, which will be compatible
with BFO, whether we introduce the word capability into BFO is still an open question.
So this is BFO, and we're interested, and BFO is now an international standard.
It's been approved, and you can find the relevant files here.
So you can now see the entire ISO file content if you go to the right place, which is unusual.
Usually you have to pay 195 Swiss francs to get the PDF version of the ISO standard.
So we're interested particularly in material entities, such as people and laptops on the
one hand, and in dispositions and roles, primarily in dispositions.
Capabilities are going to turn out to be a subkind of disposition.
But we're interested in roles because we have to distinguish those kinds of capability-like
entities, which are in fact roles rather than dispositions.
Those roles and dispositions are realisables in BFO terms, and I think we all know what
realisable means, so an attribute of a material entity is a realisable if there is a certain
kind of process which manifests it, makes it manifest, makes it appear.
So going bald is a disposition which all males possess, and this disposition is realized
in processes of losing hair.
And so now dispositions are well-known, cases of realisables, roles are well-known, cases
of realisables, functions are a special kind of disposition, and we're going to introduce
now capabilities.
Dispositions in general include bad things like losing hair.
These are good things like thinking or speaking.
Functions are really good things, as we shall see.
And then roles are those things, those attributes which we have in virtue of some social convention
or social description.
So being king or being the owner or being a renter are all matters which hold independently
of any kind of physical changes, where functions, capabilities and dispositions, all of which
are dispositions, have to occur, physical changes have to occur before they exist.
All right, so this is where function goes in BFO, and a function is a disposition which
is the raison d'être of its bearer.
Functions don't like it when I say raison d'être, because they think that that sounds
like teleology, but functions are teleological entities which exist in the world.
And they exist because there has to be entities of that sort, for reasons of survival and
reproduction in the case of biological functions and for reasons of need or desire in the case
of artifactual functions.
So the BFO idea is that only material entities have functions, and they have that function
for as long as the disposition remains a real physical possibility.
So if I have a heat pump in my attic, and my attic becomes so full that I can't enter
the attic to switch on the heat pump, and maybe things solidify, so it's impossible
for any person to go into the attic.
The function of the heat pump is still the same, it's to pump heat.
So functions in particular and dispositions in general are merely a matter of the intrinsic
physical possibilities of the bearer.
The environment doesn't matter, where for the roles, the environment and particularly
the social environment is the only thing which matters.
So a very sick heart still has the function to pump block, even if it can only just pump.
Maybe even if it can't pump at all because it's been removed temporarily from its hosts,
it still has the function to pump block.
So you're saying this is only a material entity?
Only material entities have functions.
This is just a terminological declaration.
This is Humpty Dumpty, words mean just what I want them to mean.
So you can't argue with it, it's just a...
Excellent.
So what is the function of that?
So it doesn't have a function in the BFO sense.
We can come back to that later.
All right, so this definition of function is perfectly standard.
So this is the Millican selective effect theory, which is also the genontology theory of function.
But BFO extends it to include artifacts.
So not only organic entities such as your heart have a function, but also your pen,
your laptop, the overhead projector and so forth.
They all have functions and there are two kinds of function, biological and artifactual.
Now capabilities.
Once we dealt with functions, we realized that there are other realisables left over.
So a lathe operator is trained to operate a lathe, but it's not the function of the
lathe operator to operate a lathe.
It's not clear that a lathe operator has any function, but he certainly has a capability
to operate a lathe because he's been trained.
So this is the first place where capability comes into this picture.
The chairman of the board has the authority to hire people or fire people or change the
regulations of the company.
That is a role.
Now given that he has that role, he can do things.
But that's not capability in the sense here, because it's not physical, it's not a matter
of physics, it's a matter of social norms.
And so we're going to ignore roles henceforth.
We're only interested in capabilities.
All right.
Now these are the kinds of entities which can have functions.
I don't think organisms have functions, but I'm willing to accept that the functions
of organisms might be to survive and to reproduce, so purely basic biological functions.
But generally speaking, parts of organisms have functions.
All your organs have functions, all your organ systems have functions, all your nephrons
have functions.
So the organism is full of functional parts.
And then all machines, all designed artifacts have functions because that's the definition
of the word artifact.
They are entities which were designed to perform a certain process.
And that means that they were designed to have a function, which is realized in that
process.
And then I think organizations have functions to help the poor to promote the pursuit of
good ontology.
These are functions of organization.
Now the queen bee or worker bees may have functions.
So it may be that for colonial organisms there are more specific functions than just surviving
and reproducing.
Now we're still on the level of intuitions.
We don't have a definition of capability yet.
But it's clear that my car has many more functions, sorry, many more capabilities than it has
functions, probably infinitely many more.
And I've just listed a few here.
And nowadays car manufacturers build many, many capabilities into their cars.
So to allow you to experience G-forces for instance seems to be a new, in Houston anyway
seems to be a new thing that cars have the capability to do and to impress your neighbors.
So there are many more kinds of entities which can have capabilities.
So these are all entities which can have functions.
They can also have capabilities.
But then these are entities which can have capabilities, which can't have function.
Because organisms can do things like dancing, the Foxtrot, ruling China.
And groups of organisms can do things like that too.
And also undesigned parts of nature can do things, like caves and so forth, which are
good for us, which we would like to happen.
So the world of capabilities is wider than the world of functions, all right.
Now this is work which is going to happen within BFO and so we have certain formal constraints.
The first formal constraint is every function is a capability and this is trivial.
If you're designed to perform a certain job then you're designed to execute your function
but that means you have the capability of executing your function.
So every function is a capability.
And the second formal constraint is that every capability is a disposition.
And this is, again, just for the sake of having a place for capability within the collection
of BFO-conformant ontologies.
And so it looks like this.
We have dispositions, a proper subset of dispositions are capabilities, a proper subset of capabilities
of functions.
And these things sometimes have role-like counterparts, but we won't deal with those.
This is the definition.
This has taken a long time and it really does work and it copes with apparent counter-examples
to some of the things we want to say about capabilities, which were problems for earlier
definitions that we were experimenting with.
So this is it.
Disposition in whose realization some organism or group of organisms has an interest.
And it's important that an entity which has been lying underground for hundreds of years
and which has the capability of threshing a certain kind of wheat which no longer grows
anywhere on earth, still, because it's been physically unchanged, has the capability of
threshing that kind of wheat.
Even though no one will ever want to exercise that capability.
And that's purely in order to save the axiom that every capability is a disposition.
All right.
So now we have some axioms which hold of capabilities.
So if a part of an organism has a function, then that organism itself has an interest
in the realization of that function.
And so that organism has that capability.
So we can apply the interest definition of capability to organic entities like hearts
and nephrons and digestive systems and so forth.
All of those are capabilities.
This is trivial because they're already functions, but still it's an important way to illustrate
the role of interest.
Now that biological axiom implies that we have many interests of which we know nothing.
And for many millions of years, organisms had many, many interests of which they knew
nothing of any of those interests.
Now because organisms, because interests can exist even though we don't know about them,
this follows that capabilities can be discovered.
So there are many unknown capabilities in the world and some of them can be discovered.
Whenever we make a plan, we have an interest in the realization of all the processes prescribed
by that plan.
And so if those are processes which are real possibilities, then they are capabilities.
And facilitation in the prescription axiom, actually no, then there is a facilitation
axiom.
If someone has an interest in realizing a disposition D and if the realization of some
other disposition D prime facilitates the realization of D, then that someone has an
interest in the realization of D prime.
And so facilitates here means either that D prime's realization is necessary for D to
exist or that D prime's realization occurring would improve the grade of the realization
of D.
And mentioning grade here introduces the topic of gradeability, yes, Jupps?
So if the facilitation also includes, the form of grade would improve the grade of the
latter, then why can your axiom be like this?
If you could only include the master card, it would be necessity.
Then it would be with the axiom, which would go to the axiom again.
But there may also be, X may have an interest in realizing the prescription D, but maybe
not in D because facilitation is not a necessity.
So he might say, D can be realized slower, if D prime facilitates and then I have D
faster, I maybe don't want this.
So he will not want D prime, but still want D because he's interested in the slow realization
of D. I could like, like getting, like eating a meal slowly, but eating it quickly.
Yes.
And so on and so forth.
So can you...
If the facilitation is necessary for the realization of D, then I suppose...
So that isn't a worry that has gone through my mind, but you've just given me a good example.
Can you write it down?
And we'll talk about it later.
So I need to think this through.
All right.
So gradeability has been in the theory of capabilities from the beginning.
So it's an important feature of functions that they're gradeable.
And it's important feature of capabilities that they're gradeable.
So your heart has the function to pump blood.
And when it's functioning in a prototypical way, then it's doing its job.
And it can deviate from doing that job more and more, but then the heart is no longer functioning
and you're dead.
So that's when the function and the capability go out of existence.
And this is the extreme form of gradeability, zero score on the gradeability change.
But all capabilities have gradeability in that sense.
And that goes hand in hand with the fact that capabilities are what we learn in school.
So we were learning earlier today about how education is to either create capabilities
or increase the grade of capabilities.
Capabilities like functions are permanent, so they last for so long as the disposition,
which they are the disposition, exists as a real physical possibility.
So this is a summary which just lists the definitions in the order which I gave them.
And now this is a restatement of how the diagram works.
So dispositions sometimes are such that we have an interest in their realization
and then they become capabilities.
And capabilities, some of them, are in fact the reason for the existence of the bearer,
and that's when we have functions.
Can you go back to the previous slide?
There's a permanent capabilities of permanent.
Permanent until the real physical possibility ceases to exist.
So you break the thing, or you...
So you take the language...
Which I'm coming to.
You forget the language.
Then the capability ceases to exist.
So permanent as long as the real physical possibility exists.
So long as you have the real physical possibility of speaking English, you have the capability.
If you forget it, and then we have to teach it to you all over again,
that's a new capability.
Bill?
Oh, I guess I was thinking about things like offering...
Yes, so if you find that Remdesivir has the capability of curing COVID,
let's suppose you find that, then it's still not the function of Remdesivir to cure COVID.
But if you then make new Remdesivir pills, are they pills?
Yes.
And put COVID pill on the box, then the function of those new pills is to cure COVID.
Remdesivir is talking about things like aspirin that get prescribed for pain relief,
and also it has a blood thinner.
So first of all, many things have multiple functions, particularly organic things.
I understand it seems like there was a social shift there, not necessarily...
So it's all...
Yeah, it's all a question of raison d'etre.
But look, there's also all selected in the definition.
So I mean, most of the...
Since Earth exists, most of the time there have not been humans around,
good design and things, but then all the functions were selected by nature.
So that's what this is supposed to mean, right?
Yeah.
Yeah, I think that drug ontology slide with what's the generic for well-vutron and anti-depressant,
that subsequently got repurposed for smoking cessation.
Right.
That bucropin or something like that.
And when it's branded as well-vutron, its function is anti-depressant.
When it's branded as the other drug, brand name, its function is to not smoke,
they both have both capabilities.
Yeah.
So I think that it works for rebranding like that.
It's not...
It's in more labor.
You can have multiple functions in one...
Right.
Yeah.
Like well-vutron does not have the anti-smoking...
No, but SSRI is a multiple function in more labor.
No, it's not.
It's got all those functions.
It's alright.
It's alright.
But if a new function is assigned to it, because you give it to drivers,
then it's added and then you have a new function until the second period.
So I guess I think about this a little bit from a data annotator standpoint.
And I'm trying to...
You know, I have all these drugs.
I have these drugs in different names.
And I run across and I say,
wow, should I say this is the capability of the drug,
the disposition of the drug, the function of the drug.
And I can draw some pretty clear guidelines into a function of disposition.
But what I mean by this is that capability of disposition or...
So every...
No, no, no.
To me...
Every capability is a disposition.
So you're always safe to use disposition.
And I think that it's actually going to make your life easier.
You can always use capability if you're not sure what the function is.
So if you know that this pill has the capability to cure depression,
because it says so on the label, then if you're not sure whether that's its function,
then you just put capability.
And the capability will be important later, as we will see.
For drugs, it's not so important whether you get the function capability label right.
But for other things, it is important.
I could just see differences arising across multiple annotations of local capability
or the disposition.
So that would...
And maybe that doesn't matter much, because they're all disposition.
Yeah, exactly.
But I think people might not like that kind of funny,
because they might want their clear, clean lines between their options.
So actually, you are pointing to an issue.
One and the same disposition can be a capability in the eyes of some people
and a mere disposition in the eyes of other people in important ways,
which are a matter of life and death, as we shall see.
So you're right to point out this issue, but I don't think...
I think the issue is so clear that the annotators will not have a problem.
But we'll see when we get to that.
So this is the diagram.
Now, there are some simple rules which enable you to tack back and forth between capabilities and functions.
So it's very often the case that if a whole has a capability,
then this is because it has some part which has a function.
So my car can play music because I have a stereo system in my car.
And my digestive system can digest food, has a function to digest food,
and therefore I can digest food, but that also causes problems.
So I have a capability to digest specific kinds of food,
but my digestive system is generic.
Its function is not to digest specific kinds of food.
That means not that there's anything wrong with the theory,
but that this general rule does not work in general.
It's a general rule because it works often, but it doesn't work always.
All right.
So for organisms, we have two kinds of capabilities.
First of all, to survive and to reproduce or anything which promotes both of those, such as eating.
Organisms have the capability to convert energy in their environment at ATP.
Is that the correct statement?
So organisms have the ability to synthesize ATP.
Because that's necessary for their survival and reproduction.
But then they also have capabilities which go beyond merely biological capabilities.
That's trivial.
Machines have capabilities because organisms have an interest in their doing things.
And those organisms might be the owner of the machine,
or the worker in the factory where the machine is made,
or it might be a patient in an ICU or a passenger.
So there are many kinds of organisms who have many kinds of interests
in the realizations of the capabilities of machines.
Better in the realizations of the dispositions of those machines
and therefore those dispositions are by the definition capabilities.
And then we have great ability.
So we can grade the realizations of capabilities from on a scale.
But that means we also have abnormal realizations,
which are not capabilities, but disabilities.
So shopping addiction, for instance.
If we realize the capability to go shopping too much,
then we have something which is no longer a capability, Simplicita.
It's a capability which has to be counterbalanced against the abnormal realization.
And this is true for many capabilities,
that they bring about abnormal side effects, which are not capabilities.
And now we come to Bill's problem, Bill Duncan's problem.
Yeah.
That's a good question.
I imagine that there are some animals who chased prey too quickly
and suffer from that.
But I don't know.
So what is a capability in one context may be a disability in another.
So the capability to kill without feelings of guilt.
Normally we would regard that as a disability,
but in the mafia that is regarded as a capability.
And there are many such cases where in one community or one context,
a disposition is regarded as something good in which we have an interest,
and in another context it's regarded as something bad.
Then, okay, so they might regard it as your function,
but they wouldn't be right because in BFO terms it's not your function.
Because it's not your raison d'etre.
All right.
And now here are the areas where capabilities data is going to be important.
First of all, with regard to education and training,
which is why great ability is important,
with regard to hiring and promotion,
all human capital has to do with the capabilities
that the possessor of the human capital has.
Consulting, I believe, is largely a process of increasing,
adding to or increasing the grade of capabilities of organizations.
A capability data is important when you're doing mission planning
in large organizations like military organizations where they have.
In the DOD they have a whole department devoted to keeping track
of the capabilities of different units within the organization.
And then there is the problem of finding capabilities.
So if you work for Google and you want to know whether there's someone in Google
who has some capability that you need to exploit,
then you have to Google Google.
So people who work for Google Google Google in order to find the people they need.
And similarly, if you work for the NIH or for any kind of large organization
where you need people to approve grants or vet decisions,
then you need to find people in your organization
who have certain combinations of capabilities.
And it's very difficult to collect and keep up-to-date data about those things.
And there are whole disciplines of capabilities engineering,
which are part of systems engineering.
All right, now very quickly, because Clint is going to talk about this in greater detail,
language is a capability.
In fact, that's the definition of language which I want to promote.
A language is, so this is a question which we could discuss maybe and maybe Clint resolves it,
it's either a capability or it's an aggregate of capabilities.
And so language is defined as a special kind of competence.
But where competence in the Chomsky world is seen as a set of universal innate rules,
universal grammar, we're viewing competence as a matter of capabilities
which are realized by people speaking and reading and writing and so forth.
And some of those are innate.
Some of the features exemplified when we speak or write or read are innate.
But no language is innate.
Not even English is innate.
All languages have to be learned.
But we have the innate capability to learn some language.
But for that, we need parents and kin and dictionaries and teachers and so forth.
There's a category error in the writing part.
Because?
Because in the socialization part, societal norms, they cannot be at the same level as peers.
Yeah, you're right, that's not my picture.
So a definition of language, it's simple.
A language is an aggregate of capabilities of its users.
Now there are problems with this definition.
First of all, it's circular.
But I believe that this is a harmless circularity.
And what we have actually is something like a triple of terms,
each of which can only be defined by reference to the others.
And which triple we choose to take as primitive,
we're going to end up with circularity anyway.
So we take the capability term in the triple as primitive,
and we get the others for free as it were.
And because we have an independent definition of capability, the definition still works.
So I can give you other examples where this same circularity feature is present also
where it proves to be perfectly harmless.
Topology is a good example.
All right, now in order for an aggregate of linguistic dispositions,
which we call English or Italian or Chinese,
to exist and to be maintained in existence,
there have to be very, very complicated mechanisms.
Mothers and schools and so forth to keep the aggregate of capabilities
going from generation to generation.
All right, a language is an aggregate of capabilities of its users.
Now one nice feature of this definition is that we can define very easily
what a dialect is.
It's a sub-aggregate.
So in other words, it's the aggregate of capabilities or competencies
to speak the relevant language in a subset of people,
almost certainly within certain contexts where they speak the specific form of the language,
which is their dialect, rather than the more generic form,
which their parents speak.
So this is a map of Great Britain,
and this is Manchester, which is roughly where I come from.
And in Manchester there are lots of dialects,
which are divided geographically in this way.
I come from the rough, well, rough broad area of the northwest,
not from the posh area.
And what this shows, well, this is a, the English language in general
is an instance of the type language,
which is a sub-class of the type aggregate of dispositions,
which is a sub-class of the type disposition in BFO terms.
And then Manchester dialect is an instance of the type dialect.
Actually, it's a collection of dialects, but we'll come to that.
It's an instance of the type dialect, which is a part of language.
So every dialect is a part of some language,
in a very, very simple, myriological sense.
And that's because one aggregate of dispositions
is part of another aggregate of dispositions.
And these aggregates of linguistic dispositions
go hand-in-hand very often with aggregates
of non-linguistic dispositions to behave in certain ways,
for instance, to beat people up if they come from Liverpool.
So...
I'm sure you never did that.
No.
All right, now Sol gets many of these things right.
So this is a long quotation from Sol.
And the point is that my ability to speak English
is based in the physics of my brain
and of my diaphragm and of all the other organs
which are involved in producing speech.
Which are pictured there.
All right, and now all of this is kept going,
not only if there are people teaching each new generation,
but also if people are correcting and enforcing rules.
Not necessarily rules of good grammar.
They could be enforcing rules of bad grammar
because that's what happens with certain kinds of dialects.
The dialects are there to protect the group.
All right, so these are specifically human capabilities.
Enforcing rules and so forth.
Teaching, managing, guiding, appointing.
Ah, we don't need that and that's the end.
All right, so how am I doing?
I'm actually, we're back on time.
Believe it or not.
So we have time, I guess, for a few questions,
but we'll move to Clint very quickly.
I just had a question about the barrier of capabilities.
So when you talk about parts of my body having capability
and then I have that capability.
Parts of your body have functions
and therefore you have the corresponding capability.
Okay, okay.
That resolves it.
I was wondering about the migration
and not, SDC's not being migratable.
Like if I donate my kidney to Matt.
Yes, good.
That's a good starting question.
So if you donate your kidney to Matt,
then the kidney in Matt still has the function
of cleansing the liquids in your body.
But they have now the capability
of cleansing the liquids in Matt's body.
Matt's body, but they don't have the function
of cleansing the liquids in Matt's body.
It's the selected...
So the design would take care of the case that was just right.
I don't think that the kidney evolves
when it's shifted from one body to another.
I don't think we need to do that.
We can use the design for the grown kidney in the lab,
but I don't see why we need it.
It doesn't have...
It still has the function of cleansing blood in his body,
but it has now the capability of cleansing liquids in...
And the function too.
And the function too, I agree.
The capability...
It's not...
No, this is the etiological theory.
The function or the capability of an entity
depends on where it comes from.
So...
Anyway, we can...
I have an issue with the definition of capability
and the word interest.
So what you're saying is that capability
can only be assigned to an organism that hasn't...
No, no.
There has to be an organism or a group of organisms
which has an interest in the realization of a disposition
for it to be a capability.
But the disposition could be in another human being,
or it could be in a table or a planet or...
So there are lots of entities,
kinds of entities have capabilities,
but only the ones where we have some interest.
Capability is an interest-dependent notion,
which is...
This is not that of the organisms that are...
We ask humans, I guess.
Well, no, the rats and mice have interests
in the functioning of their parts too,
so they have capabilities.
It's not just humans.
Tables don't have an interest.
No, tables don't have an interest.
Any more?
Okay, so Clint...
