I'm going to talk about today is a survey of the ontology of mathematics.
I'm going to go through this quickly and so I'll go through the main options in the ontology of mathematics very quickly.
And then I am going to spend a little bit more time describing the option that Yorbsden and I are developing,
..which is not completely original..
..but it's original as applied to mathematics.
It's also original in the sense that it's still new.
Which means that we haven't, by any means, identified all the weak points.
And even the phrasing, in other words, the terminological choices..
..that we want to make in order to make our view clear..
..they're still somewhat uncertain.
i gyd gyda'i
ddim yn éch dechinizio gyrfyddu yn erbyn Länder, oherwydd o edrych yn dda i'chhaol budd, i am ddod
i gynghoriad, i ddyl carbol, arweinutau'r rhaid yn y lleol, ymyín én yn fywad y boliad.
Ond ges ydyried o'r unig bucksunden honno gweithio gwaith,
ydy casa maes i gyllumin,
s traz, Yhbedwydd.
Ychydig,
yr hyn.
Dyma lle roddodd venue yn ardal
gan ymingodion réu ar gyfer eur iawn cop constant
ac bilyd i gwio bwysig,
mae'n suheadd yn esdweithio gandain.
Felly yn rhywbeth yn gwneud
a llwy O'r byd fourteen tolerant.
A ychydig, mae'r tymidol gyda gweithr.
Felly mae'n yn tuch gweld cyn mur eitherível yn y ddebyg yw y mydd an hari.
Mewn an Ywn daed lawer ers ein le abolition ardigedd o ran gyflwm beth,
dw am defnyddio o Ryfnegwad ar hynny mewn iaeth yn ddr Griffin Llywodraeth,
ond mae'n ein gewch genlyniad a reaches eich ysgol nyaeth addysg
a chymno'r llwwyr yn tu'n unfoldog yma ar ôl ein bod i addysg ar ma nhwch
meddwiad yma i gan gofio pethau gyntaf ei fodedd i'n comparnu feddwl o gweld fy m lorsque
a brosie'r percoffiれ ffgodd borderี i'n ddegu ei meddwl ar ungylched хорошad ym rhai
rydyiness�� Aerotherie felly roedd llwyddaeth eich hyd oherod rychosig
Theoretic said that to believe that there are mathematical entities is just a mistake now
we can use mathematical symbols to do all kinds of wonderful things but those symbols don't
refer to anything and those who think they're referring to something are just making a mistake,
this mistake is a very useful mistake to make but it's a mistake.
followed by a related in the sense that there isn't really a festa mindist rather emotemical internetist is a logical system.
Lodgeth is not about anything to say that if p then p or q is not about anything, but it is a valid rule of logic.
Now what logitism says is that mathematics is a branch of logic, and therefore mathematics doesn't say anything, it's not about anything.
It gives you certain kinds of rules of inference. We'll say a little bit about that, but we're not going to take it very far.
That is the most mature view of mathematics, and the most thoroughly developed, but unfortunately it was also shown to be not workable at different levels.
Now another view, and again I'm not sure this has ever had any defenders in mathematics, but has had defenders in other areas like ethics.
It might be called anything that satisfies them, and the idea here is that if you have a complicated theory about ethics for instance,
and you don't know what norms or values or good or evil are, then you just present your theory as a collection of axioms,
and you say anything that satisfies these axioms is a norm or is a value. I don't know what those things are, and I don't care because I have my axioms.
That is a whole programme in philosophy called the camera programme, because it was invented and I think it's still defended by some people in camera.
Platonism, this is probably the oldest but not the most well-developed theory, says that there is a whole realm of mathematical entities which are abstract or atemporal outside our purview.
It's not part of the empirical world, and mathematics is about those entities, so mathematicians stare up into this platonic heaven and they decide how to write their axioms, and you do see some mathematicians staring up when they were.
The big problem with this is that we have to explain how it should be that truths about abstract entities in some transcended realm could be so useful when doing physics for instance, and that's the big problem in philosophy of mathematics, namely how do we explain the applicability for mathematics.
The final view, and our view will be a sub-view under this heading, although you'll taste the idea that we might be social constructionists. We are good social constructionists.
The final view says that mathematical entities are social constructions, and I will give you some examples of bad social constructionism, and then I hope you will be convinced that there is also good social constructionism, and then we will argue that mathematics is one example.
I think there's another option, that is the fictionalism.
Oh yes, you're right. Actually it was on my list, but somehow I did it. Fictionalism is a bit like the error theory. Fictionalism says that mathematical entities are like fictional entities.
In fact my very first publication defends of you like that, but in a good way.
Alright, so fictionalism is whenever I use a zoom in the university the internet breaks down.
So in order to avoid the consequences of that I'm going to record in the real world rather than in the zoom world.
I'm recording if you want.
You could record it. You are recording. I will record it anyway just for fun.
Ok, now.
Let me get rid of this with any luck.
It really likes to live things.
Are there any other questions while we're waiting?
Alright.
Can you say fiction is a kind of social construction?
No, because there's nothing constructed.
Well, I guess so, but that's not going to be an important question.
Logicism, as I say, says mathematics is a branch of logic, so if you could express all the theorems and axioms or all the theories of mathematics in logical terms,
then in principle you ought to be able to deduce all of those theorems or all of those axioms from the axioms of logic.
Frager and Russell both believed that this was possible and they both presented their accounts of how you could indeed infer large bodies of mathematics from logic.
In Frager's case, Russell showed that Frager's axioms were inconsistent in creating Russell's paradox, which he created just before Frager's main work was about to go to the press.
Frager was able to add a paragraph at the beginning forward in which he said that Mr Russell has suggested to me that there is some problem, but I believe that this problem can be addressed if you just add this extra wrinkle to some axiom.
That extra wrinkle did indeed work, but only in a universe which had exactly one object or some crazy restriction.
Russell published his own version, along with Whitehead, and he did a much better job in the sense that he was, as far as we can tell, consistent, but the job that he did was very, very complicated.
It was useful in the further development of logicism within the realm of set theory, but it was more complicated than the useful versions of that theory.
The useful versions of logicism say that not that all mathematics is a branch of logic, but that all mathematics can be expressed using set theory, the axioms of set theory.
A set theory is somewhat more powerful than logic as we understand it, and also set theory has problems with itself.
But I know recently there's a song chain called New Fragerism, so some guys may not be able to fix the problem.
These things come back. Anything that satisfies this and we've already mentioned, I've mentioned that Whitehead and Russell work in three volumes, it's called Wikipedia Mathematica.
It's an amazing piece of work, but as I say, it became outmoded.
A logicism, we've talked about. The next bit is taken from a talk I gave 20, maybe more years ago, hence the real old-fashioned design of my slides compared to the new ones, which are much more modern.
I deleted all the animation. This is just an extract, a few slides from this old talk, because economics is one area where social constructionism would seem to be a reasonable choice.
But Austrian economics adds a very important dimension to social constructionism, which I will try to explain very quickly, and then later on we'll see the relevance to mathematics.
Carl Mega was the founder of the Austrian School of Economics. He founded a school, some members of which were associated with Austrian philosophers such as Brentana, and so I published a book on the Austrian School of Philosophy, which contends treatments of Austrian economics.
I also published several papers on Austrian economics. The two running threads which joined together the Austrian economists and the Austrian philosophers are a kind of reverence for Aristotle on the one hand, and then a belief in a priorism on the other hand.
I will explain the a priorism in due course. Now, Mega had a reference for Aristotle in some of his terminology. He also had a reverence for things which were not Aristotelian in other parts of his writing, so Mega is not a simple programme for any kind of Aristotelian approach.
Now, what is economics for the Austrian School? So the economic domain domain includes things like buying and selling, valuing and pricing, putting a price on something and negotiating in many other things.
And if you take the state into account that includes things like taxing and includes banks in the account and includes things like interest rates, loans and so forth, so there are lots of constituent parts of the economic domain and the Austrian School says, well, let's work out what are the necessary dependence relations.
So in order for something to have a price, does it have to have a value? I don't know, but in order for something to have a value, the Austrians would say, it has to be such that someone values it, so there have to be things like preferences.
So we have a dependence relation between value and preference or between value and wanting. Now, this is a very simple example of what we're going to be calling an a priori law.
And what that means is that it's not a matter of logic. In other words, it's not purely empty. There is some content, some real content there. And it's something which is intelligible.
Anybody who understands what value is in the economic realm and what wanting or preferring is in the economic realm can see that value requires wanting or preferring.
This is called subjectivity in the Austrian School. The idea is that things have value only to the degree that the subjects in the relevant society are willing to pay or are willing to barter in order to own those things.
And there are many others such a priori dependence relations in the doctrine of the Austrian School, which become very, very sophisticated and have all kinds of implications.
I've given another one here. You can't have an exchange without having an exchanger and an exchange. You can't have a buying without having a selling and you can't have a selling without having a buying.
There are lots and lots of relations like this. Now, some of them may be analytic in the sense that they are just a matter of definition.
But you see, if we take buying and selling, it can't be that both buying and selling are definable in such a way that it becomes analytic that buying requires selling and selling because of buying.
You have to start either with buying or with selling. You can define selling in terms of buying, but then you have to accept buying and the features of buying as being something which is not analytic.
And I'll talk a little bit about that as we go along.
This is an example of the kind of analysis that Menga created. For him, a good exists only if there is a need. A good implies value and value exists only if there is some kind of a need, whether this be a basic need or whether it's a need of the moment.
For instance, when you see that some film is playing in a cinema and you feel a need to go and see that film, that's not a basic need, but it is a need in the sense of Menga.
A basic need would be the need for food or something.
The object has to be searched and you can satisfy that need. There has to be knowledge, so good exists only where there is knowledge. Knowledge of needs and knowledge of causal connections and not necessarily on your part, there could be causal connections on the part of the seller.
And a command over the thing so you have the money to buy it. Somebody has a copy to sell.
Now, this a priorism as the Austrian school is defended in Menga, but it's defended in a more radical way in Mises, Ludwig von Mises, who was a famous Austrian economist.
First half of the 20th century, with a large school of followers, and he says, and he was influenced by Kant, which may explain why he gets things wrong.
He said that there is only one axiom and that all the other axioms are economic to follow from this one axiom, and the axiom is man and act.
This is the axiom of action. If we understand action, he says, then we understand need, value and all the other things, analytics. They all follow from this one axiom.
And then two of his followers, one from Murray Rothbard. Rothbard, in fact, reviewed the books that I wrote on the Austrian school very friendly.
And Hermann Hoppe, he's a German, which is not necessarily a bad thing, who wrote a very nice book, which I like defending sovereignty. It's called something like The Mistake, which is democracy.
And I like some of the thinking of Hoppe.
All right, now, so we've already mentioned many of the terms that we're going to need, so something is analytic if it's a truth of logic, and we're talking about truths or propositions or judgments or statements.
A truth is synthetic, if it adds to your knowledge, it's not analytic in other words.
Truth is a priori, if it's known independently of experience, which means it's intrinsically intelligible in some way.
And a posteriori just means known via experience, and that is the answer.
You could have picked a better photo for sure.
Absolutely, I did, but he must have looked like it.
I mean, there are better pictures of it.
As an a priori.
So, Kant had the theory of the synthetic a priori, but he thought that he only held for physics.
We have synthetic a priori knowledge about time, space, and causality, and that knowledge is called Newtonian mechanics.
He thought we knew that a priori, and maybe he's right, but the point I'm going to be making in what follows is that there are many, many other areas
that are such that we have a priori knowledge, seemingly, which Kant did not address.
So, Kant may have got some aspects of the synthetic a priori right, but he certainly didn't get the scope right.
All right, so I just said that.
Now, I don't want to talk too much about visas on mega, these are just illustrations.
This is more important, so this shows the Aristotelian basis of mega's views, and general essence and general connection,
they are the two key components of our view of mathematics and physics, actually, when we get to it.
So, in German, that would be Wiesen, and Wiesen's Zusammenhang.
Now, general essence and general, and the general connection of economic phenomena, they sound okay in a sentence like this,
but if you try and write about general essence in a paper published in an analytic philosophy journal, which is the only type of philosophical journal which we're publishing in,
then people will just turn up their noses and say this is something old fashioned, so that's our problem.
So, we would like to call the synthetic a priori truths, which we are studying, basis of Zusammenhang.
General connections of essences, but we can't because it's German.
So, I want to stick with the synthetic a priori truth.
Because we're not talking about truth anymore, we're talking about things on the side of the mathematical or realm of physics.
Can you call the postulates instead of truths?
That's the same problem. So, postulates are on the side of truths. We want to talk about what is on the side of objects.
We want to say that there are essences and essential connections on the side of the objects in themselves, or objects themselves.
And that this is so in mathematics as well as in physics.
In mathematics, if anything, even more obviously the case, but in mathematics, the tendency to see things as being analytic is very strong because of logic.
So, this is another word for it, non-inductive intelligible structures.
Now, we know that every human is born virtually with the capabilities to apprehend, recognise non-inductive intelligible structures.
Differences between colours, for instance, can't be learned. Differences between shapes can't be learned.
Differences between feeling good and feeling bad can't be learned.
And grasp those things innately. They are intrinsically intelligent.
And as we get older, more and more of these intrinsically intelligible structures become evident to us.
So, as a result of the fact that we also learn a lot of things very quickly.
Okay, this is Adolf Reiner, who has a much more, much straighter face than that should be.
He was a philosopher of law, who was also a student of Hussal.
And in 1913 he published a book, Length Monograph, on the a priori foundations of the civil law.
And it's that which is our model for mathematics.
We want to do the ontology of mathematics based on this Reinachian approach.
And I have a lot of slides now about Reinach, but I'll go through them very quickly, so don't be disturbed by the fact that I'm going through them very quickly, because we don't need them most of the time.
Let me say a little bit more about Reinach, just for interest sake.
So, Reinach was sometimes referred to by Hussal's followers, so Reinach was a follower of Hussal.
Hussal founded a school, but there was a group of Hussal's followers in Munich.
And Hussal was in Göttingen, and then in Freiburg, he was not in Munich.
So, the Munich School of Phenomenology is a kind of separate wing.
And they were accused by Hussal of practicing what he later on, when he became critical of some of the Munich School work, of practicing picture book phenomena.
What that means is they would take a domain like aesthetics or chemistry or ethics or the will, and they would draw phenomenological pictures, diagrams effectively, although they didn't use diagrams,
but they were thinking in a way in which you could capture very well diagrammatically.
That's why I like them, incidentally. I like diagrammatically the representations of philosophical views.
That's why I became an ontologist.
So, Reinach was almost certainly the cleverest of these people, and he was referred by other people later on, even when he moved to Göttingen to be in the same town,
in the same university, and he was referred to as the phenomenologists.
Because you should go to him if you wanted to know about phenomenology, not to Hussal.
He was a much better teacher.
Now, another person who was in Göttingen is Edith Stein.
And I ought to see if you all know who Edith Stein is.
Edith Stein.
So, she was Hussal's assistant during this period.
She helped Hussal write at least one of his books.
Hussal obviously couldn't give her a job because she was a woman.
But she was Jewish, but she converted to Christianity.
But she was sent to a concentration camp.
Her life was a model of singiness, and so, after she died, they made her a saint.
So, the Munich school had at least one saint as a member.
But actually, it had two, because another member of the Munich school, who was also a friend of Edith Stein and Reinach,
was a Polish philosopher called Roman Ingaarden, who applied the Munich phenomenological method to works of art, literature, architecture, music, and so forth, among other things.
And one of Ingaarden's friends in Poland, when he went back to Poland, became the Pope, the Polish Pope, who was now a saint.
And the Polish Pope was a professor of philosophy, and he was focusing on Thomas Aquinas and Max Schela.
Max Schela is another member of the Munich school who applied the phenomenological method, in his case, to everything under the sun from aristocracy to war, to the greatness of Germany and the impoverishedness of the grocery in England and so on.
So, Schela was fantastically all-encompassing, but his book on his ethics is also fantastic.
All right, so this work, like the Speech Act theory of Austen and Stealth, starts out with a promise.
The promise is a phenomenon which we're all familiar with and which is obeying a priori look, just like buying and selling.
In fact, it's related to buying and selling because there are some promise aspects involved in many economic transactions.
Contracts are promises.
And now, this is a very good source book about Reina and the whole Munich school.
Okay, I'll come back to Reina in a minute. Let me just talk about social constructionism.
First of all, it's a big bad, ugly vegetable garden with different kinds of views.
A very illustrative account of this big bad vegetable garden is by Ian Hacking.
It's called the social construction of what.
And some of the examples he deals with in that book are facts, gender, quarks, madness, reality and so on.
So, the idea that madness is socially constructed would turn on the fact that particular terms like hysteria,
which were very common in the Victorian times but which are now completely not used,
would suggest that what those particular terms referred to was a worse social construction.
That's the kind of idea, always a historical idea in Hacking,
that Hacking uses to characterise, identify social constructions.
All right, now, I'm going to talk a little bit about In-Garden
because this will give us a clone to the complexity that can be found on the side of socially constructed entities.
Now, the whole world of works of art is clearly socially constructed.
There are clearly different tastes at different times in the history of art,
which makes certain things beautiful to one generation that would not necessarily be beautiful to another generation.
Now, In-Garden's approach to unpacking the ontological structure of a work of art is in terms of what he calls strata.
So, a work of art for In-Garden has strata which we need to apprehend in order to apprehend the work as a whole,
but we apprehend them as a unity.
This is a work of literature. We have phonetic formations.
In other words, when we read a poem or a novel, then we read in such a way that we read the words as being spoken with a given accent.
For instance, if we read a novel in which there is a German or a Russian character,
we may hear the German or the Russian accent, but in any case, there are sounds afoot in the literary work.
If you don't have any sound associations when you read a work, then you're not getting the full body of the work as an aesthetic object.
Then there are meanings, simple meanings and complex meanings of all the sentences and paragraphs and so on.
Then there are what In-Garden calls schematised aspects.
So, we are presented with the hero as having long black hair, but we're not presented.
We don't know how long, and we don't know whether it's genuinely black or whether it's dyed, so that it's schematised aspects.
That means that we don't know everything. We only know certain things, a finite number of things about the places and people and actions presented in the work.
Then there are those places and people and actions and states of affairs which are presented in the work, and they form a stratum in and of themselves.
In some cases, there will be value qualities and metaphysical qualities which you apprehend when you read it.
The In-Garden has a very complicated account of what it is to read a literary work.
What the work is depends also upon the readings that take place.
He has a theory of the literary work of art as being a product of human intentions.
Now, that's a kind of social construction.
So, if you just throw a lot of ink on paper and it comes out with words, to be words, by whatever means,
but no, it's never sold, it's never given to anybody as a novel, then it does not exist as a literary work.
A literary work exists only if there is a readership.
Now, it may be that no one reads it anymore, but still it exists because there was once a readership.
So, it's a social construction because the readership is a social entity.
And the author is relatively insignificant.
So, the author doesn't decide what the meanings are or what the schematised aspects are.
I accept, insofar as he gives all the clues that you can ever get when he writes the novel.
It's the readers who make those decisions.
Clearly, they'll be guided by what the author says, and they will share lots of assumptions that the author shares,
but they may also have different assumptions.
All right, so, an example, well, now I won't do the next one.
Now, music has only two aspects, or in some cases only one.
So, we're talking now about, not about opera, but about synthesis of one second.
And some works of music have value qualities, they have a kind of metaphysical quality about them.
But, basically, what music is characterised by, and here is an error,
is not by words sounds as it says here, but by sound.
So, the work of music is a sound formation, a big one.
Yes, Carmella.
Are readers or audiences co-agents?
It comes down to that, yes.
It's not symmetry.
So, basically, in Garden has a view according to which the work of art has a life.
It's born when the author pushes the manuscript on the publisher's desk, or a bit later than that,
and it dies when the planet is annihilated or everyone stops reading it.
And during that time, the readers determine what the significance, meaning, the sounds even.
So, Shakespeare, we hear now, if it's performed today, may be in a kind of old-fashioned English.
But still, it's English, where in Shakespeare's day, the accent that people spoke in England
was a combination of what is today Yorkshire and Danish.
And that's quite different from what the way we hear Shakespeare now,
and that means that Shakespeare's plays have, in their life, evolved to be different today
from what they were in the olden days that Mark created.
And the examples come from set theory.
The best example of autonomous mathematical objects, I say, are the numbers.
And so, the German mathematician Chronica had a saying, which has been repeated many times,
God made the natural numbers. All the rest is the work of man.
So, I'm defending the... something like the Chronica theory.
And then, the second paper I published was on the same topic, actually, I was already boring.
So, I just went into more details about the historical aspect of mathematics,
although I didn't really say any of the things that Jobs and I want to say now about the history of mathematics,
because I was working with a rather narrowly constrained phenomenological framework.
I was working to find a way of applying Ingarth's ideas to mathematical entities.
And then, the third paper I will mention, all of this is within the 1970s.
These were the... I think this was not the third paper I published.
This paper is about this relation between representations on the one hand and the real world now.
And so, there is this picture. It was really published.
It didn't force me to make a real print quality graphic, unfortunately.
So, that's the real world down there, and the real world, of course, includes consciousness.
And the graphic doesn't even capture that very well.
And because there is consciousness, there are all kinds of targets of intentionality.
Now, some of these targets of intentionality, which are in the inner suburbs, if you like, might exist.
So, for instance, the snow-smoking zone in a restaurant that's socially constructed, if it really exists,
Poland really exists, that's socially constructed.
But some of the things in the outer suburbs are dependent for their ontological status exclusively upon consciousness.
And examples would be fictional characters.
Now, the question is where mathematics goes.
In the earlier papers, I had an argument for the role for two kinds of mathematical entities.
But this is about all the different kinds of entities that we can be directed towards in our mental experience.
Some of them are autonomous, some of them are intentional, but they really exist, like Poland,
and some of them are purely intentional.
So, they can be targets, but they don't exist in any sense, such as Hamlet in play,
or better Sherlock Holmes in the novel.
Now, this is a slightly richer diagram, so it's a better diagram.
So, the inner suburbs now are counted as parts of the real world, but the parts of it here are still dependent upon consciousness.
And these are intentional, so the rocks and the planets are autonomous, but everything above the line is intentional.
And the outer suburbs then are fictional, basically.
Now, how many people have heard of intuitionism as a philosophy of mathematics?
A couple of you, three.
So, intuitionism is one of the classic positions that people developed in the philosophy of mathematics.
After the failure of Frege, people wanted a more grounded foundation for mathematics.
They wanted to have certainty.
Frege thought he had certainty, but the whole thing plopped.
Frege is fantastic, his contributions are fantastic, but his account of logicism was a failure,
and therefore his account of mathematics is a failure.
Brower and Heiting developed their own peculiar way of shoring up the safety of mathematical claims,
and the way he said, we can only believe in mathematical objects if we've constructed them in a construction,
and a construction is a kind of proof, so you can construct numbers by counting to them.
There were some extreme followers of this kind of view who said that since we can't count to, let's say, 600 billion,
600 billion is already infinite.
They were called finitists, and the leader of the finitist movement is now dead, I assume.
This was called Yes it involved it, and maybe there were no other members.
Brower and Heiting were much better than finitism, so they developed a version of calculus on intuitionist lines.
The main way of understanding intuitionism is to find out that it implies that we cannot believe in the law of excluded middle.
The law of excluded middle says that if you've proved that not P, then you can infer that P, and that fails for intuitionism,
because you might have a constructed proof that not P, but no constructed proof that P, and you can only assert P when you have a constructed proof.
This is a very interesting idea, so some of you will know that I studied with Michael Dummit in Oxford,
and I attended a whole terms worth of lectures by Dummit on the intuitionistic calculus,
which is like doing calculus with one hand tied behind your back,
but you learn a lot if you have to do calculus without using the law of excluded middle.
Now, but it died, basically. There are very few people who believe in intuitionism as a movement anymore,
but it became a settled part of what you might call the lattice of mathematical options.
If you regard a mathematical theory, so I say lattice, I could say Boolean algebra,
I suppose we have each approach to mathematics, sees mathematics as a Boolean algebra,
then you can see the intuitionistic mathematics as a special kind of Boolean algebra, a weaker Boolean algebra,
and to be precise, it's a relatively pseudo-complemented pseudo-Boolean algebra.
Pseudo-complemented means that if you know A and you know not A,
then you don't know that you've filled the whole space of options.
That's not quite right, but anyway, I won't say any more, you can work it out for yourself.
All right, so this paper I published, this is chronic, my example were Cantor set theory,
and then there are transfinite cardinals. So Cantor set theory is a theory of sets, it works very well for.
Finite sets, people show that it works very well for infinite sets,
but now you get a lot of freedom in creating more and more types of really, really big infinite sets.
Clearly, there are different paths you can take in building bigger and bigger infinite sets,
and it seemed to me intuitive that some of those paths might be leading to truth,
but at least some of them, and you could make a fake one if necessary,
at least some of them are not leading to truth.
So transfinite cardinals of this sort, just a very messy sort,
but one clue whether a particular branch of set theory is useful, or is real,
it's about real things, is whether it's useful, and some transfinite set theories are useful
for physics or in some other economic field, and so they probably are about real mathematical sets,
some of them are not useful, and they might be good candidates for being fictional,
so it's beautiful fictional mathematics.
All right, now the next topic we have to deal with is structuralism.
So if we want to say that pi is a socially constructed entity,
we still have to say what kind of entity it is.
Here the plate in his view is still embraced by many people,
including by many mathematicians consciously or not,
but another view which is embraced explicitly in a number of very influential publications is structuralism,
and this says that mathematical entities are structures,
and the locus classicus of this view, which is also the first paper I read in the philosophy of mathematics
when I started studying philosophy of mathematics in Oxford,
is that by a man called Benasirath, this is a classic of the philosophy of mathematics,
and his idea is you take Russell's theory of what numbers are,
and you take, I think this is Cantor's theory of what numbers are,
and so three is the set consisting of zero, one, two, and so forth,
and you get two logically incompatible accounts of what numbers are,
both of which have perfectly good application, there's no difference in the degree to which they're useful.
There are many other accounts of what numbers are, you could generate your own theory,
and so Benasirath concluded that numbers are none of these things,
rather we have a certain structure which we could call the number structure,
and this number structure is exemplified here and there,
and in all of the other various candidate accounts of what numbers are.
So numbers are nodes in structures, and they are probably themselves structures.
Everything is a structure from the point of view of structuralism.
Now, we, Ylfynai Embrace, structuralism, but we do not hold that all of mathematics are structures,
we think that would be, that would be turtles all the way down,
and so we want to have some basis, some vision, some essence upon which the vision is examining
at the combinations of vision which are represented standardly and set theory terms could rest,
and so our resting places are going to be zero, one, and maybe the line or the point,
and various other unitary things, so non-structures,
which will be the basic elements out of which the structures are built.
So we're not classical structuralists, we are structuralists with bottom.
All right.
I think Noah has a question.
Yes.
So are natural numbers standard in the grounding?
No, just zero and one, because once you've got zero and one,
you can get all the others, basically by adding one, and adding one again.
Zero and one, and what else?
Well, we don't know.
We almost certainly will never know everything about what constitutes the bottom.
I know things that you can do it with just zero and one, but I'm fighting.
Why wouldn't you be able to?
I just have this feeling in my phone.
How do we get the circle?
What is stopping us?
Is there any errors that we face when we just go down to zero and one?
We need to be able to construct the circle, and it's hard to see how you do that from zero and one.
Yes.
Can we say on empty side is a circle structure?
A what?
Empty side.
Is empty side a structure?
I can't hear it.
Empty set a structure?
Empty set.
Yeah.
When York talks about these things, he identifies zero, empty set, and the null operator.
He thinks they're all the same.
And then he has one, the set, which you can say is the empty set as its only member.
And the progressive operator.
Yeah, you had it on a different side, yeah.
Yes?
Zero and one are...
If they're doing a ground name, where do they exist?
So, that's a very good question.
I would...
What if I exist?
So, zero and one are going to have to be created.
They're going to have to be socially constructed.
So, there are two kinds of mathematical entities.
Those which are socially constructed are the initial, in other words, as part of the ground.
And those which are socially constructed with the help of one or other structural combinatoric relations.
And part of our ontology mathematics includes structure-generating relations, like set-all.
And the idea, the historical idea, would be that they'd discover pi, and then they'd discover...
Or, roughly at the same time, they'd discover all of the geometrical relations that you can construct with compass and ruler.
But first, they'd discover how to construct those things, but they didn't do it in the right order.
So, they discovered pi before they knew of anything about irrational numbers or about sets.
But if you reimagine the history of mathematics so that things are discovered in the right order,
then you get a chain from the very, very simple mathematics to the more complicated.
And then our basic theory says that the principle driver in creating more and more complicated mathematics is physics.
So, as physics develops, engineering develops, people's inventions develop, they need more and more complicated mathematics.
That forces the development of more and more complicated forms of mathematics, and thereby mathematics then continues to develop.
And that's what's happened since about Galileo's time.
There's no worry about a structure-generating and apocalyptic event where enough of us die, and the only remaining people are like the Amazonian tribes.
And do you really want to say those numbers are out of existence?
Yes, so I'm afraid I don't have any choice.
I don't want to say it, but I think it seems like...
What are the chances of aliens being...
So, as long as there are records left...
I mean, we need to leave it like that.
Can you imagine another planet away from here?
Yes, so that is a problem.
So, let's go through your possible scenario.
So, one scenario is that all records and all civilisation is destroyed on Earth,
but there are tribes who survived after a few generations.
They recreate mathematics, but they do it differently in whatever way.
Maybe they do it inconsistently with what we did, but maybe they repeat.
So, they invent part. Is it the same mathematical entity, or is it a different one?
If you're a Platonist, the answer to that question is easy, if you're a social constructionist as well.
I don't know if I'm just one of those questions for which I have no answer.
Now, exactly the same case would be if, on Mars, they did the Martian's Development and Mathematics,
which happened to discover part, would it be the same?
The temptation is to say it would be the same, but that's because Platonism is always the temptation.
Yes?
So, is it not necessary that pie will be different?
No, it's not necessary at all.
For many thousands of years of existence of human beings, they didn't discover part.
It took time.
We see it as being rather trivial, but it wasn't quite complicated to reach that point.
It's complicated to reach the point where you could recognise that a hypotenuse on the right angle of triangle
is not necessarily going to be measurable for the real number.
Yes?
So, now, zero, one, pie are constructed.
No, zero and one are ground stones, they're foundations then. Pie is constructed.
Wait, they're ground stones, but didn't we also create it?
Yes, we'll have to lay the foundations ourselves.
Yes, so create it.
But are there a priori los where nothing is constructed?
So, once we create certain mathematical entities, then certain intelligible truths are forced upon us, really.
It's not that we create them, it's that we're forced upon us.
And now, this is always complicated at the time that the things didn't happen in the right order,
but the people who invented pie knew very well as a matter of a priori truth that pie is the ratio
between the circumference and the diameter of the circle, because that's how they discovered it.
That's what it was meant to be, so that's almost one of it.
But then they discovered various other relations involving pie, and they proved to themselves,
using the Ythelian methods that those relations hold universally for all circles,
and that means that they had more a priori truths and a priori knowledge about pie
as the geometry, geometric understanding developed.
So, we don't make the syndeticate priori, all right?
Truths, we discover them after we've made the objects which they're about.
And this, when I get to the law, this will become clear. Anyone?
All right, so this structuralist that I recommend that you read is Scott, Stu Shapiro in Ohio.
There is a Stu Shapiro in Buffalo. I have to make it clear which Stu Shapiro I am referring to.
So, I think he's right about the first two, but that he's wrong when he says just here.
For him, it is structures all the way.
All right, so now we're going to develop Ryanachian structuralism,
and we're going to start off where Ryanach started, which is in the ontology of law.
And as I said, he invented in 1913 much of the act, but it is simultaneously a speech act.
So, it's not that you have a mental act which you could formulate in words,
a mental act which is formulated in words, and in the case of the promise, it has to be formulated in words.
Visa vi, the promisee, so the promisee has to register that you have made a promise,
otherwise you haven't made a promise.
And all of that is a priorite, a synthetic a priorite.
And Ryanach recognized that.
So, and Austin had glimpses of that, but they didn't want to embrace the doctrine that there is a synthetic a priorite truth.
So, Ryanach is indeed a synthetic a priorite structure, which is what Ryanach is all about.
Ryanach is about the synthetic a priorite structures realized in these sorts of cases,
and also in many other sorts of cases which go to form the law.
So, he developed a whole ontology of social reality, which he expressed in terms of the collective imposition of function.
He is a president, which is a physical thing, but we imposed upon the president the function of ruling the country.
That was a collective imposition of function.
And so, that is the theory of everything in social reality.
It's always a matter of collective imposition of function.
And so, we can do it on objects.
So, we can do it with cathedrals, we can do it with driver's licenses, we can do it with dollar bills.
And this is all captured in this slogan or formula.
So, a cathedral, about building counts as a cathedral in context, if there is a bishop and so on.
So, this human being counts as a president because we have collected the imposition of function upon this.
And this doesn't work.
So, I am one of the few people who showed Searle that he was wrong.
So, he printed a correction.
It doesn't work as a general theory of social entities because a debt is a social entity.
But there is nothing upon which we collectively impose a function.
If you write IOU on such and such, then the debt note is fitting with Searle's formula.
But if I just say I promise to give Ali a hundred dollars tomorrow,
I should let's say 18,000 dollars a year in six months, which is not actually the end.
I signed paperwork, or I will be signing paperwork.
The other person who has to release the money has not signed yet.
So, I just promise to Ali.
And therefore, I have an obligation to Ali.
But my obligation is not a piece of reality, a piece of stone or plastic,
organic material upon which I impose a function.
So, Searle is wrong and he abandoned this formula.
He said he never meant it here.
He abandoned this formula because of what I call freestanding y terms.
So, x counters y.
There are some x's which are social entities for which there is no y.
Sorry, y counters x, so there are some entities in the social world, some y's,
which are not such that there is an x of grounding upon which they rest.
So, they are freestanding y terms.
But you can think of it as quasi abstract.
And now, I don't think I need to.
So, the obligations and so on nowadays, we record them on paper,
but in the olden days, they were recorded in people's memory.
Now, a couple of years back, there was a man called Julian Cole,
who was a professor in Buff State, a professor of philosophy.
And every year also, he would come to you and give a talk
about social construction of mathematics.
And every year, I really attacked him.
He always came back for more.
I now think he was right.
So, it just shows.
So, this is the first of a series of paper.
Actually, I think there were two earlier ones,
but this is the first of a series of paper.
So, he is basically re-creating some of the things I said
in the Anthropogenesis of Mathematical Objects paper.
We're doing it much better, much more statistically.
He captures the creativity and the freedom of mathematics.
The big problem is the authority.
So, how do you get authority for your mathematics in this country?
And now, which is the money phrase in this.
So, we have to authenticate the ontological commitments
of mathematical theories without curtailing
mathematicians' freedom to creatively introduce
mathematical ontology.
I argue that these two constraints are best met
by a metaphysical interpretation of mathematics
that takes mathematical entities
to be constitutively constructed.
By that, he doesn't mean much more than socially constructed.
Then, in the next paper, he brings in the dimension of institutions,
which is what I've been pointing to
when I talk about social memory and recordings
which I've developed over time.
Notice he uses the freestanding term.
I'm not sure he got it for me,
but it's nice that he's introduced to serve
representational functions.
Now, he's describing this institutional reality
and the meta-ontology, whatever that means,
arguing that the philosophy of mathematics
that has its central thesis,
sorry, its central tenet,
this can account for the objectivity, necessity
and the atemporality of mathematics.
Now, these are the things which I was arguing with him about.
I said you cannot ground the necessity of mathematical truth
in a social construction account
of the ways mathematical entities begin to exist
because, particularly, you take creativity
and these other things if you can,
you can't creatively create the necessary truth.
Now, I think what I would say now
is that you can creatively constrain,
create a mathematical object
and by you describe it in a certain way,
it's the ratio of the circumference of a circle to the diameter
and then you can infer necessary truth
from your description, which is an axiom.
That's what I would say now.
All right, and then the third one is called
social construction mathematics
and the collective imposition of function onto reality.
So he's really being surly in here,
except he's following my freestanding correction of sir.
Stereotypes of social construction suggest
that the existence of social constructions is accidental
and that such constructs have arbitrary and subjective features.
Here I explore a conception, so on.
In particular, I argue that the collective imposition of function
is typically non-accidental
and the products of such imposition frequently
have non-arbitri and objective features.
Now, this is, I think, where he addresses a really difficult point.
So when we created pi,
there were objective features of reality
that we had to confront, namely circles.
And we couldn't draw perfect circles,
but we could draw very nearly perfect circles.
And when we constructed pi,
we were indeed bending to those necessary features of reality.
But then a place in this can say,
Aha!
What you mean by pi is a necessary feature of reality,
which was there already,
because, as we placens know,
mathematical entities are a temple.
They're not created by people.
So there's an issue here.
How do we distinguish the mathematical entity
from the features of reality
which have non-arbitri and objective?
So that's an issue that Yorkson and I have to address.
I won't talk about document acts.
So Rhina has a very complicated ontology of social acts
of which speech acts, like promising are one example,
and of the parts of social acts
and of whether the underlying experiences,
the underlying mental content,
are states or processes,
and whether they need to be addressed to other people,
whether they need to be registered by their addresses.
The founding relation is that you can't marry somebody
unless you have a certain authority.
All of these are a prior issues.
What they give rise to.
So a promise gives rise to a mutually correlated claim
and obligation, for instance.
And then the entities which have to obtain
in order for the social acts to take place.
And such adds relations of authority.
That's an entity.
And then other parts of social acts.
So when you make a promise,
there has to come into being a disposition on your part
to realize the promise.
Otherwise you didn't make a promise.
So the promise is necessarily dependent on the disposition
on the part of the promise.
All of these are a prior laws.
And you can represent them in diagrams.
And then once you have these diagrams,
you can see that there are modifications.
So there are different kinds of sham promises, for instance.
And different kinds of collective social acts.
And the modifications occur because some elements here
are missing.
So maybe that no one registers the promise.
Or maybe that there's no sincere attention.
Or it may be that no action follows.
You never actually fulfil the promise.
And so no trust.
That's another dimension.
And you can apply the whole thing,
which is very similar to the case of commanding.
Commanding is just switching.
The commander-commandee relation
so that it becomes a commandee-commandee relation.
All right.
Now, the most important of all of these,
all of these social acts,
is the act of enactment.
And if you have a dollar bill,
anyway, if you have a pound, a British pound,
now you see that there is a declaration
from the Governor of the Bank of England
that he will pay the bearer of this pound note,
one pound.
And then there's a signature underneath.
Now, when that signature was made,
when the relevant actor,
then the pound note came into existence,
both that particular instance and the genre,
the type of document.
And it came into existence through enactment.
And this enactment had a mathematical dimension
because a pound note was then,
in the good old days, worth exactly 240 pence.
And you could even make it worth 480 hapenies,
which is a half pence.
And that's important for some of the entities
which are brought into being by enactment,
which are very important, particularly in the economic domain,
namely that you can divide them mathematically
into perfectly equal fractions.
So, this is the first paragraph
of the German civil code,
which Reina wrote a lot about.
And it tells us how a subject of rights begins to exist.
But it doesn't tell us as a fact.
It enacts a social fact.
The social phenomenon of a thing that is subject to rights
begins to exist at the completion of birth
as a result of this enactment.
So, it makes the entity, namely an organism subject to rights.
And that is the model for how mathematical entities currently exist.
It's a matter of enactment.
And here, the enactment is towards all the subjects in the society,
in Germany in this case.
And in mathematics, the enactment would be to all the subjects
engaged in a particular kind of mathematics,
both present and future.
All right, we don't need this.
Now, when we think about enactments,
then we realise that there are three sorts of history
that an entity can have.
So, numbers, if you're a Platonist or a believer in Chronica,
have an atemporal or, what's the word?
Omnitemporal exists.
They exist all the time. They never change.
They don't have any causal features at all.
And then you have Bill Clinton, who's changing all the time.
And that's true of all other organisms, buildings,
everything in the real world of what happens and is the case.
They're subject to constant changes through time.
And they have a beginning to exist in time,
and he, even Bill, will die in some stage.
19 minutes or so later, he will cease to exist.
Or maybe he'll have a bit of a longer time,
but he will die sometime.
But now Clinton's presidency is different from these.
Clinton's presidency began to exist at a certain point in time.
It existed, and then it ceased to exist.
And this is characteristic of the way in which entities,
which are inactive, exist.
They are part of history, but they do not change.
They just come into existence, exist, and then go out of existence.
Now, mathematical entities may never go out of existence,
so they may just have this part.
They make this go on forever.
But certainly things like presidencies, obligations,
debts, permissions, and the like, they have this shape.
And all offices, being senator, being...
Yes?
Are universals like one?
Yes.
Well, so that is...
some universals are like one.
Are universals dependent on their existence,
on the existence of existence?
Yes, so I don't want to go into that story,
although it would be a story that we have to go into
in the ultimate statement of history.
But, yes, it's a good question,
which means I don't have a good answer.
I will have a good answer.
All right, so in the first group we have necessary objects.
In the second group we have contingent objects,
caught up in the world of causality.
And in the third group we have objects which are intelligible,
but have a starting point in time.
And so I think that Reina deserves to be honoured
to a much greater degree than he is,
because I believe he was the first philosopher ever
to recognise that there are objects of this kind.
So cancer didn't know about this.
Plato didn't know about this.
The ingarden certainly devoted,
but I'm pretty sure that was under the influence
of his teacher Reina.
And it's amazingly important,
because it applies to the whole realm of the law
and the whole realm of economics,
and many other parts of everyday life,
such as the whole realm of the teachers.
But people just didn't notice.
Still very few people know how important Reina is.
All right, now, it applies also to chess.
Chess and game generally are another area
where we find entities of this third kind.
So the chess game was invented, it started to exist,
and it has changed in small ways,
but still not in ways which disturb the face of the picture.
So many of these abstract entities,
or historical, cultural entities,
these quasi-astract entities of the third kind
have quasi-mathematical properties,
and that's important.
These are some examples.
Your social security number is not a number.
It doesn't have prime factors or anything.
It's a social object, and you can't burn it.
It can only be created by a certain process,
and it can only be eliminated by a certain process.
All right, so I have all the wrong views about that.
All right, so I believe that Reina's a priori theory of law
is a very good approximation to the underlying ontology
of the Austrian School of Economics.
So where Reina was talking about the micro-institutions
of human life and indeed the meso-institutions
of legal affairs,
the Austrian School are talking about the micro-economic realm.
So these are other areas where the Munich approach
to doing ontology could, in principle, be applied,
and in some of them, so that colorology and tone theory
have been applied to,
that they've been developed in ways which are similar
to the way the Munich phenomenologists worked,
and all of these have been developed
by Munich phenomenologists.
Reina points out that while there are some relations
and some essences or a priori structures
which are subject to a priori laws,
there are others which are purely conventional.
In other words, you add conventions.
So an example would be an endowment mortgage
or derivatives created by some formula on the stock market,
or football team managers.
So there are no a priori laws governing football team managers
in the way that they are governing pie.
But now what is involved in each of these
is always that they always have a grounding
in a priori social institutions.
So the idea of a manager, or the essence manager,
is grounded in the fact that one person has authority
over other persons,
and an endowment mortgage is grounded in the fact
that one person can loan money to another person.
So what we have here are institutional modifications
of a priori institutions or a priori institutional essences.
And another example would be,
let's suppose that it's true in New York State
that a miner cannot sign a contract
and be liable for what the contract states
that the miner has to supply.
This would mean that a contract signed by a miner
is not valid.
That is not an a priori institutional entity.
It's a modification.
So this modification, if you are less than 13,
you can't sign a contract,
is a product of positive law,
not a product of a priori law.
Rynaw was writing about a priori law,
but also about the ways in which a priori law is used
as a grounding for positive law,
where lawyers and politicians
make more or less arbitrary changes
to what should obtain in an a priori law
or a priori of the underlying institution.
And you can see how we're going to have similar modifications
in the realm of mathematics.
All right, now let me try and move quickly
to get to my...
I'll put these slides on the...
on the witty page.
All right, so the idea is we have a history of mathematics
and a history of physics,
and physics is constantly feeding into the history of mathematics
to yield new problems.
Mathematic growth,
there will be some offshoots where mathematicians grow
new kinds of creatures
which are not addressing specific needs of physicists
or engineers at a given time,
but they may later prove to be useful.
That's a very common phenomenon
that mathematicians are doing something crazy
that they are doing it for the sake of the beauty
of the entity that they're building,
but it turns out to have an application
in the next generation.
And this is something of an illustration of that.
But I found this, and as you know,
I like diagrams in the Wikipedia article
on mathematical physics.
And of course I like it because it contains
the word ontology.
Now interestingly, the Wikipedia article
doesn't mention the word ontology at all,
so I have no idea what they meant.
They just have the diagram,
but there are some things which explain what this means.
So we have mathematics, mathematical physics,
ontology and physics,
and in some way we get physics
by taking mathematical physics and taking ontology
and smashing them together.
And mathematics is somehow feeding into both of those.
And I understand how mathematics is feeding
into mathematical physics.
I don't understand what they might mean by this argument,
but we've got three hundred fours.
Mathematical physics is an approach to physics
which emphasises mathematical reading,
that's what they say.
Theoretical physics is an approach to physics
that emphasises observations and experiments.
And so we're interested in mathematical physics
which is looking at physics
as a structure or an endeavour
which is aiming to utilise the rigor
that you find in mathematics.
And I could simplify that by saying
it's going to be using these mathematical structures
which the mathematicians are inventing.
So mathematical physics is import use application testing
of mathematical structures to physical phenomena,
trying to find which mathematical structure fits
a given physical phenomenon.
And now we can understand the diagram as follows.
So you start historically with a piece of mathematics
and this might be a model of mathematics
which is a model of periodic motion
with constant amplitude
which you can define in purely mathematical terms.
And then you add ontology
and I'm going to take that to mean you add reference
to a specific system, in this case the harmonic oscillation term.
And specific magnitudes such as force
and so forth and amplitude.
And when you add ontology to the mathematics
where the ontology includes pieces of the physics ontology
then you get physics.
So that's just a complicated way of saying that
physics is the application of mathematics
to real world phenomena like oscillation.
So we finished exactly on time by my law.
Are there any questions?
