Thank you, David. Thanks very much. Can everybody hear me in the back? So I get to talk about
my trips, but you don't. It doesn't seem fair. So I'm going to just talk for about 10 minutes
and just tell you a little bit about what this book's about, and then I'd love to take
your questions and let your interests dictate the path that we take this afternoon. First,
thanks. Thank you very much for coming. This book is a real departure for me. Those of
you who know me as someone who writes about food might think it's a little weird that
I'm turning to psychedelics. But in my head, there is some continuity as well as change.
And the continuity is that I see my writing about food as part of a larger interest in
writing about nature. And the way we eat affects nature dramatically, more than anything
else we do, actually, in terms of changing the landscape of the planet and the atmosphere.
It's your most powerful engagement with the natural world. And I've always been interested
in that engagement. And we use nature and plants, especially for many things. Food is
an obvious one. Beauty is another. But something we almost all use plants for that I've always
been kind of curious about is to change consciousness. Most of us today probably use the plant to
change the contents of your mind, or at least the feeling tone in your mind, you know, whether
it was coffee or tea or a cigarette or cannabis or whatever it is. I mean, this is something
we do in every culture on earth, does it? With the one exception that proves the rule,
the Inuit do not have any plant drugs. But it's only because not even grow where they
live. As soon as they go somewhere else, they get with the program. So it's been a longstanding
interest. And to me, it's all part of that story about this fascinating engagement we
have with other species that defines us and reveals a lot about us. So I've, and I wrote
a little bit about cannabis and botany of desire. And I wrote a long piece about growing
opium in my garden back in the 90s. And I've written about medical marijuana. So I had
this interest. And then along comes this new research, which I began reading about. In
2010, I read about a really interesting odd study where researchers at NYU and Johns Hopkins
were giving psilocybin, this is the ingredient in magic mushrooms, they were synthesizing
it, to people who had cancer diagnoses, people very sick, many of them terminal, in the hopes
that they would have what they call the mystical experience, a powerful spiritual experience
that would change their attitude toward their death and help them essentially to die with
more peace. These were all patients who were struggling with depression, anxiety and fear,
profound fear. And the stories, so I started writing about that because it seemed like
the last thing I would want to do is trip when I was facing a terminal diagnosis to
lose control like that. And you would presumably have a very dark experience. So I started
interviewing these people for a piece I did in the New Yorker in 2015. And just to give
you one example to give you the flavor of it, I remember talking to this woman, she
was a figure skating instructor in New York, in Manhattan, she was about 60. She was not
a psychonaut, she'd never used psychedelics before. And she had ovarian cancer. And her
cancer had been treated successfully, but she was paralyzed by the fear of recurrence.
She just couldn't function because she thought any day now this could be back. So she entered
into this trial at NYU and had a high dose psilocybin experience. And I should explain how
this is done because the image you may have in your head of taking psychedelics, you know,
taking a handful of mushrooms and going to a concert or something, this is not how it is
used in a clinical setting. It's a very controlled experience, it's guided. So you work with two
guides, a man and a woman, they prepare you over a course of several sessions as to what
to expect. So they'll talk to you what to do if the experience becomes frightening, which it
often does, and how to navigate that. They call it the flight instructions. And their main
advice is, you know, if you see a staircase, go up it. If you see a door, open it. If you see a
monster, don't run away. Just step right up to it and say, what are you doing in my head? What
do you have to teach me? In other words, surrender to the experience. Trust, relax. You
know, they quote John Lennon, relax the mind and float downstream. And that's very important
advice. And it's often the difference between a good trip and a bad trip. A bad trip is
essentially a panic reaction against what's happening in your head, which is very heavy.
I mean, you're experiencing your ego dissolving, in fact, in front of you. And then they sit with
you for the whole experience, and they give you a helping hand if you're getting upset or
struggling, and they take you to the bathroom and give you a glass of water. And then afterwards
is a really key moment called the integration session, where they sit with you, you tell the
story of your trip. And it usually is this narrative. It's almost like this intracyclic
movie where you go different places, and you try to make sense of it and apply the lessons to
your life. So in the case of this woman, her name is Dina Bezer. She had this trip, and there were
many elements I won't go into. It was like six hours. And she went into her body, imaginatively,
and she saw this black mass under her ribcage. And that was her fear. It wasn't her cancer,
because that wasn't in the right place. But she saw what she realized was her fear. And she screamed
at her fear. And you have to see this woman. She's a very timid, small woman. And she said,
get the fuck out of my body. And it did. It disappeared. The black mask was gone. And afterwards,
she said, I realized during that experience that I can't control my cancer, but I can control my
fear. And that distinction meant everything to her. And one of the hallmarks of the psychedelic
experience is that whatever insights you have during it have a force, the likes of which you've
never experienced. These are not just opinions or insights that reveal truths. This is something
William James a long time ago writing about the mystical experience called the noetic sense.
It's a very uncanny thing. And it's what allows people to change that if they think, say they're
trying to quit smoking, and they have some epiphany that, gee, my breath is really precious,
I should not ruin it by smoking, suddenly that'll be so strongly held as a belief that they can
actually stop smoking. So anyway, so that's the kind of experience that I was learning about.
And I became fascinated to understand the neuroscience behind it, what's going on in the
brain when people are taking one of these trips. And we now know some interesting things about
that. If you're interested, I can talk about that. And also the history of it, like, what happened to
psychedelics in the 60s that they became so stigmatized that research stopped. There had been a
very productive period of research all through the 50s that was yielding really promising results
in the treatment of alcoholism, in dealing with people who were dying, depression, anxiety, obsession.
And then after this moral panic that hits the culture around 1965, nobody studies it anymore.
The funding dries up, scientists are a little embarrassed by it. And we had an unprecedented
situation where a promising line of scientific investigation was stopped. That never happens.
And we lost 30, 35 years of research into psychedelics. Thankfully, it's resuming.
And my book is very much about the Renaissance, even though I go back and look at the history and
figure out why we had this panic reaction about them. And try to look at them in a very matter
of fact way as interesting tools, interesting tools for understanding the mind and for healing
the mind. Now, we haven't proven all this. There's still more research to be done.
We're kind of in phase two, and there's three phases to FDA drug approval. But so far the
results have been remarkably encouraging. It is one of the most powerful psychiatric interventions
that the researchers have ever seen. And we're in a situation where mental health care is so
broken in this country. It's failing to reach half the people who need it. The last major
innovation were the SSRI antidepressants in the late 80s. There really hasn't been anything since
that. And so we need some new ways of thinking. And along comes this powerful old but new innovation.
And the research is, you know, it's being privately funded for the most part. Big
pharma is not interested in this. There's no intellectual property that you can control.
But a lot of donors, many in the tech community actually have stepped up and are funding this
research. And I was just at a fundraiser where, you know, the last seven million dollars was raised.
And so we will find out. We'll get the real test, the scientific test of what are these drugs good
for. And then there's the question of what are they, what value might they have for the rest of
us? Because they help people who have serious problems. But as one researcher put it to me,
they're very important for the betterment of well people. And I can talk a little bit about
that too. So as part of this, because it's sort of my brand to do immersion journalism, you know,
when I wrote about the cattle industry, I bought a steer. When I wanted to learn about architecture,
I built a house. So of course I had to experiment. And I found some guides underground. And there
is a thriving community of underground guides in America who could give me an experience very much
like the ones at NYU and Hopkins. And they were, you know, transformative experiences, some of them.
Some of the most meaningful experiences of my life. And the idea that a molecule could occasion
that is to me still kind of mind blowing. So I'm going to, though, I've given you lots of leads
and things you might want to follow up on. And I'm happy to talk about anything. I advise you
not to talk about your own experiences. I want to welcome the Google Microdosing Club to today's event.
Anyway, so yeah, question. Alright, so I don't want to be the devil's advocate here.
Please do. This idea that we're going to, we're going to give somebody this drug,
they're going to have this transformative experience, and then it's going to change them.
I understand how that makes sense to me. But the idea that that change would necessarily be
for the better, that person comes back from a trip and decides they're going to quit smoking,
that's great. But why doesn't a person come back from a trip and decide they need to kill their
neighbor? Right. How do we break the symmetry there? Set and setting. So one of the important
features of psychedelics is how little the experience is foreordained or dictated by
the drug itself. The drug is like an unspecific mental amplifier. And so your expectation and
intention is very important to what happens. And one of the things that happens in the preparation
is that the guide is helping you set an intention. Like I want to quit smoking. I want to confront my
mortality. And you will usually have an experience in that realm because that's what you've been
primed to have. Could the drugs be used for evil? Well, we have the case of Charles Manson. Manson
apparently, we don't know that all the details, but used LSD on his little posse of what would
become murderers. And the drugs are incredibly suggestible and that you could imagine a charismatic
figure using them that way. Now, the CIA sought to use them that way too. The CIA had a very active
research program in the 50s. The same time all this university work was going on in the 50s to
help people, the CIA was trying to weaponize LSD and psilocybin. And they thought they went through
a series of different paradigms. One was you would use it as a truth serum. People could tell you
the truth if you gave it to them in interrogation. People said crazy shit. It didn't work. There
was no truth in that. And then they thought, well, we could use it to have foreign leaders. We could
dose them and they would do embarrassing things. That might work. I don't know. And we don't know
how far they got with it. And then the other one was his mind control, right? That you could use
this drug to control people's minds. As far as we know, that didn't work either, but we don't know
for sure. And we shouldn't put too much by them. So I think it all depends on your therapist and
how the situation is. People don't generally have violent episodes after psychedelics. In general,
the experience tends to be one where you discover that love is the most important thing in the
universe. And this hallmark card platitudes suddenly becomes this profundity. And it is a
profundity, but we've heard it so many times that it's banal. There's an interesting line between
the banal and the profound. And psychedelics definitely worked on that line. So I think
we should be mindful of that possibility, but I don't think we certainly haven't seen anything
like that. There have been a thousand dosings of volunteers since this next, this new wave of
research. And there has not been a single adverse event. No psychotic breaks, no jumping out of
windows. But there's no question that people can do stupid things on psychedelics as they can on
alcohol and any number of other drugs. So thanks for your question. Do you have any theories of why
our brains are wired to react to things from plants and fungi? And are there any things from the
animal kingdom that do the same thing? Well, animals do like plant drugs also. We have many cases of,
I mean, if you've had a cat, never given them catnip. No, I meant like any venoms that... Oh,
yeah. Well, one of the psychedelics I experimented with is something called Five-Meo-DMT. This is
a pretty obscure psychedelic. I see a couple of nods in the crowd that... Actually, only one.
That is the smoked venom of the Sonoran Desert Toad. Somebody figured that out, right? I mean,
what a species, huh? But why are we wired for this is a really interesting question. So the way the
drugs appear to work in the mind is that they bind to your serotonin, one particular serotonin
receptor that's very common in the cortex. And they start a cascade of effects. That's what
neuroscientists say when they really don't know what's happening for a while. But that that in
turn eventually down-regulates something called the default mode network. I'll tell you what that
is because it's very important, actually, and it explains a lot. So when they first started doing
fMRI imaging of people's brains on psychedelics, they would basically inject you with psilocybin
and slide you into the MRI machine, and you'd have what could be a very scary experience.
And then they took these pictures, and they expected to see lots of extra activity because
there's such fireworks in the experience. But they were very surprised to find that, in fact,
this particular network went quiet. And this is a network that's very active when you're not on task,
okay? It's in a seesaw relationship with the attentional networks when you're like working or
something like that. But when you're asked to just lie back in an MRI machine and they're trying to
get a baseline, this lights up. And they were like, why is that? What is it doing? Well, this appears
to be the part of your brain that is active when you're mind wandering, when you're ruminating or
worrying or reflecting on yourself. It's a center of self-reflection. It's also involved in time
travel, the ability to think about the future or the past. And it's involved in theory of mind.
This is the term for the ability to think about the mental states of other people,
central to compassion and imagination, things like that. And lastly, it's involved in something
called the narrative self or experiential self. And this is kind of where you knit together what
happens to you at any given moment with the story of who you are, based on who you've been and who
you want to be. And it's kind of where we sustain that story that our sense of self depends on.
And so this network, so if the ego has an address, it's in the default mode network.
This is what the research shows. It's really interesting that this is what gets down-regulated
during the experience. And it chimes with the experience of ego dissolution people report
on a high-dose experience. I had an experience on a guided psilocybin trip where I felt my
sense of self scattered to the wind like a blizzard of post-its. And then I looked out,
and I don't know, who's the eye who's looking out at this? I mean, there was a split in consciousness
where I could watch myself then get spread over the landscape like a coat of paint out there.
And I was fine with it. This other self was fine with it. And it was this kind of very
unperturbable consciousness that could behold this thing. And I realized I'm not identical to my ego.
And that's a very important insight to acquire, I think, and very useful. But what was going on
in my brain was the default mode network was going offline for a period of time.
The sense of self dissolves. And then something else happens, which is other networks in the brain,
which normally would only communicate through this hub, start talking directly to each other.
And there's a map in the book of the brain on a placebo and the brain on psilocybin.
And one looks like the root map of American Airlines. And the other looks like the root map
of some little commuter line that only goes to 10 places. So new connections form. And what are
those new connections? I mean, that's the interesting question. Is that your, say, your hippocampus
talking to your visual cortex? And so you start having images of things that you fear or desire?
Is it the basis of hallucination? Or is it perhaps the basis of a new metaphor or new insight
or new meme? We don't know yet. That's the next step is to really understand that. So these are
temporary changes in the brain. Eventually your ego kind of reconsolidates. But having had a glimpse
of that other way to behold experience is very powerful. And in my integration session, I said
to Mary, who was my guide, I said, well, okay, I've had this amazing experience of ego dissolution.
And I realized I'm not identical to my ego. I can have a little distance on it.
But I said, my ego is back in uniform and on patrol. So what good is that? And she said,
well, basically, you've had a taste of another way to react to life, a little less defensive,
a little less trigger happy, and you can cultivate that. And I said, how? And she said, through
meditation. And meditation is kind of how you keep alive the psychedelic experience. It makes
you a very good meditator. Although I know you're not supposed to say good or bad meditator.
But being trapped in that language. So that's kind of a real shorthand of what we understand
about the neuroscience. The neuroscientific investigation of this phenomenon is absolutely
fascinating. And for me, that chapter of the book was the most challenging to write. Well,
not the most challenging, but one of the most challenging and fascinating to learn about.
So thanks for your question. Hi. So I have heard rumors that monks have been able to achieve
similar thing to a psychedelic trip. Do you know anything about what that entails? Or if there's
any research that leads to it being a strong? I mean, there's anecdotal research that's really
interesting. So one very relevant fact, at the same time we were doing this imaging work on
psilocybin in the human brain, there was another researcher at Yale, imaging the brains of very
experienced meditators, people who had 10,000 hours of meditation experience, and they would go
into the fMRI and meditate. And their brains looked identical. They also had this suppression
of the default mode network. And of course, that is the state of kind of selflessness that people
report coming out of meditation. In terms of the monks, these are people with really long
experience meditation, meditation, and that they can almost it will probably quiet the default
mode network. There's a famous story about Ram Das, Richard Alpert, who was Timothy Leary's
collaborator, went during the Harvard psilocybin project in the early 60s. This guy went on to
become a guru, basically. And he's still alive. He's in Hawaii. And he was very interested in
psychedelics and then found Hindu religion. And he went to India and he told his guru about LSD.
And his guru said, I want to try it. I want to see what happens because you're telling me you're
reaching this spiritual plane on this drug and that's my territory. And so Ram Das apparently gave
him 600 micrograms of LSD, which is a beyond heroic dose. And that's what the guy wanted. He said,
give me as much as you have. And the monk, or whatever he is, he's a guru, I guess, takes it.
And so nothing happened. Is this true? I mean, it's, you know, Ram Das tells the story and
swears that it's true. But it goes to your point. There are other ways to achieve the same effect.
Psychedelics are probably a shortcut to becoming a really good meditator. But my guess is we will
find at some point that all the disciplines, the spiritual disciplines that share this sense of
of transcending the ego are doing the same thing in the brain, that that is where that's
happening. And I'm thinking of sensory deprivation, you know, if you get into these tanks, sensory
deprivation tanks, they're sort of coming back. They were a thing in the 60s, or fasting, or prayer,
or the right kind of music and breathing exercises. One of the psychedelic trips I had
involved no drugs, something called holotropic breathwork. It's based on a yogic breathing
exercise where you essentially hyperventilate. You breathe really fast, you exhale more than you
inhale, and you enter a trance state. It's the most uncanny thing. And my guess is that
hyperventilation is starving the default mode network of oxygen, and reducing the activity
there. So this is all areas to be explored. We may find other ways to achieve the same thing.
But I think it's all connected. Thank you so much. Thank you.
Hi. One of the interesting trends that I've read about on blogs and whatnot is the rise of
microdosing. For those who don't know, microdosing is taking small doses of psychedelics on a
somewhat regular basis, far too small to actually cause any sort of trip. And proponents of microdosing
claim that it can help with things such as depression and anxiety, improve mood, improve
creativity. I'm wondering if you've got a chance to investigate microdosing at all in your book.
And if you get a sense that some of the renewed research interest for
high dose experience might carry over into researching whether microdosing is clinically
significant or not. Excellent question. So microdosing is a very interesting phenomenon.
As the questioner said, it's taking a subperceptual dose, often with LSD,
about 10 micrograms every third or fourth day. And the reason you don't take it every day is
because it would lose its effect. The drugs kind of cancel themselves out at a certain point.
Many people anecdotally report success with this, that it's kind of a brain tonic,
and it does help with depression. There's a wonderful book written about it,
if you want to follow up, by Ayelet Waldman called A Really Good Day. And she's someone who's
struggled with depression for many years and found more relief on this regime of microdosing,
and she's been through the whole pharmacopoeia, I'm sure. The reason I don't spend a lot of time
on it in the book is that there isn't yet anything beyond the anecdotal reports. They're
interesting, they're really provocative, and they're being systematically connected. If you go online,
there's a guy named James Fadiman, who is one of the first generation researchers,
who's advising people on the protocol and soliciting reports and getting this interesting
dataset. But it has not been trialed the way the large dose psilocybin has. I hear that these
trials are about to happen, and so we may get some really solid information on whether microdosing
works. The fact is, though, there is such a strong placebo effect with psychedelics.
They're so suggestible that it's very easy to see how it would work. Just the very idea that
you're taking a small dose of LSD probably would have an effect. But is it a pharmacological effect
or a placebo effect? That's what remains to be learned. I'm skeptical about it. I do want the
research to happen, and this interest in macrodosing, if you will, has stimulated people to fund some
research, some of which will be underground and some of which will be above ground. So I'm very
excited to see what they come up with. Thanks. Thank you. Thanks for being here today. Wozniak
pretty famously said that LSD was one of the things that differentiated Apple from Microsoft.
Yeah. I think Job said that too. And at this organization, we selected, apocryphally,
Eric Schmidt, a CEO because he was the candidate that been to Burning Man.
As an external observer, I'm curious, what are your observations about the intersection between
psychedelics and the technology or the tech industry? It's a really interesting relationship.
So Steve Jobs famously said too, it had been formative to his intellectual development. And I
thought it was him, but maybe it was Wozniak who said that Windows would have been a much better
product had Gates ever taken LSD. It was like a really mean thing to say. I think Gates immediately
said, but I did, but I did. But it didn't work. It must not have been enough.
And I thought this was the beginning of the tech community's interest in these drugs.
And because it's very current, I mean, you know better than I, but I mean, I've talked to lots
of people in Silicon Valley and it's a big part of the culture right now. Microdosing,
macro dosing, there's, I mean, I know one prominent tech company that uses it in their
management training, you know, LSD. So it's, there's a lot of, you know,
a lot of interest there. And it is the tech community, as I said, that's funding a lot of
this research. But it turns out that engineers have been interested in LSD back in the 50s.
And that there's this very interesting episode before Timothy Leary and the whole 60s psychedelic
story that we think we know so well. There was this research period. And there was this very
interesting character who's kind of a counterpart to Leary named Al Hubbard. And I tell his story
in the book. He's a very mysterious figure. He's got, he's involved with the OSS, which became the
CIA. He's playing both sides of many worlds. But he had a vision in 1951 that told him he could be
involved in a major civilization change. He realized it was LSD. He went to Sando's where,
which owned the patent on it. It was a Swiss pharmaceutical company, persuaded them to give
him something like a liter bottle of LSD, which probably is enough to trip a third of the population
of earth at that point. I mean, just an incredible amount, which he keeps buried in Death Valley at
his place. And anyway, he's a great character. He's so much more interesting than Leary. So he's,
he becomes the Johnny Apple seed of LSD. And, but he's got a different theory. He said,
he was kind of a conservative guy. He wanted to turn on the elite. So he was going to do captains
of industry, you know, engineers, artists, people in the church, the Catholic church.
And he would go around with the satchel tripping people. Remember, it was legal then. And he became
a very gifted guide. So he has his eye on the tech world as one of the places where you could
have this multiplier effect. So he turns on a couple of engineers who are working at a company
called Ampex, which is actually one of the first Silicon Valley companies in the 50s.
They make magnetic tape on which, as you know, all computer information was stored,
but also video and sound recording. They had 40,000 people in the valley before it was called
Silicon Valley. And, and the head of strategic planning, he turned on another guy and actually
Ampex for a while was going to be the world's first psychedelic company. And, but the, the president
was Jewish and Al Hubbard was Catholic and he kept bringing in crucifixes and things and the
president said, go away. And so, but anyway, so these engineers though were so taken with this
experience that they left the company, a group of three or four engineers and started a big research,
something called the International Foundation for Advanced Research. And they were doing a lot of
psychedelic research. And I've always been interested as to why engineers in particular
had such a strong reaction to this drug. And I talked to, I talked to a couple engineers about
and you can tell me if this chimes with your sense of things. But this guy, this one guy in
particular told me that, oh, and the, some of the early chip designers were into LSD. It's very
hard to design a chip without a computer. But of course, at the beginning you had to. And you
could hold this complex 3D structure in your head with the help of the drug. And this guy said, oh,
and one of the, sorry, one of the early people at the International Foundation for Advanced
Study who was tripped was someone you probably know, if you know your history of your industry,
but a Doug Engelbart, right, who invented, you know, the mouse and the interface and email and
like everything, right? There was this mother of all demos. Well, that guy got LSD from those
Ampex guys. And under the influence, they were doing a creativity study. He invented something then.
It wasn't that profound. It was something he called a tinkle toy to toiletrain boys and was
something you could like aim a stream of urine at and it would make things happen. Okay, it's not
quite the, you know, the mouse, but it was pretty cool. But it primed the pump, you know. So anyway,
where was I? So this engineer was talking to you said, well, the problem, if you're an engineer,
as opposed to a scientist, scientists can like their goal is to reduce problems to the simplest
terms. But engineers are faced with an irreducible complexity and number of variables. So the
challenge is different. The challenge becomes finding pattern. And psychedelics, one of the
things that happens is you find pattern where you didn't see it before. And that he thought was why
so many engineers found this a useful tool. I think that's fascinating. I think there's,
John Markham wrote an interesting history about Silicon Valley and the 60s. And there's some
very good stuff on on drugs. And he interviewed jobs about his experience. But yeah, it's part
of the tradition you're in. Thank you. You're welcome. Hi. Hi. So you talked a little bit about
how like every culture in the world has experienced this to some degree or is integrated into their
their culture. And I'm curious from a sort of anthropological perspective, because I imagine
there's a huge range in the way that that these drugs are applied, right? It's a select few or
it's open to everyone or it's ritualistic or it's ordinary or whatever. Are there other sort of
cultural patterns that can be deduced or associated and, you know, from from drug use within those
it's a good question. I actually think we have a lot to learn from the traditional use of these
drugs. So we're going to stay on psychedelics. And there are lots of plant drugs that are not
that controversial like caffeine, although in some cultures they might be. But psychedelics have been
used for it looks like several thousand years. It appears that the ancient Greeks, all the writers
you've heard of participated in an annual ritual that involved what seems to be a psychedelic.
It was called the Kikion. It was an annual rite in honor of Demeter, harvest related.
It was called the Eleusinian Mysteries. And everybody was sworn to secrecy about this.
So we don't know that much about it. But everybody took this potion and went to the underworld,
had experiences of a beyond and it was very profound. And it was the only time you were ever
allowed to take this drug. We don't know what the drug was. And in fact, one person was caught
using the drug at like a party and, you know, was, you know, imprisoned or killed or something.
It was a big crime. The lesson I think the takeaway from lots of traditional cultures use
is that they recognize that these were very powerful medicines not to be treated casually.
And that they all surrounded the use of their plant medicine, as they often call it,
with ritual, ceremony, elders in attendance. It was never careless. It was never casual.
It was never recreational. It was a profound experience. And I think when the drugs hit the
West, beginning in the late fifties, early sixties, we didn't have any container for them.
We didn't have rituals. We just kind of like took a handful of mushrooms and went to a concert
or we drank LSD from the punch bowl. And I think that's why some people really got in trouble.
And so that the lesson that we failed to learn was that, yes, these drugs have an ancient lineage,
but look how they were used. Look at what those cultures learned by trial and error.
And now we see it in shamanic ceremonies in South America. There were mushroom cults in Mexico
that went back, we don't know how long, but at least a thousand years. But they were always taken
in a group with guidance, with someone who wasn't taking the drugs, and with enormous care. And
I think that's what we lost. And we need to now invent that container for ourselves. Maybe it's
this therapeutic protocol I'm describing. I'm not sure. But that's the cultural work that needs to
be done. So thank you. Sure. I was wondering whether in your research, you'd come across the video
of a debate from 1967 between Timothy Leary and Jerome Lethvin at MIT. No, Jerome Lethvin.
For those who don't recognize the name, Jerome Lethvin was one of the pioneers of neuroscience.
He was one of the four authors of one of the first papers on the physiology of perception
titled What the Frog's Eye Tells the Frog's Brain. And he was also one of the most charismatic
professors at MIT in the 1960s. And they held this debate sometime in 1967. And Leary went first and
he had the whole audience lulled into going along. He was very charismatic. And Lethvin got up and
said, bullshit. I think it may have been the first time bullshit was allowed to be said on
broadcast television. Anyway, Lethvin's biggest argument against taking LSD was the phenomenon
of uncontrolled flashbacks and how that could get people into trouble. But as I was standing
in line here, I looked it up and it's on YouTube. The whole thing actually ran about two hours.
WGBH, public TV station, recorded it and broadcast it at a one hour edited version.
So Lethvin, L-E-T-V-I-N? Yes. Maybe one or two teas. Well, this is a good occasion to talk about
risk. So let me, unless you want to frame the question, but I'd love to. I'll let you talk
about it, but I just wanted to ask one more side question. When you talk about food, you almost
always bring a bag of groceries. Yeah, oh yeah. I was wondering if you brought a bag with you.
Let me tell you a little tutorial on the law. So I was a very nervous Nellie doing these
experiences. I didn't have a lot of experience with psychedelics in college. And even after,
I was really too afraid to take these drugs. I didn't think I was psychologically sturdy enough
at that point in my life. And so before I dove in for this project, I did a lot of research
as I want to do as a journalist to figure out, well, what are the dangers? Because there are
lots of stories you heard in the 60s. People staring at the sun to let go blind. That was one
story, scrambling of your chromosomes. Both those stories, by the way, were, one was made up. The
first was made up and that's been proven. And the chromosome story was withdrawn within months.
It was just really bad research. Psychotic breaks and that did happen sometimes. There are people
at risk for schizophrenia that an acid trip was what tripped them off. But a lot of what was,
well, let me divide it into two. There's physiological risk and there's psychological
risk. On the physiological side, it's stunning how, I don't want to overstate this, but that how,
compared to other drugs that we take routinely, how non-toxic, relatively non-toxic, classic
psychedelics are. And I'm talking about LSD, psilocybin, DMT, mescaline. There is no known
lethal dose, which you can't say about over-the-counter drugs you take for a cold or for pain.
There are very few molecules in your brain that are washed out really quickly and they don't seem
to affect the, you know, they affect your brain and they don't affect other parts. If you have a
panic attack, your blood pressure is going to go up, but they don't directly affect other systems.
That's one thing. And they're also non-addictive. The first thought you have upon finishing a
psychedelic trip is like, when can I do that again? It's actually, do I ever have to do that again?
And because it's really intense and they're, so they're not habit forming. If you give the rat,
in that experiment where the rat has two levers, one's cocaine and one's
food and if you press it the lever, he gets a dose of cocaine and they'll press it till they die
over and over and over again. You put LSD in that contraption, they'll press it once and never again.
I mean, imagine being a rat on LSD. So from the physiological point of view,
they're safer than a lot of drugs we take routinely. And I was surprised to learn that,
frankly. Psychologically, you know, it's very hard to sort through the stories.
The flashback phenomenon, which I've heard reported, I have never found any really good
research on it. And I'm still looking for it. If anybody has a good paper on that, I'd love to see
it. There are, you know, I've had, I've kind of flashed on things that happened in my experience
because they're part of my store of psychic, powerful psychic memories. Is that a flashback?
I don't think so because I can get it out of my head. But there are people who have these unbidden
moments of consciousness that are, that, you know, may be connected to what happened to them.
I haven't heard that they interfere with people's life or mental health. But it's a question mark.
The great danger is the danger you have drinking too much also, which is doing stupid things,
walking into traffic, falling. All that happens on psychedelics as it happens with any powerful
drug. And that's why a guide is really important, somebody to look out for your body. In the
studies that have gone on, there have now been a thousand dosings of people who have been screened
for mental health problems and things like that. And there has not been a single serious adverse
event. So are there adverse events when people use the drugs recreationally? Yes, we all know
people who've had really bad trips and they usually stopped using it at that point, felt trapped,
had panic reactions. But often psychiatrists who didn't know this territory would misinterpret
a panic reaction as a psychotic break because it sure looks like that. You're having delusions,
you're hearing voices, you know, I mean, to an average psychiatrist, this would say psychosis.
But often it was a panic attack. I interviewed Andrew Weil, Dr. Andrew Weil about this. And he
was very interested in psychedelics in the 60s. He was at Harvard and Lyria was there. And when he
graduated from medical school in 1968, he went out to San Francisco and volunteered at the Haid
Ashbury Free Clinic. And they were seeing lots of LSD casualties as they call people coming in,
having bad trips, thinking they're losing their mind or they're dying. And he knew the territory
really well, having used a lot of psychedelics. And he would come into the little cubicle with
somebody who was completely freaking out. And he had on his white coat and his stethoscope and his
clipboard and he'd ask a few questions. Then he'd say to the person, well, excuse me, there's someone
in the next room who's really in trouble. And he'd leave. And they were like, wow, someone's more
fucked up than I am. And they would suddenly feel fine. They would just completely subside. So
suggestibility is a very big part of the experience. Yeah.
Thank you very much for coming to talk to us today.
Oh, thank you. Thanks for your great question. Thank you.
