I think you're really going to enjoy this conversation with Daniel, I know I did. He's incredibly lucid and his insights are very deep and comprehensive.
And probably because he is so attentive to that clarity of what he says.
When we started off, it's the morning for me here in England, it was late at night, middle of the night for him in the USA.
And we've never talked before.
And Daniel said, well, maybe we should get to know each other in this time.
And then, you know, I can, because the things that you're interested in, the philosophical issues are, I feel like I am reticent to talk about them in public before I feel ready.
And I completely get that. But I'm very pleased to say I stopped recording and
politely asked if it was possible that we could record anyway, just because I know that when we're spontaneous and these conversations are just that.
They're just me having conversations with people that I'm really interested in.
That so much of the magic can go from the first conversation never makes it into the subsequent one because you've already met.
So I suggest that we just recorded it anyway. And if he didn't feel like it reached the level of clarity or he was concerned about way things are gone, then I just keep it private.
But I think we had a phenomenally interesting conversation. I loved it.
And at the end, he was more than happy for me to share it as part of this What Is Life series.
So I'm going to do that. And here it is. Enjoy.
Thank you.
So, okay, so we've got this chance to get to know each other.
So the premise that's making me, the premise that's making me do the, this What Is Life thing and why it gets into all of these spiritual areas for me.
I'm waiting for this to, you know, to meet up with you. It's that it feels like on your website. I read this, the line you said you're interested in civilization design.
I just thought it was such a fantastic phrase.
And I love that.
And then it seems to me that actually how we see everything eventually lies on what we think reality is.
And that really to get to those places somehow we have to start with with that.
Hence the kind of like what is life, what is existence of coming in on that as a starting place and going okay so what you have thought hugely about these areas since making evolution civilization design.
But underneath it there will be an idea about what reality might be and kind of wanting to start there to have the conversation rather than jump straight into the, to the other stuff.
I think what you said which is how we would want to design a civilization has to be grounded in a metaphysics is true for philosophers.
I think you and I probably both have this experience of like, well, what is a desirable civilization is fundamentally an existential and ethical question what is good.
And then what is good is going to be bound to what is real how do I know what is real so foundational ethics aesthetics ontology epistemology like our proceeding theory of governance or design or economics or anything else.
I don't find that functionally that's true for most people.
Most people have felt sense of what is real and what they desire that's enough for the basis of their behavior and the interaction of their behaviors and the kind of emergent game theory and topology of that guiding the world.
It doesn't have to have an integrated metaphysics and almost never does.
But isn't it there unconsciously isn't there isn't that isn't the feeling that you were you were you were mentioning before we started recording this that that that that these areas are difficult to handle precisely because there is a mainstream view.
And, and it, and it percolates the thought I was having before we talked was, if all of the if metaphysics spirituality, for instance, if that's all just below me, then you know it's great that we've left it behind.
It's actually pointing to something about the nature of reality and that the mystics through the ages weren't just crazy well meaning people, but we're actually exploring a certain level of what's real.
Then if we don't factor that in and we don't make it conscious and we don't see that it's relevant will be constantly missing.
We won't be dealing with with reality and therefore we won't function anywhere near as well as we might.
I hear you partly saying that the philosophy of science is an inadequate epistemology for understanding the real that it's a way to understand the objective but not the whole of the real and kind of conflated objective and real is synonyms when objective is more right to think of as a subset of the real.
So then the question is what is the expanded epistemology that includes but transcends the philosophy of science that can give us a relationship to the real as a basis to understand and relate with what is which will also then be a basis for choice.
I just take that word for word and put that in my next book that was beautifully put that was exactly what I was trying to say.
So that's kind of partly what I'm hearing you say is the need for the upgrade to epistemology. And then partly what I'm hearing you say is that there's a
there are interpretations of modernity and physicalism that lead to nihilism and that there is a desire for some grounding basis for something other than nihilism.
And so a question of is there actually meaning and is the nihilism emergent from physicalism partly because physicalism is inadequate.
Yes. Yeah, exactly. Exactly. What's your thoughts on that.
Yes, physicalism is necessary but not sufficient. I wouldn't say physical.
The philosophy of science is necessary but not sufficient physicalism is the kind of ism that the philosophy of science is sufficient.
The idea that what is fundamentally real is physics is physical matter stuff third person stuff and first person stuff is either then illusory like in radical limitivism or it's a epiphenomena.
And usually an a causal epiphenomena though there are some examples where it's a epiphenomena that then has exerts top down causation through quantum mechanics or something.
Yeah.
Yeah, so I mean, roughly we can say you have the domain of third person stuff and the domain of first person stuff, right?
Matter and physics and then experience.
Whatever you starting to get into words like consciousness subjectivity experience whether we think of those as synonyms are all different.
This is one of the reasons why I'm a little hesitant here is because I find that a lot of the wrong thinking is because is embedded all the way down to the words the semi.
I couldn't agree with you more.
So I'm going to try and do like a very high level where I'm treating certain words as if they're send them where I think actually getting down to where they're not as pretty important.
Yeah, but if we if we just kind of take the classic philosophic dualism thing of this mind stuff and this matter stuff and you've got a kind of philosophy of science that says the matter stuff is primary.
And then there's correlation between the matter stuff in the mind stuff it seems because it seems like when people describing in different subjective states and we're doing EEGs on them that we see the neural correlates of consciousness,
which means certain corresponding third person objective brain states corresponding with certain first person dynamics, first person experiences, but then the assumption is that physics is a causally closed system.
The brain state this moment is the result of a brain state a moment ago unfolding by particle physics in the brain fundamentally.
And so to the degree that there is correlation between this third person brain system and first person first person must be an a causal epiphanom.
And you can have that model right as physicalism with a lot of different sub flavors.
But you also have that the philosophy of science started with theory of measurement, right so we're going to measure some stuff we're going to look for things that are both measurable and repeatable.
And so there was already an ontologic assumption that what is real is third person measurable stuff.
And so we're going to go figuring out what is real by measuring stuff and then repeating the stuff. There's a certain assumption about ontology that was baked into the epistemology so we got an epistemology that was good at looking for those ontologic things.
So of course then it says what's real is the stuff that we were looking at.
Whereas for instance if I look at kind of Buddhism and the coming out of the Vedantic tradition, they answered, not what is real is what's measurable and repeatable but what is real is what I am experiencing prima facia a little closer to Descartes inquiry on that right.
I might not be thinking I am but the prima facie experience of thinking the self referentiality of that I am.
For them it's like maybe all this physics out here is all a dream.
Maybe this is all hallucination.
So what I can know for sure is that that experience is arising. So first person is for sure. And third person is either illusory or an epiphenomenon of first person.
But again, their epistemology, which is kind of inquiry into the nature of experience, the phenomenologic inquiry was based on also kind of ontologic assumption that what is real is experience and they started that right there's this whole process it says,
notice the tree, notice that you aren't the tree you're the noticer of the tree now notice your thoughts notice that they can come and go notice that you're not the thoughts you're the noticer of the thoughts etc etc.
And then they point out, you are the witness.
And, but they were actually only able to do that by starting with there is the subjectivity and objectivity bound to then be able to say subjectives primary in the same way that measurement is a measure measuring a measure that they're bound to then be able to say the measure
isn't. So you've got like, idealism, physicalism, and then dualism which is kind of sloppy, and then a chemset some kind of interval monism, like bone tried to do with an implicated order.
And I would say that I would say that kind of Vedantic idealism and physicalism are both reductionist in exactly the same way but it mirrors each other.
And most methods of dualism are just sloppy, and they're not also not asking, is the relationship between subjective and objective.
Part of the class of subjective or is it part of the class of objective.
Or is it neither is it a third distinct ontological class.
And that insight helped this start really getting more formal for me, this came from forest Landry's metaphysics, who should really be on your show.
Okay, but I don't know, I don't know for us.
First developed something called the eminent metaphysics in integrated formal metaphysics that claims to be at the upper boundary of what a metaphysics can be.
And it's definitely the, the closest thing to something that matches that claim that I've encountered.
Before we get into him though I just, I just, I just need to say this because I mean I speak to a fair few people along the way.
That is the close what you decide there is the closest to my own perceptions that I've probably heard, which is exciting.
This is the thing here this is the thing there. I've come personally, much more from the idealist Eastern approach, not just Eastern but mystical approach that's been my background, and where I've had to notice the assumptions and it's taken me,
it's been a long time to notice my own assumptions. It's been, it's been tough. And, and one of the things which caused a bit of a stir recently was coming out and making a little video saying that I was wrong in 33 of my 35 books, and precisely through seeing the level of that because it's so hard to see.
So it was really exciting to hear you just say so clearly, those two perspectives, and why they're both kind of mirrors of each other, I completely get that.
And what I would say, instead, is that the impulse to see the correlated things and ask which one is causally primary ends up being a mistaken impulse.
And that this inquiry is happening where there is a
subject considering an object. And then asking about the fundamental nature of subjectivity and the fundamental nature of objectivity and then usually forgetting to think about the fundamental nature of the relationship between subjectivity and objectivity.
Yes.
So, so the phrase which works for me right now, in trying to express this is, is, is going, look, the mistake I hear in sort of a Vedic philosophy and all that stuff that I've been around is that it's all one.
But actually it's more interesting. It's actually the one in relationship to itself.
And that that oneness of the word that that I would use for is what exists being in relation to itself in a process of becoming. And so everything and this I think it's the great insight of physics now.
Everything's relationship, everything's relational.
Time, space, energy, everything. It's, it's all relational information, which is describing the qualities of being and that therefore there is no subject and objects separately.
There's only the objects subjectively perceived and that subject and object relationship goes right down into the, actually, I think it goes into numbers but it certainly goes into the corner particles and physics and all that and then right the way up to you and me.
Where the world I perceive is the world I perceive because of my nature and that everything has that interconnected subject object and that the evolutionary process isn't an objective one.
It's a relational one. Yeah, and that's what's been going on for 14 billion years.
Whenever we say something like Vedic philosophy or even worse Eastern philosophy.
Yes, yes.
Different schools philosophy.
Very, very important.
And so specifically at minimum six primary schools of Vedic.
Yes, absolutely right.
This school called karma Mimamsa, which comes right before Vedanta in the set of six, actually put forward a my understanding of it.
A triadic fundamental ontology that was actually critical to understand the way Vedanta talked about oneness, which was a oneness of plurality rather than the oneness of singularity.
Yeah.
And so they had, you know, you can think of it superficially as Brahma, Vishnu and Shiva, but but it related in the kind of core philosophy to the knower, the known and the process of knowing or the observer, the observed in the process of observation
the measure, the measured in the process measurement.
Yeah.
Subject object relationship between them.
Yeah.
And that those were seen as co defining co arising distinct but inseparable.
And that the oneness was the oneness of plurality of those always occurring together, but that that includes fundamental distinction.
Yeah. Yeah, that's it. And yeah, you're absolutely right. And I'm, you know, you use these short hands like Eastern West is just ridiculous. But but yeah, that that you can see these resonances that come through you mentioned dialectics for a man I think
there's a lot in dialectical thought which is trying to point to this to this, the same thing.
So, so, you know, the original conversation was the was I had in mind was to say to you know what what for you is your thing and I know you you you might not be comfortable to explore publicly but what you know why is that first that's
interesting thing for this thing that may not go live why I'm fascinated what what is it that you that you you're reticent about and what actually is your underlying view of reality would you say
what is my underlying view of reality.
Let me come let me forget the reasons why you might not be might not be comfortable get back into that later I am intrigued by that. I want to try to say is
what I want to, I want to let me.
Here's Tim, he's 61.
He's going to die within the next whatever 30 years for sure. Well, probably, and I'm doing my best to make sense of this, and it's not just a theoretical thing.
It affects everything I do every single day to make to really take in what's happening to what it is to be alive and to experience it with depth and to meet it with love.
When I, what's Daniels, what's Daniel made of it on his, I'm sure strange journey through all of this.
So, I'm thinking around how to construct this.
So the place that I want to start is where allowed to started first verse of the Tao Te Ching is the doubt that is speakable is not the eternal doubt.
The doubt that is knowable is not eternal knowledge, which was a pre statement of girdles and completeness theorem, or I've never thought that that's beautiful.
And it was in the later theorems and girdle and Tarski.
Similarly, Heisenberg and bells theorems, which are all upper bounds of no ability.
They're actually logic's ability to recognize the limits of logic relative to reality.
And so with girdle serum you get that you can have a system that's consistent or complete but not both that the system of math has a fundamental infinity involved which logic can't do the fundamental infinity.
And yet there's this very interesting question of what was running in girdle in his awareness that was not math and what was running in Tarski that wasn't a formal logical system that could recognize the limits of the formal logical system.
Right.
So, I think the moment we try to say, here's the sense I've made of reality and I'm going to convert all of reality and what is real what is meaningful the true the good the beautiful I'm going to try to convert that to a couple sentences, or to a book.
It's definitely going to be wrong.
And to the degree I tried to live based on that model it's going to suck. And to the degree to which I really tried to push for intellectual congruency I can tell it's wrong.
And so then I'm left either searching more or with some kind of nihilism or having to, at some point, suddenly lie to myself that one of the things that I'm thinking about this kind of squishy is more logically sound than it really is.
The, the biblical have no false idols.
The way that I relate to that is, if reality is sacred to me, then no understanding of reality that will always be in information compression on reality less than reality is sacred to me I don't make my model in idle.
And so I'm actually not my confidence margin on any belief system about the world is never 100%.
And my connection to the world is not mediated through them.
The reason I'm saying this is because we're having a conversation in words as philosophically interested people, but when you say it's not mediated through them do you mean it's not entirely mediated through them.
Yes, you're not entirely. Yeah, yeah, because presumably through them to some degree.
This is something we should come back to.
So, my felt sense and experience of life and the meaningfulness and the beauty of it exists independent of any cognitive models I have about the nature of aesthetics and ethics.
And there's a quote by Joseph Campbell.
I don't remember it exactly there was something to the effect of that we search for the meaning of life when we don't feel connected to the feeling of aliveness.
But what we're actually really looking for is the felt experience of full aliveness, and the shadow of that is the idea of what is the meaning of life. And I don't think that's the whole truth but I think it's an interesting insight.
So,
I can come back to that thing of what is base experience, what is modeling what like what are the modes of perception and consciousness and how do they relate to each other.
And I want to start with this is to say, I can share some models about ontology, what do I think is real, and what do I think the nature of consciousness and meaningfulness and evolution are in time.
And I know that everything that I'm saying is at best partial.
Yeah.
That's same, I would say.
So do you want to go somewhere with that or do you want me to come back as modes of perception.
Well, let me let me just, let me just respond to by you know, by agreeing the.
So for me, the foundation, I wrote my book before the last one was called the mystery experience. So, so for a long from for decades really.
Part of what I felt my role was was just to talk to people are going, have you noticed you don't know what this is. And that was it. It was like, it's just to encounter the mystery so that profound sense of mystery is absolutely the foundation.
And it never goes. And it's never diminished. And then alongside that over the last 1015 years.
My emphasis has been much more on okay so you know to use a very crude analogy. If we want a map of the terrain, the map will never be the train the menus not the meal, etc, etc.
It was a handy thing to have and it can be better or worse, and it will govern how we think about it and it will govern how we act and what we do and what we value and, and changes in it can open up a perception which you didn't have before of something about the nature of life so
when you get a more expansive understanding suddenly, your actual reality can expand. And so holding those two together and what I call a kind of paralogical pair.
And choosing one or the other but being able to sit with a mystery and this is my best guess.
But it's not, well, it's not just a guess. It's the best guess that I've been able to think about and push and pull and doubt and, and this is this seems to have some value.
This accounts for more of my experience, and more of what I know of the experience of others than anything else I've got so far, and these areas still don't make sense. And this area doesn't make sense but this area is beginning to perhaps.
That's kind of where it feels like this stuff is of value.
Yeah.
I relate to what you're saying right now is
there's a certain kind of you can call it spiritual maturity, emotional psychological maturity.
It has to do with comfort with both uncertainty and certainty. Yeah.
And it's easy to have to err on the side of either of those.
But depending on the side of certainty, we know what that looks like it looks like, you know, fundamentalism and it usually is seeking security by being over certain about what reality is.
But the kind of postmodern compensation that any certainty is going to be some kind of bad imperialism so I'll just laud uncertainty.
It is also a bias.
And I want to be seeking increased certainty so that I can make better choices.
But I don't want false over certainty so I want to be asking, what is my confidence margin on a particular thing based on what epistemic process and what is the right epistemic process for the domain.
And what level of confidence do I need to act factoring the consequentiality of non action as well.
So given that
what's going on.
What do you think this is that we're in.
What is this experience we're having.
What's your best guess right now, we'll can progress.
When you say what is this, do you mean literally, I mean, what is this.
What is this thing that we're in, we're having this human experience what the hell is it.
Like, do I have an origin story on whether I think the big bang or the simulation hypothesis or that maybe maybe but I don't necessarily mean that.
I mean that I mean that we're faced with, you know, you know, maybe I'm saying more about me here and just kind of seeing what your responses but you know I wake up every morning and this is happening.
And it's been going on for a long time, and it keeps changing and it keeps getting deeper and more interesting.
So, like, I think what I'm kind of asking is, is really that it's like, hey, Daniel, what, what, what, what do you think, what, what is it that we're experiencing here.
Actually, and what should we do with it.
And that's individual that's collective it's like, does that make any more sense am I still being in articulate
But it feels like a lot of different questions together, all of which are actually kind of hard because when I say what are we experiencing.
I have, what is the nature of reality my core ontologic question.
Yep.
Then I also have what is the nature of experience.
Go for the first one. And then, and then that's the head for the second one maybe after the first one.
I don't feel like I can do it justice in any, I mean, at all, but do it in a reasonable amount of time.
I mean, I can tell you reality models, like the simulation hypothesis or the physicalist big bang hypothesis with a tear to charge on model and I can tell you what I think is wrong with them.
Right.
In terms of the description of reality and then I can say what that kind of points to, but to try to say, what is the nature of reality is going to have
Let me phrase it, let me phrase it differently that might appeal to you more.
What does it help if I say, and we don't have to go down this road, you know, we can go down any road it's just lovely to talk to you.
Would it would it would it be easier if I said, of all the models that you are aware, which is the one that attracts you as the most adequate, given the inadequacy of all of them and let's use first line.
Um,
I think
the tear to shard on line of inquiry, kind of intersecting with the Bohmian line of inquiry is interesting and good and I kind of came up through that.
And then I think when you start to look at say Stuart Kaufman's work.
Some parts get added.
I think the question around.
And I heard you talk about this I think in a TED talk is consciousness or mind and emergent property of biology or life that evolved at a certain point.
I think that's a very problematic idea.
So what is fundamental and what's evolving or the constants constant or the laws a priori or the laws evolving.
If it's all about emerging, what is the basis of emergence itself, right, these are, is emergence fundamental. There's some very deep questions in there.
There's a nature of time there's assumptions built into the idea of evolution about the nature of time. And so we have to get into that and of course to get into that we have to get into the epistemics of how would we know how would we base that proposition.
What I'm coming to is just a handful of really hard problems, like some generally good feeling kinds of things that seem to answer some stuff and some really hard problems at the boundary conditions.
The best answers I have seen towards those really hard problems in an integrated fashion so far is this eminent metaphysics that I was telling you about that.
This beautiful thing where it was able to express Gertl's theorem and Tarski's theorem and Bell's theorem and Heisenberg's theorem as special case instances of a generalized theorem of the ontologic upper bounds of no ability within a domain.
And then it was able to create a metaphysics that showed that it was the upper bound of no ability across all domains, which like the Tao Te Ching, it's still saying there is reality outside of this but this is the upper bound on what you can do with models.
What was the guy's name again, Daniel?
Forest Landry and I'll connect you with him. He should be on here but you'll need to take a meaningful amount of time because one of the places where some of the breakthroughs occurred was him really formalizing semiotics.
Okay.
And that there ended up being quite a lot of bad ideas baked into the way we use the words and the way we compound the meanings.
Endless, I think.
And so there ends up being a lot of concepts that kind of need deconstructed and then posited and, you know, what is the minimum axiom set? I can't derive the axioms. What I can do is reify them afterwards and say, did that axiom set give more reifying power than any other axiom set?
Yeah.
Yeah. So this part of me that wants to dive in and go, hey, you know, and share with you the ideas I've been exploring around time and mind and all these things.
And it's part of me that wants to talk to you about civilization because it feels like that's something I find what you're saying about that. Absolutely fascinating.
So, so but in terms of the TED talk, let me just say a little bit. In terms of the TED talk, I think what I because I come from a kind of a phenomenological inquiry, fundamentally, which has all been about awakening and all of that.
So for me, it's that I look at this the whole time. And so what I see when I look at this is time is that one thing changes into another.
So, and I also see that what happens with when it changes is that every new moment has never happened before.
So something about the nature of time is it's constantly realizing new potentials. And then it feels like every new moment is based on the one that came before in a new way.
And it contains the past in it.
It's implicit in it so that the past hasn't gone anywhere. It's actually, it's actually not passing. It's actually accumulating.
Everything that's ever happened is implicit in this moment right from, you know, us connecting learning to speak English, the evolution of the human body, the big everything.
Whatever's happened, whatever it is that's happened, everything is implicit in there and right now everything that Daniel's ever been is meeting everything that Tim's ever been.
Time becomes something absolutely fundamental because it's the accumulation of all of the realized information.
And, and then what I mean what I'm what I'm exploring myself, and I don't know whether it's going to work. But so far it's really got my attention is based on that based on that's what every moment I've ever experienced is.
Is it possible. And now we know that it's been going on for 14 billion years it seems and one with one understanding.
And it's got us from like Brian Swim says from hydrogen to you and me having this conversation.
It's going to be emergent things build on each other, and you can't have this until you've had got this and so forth, that whether it's possible to account for what existence is with a simple idea of emergence that is being in the process of becoming
or it's the realization of potentialities and ever more emergent ways and that everything that has a quality is emergent.
And that quality would be the one thing that everything has, which is being, which is so obvious it's kind of sounds uninteresting but it's not I don't think it is interesting that there's a, there's a commonality of being, which is taking on all of these different forms, as it becomes as that process
of time or emergence or becoming unfolds and that because it's the one in relationship to itself, all of that is relational.
Relationality will it will will first be physical relationality which is electrochemical and all of that, then it will be biological which will become the sense senses and then it will become imaginal.
But that's one expanding thing and hasn't explained consciousness but we'll leave that for another time. And the but did you see do you say I'm trying to say very quickly there.
So it's, it's the, the thing which is kind of grabbed my soul and shaking me around is like, is it, is that, is there a way in which we can see that everything.
So not like the spiritual, the whole spiritual realm as it were whatever the name you give to that, the whole, the whole tradition is that always exists and we fall from it.
We've got the scientific model which is we evolved up to being animals and then this is funny epiphenomena called the mind or the psyche of going.
What if this isn't eternal, but it is, it is a domain of existence which has emerged just like the biological ecology has emerged, the ecology of soul or psyche is also emerged, and that when you go off into it which is why I've spent my life doing.
Massive and huge and, and worthy of immense attention and interactive, not like an extra stuck on the top but the most emergent level that's constantly interacting with it.
In fact, it is right now, you know, my intentionality which is imaginal information is making my mouth move I don't know how it does it but it does.
And so that's the kind of overarching thing I've been trying to see if I can make work as a as a thesis to combine these different forms of knowledge that interest me science and spirituality.
I think what I'm going to say is a clarification that you probably agree with or at least have thought about but it's important starting place for me to say that there are properties of mind particular certain types of symbolic representation and
formal logic and that are results of abstraction that seem to be pretty unique to humans maybe starting with an earlier species like homo habilis or whatever.
And that that is kind of a emergent domain that didn't exist before it obviously here, and that that is both an emergent kind of subjective domain and objective the technosphere the anthropocene is obviously result of it.
Yep.
Yes, sure that's clear.
The kind of tear to shard on idea that evolution was increasing the orderly complexity of things in and basically selecting for emergent properties.
What natural selection would be selecting for was something that had some adaptive capacity that was things that came together in a particular way that had emergent property.
And that with humans you have a the level of complexity to have abstraction as an emergent property that can then contemplate evolution. And so we are the evolutionary process to wake to itself, and then can consciously implement it the kind of our marks Hubbard and friends idea.
I think there, I'm not going to say that is true I will say there is truth and there is beauty in that idea.
That's very different than saying sentience or consciousness is an epiphenomenal biology, or if neural networks that's very very different.
And you at one point I think called it soul is is soul or psyche. And this is where we need to define our words.
Yeah.
The idea of I would maybe define kind of weak strong and radical emergence as three different types of ideas when we talk about emergence.
Strong emergence is where things come together where you get more of an existing property that was already there as a result of synergies strong emerges where you get a new property that wasn't there before at all radical emergence is the idea that you can get a
kind of ontological domain.
So the idea that the domain of first person that isn't made up of atoms and magnetic fields and gravity and electrons but it's made up of feelings and sensations and thoughts and longings and emotions that the domain of subjectivity is an emergent property of the complexity of objectivity.
I'm not saying.
Yeah, that's what I was saying I think you probably weren't saying.
In which case we get to this even harder thing of having to formalize something like panpsychism.
Well, that's why that's why getting into that.
I feel we're getting into my area and I'd like to get into yours but it will maybe get to that often we just finished with us but
it goes back to the thing we we said earlier like the one in relationship to itself so it's transjective it's subject to an object at the same time and everything is the relationship between those two poles and they can't exist independently.
And so the whole universe like right now it's like everything is is so subjectivity is there right from the start. So, like the classic hard problem thing I think is three problems.
Where does subjectivity come from, where does conscious sentience come from, where does conscious psyche come from, and I think they're three separate things.
So, so subjectivity which is the real hard problem the big one, my response is, it's not panpsychism exactly or even experientialism like Whitehead says it's, although that maybe that's what they're trying to point to they're just not good words.
It's pan subjectivity if you like or pan transjectivity that it's right the way down all the time is the interaction between perspectives on the one on itself.
So the subjects right there. That's that doesn't arrive. It's not emerging it's there. It is itself emerging on in relationship it's constantly emerging on other levels.
So that when you reach the biological level. And I don't because I'm not, you know, I'm not reductionist so when I talk about information I don't mean it's really the matrix. I mean, there is information which has become this.
We're us, you know, it's real, I think, so that we are reading information everything is reading information on every level.
So on our on the biological level. I wonder whether it's just, we can understand it simply as the level of the information being read is so complex now.
And some of it really matters because with life there comes a gender to survive to reproduce to eat not be eaten all that stuff. So that some of the information that the particular system is receiving really matters and the rest of it doesn't.
What prioritizes information. And what I notice again when I look at my experiences, it looks like that's what consciousness is. It's the information I prioritize the stuff that matters, and that it's a focus subjectivity.
So that when I focus on it does this and then the vast, vast, vast amount of information is just being processed unconsciously.
It's just a certain amount of it. I, I focus on, and that becomes lifted up and as it evolves into the level we've got you get that sensory, and it goes into HD it becomes vivid, everything which which which becomes focus, the more focus the subjectivity
the more vivid the reality.
And then that in its turn is going to lead to the processing of everything which is going on with like the whole universe is building up this.
It's like a learning machine. It's like it's, it's, it's learning how to be learning the habits, the algorithms or whatever it's going to make it function.
And I'm the same and and that the that once you've got that ability to have focus subjectivity you can focus not only on the information coming in but the processing of the information.
And that's the beginning of a whole new level of emergence then, because then you're not focusing on the tree which is there. You're focusing on the memory of the tree that isn't there.
And now you've got an image. So you've got images and then ideas about images and ideas about ideas about ideas and you're beginning to see and then that's giving rise to a whole new level of both subjective and objective reality.
Because it seems clear as day to me that the information that I'm passing to you now is not in the funny sounds.
It's on a different level. And yet you there it is, it exists and it can't be reduced to the funny sounds I'm making.
So that's more that's the kind of picture that I've been playing with them that that that domain then exists now, just like the life domain now exists.
And it's not some side effect or anything it's just a more emergent level of reality, which is huge which is really is evolving exponentially to where all the evolution has been happening for quite some time.
Yeah, I think I think I agree.
I'm, I'm pausing because
again, formalizing our terms even exists and is real.
It's anonymous.
The math exists. Is it real or not necessarily the same question based on how they're defined and a lot of the problems come down to this stuff.
Yep.
So, I'm just going to skip that for the moment.
What I hear you saying is that you defined at least three different levels of first person.
I don't remember what you called the first one wasn't in psychism and sensing.
I call it, I mean, the phrase that I just to differentiate called it pan subjectivism, because it's like it's what it's saying is there is first person or that everything is a perspective, whether it's the perspective of something physical, something biological, or something psychological.
Right.
And because you haven't got it because you because you're not saying it's got some little bit of consciousness in it, or because it's got some bit of psyche, you don't have the, the problem of the accumulation of you know the whole problem with in pan psychism of just like adding more and
more consciousness in what would that mean. You're just simply I'm simply saying everything is a prospect everything that exists as an independent system of some or relatively independent system has a perspective on the whole, and is reading all the other systems and exists only in
relationship to them.
And that what exists is the relationship between them.
Yes.
And then we have to define exist. And this is that Kohan of if a tree falls in the forest.
To say something exists posits that it could possibly be interacted with. Otherwise, what does it mean to posit that it exists and how would I know. Yeah.
So, interactive potentiality, which is relationality is critical and defining exists. Yeah.
So, if you want, I'll share a something about this that's formalized in that system of metaphysics I was describing that I think is a very insightful way of thinking about it.
So we say that perception is fundamental and it's linking a perceiver and perceived, and those words are co defining each other, the words don't mean anything without each other and that the realities the words point to are also co defining that
perceiver isn't a meaningful, ontic thing without process of perception and perceive, and that perception, which is the relationship between perceiver and perceived is more fundamental because prima facia the experience of perception is
occurring.
And I believe that the thing I'm perceiving the light waves altered on my way here, or the nature of the experience had some distortion in it. So it might not be what I'm thinking it is or perceiving it as and I might not be the nature of the perceiver that I think I am but that the perception is
occurring is kind of fundamental was just another way of restating the card there, right.
And if we so if we're going to build a metaphysics we start by saying, perceiver perceived perception are distinct inseparable and non interchangeable.
And perception is fundamental.
And so then we're building a metaphysics of perception.
And then we can identify there's a few different types of perception that are distinct from each other. And I think the three that you said Matt perfectly to the way this is modeled.
But then there's a proof of closure that there's not more than those three.
So you get a closed triplicate ontology.
And I think called the eminent mode of perception and dwelling in the moment in the experience in the nature of the perception itself. This is perceiver perceiving perceived directly.
So I don't have any narrative running right I'm not self aware in the process it's just the experience of perception.
There are whole spiritual processes just trying to get people to be in that state where they aren't modeling and thinking about it and having abstraction on top of it but are just in direct sensory experience, right.
And that's where what the perceiver is perceiving is some object of perception directly.
Those are stored in memory.
And I can actually perceive my previous perceptions, which is one step abstracted.
You can call that an omniscient mode standing on the outside being able to look at it from the outside.
And this is where I can not just have my imminent experience of you in the moment but I can have many experiences of you where I tried to now model who you are or tried to model how physics works or whatever it is so this is now the domain of knowledge modeling
semiotics.
And I can also take another step back.
So I was perceiving the perceived and then I was perceiving the perceptions as their own new objects, right.
Then I can perceive perception itself.
Yeah, which is a transcendental mode, which is what Ramana Maharshi was talking about and they don't talk about.
And so then one of the very interesting things that that system goes on to do is to be able to show that you don't get infinite recursion on that that you actually get a kind of ring or loop process between those modes, and that there's
actually an order in which they process so when I was saying earlier that my experience of reality is not mediated to the models.
The only thing is that the eminent mode actually comes before the omniscient mode.
One of the axioms is that a whole class of the eminent proceeds a single instance of the omniscient.
And it has to, because if I haven't had a whole class of first person experiences, like multiple of them, then I can't model a single thing we can't come up with a single model.
And a whole class of the omniscient proceeds an instance of the transcendent.
I can't perceive perception itself unless I can notice what is common across lots of perceptions.
Fantastic.
And then the closure is that a class of the transcendent proceeds a single instance of the eminent.
And this is a little bit harder, but choice happens as an eminent mode in actual choice to do a particular thing happens.
But the choice is a selection process out of a plurality of potentials, the plurality of the potentials existing in the transcendent, then moves into action in the eminent.
So, or I can also say a whole series of models are involved in my in the actual neurological processing of any particular eminent mode experience that's occurring.
So, yes, I'm not just perceiving through the models but my perception is being colored by the models all the time. Yeah, right.
So this class instance relationship and the directionality of proceeds ends up being one of the axioms of the system and a proof of closure.
Then that system goes on to say that these three modes of perception eminent omniscient transcendent
are corollaries, there's a handful of axioms, and that there are corollaries in every domain, that there are instances of each of those modes that define the fundamental ontologic axis of any domain.
So you end up being able to take the foundational metaphysics and see fractal like projections of it within all the various domains.
I love that. That's really, really insightful. And I'm not quite sure about the last bit that you said was more difficult.
I can go back to that another time. But the other way of seeing it, I really, really can relate to it, absolutely makes complete sense to me.
Beautiful. You're so really, really elegant.
Yeah, I think so for if we define a metaphysics as something that would ground a physics, right?
Then a physics as Pertarsky's theorem, which is defining the laws within a domain.
A physics isn't going to be able to define its own axioms and if it's consistent, it won't be complete, right?
So then the metaphysics is what is the basis by which we are assessing the adequacy of one set of axioms over another relative to the base reality.
There's something that isn't within that set of physics that's giving us the ability to assess the effectiveness of the physics, right?
This is what you were pointing to earlier.
Yeah.
Yeah, yeah.
Okay.
And so while a physics is grounded in the metaphysics in Western system, that'll be things like formal logic and mathematics and positivism and stuff like that.
A metaphysics can't be grounded in something outside of itself to be a metaphysics if it's a post of a kind of closure.
So it needs to explain reality, explain itself and explain the process by which it explained the other two so that no concepts are imported into the explanation process.
Yeah.
And that's where you get a closure on a metaphysical system.
So the way that derivation happens there is really quite elegant.
Yeah.
Wow.
Fantastic.
So I'm, I'm, it's been such a delight Daniel to connect with you. I'm just aware that it's the middle of the night for you.
But I did I get the impression you're a bit of a night owl or
I am.
You are.
Yeah.
So I'm aware if we were getting to the point where it's getting a bit late for you, then you just need to tell me because it's just the morning for me.
We can wrap soon, but was there anywhere else you wanted to go while we're here?
Yeah, loads of places. It's just the joy to talk to you and and we've not we've gone into areas that I didn't expect, which is nice.
And you've said things much closer to ways that I'm exploring than I expected, which was not completely unexpected but was is was has been very interesting.
I enjoyed that.
But I really wanted to talk a little bit about, about society and the general sense making thing and civilization and there's a whole another conversation really, but
let's just maybe we can just touch on it a little bit because I've that's another area where so I have this again I'll just say very, very quickly and then you can take it from there.
So, where I'm heading now is I'm wanting to articulate this evolutionary metaphysics, the idea that everything can be accounted for us within some very simple assumptions.
Is that possible, but I'm interested in it and it's not for me it's never been just about understanding it's about what we what we're about being alive and what we do with it.
And so there's also wanting to make it practical spiritually and also in terms of how we, we are evolving collectively. So I've got this word which I just find useful.
What I see happening is that the, or what might be happening is that we're evolving from individuals and to what I'm calling the individuals which are individuals conscious of unity,
conscious of conscious that they are the universe. And to me, the way that I approach that is I'm what the hell else could I be.
Of course I am, it's like there's the universe and me is there. That's how is that work. You know, it's like I am the universe.
As Tim meeting the universe is Daniel, and what I've been exploring with awakening to the, the, to the oneness of things, and the connectivity and the love that comes with that is how that affects how I live and then how we affect how we live collectively.
So I'm, I'm interested in the inner movement from this intense individualism which I think it's been very positive.
But not what I see with the thing which I'm opposing spirituality for instance is the oldest traditions which are very popular right now of the self is an illusion the individuals in the way it's all your ego man get rid of you Tim's the problem.
It feels like no I don't think that's at all right feels like no the individual, the evolution of the individual has been the foundation from which we can wake up to a deeper sense of our being, which is one with the being of all.
And that fundamentally shifts then because you're no longer just an individual in relationship to the one, you're the one in relationship to itself.
And so to explore that the deeper and deeper, you know, comes and goes but it's gets it's gets deeper and it changes this and what comes with this is kind of universal benevolence, because you're in a different relationship.
So that's what I'm exploring in relation to us, how we might change things collectively and my feeling is it's been happening for a long time.
It's just we don't notice it. So, I know, I know you have some, you know worries about the way that society is going I do too. But also, it blows me away when I look at history just how well things have gone.
And that there's so much more compassion in the world than there was just 50 years ago, you know, or that my dad had to fight in the Second World War and I'm an Englishman who's never been in war, which is pretty damn rare, probably never happened before.
And all of that, and that people care about other species, why, but they do or other races on the other side of the world, why, but they do. And it feels like this this underlying growth of this
of individualism of a connection and I and so I wanted to what I wanted to just see is it does that in any way intersect with what you're exploring or is that a completely different thing.
Yeah, I'll, I'll say some thoughts that came to mind when you're expressing that.
I don't mean this in a way to dissuade the, the work towards a kind of metaphysics that can be oriented to people at all.
Because when I was thinking about theory of governance and theory of economics and like that it fundamentally came down to well.
The basis of governance is going to be rule of law rule of law is going to be based on jurisprudence jurisprudence is based on ethics there's an existentialism of what is good.
I can't fucking answer these things with the philosophy of science as long as I have an is ought distinction where science can say what is but can't say what ought then it can build better and better technologies to affect what is with no basis to guide in which way other
market theory and game theory which ends up self terminating and increasing power so how do we get a metaphysics that can.
Is it possible to have a non relativistic ethics that is commensurable with the philosophy of science that can bridge the is ought distinction and be a reified basis for theory of governance.
I still like that idea but I've kind of given up on the idea that in any reasonable timeframe, there's going to be some integrated metaphysics that everybody buys and things was properly alive and properly closed.
And so I, I think my ambitions are a little humbler at the moment with regard to that. And, you know, there are many different philosophic views that have led to love and charity and non violence.
And whether I think all souls are separate but made by God so there's a divine spark and love thy neighbor as I self, or whether I believe in reincarnation and they might be my mom in the past life, or whether I just care about all sentient beings and suffering.
And I think that there is no afterlife, or, or whether I'm a kind of Greek stoic philosopher who has ideas of what virtue is and I want to behave in others in a way that's aligned with that.
I can work with any of those kind of there.
So, I, I don't need that that arises from a particular kind of theology or metaphysics. I need that it orients to a particular set of experiences that reify the meaningfulness of life and the sacredness of life that lead to the kinds of emergent behaviors that are aligned with the well being of life.
So you said sacredness of life there Daniel, what made you say that word.
I said sacredness and I said meaningfulness.
And these are both philosophic topics. Right.
Let me sidetrack you. I'm really I'm interested in what you think what those are in the what what's the thing that we can is have you been able to articulate or even begin to for yourself, like what those simple orientations might be that could
Sure. Very, I'll do it very prosaically sacred and sacrifice of the same etymology.
And so what is sacred to me is something I'm willing to make sacrifices for.
And what is essentially sacred is what is worth more to me than my life.
And if I know what is worth more to me than my life and I make sure that the choices of my life not just giving my life but that giving my my living is aligned with that. That's very helpful.
And if I hold that life itself with a capital L is sacred and sentience and experiences, then I would never unduly harm it.
And it can be because we're all sparks of the same God or because we're all facets of the same self or because consciousness emerged out of these brains and we die soon and we want people to have the best experiences they can in the short little bit of sentience.
I can kind of work with any of those.
But, but there are some you can't really work with, because they orient towards not recognizing life as sacred or meaningful.
So, you were talking about the no self idea. There is.
There is a way that
there are interpretations of Buddhist thought that can make someone an idealist
because if this is all Maya none of its real including that hungry kid isn't real, and my desire to go feed them is actually the sign of my unenlightened and ignorance that I bought into this Maya.
So that's not just making them a nihilist is making them associate path through adopting a spiritual idea that disconnects them from empathy and experience.
And so that idea doesn't work and the same idea that if somebody prays to the wrong other God you have to kill them.
Or that because it's there's no free will and consciousness is an adaptive illusion might as well just unabomber everything.
So,
there, there are versions of them that don't work, right, but there are versions of all of those that end up leading to a kind of respect for the integrity of life that orients us to behave as stewards of it.
And I can, I can kind of work with any of those. But when we're talking about
the kind of society we want to make and we're talking about governance governance is a process of shared choice making.
What is the basis of the choice we make well it's epistemology and ethics. It's our sense making of what is, and what the effects of a particular injunction will be a law or a technology or whatever.
And it's our value set of what is valuable what is meaningful that we want to make choices in service to. So our ability for collective choice making through something like democracy or any process like that is going to be grounded in our ability for
collective sense making which means individual sense making and ability to communicate effectively and ability to explicate what we value and what we're trying to serve with a particular injunction understand other people's values and find higher order dialectics of values to then be able to come up with strategies that
can meet everyone's values aligned with what we're sensing more effectively.
Yeah.
Well, I would like to talk more about that one day.
That's fascinating. And I feel like we've kind of done a whole lot of philosophical stuff which I guess is the kind of nature of the conversation I've valued you to but there's so much there that I find fascinating and yeah it's just been a delight to hang out with your, your
insights and your work with you, really.
Yes, this was fun.
And maybe we will talk more on the civilization topics at some point.
And definitely be up for that if you if you are Daniel this could be part one.
How do you feel about making any of this public. I thought you were brilliant. I mean, you just seem just as clear as clear than anyone I've talked to to be honest with you.
I don't know if any of this will be useful to anybody else but I'm happy for it to be public.
Well, you know, it's kind of I gave up on that you know it's like, like I said, for me it was, it was an excuse, you know, if I didn't have this excuse we probably we may never have this conversation.
Yeah, I've been able to go around to a whole load of really interesting people and and have conversations that seem.
I've mentioned for us but I have a couple other people I think would be worth coming on as well so I'm happy to make the introductions.
Oh, please do that would be I'd be really, really, really grateful. And so, yeah, cool. All right. So, um, well let's connect about part two.
We'll email or I don't have your email actually, but Facebook.
Facebook works and I'll give you my email there, and then we can do the introductions over email.
Great. All right. Well, good night.
