These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
The Great Courses cover a broad array of university level disciplines.
The lectures in each course are either 30 or 45 minutes long.
By listening for less than an hour a day, you can finish even the longest course in
just weeks.
Pause our catalogue or website and imagine how much you could learn if you spent just
30 minutes a day for the next year in the best college classrooms in the world.
The lecturers are university professors carefully selected by The Teaching Company and its customers
for intellectual distinction and teaching excellence.
These lectures are titled Science in the 20th Century, a Social Intellectual Survey, Part
1.
The lecturer is Professor Stephen Goldman.
Dr. Goldman is the Andrew W. Mellon Distinguished Professor in the Humanities at Lehigh University,
where he has taught for over 25 years.
He received his Bachelor of Science degree in Physics at the Polytechnic University of
New York and earned his MA and PhD in Philosophy from Boston University.
Before coming to Lehigh University, Professor Goldman taught at Pennsylvania State University,
where he was a co-founder of one of the first U.S. academic programs in science, technology,
and society studies.
A prolific author, Dr. Goldman is authored or edited eight books and has an impressive
list of scholarly articles and reviews to his credit.
He has been a national lecturer for the Scientific Research Society, Sigma Xi, and a national
program consultant for the National Endowment for the Humanities.
Professor Goldman is the recipient of the Lindback Distinguished Teaching Award from
Lehigh University.
Dr. Goldman prepared the course guide that comes with these lectures.
The course guide includes a detailed outline of each lecture, a glossary, a timeline, biographical
notes, and a bibliography.
To get the most out of this course, you may find it useful to follow along with the outlines
or review them before or after each lecture.
