Normally we think of the atom only in physical terms, but let's understand what in the 19th century the atom came to represent.
It came to represent the view that natural phenomena consisted of fundamental building blocks that could be configured to produce the multifarious phenomena of nature.
So of course the physical atom is an instance of that, and of course the chemical atom is an instance of that.
But the gene is also an atom. That is to say it is an atomic view of inheritance.
A theory of inheritance based on the gene, which was Gregor Mendel's contribution in 1865,
recovered in the 1890s and 20th century genetic theory is based on that.
That too is an instance of the atom. The germ theory of disease is an instance of the atom.
And so when we think of the atom it is a way of looking at nature not specifically tied to material atoms.
It's not a question of oxygen and nitrogen and iron.
It's a question of looking at natural phenomena as if they were composed of fundamental elements like Lego blocks that were linked together.
The second idea is the idea of energy.
The idea of energy in the 19th century is a fundamentally new idea.
Of course people had names for what we would call let's say mechanical energy today,
but in the 19th century a science of energy was created in the middle of the 19th century.
It got the name Thermodynamics that recognized that energy was a phenomenon in nature parallel to matter.
Until the rise of the concept of energy in the mid 19th century modern science was committed to the view that all natural phenomena could be explained in terms of matter in motion.
It is what in other terms is called materialistic determinism.
The idea that all natural phenomena are the result of matter in motion.
Matter in the 19th century has an atomic constitution.
Given the properties of atoms and given the rules for configuring atoms you can put matter together.
And then when matter moves it generates all the phenomena of nature.
That is the core dogma of modern science until the 19th century.
When the concept of energy is introduced energy becomes a new dimension of reality.
And the science of thermodynamics was the name given to this generic theory of energy.
Energy does not exist in the abstract.
It always takes a concrete form.
There's heat energy, gravitational energy, mechanical energy, electrical energy, chemical energy.
But the theory of thermodynamics is a general theory of energy which correlates all of these different kinds of energy.
So the concept of energy is one of the most innovative ideas of 19th century science.
And it is one of the elements of 20th century science that's not gone away but it was fundamentally transformed as we will see.
Third, the idea of the field.
And here we begin to see how ideas generate offspring of their own and sometimes unexpected interactions.
The word field in 19th century science referred to something that should not have been part of a science based on materialistic determinism.
A field is an immaterial something which is capable of exercising forces on material objects.
Almost ghostly.
So for example an electrical field has no mass.
It extends throughout all of space.
But if you take an electrically charged particle and bring it into that field it will experience a force either of repulsion or attraction depending on what the source of the field is.
If the electric field is surrounds an electron which has a negative electrical charge.
The electron was not known in the 19th century.
Then if I bring another electron into that field it will experience a repulsive force.
But if I bring in a proton, another 20th century particle, it will experience an attractive force.
But how did that happen?
There's no physical contact between the electron and the proton.
It was the field that did it.
So this notion that energy, that there can be physical realities that are not material realities.
And that these immaterial realities can be described accurately, that they observe laws and that they can exert forces.
Also on material objects is a profound intellectual development in the 19th century that becomes crucial to understanding 20th century science.
For the 19th century discovery by chemists that structure matters.
It's a subtle point.
But until it was realized that structure matters.
The prejudice of science was that what mattered were the fundamental constituents of reality and their properties.
What chemists discovered in the 1830s and 40s and 50s was that the physical arrangement of atoms in three dimensional space
changed the properties of the molecules that resulted.
Knowing what the atoms were that made up a specific molecule and knowing all the properties of those atoms would not allow you to predict the property of the molecule
unless you knew how those atoms were configured in three dimensional space.
And this was a very surprising discovery.
Structure mattered.
