I've talked about the intellectual inside of 19th century science, how about the social context outside, what there became critical to understanding 20th century science and from the outside in terms of the social context.
Well, there are two areas that I want to call your attention to.
One is the emergence in the 19th century of technological innovation as the primary agent of social change, as it has been for the last 200 years now.
As it is today, technological innovation replacing religion and politics as the primary agent of social change.
Technological innovation in the 19th century increasingly became entangled with science so that in the 20th century people talk about technoscience, science-based technological innovation.
In the course of the 19th century, the transformation of communications industry, transportation industry, power generation industries increasingly became dependent on a scientific foundation.
And in chemistry, this was particularly obvious for example, as chemists began to create wealth and power through the synthetic dye industry, the pharmaceutical industry,
and the synthetic materials industries with military applications in the area of powerful explosives and propellants for artillery shells for example.
So that by the end of the 19th century, science and technology had become entangled and three developments reinforced this.
First of all, the invention of the industrial research laboratory.
Secondly, the emergence of the university as a center for scientific research.
We take it for granted today, but until the 19th century, universities were transmitters of traditional knowledge.
Professors were not expected to generate new knowledge.
That was an outgrowth of science and technology-based research in Germany especially, and then that model was copied here in the United States.
And finally, the government involvement in science.
Governments deliberately leveraging scientific research in pursuit of military, economic, and social policies.
So that is a quick and dirty look at some of the most critical 19th century elements which will have changes rung on them in the 20th century.
They will become the materials that get transformed by way of new ideas into new kinds of theories and new interpretations of those same ideas, new interpretations of Adam, etc.
Let's jump ahead and let me identify for you six ideas that cut across the disciplines in 20th century science.
Six ideas that we will find in the physical sciences, the life sciences, and the social sciences.
And one of these I have already mentioned, and that is the idea that relationships are real.
Not only real, but increasingly perceived to be the ultimate reality, which is in some sense counter-intuitive.
But what are the relationships among?
Well, that turns out to be irrelevant.
And we'll see when we talk about contemporary quantum theory at the end of the 20th century that the idea that reality is ultimately describable in terms of relationships.
And the relata drop out is an incredible inversion of 2,500 years of Western intellectual history when we attributed reality to things.
And now, by the end of the 20th century, relationships become what science has to pin down, not things.
Co-related with that is the concept of system, looking at natural phenomena as systems.
Big difference between Lego block building up from the bottom and looking at things as holes in which every part has to be understood in terms of its relationship to the whole.
So systems thinking is top-down thinking.
So that's one set of ideas, relationships and systems.
Second, dynamism, accepting change as normal and not trying to reduce it to stasis.
By the same token, in the 19th century, scientists looked for equilibrium situations.
How does a natural situation come back to equilibrium as a peace and harmony with a norm in nature?
In the 20th century, scientific theories increasingly look at non-equilibrium situations from which we have discovered that nature is capable of self-organization.
And that will become critical when we try to understand life.
Third, information as a feature of reality.
Not as a fact, not as a statement about what we know, that information, like matter and energy, can be a category of reality.
Fourth, the emergence of complexity out of simplicity.
It was an intellectual discovery in the 19th century that you could get unlimited complexity from the combination of simple things.
You don't have to have a complex foundation in order to have a complex superstructure.
Five, quite extraordinary, the recognition in the course of the century that the distinction between subjectivity and objectivity,
between mind and world, is not so clear-cut.
And this will come up again and again in physics, no less than in the social sciences.
And finally, in the course of the 20th century, scientific research became increasingly cross-disciplinary and collaborative.
Not the individual researcher hero that we see in 1900.
And not a focus on, I'm a physicist, I'm a chemist, I'm a biologist, but cross-disciplinary research and collaborative research.
That is the basic structure of the odyssey that we will be embarking upon.
And in the next lecture, we will begin by undertaking the special and general theories of relativity.
Thank you.
