Lecture 2, Matter and Energy, Redefining Reality
Welcome to the second lecture in this odyssey, carrying us through science in the 20th century.
Today's topic is the theory of relativity or the special theory of relativity and the general theory of relativity,
which we will discuss sequentially, but they really represent a single more comprehensive view of space-time matter and energy
that we'll occasionally call the theory of relativity.
1905 was an astonishing year for Einstein.
Among the papers that he published were three, each of which was epical in the history of 20th century science.
One of them was on the so-called Brownian motion, something that had been observed for 70 years before Einstein,
but never satisfactorily explained, and that is that very small particles suspended in a solution
if examined carefully jerk around for no obvious reason and don't follow any obvious path.
They just jerk around in what seems to be random motion.
In the course of providing a theory of Brownian motion, Einstein managed to convince most of his fellow physicists for the first time that atoms were real.
The chemical atom had been accepted as real by most chemists in the 19th century,
but most physicists did not believe that atoms were real until the first decade of the 20th century.
So Einstein's paper on the Brownian motion was quite influential on convincing his fellow physicists that atoms were real,
not just an intellectual construct that was useful for solving certain kinds of problems.
The second paper, which we will come back to in the next lecture, is on the photoelectric effect.
Einstein explains the phenomenon that certain materials typically metals.
When exposed to light, give off electrons. We're familiar with this as photovoltaic devices today,
but that's based on this photoelectric effect, which Einstein explained, and in fact that's what he got the Nobel Prize for.
He did not get the Nobel Prize for either the special or the general theory of relativity.
Even in 1921, when he won the prize, they were considered too speculative to give a prize for,
but the photoelectric effect paper of 1905 is one of the foundational papers of quantum theory.
It really begins quantum theory, and yet Einstein published a third paper in that same year that was of fundamental significance
for the course of 20th century science, and that is the paper that we call the special theory of relativity paper.
In fact, the title was much more esoteric. It was on the electrodynamics of moving bodies.
What is the problem that the special relativity theory came to solve?
Well, there were really two problems. One problem that physicists shared and one that was Einstein's.
The problem that physicists shared should have been a simple problem, but in the second half of the 20th century,
using the wave theory of light, physicists tried to measure the speed of the earth, the motion of the earth in space,
and every attempt to measure it came up with zero.
Now, we knew that we could measure the earth's motion relative to the sun, but given 19th century science,
it should have been possible to measure the speed of the earth with respect to space.
In fact, Michelson, who I referred to as the inventor of the interferometer in the last lecture,
invented the interferometer in order to measure, to use light waves in order to measure the absolute motion of the earth with respect to space.
So every experiment came up zero, and furthermore, every attempt to measure the speed of light
discovered that the speed of light was the same no matter what you did, which is very bizarre.
Nothing else in nature that we're familiar with has this characteristic.
If you are traveling in an automobile on a highway and an automobile is traveling towards you, you're traveling at 60 miles an hour,
it's traveling at 60 miles an hour, you will measure its oncoming speed as 120 miles an hour.
If you are traveling at 60 miles an hour, passing a car going 50 miles an hour,
then you will measure that other car's velocity as 10 miles an hour slower than you.
But light, no matter how you're traveling, no matter how you measure it, keeps throwing up the same speed,
186,000 miles a second approximately, or if you prefer kilometers, 300,000 kilometers a second.
That was the problem that was common to all physicists.
Why can't we measure the speed of the earth, and why does this business with the speed of light?
