This concept that structure matters in the 20th century will become transformed into the idea that relationships are real.
That relationships, like fields, can have properties and can exert forces.
Because until you recognize that, you think that only things can be real.
And that is a prejudice in the West that goes all the way back to Aristotle.
And it was a very deep-seated prejudice that began to be undermined in the 19th century, but really was transformed in the 20th century.
So we've got four things so far for what I've called core ideas, the idea of the atom, the idea of energy, the idea of the field, and the idea of structure.
We're going to have four more.
Fasten your seatbelts for this one.
Non-euclidean geometry.
Now, not many people study non-euclidean geometry in their spare time.
Fascinating, though it is, for those who love it.
But non-euclidean geometry was discovered in the 19th century, and it sent intellectual shockwaves through Western culture that would be very difficult to overestimate.
For approximately 2,300 years prior to the mid-19th century, Western science, Western philosophy, Western mathematics was based on the confident assumption that deductive reasoning was closely linked to truth.
That if some set of ideas could be organized deductively, then that was a sign that those ideas were true.
So, for example, in the case of what we call euclidean geometry, which is a set of theorems describing the mathematical, the properties of mathematical objects like triangles and circles and spheres, etc.,
Based on axioms definitions and postulates, which are considered to be self-evidently true, the Greeks and almost nobody challenged this for 2,300 years, that these definitions don't need any proof.
They're just obvious as soon as you understand the words.
The assumption was that because the theorems of euclidean geometry were deduced in strict logical fashion from these self-evidently true axioms definitions and postulates, that therefore euclidean geometry was true about space,
that it was the geometry of the space in which we live and move.
In the middle of the 19th century, independently, three mathematicians, and possibly four, discovered that you can have deductively perfect geometries that contradict euclidean geometry.
And now the question becomes which of these geometries is true of real space, but now that becomes an empirical question.
It can't be answered deductively. You have to do it experimentally, but once it's experimental, then it loses its logical purity and beauty.
The discovery of non-euclidean geometries in one blow severed the mindless, uncritical connection between reasoning and reality.
We could never again be as confident as Descartes and Spinoza and Leibniz were in the 17th century, as Kant was in the 18th century, that if a theory were worked out deductively, then it must have some truth to it.
All of a sudden the connection between reason and truth, reason and reality, was made problematic.
I want to mention two other developments in mathematics which we will take up in some more detail in the lectures on mathematics, but I won't go into them in much detail now.
One is the invention in the 19th century of symbolic logics, and this is connected to the concept of relationships being real, the concept of the field and of structure, the two ideas that we just talked about.
Because symbolic logic teaches us several powerful lessons without understanding any symbolic logic, just as you didn't really need to understand non-euclidean geometry to appreciate how the invention of non-euclidean geometry,
or the discovery, depending on your view of these matters, of non-euclidean geometry could have a tremendous intellectual impact.
Symbolic logic teaches us, let's say, two lessons. One, it reminds us that notation can have a tremendous intellectual impact.
Simply replacing words with symbols can lead to new kinds of insights. You know, in the 16th century, equations in mathematics were words.
They were written out in sentences. What we recognize as mathematics, the plus sign, the minus sign, the equal sign, those were all invented in the 16th century, and they transformed mathematics.
All of a sudden, mathematics exploded, and it's probably related, in part, at least, the existence of a symbol system.
Into the 19th century, the prevailing form of logic, which was laid down by Aristotle, just as the prevailing form of geometry was laid down by Euclid, in the 4th century BCE Greece,
the prevailing view of logic was that substance, subjects, had priority over predicates.
That things were the ultimate reality, and relationships were a secondary consequence of the way things were organized.
But symbolizing logical relationships suddenly called attention to relationships, and the discovery that relationships had properties of their own, independently of what they related.
For example, the parent-child relationship has properties that the sibling relationship doesn't have, and you don't have to know who the siblings are.
You don't have to know who the parent and the child is to know that, ah, the parent-child relationship is not symmetric.
