If you happen to be an astronaut and you're doing a spacewalk from the shuttle,
the shuttle is in an orbit which effectively cancels out the effect of gravity.
Gravity is still there, but it's moving in such a way that gravity is neutralized.
Any orbital satellite is in that situation.
Nevertheless, if you want to move the space shuttle, you can't just push it.
The space shuttle has a certain amount of mass even in a gravity neutral environment
that resists being moved.
That's why you need to have fuel on board.
Otherwise, if you could change the space shuttle's orbit just by having somebody
hop outside and give it a push, then NASA's life would be a lot simpler.
Now, the puzzling problem was gravitational mass and inertial mass are identical.
So, big deal. Einstein saw that as a problem.
Why are they identical?
Now, it so happened, not a coincidence really, that an eccentric aristocratic
Hungarian scientist named Laurent Ertwersch did an exquisitely sensitive
and beautiful experiment and proved that gravitational mass and inertial mass,
weight and resistance to motion, are equal to within one part in a billion.
Einstein said, let's make this a principle of nature.
We see a style of reasoning in here, right?
He did the same thing with the speed of light in the special theory of relativity.
And that's what the general theory of relativity is based on.
Let's take traditional mechanics.
Let's take the traditional rules and add the equivalence of inertial mass
and gravitational mass, take special theory of relativity and generalize it.
And what emerges is now a new universal theory of gravity, which is, by the way,
still the dominant theory of gravity, a new universal theory of gravity
in which space, time, matter and energy are intimately correlated.
Now, it's quite clear that space and time are names of relationships.
And so is matter because the mass of an object, although it sounds bizarre,
is dependent on, in some way, the total distribution of mass in the universe.
If a star winks out of existence through exploding, that doesn't wink out of existence,
but a star explodes and distributes its mass over a huge volume of space
instead of concentrating it, that has implications for the shape of space throughout the universe.
And because what we mean by mass is the relationship between a material object
and space and, of course, mass and energy into convertible,
so I use the term now to cover both, then the mass is going to change.
And we'll get back to that in a moment.
So space and time now in the general theory of relativity are relationships.
They have no reality apart from their connections with matter and energy.
If there's no matter and energy, there's no space and time.
What was there before? There was no time before.
Time and space emerged with the emergence of matter and energy.
Space has a shape.
Classically, space doesn't have a shape.
It's Euclidean. It's featureless in all directions.
But relativistic space has a shape.
Very famous illustration of this is a taut rubber sheet on which you drop a golf ball.
Well, you know, that deforms the rubber a little bit.
Drop a bowling ball on it. It deforms it much more.
So the shape of space is a function of the distribution of matter and energy in space.
The more dense the concentration of matter and energy, the more shapeful spaces,
the more curved spaces.
So space has a shape.
But space has a shape that is not infinite, and Newtonian space was infinite.
In fact, scientists used to be proud of a fellow named Giordano Bruno,
who in 1600 gave up his life.
It was said inaccurately for science because he promoted the idea that space is infinite.
But in fact, in the general theory of relativity, space is not infinite.
The general theory of relativity predicts that rays of light will bend when they travel near a concentration of mass.
They don't really bend. What they try to do is to go in a straight line,
but try to imagine a straight line near a bowling ball on a drawing a straight line close to the bowling ball on the rubber sheet.
You can't draw the straight line. You can try to draw a straight line, but it's going to be curved because the sheet is curved.
That's what happens with light rays according to the general theory of relativity.
And in 1919, the British physicist Arthur Eddington, part of a team of researchers sent out by the Royal Society of London
in order to test the prediction made by Einstein's general theory of relativity during an eclipse
because we can only see stars that are near the edge of the sun, what's called a limb of the sun, during an eclipse.
You can't see them during the day.
So what you do is you look at a star whose position you know from the night sky
and you compare it to where it is when you see it during the day during an eclipse
and you pick a star that's as close to the limb of the sun as you can get
and by golly it confirmed Einstein's prediction.
