Bohr came to that laboratory in the nick of time.
A young man who was familiar with Einstein's work with the quantum hypothesis,
Bohr's reaction was, let's apply the quantum hypothesis.
Now, the quantum hypothesis until then was being used for electromagnetic energy.
Understand the implications of this.
Bohr now says, let's look at the mechanical energy of these orbital electrons.
Let's apply the quantum hypothesis to the orbit.
Well, what does that mean?
Well, Bohr says, I'm going to lay down the following principle of nature which nobody had thought of.
Orbital electrons don't radiate electromagnetic energy,
even though they are electrically charged particles moving in the presence of a positively charged particle.
And Maxwell's theory says, well, in that case they better start radiating electrons.
No, they don't do that.
They only radiate when they change orbits.
And furthermore, they're not allowed to be in any old orbit.
They can only take certain orbits.
They're quantized, they're orbital energy, the mechanical energy,
their movement around the nucleus at a certain speed, at a certain distance from the nucleus,
is controlled.
Certain orbits are permitted.
Others, they cannot be in between.
They can be at point A, they can be at point B, they cannot be anywhere in between.
Which has implications for continuity, right?
How can you go from point A to point B without passing through intermediate points in between?
But when an electron changes its orbit, it's in orbit A,
it's in orbit B at a subsequent time, it is not in between at any time.
You can't stop it in between.
Bohr made these assumptions and said, if you assume this,
if you agree with me to accept these assumptions,
then one, I rescue Rutherford's atom.
Now the atom becomes stable because the electron's no longer spiral into the nucleus.
Two, Bohr says, I can begin to build up the periodic table.
I can build up the periodic table because I can now imagine that the way that atoms are arranged is
that the electrons are organized into shells or according to the new quantum rules
that he and a host of other physicists in the period 1912 to 1922 worked out
that we can organize, we can explain why the atoms take the form that they do in the periodic table
and perhaps even why they have the chemical properties and some of the physical properties that they do
in terms of their orbital electrons.
This was very attractive and in fact between 1912 and 1922 Bohr, among others,
but he played a leading role in this, did show how the periodic table could be built up
on the basis of a quantum interpretation of atoms.
But there was another reason why people would pay attention to what Bohr was doing here with this quantum hypothesis
because it is on the face of it crazy and that is that starting in the 1850s approximately,
physicists using the instrument that I described to you in the very first lecture called the spectroscope
had built up an enormous body of data that had no explanation whatsoever.
What physicists discovered and chemists, when they heated matter to the point where it glowed
and therefore was radiating electromagnetic energy, passed that light from, let's say,
a specimen of sulfur that has been heated, passed that light through a spectroscope
and now you discover that every element has its own light print,
that every element has a distinctive set of frequencies that are associated with it.
If you get really good at this, you can look at the frequency list and say,
oh, that's mercury, that's sulfur, that's phosphorus, that's iron, that's helium, that's hydrogen.
As a matter of fact, helium was discovered in the sun before it was discovered here on Earth.
It was discovered because there were lines in the sun's light,
there were spectroscope lines in the sun's light that were not accounted for by hydrogen,
that were distinctive and so it was anticipated that there is an element in the sun
that is radiating that particular set of frequencies of light.
This is very important because as a technique, it has been throughout the 20th century
and continues into the 21st century as one of the most central tools of astronomy.
Thank you.
