Astronomers don't just look through telescopes at stars.
What they want to do is collect the light.
And the way they analyze the light is breaking it down into the frequencies.
It's the frequencies that allow them to know that some star is X percent helium,
X percent hydrogen, Y percent iron, Z percent sulfur, whatever.
That's the result of spectroscopic analysis, which is why I indicated
that the spectroscope, a relatively simple machine,
has been such an important 19th century invention,
and it is a consequence of the wave theory of light.
So that's, again, a reason why the wave theory of light
is such an important 19th century conceptual innovation
when, in quantum theory, we now want to change the wave theory of light.
We're talking about changing something that's really important to physicists.
This is not a matter of refining or, you know, of improving things at the margins.
We're going right to the heart of physics
when you tamper with the atomic theory of matter,
and now it is unrecognizable to Dalton.
Now the atoms are mostly empty space.
And by the way, by the time we get to the end of the 20th century,
the nucleus will turn out to be overwhelmingly empty space
because the nucleus, as we began to find out in the 1930s,
is made up of shells of protons and neutrons,
which are much smaller than the space taken up by the nucleus.
But in the 1980s and 90s, the quark theory of matter says
that protons and neutrons are made up of quarks,
which are much smaller than protons and neutrons.
So as a matter of fact, if what you're looking for in life
is something solid to rest on, you're not going to find it.
It's all energy relationships.
Matter, which seems solid to us at the empirical level,
at the atomic level, mostly empty space.
At the subatomic level, the atom is mostly empty space.
At the nuclear level, the nucleus is mostly empty space.
At the proton-neutron level, mostly empty space.
So now we're down to quarks.
And some people are beginning to say that quarks are made of
more fundamental constituents,
although we hope that they reach the bottom at some point.
So Bohr's solution then, Bohr's solution,
was to quantize the orbital energy of electrons
in the process he offered two things.
One, stability for the Rutherford atom.
Two, explaining spectroscopic data.
The spectroscopic data were huge.
They had filled up books and books and books
listing the frequencies for every element,
of the frequencies of light radiated by the different elements.
But there was no explanation of why they radiated those frequencies.
Bohr comes along and says,
this is why they radiate those frequencies,
because in every atom,
there are specifically permitted and forbidden orbital transitions.
When an electron changes its orbit,
when it goes from a higher energy level to a lower energy level,
it emits a photon of exactly the frequency corresponding
to the loss of energy that the electron,
mechanical energy that the electron experiences.
The electron is moving, let's be crude,
in say a million miles an hour, at the lower level.
It's only moving at, let's say, 180,000 miles an hour.
So it's got to get rid of 820,000 miles an hour of mechanical energy.
It converts that into a photon
of an equivalent amount of electromagnetic energy
and radiates that out.
In hydrogen, you can map the different orbits
by looking at the frequencies in the book
of spectroscopic data on hydrogen.
For iron, you look in the book for iron
and you can say, oh, I know where the orbits are for iron,
because they have to be the ones
where the energy differences exactly translate
into those frequencies of light.
So it was the spectroscopic data explanation
that made people willing to entertain
what otherwise is madness on Bohr's part.
I mean, he's altogether 22 years old.
How are you going to let this man overturn 19th century physics?
And the answer was that that spectroscopy stuff
has been bugging us for 70 years.
And now it all begins to make sense.
The bonus, which Bohr held out,
it's kind of interesting echo of what Watson and Crick
will say at the very end of their DNA paper.
The bonus was, I think I can build up the periodic table
in a way that makes sense using this quantum hypothesis as well.
And we will turn to that in our next lecture,
in which we carry quantum theory,
this heroic stage of quantum theory
from what Bohr is doing in the period 1912 to 1922,
and lots of other people, including Einstein,
into the 1920s and the culmination of this heroic stage
in what is called the Copenhagen interpretation
of quantum mechanics.
Thank you.
