Lecture 4 Matter and Energy, The Heroic Old Age of Quantum Theory
Welcome back to the Odyssey and our second lecture on the heroic stage of quantum theory.
I mentioned at the end of the last lecture that Bohr, through his quantization of the electron orbits inside an atom,
rescued Rutherford's solar system model of the atom.
And I tried to explain why anyone else besides Rutherford, and one hopes his mother, cared by suggesting that the explanation of spectroscopic data,
which had accumulated between approximately 1850 and 1910, as a mass of information that had no explanation,
was an extremely attractive reason for signing on to these bizarre assumptions of Bohr's theory,
and also the prospect of building up the periodic table in a systematic way.
Now, I want to call attention, however, to how strange this quantum theory is, even at the stage of 1912 to 1925.
First of all, there is the duality that is associated with electromagnetic energy.
The fact that you have to suppose that electromagnetic energy is both a wave and a particle,
or to put it differently, because maybe it isn't both a wave and a particle, it just behaves like a wave, and it behaves like a particle.
But waves and particles are mutually exclusive concepts.
From the point of view of physics, nothing can be both a wave and a particle, because they exclude one another.
A particle is narrowly localized in space, and its energy is a function of its mass and its velocity,
whereas a wave is distributed in space, and the energy of the wave is typically associated with what's called the amplitude, the height of the wave.
The height of the wave.
So waves and particles are two different kinds of things.
They come from two different category buckets, and nothing can be both a wave and a particle.
And yet, quantum theory requires that we make electromagnetic energy, very important, as you know, in physics,
that we have to attribute to it particle-like characteristics and wave-like characteristics.
Second concern-ful feature of this quantum hypothesis is that it's pushing discontinuity deeper and deeper into nature.
Continuity was very important in 19th century science, and now not just the emission and absorption of electromagnetic energy,
not just electromagnetic energy in Einstein's photoelectric effect paper and afterwards are discrete,
but now the orbital electrons observe a discrete pattern of change that can only change in little jumps,
and this seems to be validated by the spectroscopic data, but it's very disconcerting considering how important continuity is as a feature of nature,
and especially from the point of view of a deterministic theory of nature.
Third disconcerting feature is that in 1917 and 1918, Einstein first and then Niels Bohr convincingly argued that orbital transitions by electrons are a random process.
Now, about 10 years earlier, it was shown that radioactivity is a random process, that when you have a sample of radioactive material,
when a radioactive atom disintegrates, when the nucleus splits, this was recognized to be a random process that needed to be described statistically.
You remember I said in the first lecture that one of the key ideas that was introduced in the 19th century that turned out to be very important in the 20th century
was the idea that natural processes at the fundamental level had a probabilistic character rather than a strictly deterministic character.
Now, in the 19th century, this was limited to the kinetic theory of gases primarily, and there were ways of thinking that maybe this is that deep down it's deterministic,
but at the level of our experimental interaction and study, it's statistical and we need to use probabilities.
But radioactivity was described as a fundamentally random natural process.
