What's interesting about it is, if it's random, then it seems as though every radioactive element should have the same
disintegration pattern. But as a matter of fact, we know that that's not the case.
Every radioactive element has its own
distinctive disintegration rate. Its own half-life is the term that
scientists use. So uranium has a different half-life from plutonium, from radium.
Every radioactive element has its distinctive half-life, and yet, if you're asking me about, so I can tell you very precisely
what fraction of the atoms in a specimen of plutonium will disintegrate in the next fraction of a second.
But I cannot tell you which individual atoms will disintegrate.
The individual atoms display a random pattern of behavior, but the population of atoms,
a large enough population, if you're only dealing with one atom,
there's no way that I can tell you when it's going to disintegrate.
But if you deal with a large enough number of atoms, once you get up to the 100 million range,
once you get up to the 100,000 range, maybe, but certainly in the 100 million range, then I can start to predict
what percentage of those atoms, depending if it's plutonium or radioactive carbon,
will disintegrate in any given unit of time you like. Make it a nanosecond, make it a second, make it a year.
It's a random process. Now, in 1917-1918, Bohr and Einstein come along and showed that the orbital transition process is random.
What's random about it is that when an individual electron decides, anthropomorphically speaking,
electrons at the best of our knowledge do not have free will and don't decide anything,
but when an electron changes its orbit, and either emits a photon, because it goes from a higher energy level orbit
to a lower energy level orbit, or absorbs a photon, hitches a passing photon, and then rises to a higher energy level,
then that process is random, and so is the direction in which any emitted photon is given off.
The energy is fixed, but not the direction or the event itself.
Now, we're going to see that a similar thing happens in quantum theory, as happened with radioactivity theory,
and that is that while individual electrons behave randomly, give me a large enough sample,
and I will predict exactly how much energy will be released when electrons fall from higher energy levels to lower energy levels,
that's the way lasers work.
And electrons are forced into unstable orbits, and then they collapse together and radiate photons of the same frequency.
And now, we've got photons, we've got lasers in CD players, they cost tens of cents to mass,
and yet they're based on a fundamental quantum mechanical principle, which says that individual electrons behave non-deterministically,
but populations of them behave in ways that we can predict, as long as you don't ask me about individuals.
So this randomness really threatens the deterministic character of 19th century science.
The fourth feature here that is deeply disconcerting is that, what Bohr called in 1919, the correspondence principle,
that somehow there is a correspondence between 19th century theories, like Maxwell's electromagnetic theory,
and quantum theory, even though quantum theory fundamentally transforms classical physics,
nevertheless, it turns out that there's a correspondence between the two, so that physicists continue to find interesting materials,
fertile materials in classical theory from which to build quantum interpretations.
So that seems rather odd, you would think that if a theory has been disproven, nobody today looks in Ptolemaic astronomy
in order to get insights into the universe.
Nobody today looks at Copernican astronomy to get insights into the nature of the solar system,
but in quantum theory, quantum physicists routinely in those days looked at classical physics in order to understand
where they needed to be looking for the quantum principle, and Bohr called that the correspondence theory.
Now as a matter of fact, the strangeness of quantum theory is going to get much worse, much faster after this 1922 period,
but in the period 1920 to 1925 approximately, a funny thing happened.
A funny thing happened on the way to collecting all of the Nobel prizes that all of these people would in fact collect,
and that is that spectroscopic data, which you remember was the primary reason why anybody paid attention to Bohr,
suddenly became the enemy of quantum theory.
Because what happened was naturally that scientists started doing more and more sophisticated experiments on light.
