If physicists call certain kinds of theories beautiful, this kind of theory, they call it ugly, but it worked.
Heisenberg invented, because he had never learned this, it actually existed, he invented matrix algebra.
Instead of multiplying numbers, for example, you can multiply arrays of numbers, a three by three array,
nine numbers arranged in rows and columns, three by three, or four by four, whatever it is, those are called matrices.
And Heisenberg showed that if you make up matrices in which the rows and columns are correctly populated by spectroscopic data
and the rules of quantum theory are used to define what you're allowed to do with these matrices, you can explain all the spectroscopic data.
You can predict based on these arrays what frequencies will be emitted by electron and what the energy will be when they're emitted,
what frequencies of photons and what the energy levels will be. They can be predicted from these matrices.
He made no attempt to explain what the heck this meant physically. It's just a fact.
And in fact, Heisenberg throughout his life believed that it was the job of science to explain empirical data
and not to tell you what was really happening behind the scenes, what was reality like.
Matrix mechanics, as it came to be called, worked. Schrodinger said it was so ugly he was embarrassed that he had become a physicist.
Ironically, a year later, Schrodinger showed that his theory and Heisenberg's theory were mathematically equivalent.
They looked like they came from different galaxies, but they were mathematically equivalent.
And in 1926, Max Born, the physicist Max Born, gave the name quantum mechanics to this type of theory,
whether it's the Schrodinger version or the Heisenberg theory, they are mathematically equivalent, but physically they're very different.
That is to say, they have different physical consequences, but what was puzzling about these theories now that they worked empirically was what did they mean physically?
What was the physical interpretation? The period 1927 to 1929, which in my periodization closes out this heroic stage of quantum theory,
was one that was dominated by the attempt by Bohr and Heisenberg, among many others, but unquestionably led by Bohr and Heisenberg,
to give a physical interpretation of quantum mechanics. It worked within the context of 1920s physics,
and no one challenged that, that it worked. The question was, what did it mean? What kind of a picture of reality did it give us?
You may remember that in the last lecture I pointed out that as radical as the general theory of relativity was in its conceptual consequences,
it nevertheless was a deterministic theory that gave us a picture of reality.
It proposed that this was what space and time and matter and energy were.
But there's no way to obviously interpret either Schrodinger's theory or Heisenberg's theory as pictures of underlying reality.
We need to interpret the equations. The terms that enter into the equations are ambiguous or in some cases have no clear physical meaning whatsoever.
We have to give them a physical meaning, and so all of a sudden quantum mechanics goes through a philosophical phase, led by Heisenberg and Bohr.
I must tell you that most physicists bailed out of this. They were not interested in doing philosophy, they just worked with the theory,
and said, I don't know what it means, it works. That's enough for me.
You would think Heisenberg would be one of those, but as a matter of fact, he became deeply involved with this question of what the theories mean,
and in particular, his matrix mechanics had a peculiar feature, which was that it violated a very familiar rule from arithmetic,
which is that 3 times 2 is equal to 2 times 3. It's called commutativity.
It doesn't matter what order you multiply two things together or add two things together, you get the same answer.
They're commutative, but his matrices were not commutative.
Depending on which one you multiplied first, it made a difference.
Which one you applied first, it made a difference.
In 1927, Heisenberg published an article in which he said that his matrix mechanics implied that there was an inevitable uncertainty in our ability to collect information from the subatomic world.
These are called the uncertainty relations, that there are limits to the precision with which we can know certain kinds of coupled facts.
For example, the energy of a process and the time that that process took place.
You cannot know both of those with unlimited precision.
If you know the energy perfectly, you don't have a clue as to when it happened.
If you know the time of the event perfectly, you cannot know the energy.
You cannot know at the same time the position of a particle and its momentum.
That is the product of its mass and velocity. Let's stick to velocity.
