The, the, the anti-electron, which came to be called a positron, was discovered in 1932
by Carl Anderson. Carl Anderson was a student of Robert Millican, who was the president
and one of the founders and president of the California Institute of Technology. And he
was, in the 1920s, embroiled in quite a nasty controversy over the nature of cosmic rays,
which had been actually discovered in, in 19, in 1910, but had not properly, so to speak,
been accepted as a scientific phenomenon until the 1920s. And there was some controversy
over what was the, what the nature of these rays were. And they came from outer space.
They struck the upper atmosphere with great energy. And in the 1930s, it began, they began
to be explored using high-altitude balloons carrying cosmic ray detectors, which were,
in effect, stacks of photographic plates. And the cosmic rays left tracks in the photographic
plates, in the emulsions of the photographic plates, not just the cosmic rays, but the
cosmic rays struck particles, and those particles then, so to speak, exploded from the force
of the collisions with the cosmic rays. And they left their secondary and tertiary
tracks in these stacks of photographic plates. Well, Millican believed that cosmic rays,
reflecting his own religious beliefs, were what he called the birth cries of atoms being created
in outer space. That they, he believed that atoms were constantly being created in order to maintain
the, the density of the expanding universe, which had been postulated, or actually, in a certain
sense, discovered in the late 1920s. And so, he believed that cosmic rays were gamma rays,
and that they were photons of high energy given off in the process of creating new matter.
In, in, he directed Carl Anderson to do this cosmic ray research, which eventually did in
showing that cosmic rays were not gamma rays, were not, were not electromagnetic rays. They
were particles. Particles of matter, they were nuclei that are emitted somewhere in the,
somewhere in the Milky Way, and, and travel through space, and the ones that intercept our
planet hit the atmosphere and, and cause a great deal of turmoil in the upper atmosphere as they
collide with the molecules in the upper atmosphere. In his cosmic ray, in his cosmic ray emulsions,
Anderson found undeniable evidence of the existence of a particle of about the mass of an
electron, but with the opposite charge, and published this in 1932, won the Nobel Prize for it.
It confirmed this bizarre prediction, which came not from anything experimental, but from a
mathematical formalism. There's another interesting story associated with this, with this, and that
is that in the Cavendish laboratory at Cambridge University of Ernest Rutherford, whose name
keeps coming up and whose laboratory was perhaps the single most fertile source of early 20th
century physics, or physics in the first half of the 20th century, two, two people working in
Rutherford's lab, PMS Blackhead and a visiting Italian physicist named Giuseppe Occhialini,
also would do in cosmic ray experiments. They also had discovered the positron track in their
emulsions, but they were very cautious about announcing something as dramatic as the discovery
of a new form of matter. The American rushed in and said, I have found a new form of matter
that confirms Dirac's prediction, but the Brit was much more cautious. They got scooped,
and Anderson got the Nobel Prize, but they announced from their cosmic ray experiment
something perhaps even more amazing than antimatter. They found that Einstein's
equal MC square equation was confirmed in that. They saw how photons were converted into particles
in their cosmic ray emulsions. How high energy photons were giving rise to particles, so matter
could be created out of energy. Remember, equal MC squared implies the inter-convertibility of
matter and energy. Here in 1932, we had a powerful experimental confirmation of one of the corollaries
of the special theory of relativity, the equal MC square equation. Dirac's incorporation of the
special theory of relativity into Schrodinger's wave equation, which Schrodinger had not done.
It's a complex mathematical job to do, and in fact, Dirac did not do it in a fully satisfactory way.
Already had these consequences of predicting the existence of the anti-electron and indeed of
antimatter. In the 1960s, we'll see that the anti-proton was discovered, and subsequently,
physicists put them together to make anti-hydrogen. One anti-electron, one anti-proton, you've got
anti-hydrogen, so antimatter can be created and has been created in the laboratory.
The discovery that by golly, you can make matter out of energy, so that matter and energy are fully
are fully inter-convertible, and now comes what may perhaps be the most bizarre consequence of
Dirac's equations, and that is that Dirac's equations imply that the zero-energy state of an electron.
