In 1932, 1933, the attention of physicists began to focus on a problem within the atom.
Quantum electrodynamics was primarily concerned with the interaction between the orbital electrons
in an atom and electromagnetic energy, photons.
However, this focus on matter, on the nature of matter that quantum theory provoked, manifested
itself in trying to understand better what's going on inside the atom.
That means inside the nucleus.
So quantum electrodynamics created a framework within while people were actually using quantum
electrodynamics, and we will discuss how they were using it in the next lecture.
They were also challenged to try to understand what's going on inside the nucleus, and so
nuclear physics was one of the consequences of this second stage of the development of
quantum theory.
The first act in the rise of nuclear physics to center stage in physics with the consequences
of the study of fission, for example, that became so popular at the end of World War
II, was the discovery of the neutron, and that story is going to occupy us now, again
because it tells us something very interesting about the way physicists work.
As early as the 19 teens, it was clear that there was a problem with the prevailing theory
of matter, the atomic theory of matter, Rutherford solar system of the atom, we've got electrons
circling protons in the nucleus, and the problem was that the combined weight of electrons
and protons was lower than the measurable weight of the atom.
That the atomic weight of atoms was greater than the number of protons and the number
of electrons.
Electrons weigh almost one two thousandth of a proton, so they are almost negligible.
So the weight of the mass of the atom is primarily the nucleus, overwhelmingly the nucleus,
and the nucleus weighs more than the protons that are in it.
The atomic number of the elements was well known, and so it was assumed that there must
be some kind of electrically neutral stuff in the nucleus that makes up the mass, the
rest of the mass that you have to account for.
And exactly what this stuff was was not clear.
In 1920, Rutherford, Ernest Rutherford keeps coming back up, Rutherford postulated that
there was in the nucleus a particle that was a hybrid of an electron and a proton.
And that's what made it electrically neutral, but it also explained another puzzling phenomenon
that we talked about the other day in the previous lecture.
And that is that the beta rays emitted by radioactive atoms when they decay.
You remember that radioactive atoms when they decay give off alpha rays which are essentially
helium nuclei, they're helium atoms stripped of their electrons, they give off gamma rays
which are high energy photons, and they give off beta rays, and the beta rays are electrons
that come out of the nucleus.
Well said, Rutherford, since the beta rays come out of the nucleus, and we need some kind
of neutral stuff in the nucleus, then let's say that there's this hybrid particle made
up of an electron and a proton when the radioactive atom decays, it gives off the electron which
then leaves us with a proton, an extra proton, and then that can be calculated into the transmutation
of an atom that is associated with radioactive decay.
This was Rutherford's hypothesis.
One of the people working in Rutherford's lab was a man by the name of James Chadwick
who had been working on beta decay already by 1914, trying to understand the range of
energies of these electrons that come out of the nucleus in radioactive decay.
They don't have a single energy, and the spectrum of energy, the spread of energy, was peculiar.
Chadwick insisted that the spectrum of energies was continuous.
Uh-oh, that's a dirty word in quantum theory.
Continuous and quantum don't go together.
In the course of the 1920s, the experimental evidence seemed to support Chadwick, that
in fact the spectrum of energies was continuous, not discrete.
