Lecture five, matter and energy, a newer theory, QED.
Welcome to lecture five in our survey of the sciences.
In the last two lectures we discussed quantum theory, the rise of quantum theory through
what I've called its heroic stage from Planck's tentative hypothesis in December of 1900 through
Einstein's photoelectric effect paper of 1905, which really established quantum theory as
a physical, as a theory of physical reality through a series of problems that quantum
theory was applied to, especially Niels Bohr's quantum interpretation of the atom and climaxing
in 1929 with the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics as it was named in 1926
primarily by Niels Bohr and Werner Heisenberg.
Let's understand what point we've reached now as we make the transition to what I've
called the working phase of quantum theory, the rise of what is called quantum electrodynamics,
the quantum version of Maxwell's electromagnetic theory, which primarily deals with the interaction
between electromagnetic energy and matter.
Let's understand what point we've reached.
Quantum theory has solved, so to speak, a series of problems that had bothered physicists
for decades prior to the rise of quantum theory.
One I mentioned was, of course, the black body radiation problem for which Planck offered
a solution in December of 1900.
The second was the photoelectric effect problem, which Einstein solved with his quantum interpretation
of electromagnetic radiation in 1905.
The third was the body of spectroscopic data that had been built up since the mid-19th
century, which had no explanation.
It was just a fact that every element had its own light print when it was hot enough
to radiate electromagnetic energy, primarily light but also infrared and ultraviolet.
And now Bohr's theory of the atom gave an explanation of that.
And finally, the problem of how are the atoms built up consistent with the periodic table,
and between 1912 and 1922, Bohr and colleagues showed that there was a quantum-based way
of doing that consistently.
The price that had to be paid for solving these problems, however, was a very high one.
And let's just look briefly at the concepts that were being undermined or challenged or
displaced in exchange for replacing 19th century physics with quantum physics, the concept
of causality.
Because at the quantum level, things were happening that had no assignable cause.
And so the flip side of causality is randomness, that the quantum theory introduced randomness
into fundamental natural processes.
It was a fact about nature that fundamental processes had a random character.
It was some small consolation that the randomness got smoothed out at our macroscopic experience
level so that the world looked lawful.
But as a matter of fact, lawfulness itself needed to be reinterpreted because now it
was a sort of a secondary law of greatest numbers, great numbers consequence of underlying
random action on the part of nature at this very low subatomic level.
The concept of continuity was undermined in ways that we discussed in the last lecture
that quantum theory insists that natural phenomena are discrete, not continuous.
This applies as well to such a phenomenon as a trajectory that when an electron moves
from point A to point B, all we can say about it is it was measured to be at point A, it
was measured to be at point B, but quantum theory does not allow you to assume that it
passed through any smooth path or trajectory in getting from A to B. You can only talk
about where you measure the particle to be or the probability that you'll find it at
some other place.
So the concept of continuity has to be reinterpreted if not given up.
And with all of this, we are unable really to talk about nature as deterministic in the
same sense that it was considered to be deterministic in the 19th century.
