Bohr, in the late 1920s, decided that to rescue quantum theory and maintain discreteness that it was necessary to give up the conservation of energy.
That's a very big thing to give up. That is a really deep principle of physics.
And to give up the conservation of energy to save quantum theory is an extraordinarily bold move.
Oddly enough, many of the leading quantum theories of the day went along with Bohr and said, OK, let's give it up.
That way we can explain what looks like a continuous spectrum of beta electron energies and retain quantum theory.
And one of the great architects of quantum mechanics was Wolfgang Pauli.
Pauli in 1929, 1930s offered an alternative.
Do not give up the conservation of energy. Let's postulate the existence of a new particle in the nucleus that during radioactive decay squirts out
and carries away exactly enough energy so that we can explain the beta electron energies in a quantum way without continuity and without giving up the conservation of energy.
This particle, he thought, would have to have a mass somewhat like the electron, but would be electrically neutral.
Subsequently, Enrico Fermi, the great Italian physicist, called this a neutrino. That was Pauli's particle.
Almost at the same time in the early 1930s, Chadwick read a report of experiments that had been done in Germany and in France by two teams that were firing particles at samples of beryllium.
And he thought that they had misunderstood their results, so he did the experiments over again.
In the process, he was able to show conclusively that the beryllium was converted into carbon with the release of a particle called a neutron, our neutron.
So in 1932, the neutron, as we understand it, was revealed by Chadwick that there really was a third particle in the nucleus that was electrically neutral and that could be a very powerful tool for inducing atoms to split,
for inducing radioactive atoms to split, or causing some atoms that absorbed it to become radioactive isotopes of themselves and to split.
In 1934, Enrico Fermi formulated a theory of beta decay which lasted right to the end of the 20th century, which is that the neutron in radioactive decay, the neutron is an unstable particle outside the nucleus.
When a neutron comes out of the nucleus, then with a very short half-life, it decays into a proton, an electron, and a neutrino.
Now in 1934, the neutrino, which Pauli had predicted, but he got it wrong, but he was right.
The details were wrong, but the concept was right, that the beta decay electrons can be explained by postulating the existence of a new kind of particle that would solve the energy balance problem, but he identified the wrong problem.
He identified the wrong neutrino, so to speak. Neutrinos remained undetected until 1955. In 1955, neutrinos were detected for the first time experimentally.
They are extremely elusive particles. They are the most numerous particle in the universe, but they are extremely elusive.
They were thought to be massless and electrically neutral, and so they treat matter as if it weren't there.
But in the 1960s, it was discovered that maybe neutrinos had a tiny little amount of mass, and they came in three different styles.
We'll be picking up on this in a later lecture, and they are now recognized as a fundamental component of matter.
But in the mid-1930s now, 1934, 1935, quantum electrodynamics has set the stage for the emergence of nuclear physics as the center of attention of western scientists, and we'll turn our attention to nuclear physics in the next lecture.
