Einstein had problems with giving up almost all of these and therefore he was hostile to the Copenhagen interpretation of quantum mechanics to the end of his life.
So now, when in 1929, 1930, P.A.M. Dirac, a British physicist, incorporated the special theory of relativity into Schrodinger's wave mechanics of 1925,
he brought wave mechanics up to another level of sophistication, which was then propagated in a textbook that Dirac published in 1930,
that became a sort of Bible for physicists working in the area of electromagnetics, electrodynamics, and so quantum electrodynamics became,
so to speak, the working framework for problems that had to do with the interaction of electric, magnetic, electromagnetic forces, and material particles, especially, of course, electrons.
So quantum electrodynamic theory, in a sense, was the time was ripe for someone to formulate the quantum theory that had developed between 1905 and 1929 into something that could be made standard physics, so to speak,
and so it became starting in the 1930s, but Dirac's quantum electrodynamics had a number of quite startling consequences that we're going to be talking about today,
and they reveal a great deal about how physics works, what kind of reasoning physicists engage in.
The first of these consequences came from the fact that the solutions to Schrodinger's equation, when the theory of relativity is introduced into the equation, had negative solutions.
Now this is a fairly common phenomenon when you use mathematical tools to solve problems in the sciences that you wind up in using these mathematical tools or resources, like equations,
all of us, I think, are familiar still from high school with algebra problems, verbal problems and algebra that required solving some quadratic equation.
When you came up with a negative solution, you threw that one away because it did not have any physical application, and you just looked at the positive solutions in order to interpret how long it took to get from A to B or how many people crossed the river and how many boats.
But Dirac had a deep belief that mathematics, in fact, was capable of capturing the structure of reality, and that when physicists use mathematics, they should not merely use mathematics, mathematical resources as tools,
that they needed to look for the correct mathematical description of reality, and that that description would be found in the right mathematics.
As a result, Dirac did not throw out his negative solutions. In fact, he believed that since his equations described the physical reality associated with these quantum phenomena,
he made the startling inference, although he wrestled with it and he had a great deal of trepidation about it, that the negative solutions meant that there was what we have come to call antimatter,
that the negative solutions corresponded to particles just like the electron, but having a positive electric charge instead of the negative electric charge that all electrons we know of have.
So he predicted the existence of anti-electrons. This is really quite interesting that from the mathematical formalism itself, without any experimental evidence whatsoever,
Dirac makes a prediction which is completely from nowhere. No one had thought of the idea of antimatter. There was no obvious reason why there should be antimatter.
Just the fact that these equations which Dirac believed were correct had negative solutions led him to suspect that the mathematics was telling us things about the physical world that we didn't know.
And in 1932, the anti-electron was discovered, which is even more amazing, and which is why physics mathematics continues to dazzle scientists with the so far unexplained connection that we continue to find between abstract mathematics and the world as we continually uncover it in continually greater detail.
