In fact, it's not zero energy at all.
It is full of virtual energy, which can manifest itself as photons.
Let me explain this in the following way.
Imagine an electron quietly circling the nucleus of some atom.
It absorbs a passing photon,
acquires more energy, and so it moves up to a higher energy level.
At a certain point, quite randomly,
it emits a photon and moves to a lower energy level.
Where'd that photon come from?
How does an electron make a photon?
The answer is, apparently,
that what we would normally think of as a state of no thing at all,
a state of neutrality with regard to energy,
in fact, is continually a boil with virtual energy and virtual matter
that balance out over very, very, very short periods of time.
But in those periods of time,
events can cause matter or energy to pop into existence
and circumstances can cause them to stay there.
So, for example, the electron, when it emits a photon,
has to move to a lower energy level.
There has to be a balance,
but this photon now is out there in the world.
It is out there to interact with something else.
It has become a reality.
So the zero energy state, in a matter analogous to that,
Dirac's zero energy state turns out not to be zero energy.
And this has enormous consequences later,
as we will see in subsequent lectures in cosmology,
because in the 1980s especially,
it was recognized that, according to quantum theory,
the uncertainty relations understood ontologically as applying to nature
mean there can't be such a thing as a perfect vacuum.
That what we call the vacuum must be continually a boil
with virtual energy and virtual particles
popping in and out of existence
and that the universe as a whole may well be
an example of a pop-out that didn't pop back.
And that we'll encounter that when we discuss
Alan Goetz's inflation theory in cosmology,
which was formulated in the 1980s
and is today considered basically correct.
Now, quantum electrodynamics had a number of problems
which were only substantially resolved after World War II.
One of them was that it did not fully account
for the theory of relativity, a special theory of relativity.
And the problem there is that the special relativity theory says
that no signal can travel faster than the speed of light.
But the equations of quantum mechanics
which predict with some probability
where an object will be
or what the energy of some situation will be discovered to be
have the peculiar phenomenon that once you've made the experiment
the probabilities go to zero
for everything except the experiment that you've just done.
And since the probabilities cover
and eventualities spread throughout the universe
then instantaneously there is this collapse so to speak
of this probability distribution
and nobody quite understood what the physical meaning of that was
but it does pose a problem for the special theory of relativity
to which we will return in the next lecture.
A second problem was that there was some tension
between the energy side of quantum mechanics
and the matter side of quantum mechanics
that the particle descriptions and the energy field descriptions
did not really mesh perfectly correctly.
And the search for a fully consistent quantum field theory
would seem to require unifying quantum theory
with general theory of relativity
and no one has yet figured out how to do that
even into the early 21st century.
And finally, the mathematics of Dirac's quantum electrodynamics
are loaded with infinities
and you can't have infinities.
So physicists worked out various techniques
especially after World War II
to get rid of these mathematical infinities
by a somewhat ad-hoc process but it worked.
So quantum electrodynamics worked
and it became the framework for the theories that physicists used
in order to identify and to calculate
the interaction of electromagnetic energy and matter.
Now!
