and proved that the QED calculations were correct.
If the QED calculations were correct,
then an atomic bomb could be built.
The Manhattan Project was launched in late 1941, early 1942,
and in fact, by the end of 1943, only about 18 months later,
the physics was basically done, and it became an engineering problem.
We'll talk a little bit in the next lecture about that engineering problem
to solve because it involved particle accelerators,
an important part of the study of the nature of matter in the 1930s and 40s,
and even to this day, but the important thing is to recognize
that Fermi's project was to validate QED,
and that very quickly led, it's really quite rapid to go from this theory
at the end of 1941, middle of 1942, to a working bomb,
atomic bomb in the summer of 1945.
The first bomb was tested at Alamogordo, New Mexico in 1945.
J. Robert Oppenheimer was the chief physicist of the project,
the chief scientist.
He ran the entire show as far as the physics and science side were concerned
and became a somewhat tragic figure after the war
because of his attempt to lead scientists into some policy role
in the use of nuclear weapons, and they were unsuccessful in this.
Let's step back to the 1930s, middle 1930s.
We're all excited about fission.
There's this tremendous focus on fission because of the atomic bomb, right?
But as a matter of fact, fission is one phenomenon
that nuclear physicists were studying in the mid-1930s.
If there had never been an atomic bomb,
it would not get quite as much attention as we give it,
but there's another aspect of the nucleus of nuclear energy
that was realized at the same time, and that is fusion.
Just as you can get energy by splitting atoms
so that the resulting mass, the two pieces, don't equal the original.
Some small portion of the mass is converted into energy.
That energy takes the form of these energetic neutrons and gamma rays,
and it is also possible to get energy by fusing atoms together.
Now, in a certain sense, the easiest atoms to fuse together
are hydrogen atoms because they're the simplest atoms.
If you fuse four hydrogen atoms together,
you can create one helium atom.
The energy required to do this is enormous.
In fact, you have to heat up the hydrogen to over 15 million degrees,
which is, roughly speaking, the temperature at the center of the sun,
tens of millions of degrees, and compress it.
And if you could do that, then the hydrogen atoms would fuse,
and a tremendous amount of energy would be released
because the helium atom would weigh significantly less in atomic terms
than four hydrogen atoms.
The difference in mass would manifest itself as energy,
much more energy than is released in fission,
and with many fewer radioactive byproducts.
Hans Bader, really one of the greatest physicists of the 20th century,
and Hans Bader, now still a professor emeritus at Cornell University,
Bader, in 1938, formulated for the first time a theory of how stars work based on fusion.
We had not understood where the energy of stars comes from until Bader.
B-E-T-H-E, as opposed to B-E-T-A, is in beta decay.
I pronounce both of them the same way, but he's not a beta decay type.
Hans Bader, a theory of stellar dynamics, 1938, is a landmark.
It helped us to understand not just how stars work,
but it really provided the beginning of an understanding of how the universe is put together.
Because what beta star theory allowed us to understand was that stars generate their energy
as they collapse gravitationally, as the cloud of gas that condenses into a star collapses gravitationally.
The force of gravity begins to pull all that mass together.
It gets hotter and hotter and hotter.
If there's enough mass there, it will eventually get hot enough at the center to ignite a fusion reaction.
That will convert hydrogen into helium for as long as there's hydrogen there.
