All of this was known by 1939. Enrico Fermi was one of the major figures contributing to the theory of fish in the mid-1930s.
Lisa Meitner, a Jewish German physical chemist, and Otto Hahn, her German partner, had been working together for over 25 years,
studying the chemistry and physics of radioactive elements, and in the 1935 fleeing from Nazi Germany, Meitner was made aware of the fact that uranium could be made to fish in with slow neutrons.
And she let physicists in the West know this. Otto Hahn subsequently stayed in Germany, of course. Otto Hahn subsequently received a Nobel Prize for this during World War II,
hardly possible to give a Jewish emigre physicist, let alone a woman, Nobel Prize under the circumstances of 1943.
And so Meitner never received a Nobel Prize for the work that her laboratory had laid the foundation for.
But what I want to call your attention to, first of all, and most importantly from the point of view of the science, QED is what underlies this.
Secondly, by 1939, the construction of an atomic bomb was inevitable. All of the elements were there. All of the pieces were in fact published in the physics literature.
Niels Bohr played a small but critical role in the calculation of the absorption coefficient, which told you whether it would really be possible for a relatively small amount of uranium-235 to be made to create such a fission reaction as you would need in a bomb.
Werner Heisenberg, as nearly as we can tell, and this is very controversial, but this is my putting the pieces together, Werner Heisenberg blew it.
He was the head of the German atomic bomb project during World War II, a story propagated after the war that he deliberately prevented Hitler from having an atomic bomb.
That seems not to be the case. He made a mistake in his calculation, and he decided that you would need much more uranium than was actually the case, and therefore he just did not think that you could build something small enough to carry in an airplane.
It was only after the war when he was a prisoner of war and heard the news about Hiroshima and Nagasaki that he went back and revisited the calculations and worked reverse-engineered.
Well, if they did that and they did that, then that must be the absorption coefficient.
So QED played this central role in providing the mathematics for the atomic bomb.
I don't want to rehash the story of the atomic bomb. It's extraordinarily familiar, but at least in the very broad outline there are some issues here that can't be ignored.
On the eve of the war, in a certain sense, all of the bits and pieces, all of the intellectual bits and pieces for releasing atomic energy were well known in the entire scientific community.
Russian scientists had contributed substantially to this. Italian and French and German scientists, British scientists and American scientists.
This was all quite familiar to them. In 1940, at the urging of Vannevar Bush, who was at that time president of the Carnegie Institution in Washington, D.C.,
President Roosevelt created the National Defense Research Council to try to start organizing the nation's academic scientists as a resource in case we went to war.
Later that year, the NRDC was converted into the Office of Scientific Research and Development, the OSRD, which Vannevar Bush was the head of throughout all of World War II,
and which accomplished quite amazing things in creating the culture that we inherited in which academic science is considered to be a public resource.
One of the first things they did was to authorize Enrico Fermi to build a small, what we would call nuclear reactor in order to test for the first time whether the predictions of QED were correct
and that you could actually release atomic energy from uranium by exposing the uranium to slow neutrons. You would think fast would be better, it turns out not to be the case.
And so under the football field at the University of Chicago in 1941, Fermi and his team of physicists, quite a number of whom subsequently died of cancer because they had no idea of how much radiation they were being exposed to,
built a small nuclear reactor where the uranium material was surrounded by graphite to absorb the neutrons and control the chain reaction so that the thing didn't blow up, and it worked the first time out.
