When the hydrogen runs out, when it begins to run out, the star starts to collapse some
more because it hasn't got the energy to keep from collapsing further.
It gets hotter and hotter.
Eventually, the helium will start to fuse into more complicated atoms.
At some point, the star has no more energy, it cannot resist gravitational collapse.
It explodes.
And now it puffs out into interstellar space a complex combination of atoms that have been
created through this fusion process.
Already in 1939, the physicist George Gamow, quite an interesting character who we'll encounter
again, the physicist George Gamow speculated that beta's theory of how stars generate their
energy, which for the first time explains how the sun can be billions of years old and
still shining.
Because by the late 1930s, we knew that the Earth was at least two billion years old from
geological evidence that we'll be discussing in a later lecture.
But nobody quite understood how the sun could still be burning if it gets its energy by
a chemical process.
So now we understand how the sun works, but Gamow said, look, what beta has shown us is
how to build the universe.
In the beginning, they were just hydrogen stars.
As they burned up very quickly, they blew up and the next generation of stars started
with hydrogen, helium, and heavier elements.
And then as each generation of stars explodes, more of the heavier elements get spread out
into space.
And as we'll see in subsequent lectures, radio-telecopy in the 1950s already discovered
heavy elements floating in interstellar space.
And there's considerable confirmation of this.
So Gamow began to formulate what in the late 1940s he would publish and subsequently was
mocked as the Big Bang Theory, a name that has stuck.
So fusion is another consequence of the application of QED to matter, the theory of releasing energy
by fusion.
Now, near the end of the atomic bomb project, a Hungarian emigrate physicist named Edward
Teller, working in Los Alamos, realized that if you used an atomic bomb as a trigger, you
could build a hydrogen bomb.
For a fraction of a second, when an atomic bomb goes off, the temperature in the immediate
center of the explosion is in the tens of millions of degree range, quite enough to
trigger a little hydrogen fusion.
And so even before the first atomic bomb was tested, Edward Teller believed he had a design
for a hydrogen bomb.
He turned out to be wrong about that, but he believed that he had a design for a hydrogen
bomb using an atomic bomb as a trigger.
At the end of the immediate aftermath of the war, J. Robert Oppenheimer and most of the
physicists, I shouldn't say most, many of the physicists that worked on the atomic bomb
project were really quite frightened of what they had released to the world, especially
to the world's politicians and professional military.
They were rebuffed in their attempts to become part of U.S. policy about what to do about
nuclear weapons.
The early attempts of the Truman administration to internationalize atomic weapons failed,
and the Cold War began.
Teller was, if anything, a manic anti-communist and anti-fascist, and believed that America
needed to have the strongest possible armaments, and the hydrogen bomb was the obvious thing
to have.
Oppenheimer did not think it was necessary that the atomic bomb was terrible enough.
No one could use a hydrogen bomb.
Teller went around Oppenheimer, got Truman's approval to build a hydrogen bomb, and then
it turned out his design wouldn't work.
But a Polish mathematician named Stanislaw Ulam, together with Teller, came up with a
new design that unfortunately did work.
In the process, Oppenheimer was ruined in that in order to get him out of the way so
that the hydrogen bomb project could go forward, Teller seems to have suggested to the FBI
that Oppenheimer was not reliable to be the head of the American effort in the area of
nuclear weapons research.
There were atomic energy commission hearings during which Oppenheimer, although he was
not found guilty of anything, Oppenheimer, except perhaps foolishness in the 1930s and
early 1940s, Oppenheimer was relieved of his security clearance and was no longer a part
of the American effort associated with atomic fission and fusion research.
He became associated with the Institute for Advanced Study in Princeton.
His career was resurrected by President Kennedy in the early 1960s, and he was given an award
and a banquet at the White House.
But it was a very tragic moment.
Teller himself lived out the rest of his life in sort of semi-excommunication by many of
the physicists of his generation who felt that he had behaved improperly in so stigmatizing
Oppenheimer.
So QED is not mere theory.
It's serious, and we will in the next lecture begin to understand how it is applied.
Thank you.
