Lecture 8 Matter and Energy What Good Is QED
Welcome to the eighth lecture in our survey of the sciences in the 20th century and the
fourth and closing lecture in our discussion of quantum theories working stage, namely the
period 1929 to 1964 when quantum theory was dominated by the theory called quantum electrodynamics.
In the previous lecture we talked about how quantum theory was used in the context of
building atom smashers in order to explore the constitution of matter.
In the lecture before that we talked about how it was used as a mathematical technique
for calculating probabilities, which sounds like an abstract thing to do except when you
realize that the context in which those probabilities were calculated led directly to the atomic
bomb and then the thermonuclear hydrogen bomb.
In this lecture I'd like to concentrate on the practical implications, so to speak.
What is quantum electrodynamics and more broadly the quantum theory of the 1930s and
40s and 50s, what was it good for?
So let's think about that first from let's call it a philosophical position in terms
of what science is about and what science is for.
At one level scientists are trying to understand nature.
Now science has become a big budget, heavily politicized enterprise in the sense that it's
incorporated institutions that need all kinds of funding in order to support science.
But ultimately I believe that most scientific researchers have as their goal to understand
natural phenomena and the goal of quantum electrodynamics at the deepest level is to
try to clarify, to help us understand the ultimate constitution of matter and the relationships
between matter and energy.
That's the ultimate goal and in fact in a certain sense we can say that the more specific
goal is to come up with a single comprehensive theory of matter and energy.
Quantum electrodynamics does not do that for us.
Quantum electrodynamics gives us insight into the electromagnetic force through the
nuclear physics that we saw developing in the mid-1930s, we began to understand that
if we want to have a comprehensive theory of everything it's going to have to explain
the strong force that holds the nucleus together, the weak force that is associated with keeping
the neutron stable inside the nucleus but then unstable outside the nucleus and gravity.
So we're going to have to be able to unify those forces if we want to have a single what
some physicists call theory of everything, the TOA, the theory of everything is going
to have to embrace those four forces.
But the goal within quantum electrodynamics was to get closer to understanding the ultimate
constitution of matter and that was really the motivation behind all of these atom smashes.
What emerged in the 1960s and 70s as the big bang theory of the universe started to receive
support and to become part of the thinking of scientists was a recognition that atom
smashes were time machines of a curious sort.
They were recreating conditions that existed in the universe when the universe was extremely
young in the first seconds of the universe's existence and as the machines became more
powerful even earlier than that in the first microsecond, in the first nanosecond of the
universe's existence.
At that time the energy of the universe, the energy of the entire universe, which if we
go back far enough and we'll be talking a little bit about this in a subsequent lecture
when the universe was about the size of somewhere between a golf ball and a grapefruit, the total
energy, the average energy level of the universe was greater than we can replicate in any particle
accelerator that we have built yet.
But at a slightly later time, well maybe we can get pretty close to that and the CERN
machine that we talked about at the very end of last lecture may be able to create conditions
that existed about 10 to the minus 12 seconds after the universe was created when a particle
called the Higgs boson existed.
These accelerators then are not just for the purposes of destroying atoms in order to see
what the bits and pieces look like to satisfy our curiosity, they are actually time machines
that led us in the laboratory, that led us in far important information about the evolution
of the universe in which we live.
Let's keep that in mind as a primary goal of quantum electrodynamics, of quantum theory
generally and this becomes even more manifest after 1964 with quantum electrodynamics's successor,
which is the curious name of quantum chromodynamics.
