This took advantage of a phenomenon called resonance, which is very, very important in contemporary physics and
in quantum theory in particular because of the wave
character.
Resonance is a phenomenon that is so familiar that giving it a fancy name like that makes it sound
mysterious. Resonance is the selective transfer of energy by exploiting
periodicity.
Now, that doesn't sound very familiar at all, but think of pushing a child on a swing.
If you give a small push at exactly the right moment,
the child will go high, will swing higher and higher and higher. If you push at the wrong moment,
you mess the whole thing up.
If you are familiar with a stringed instrument, let's take the piano for example.
If you have a well-tuned piano,
and you
strike middle C, and
you then hold down any other C on the keyboard,
that string will resonate
even though you haven't hit that key.
It will resonate in sympathy, so to speak, with the C that you struck,
but the D string right next to the C that you struck will not, if it's well-tuned, will not move.
So the sound generates a shockwave,
but because the D string is tuned to a different frequency than the C, it will resist the shockwave.
But all the way down here at the high end of the keyboard,
there's a little C that you haven't struck at all, but that string is tuned to
the middle C frequency, not the same one, a what's called a harmonic, a multiple of it, and it will absorb that sound energy.
Similarly, with your radio and television, there's a term, there's an
almost incalculable amount of electromagnetic energy that floods us all the time, and
if you turn on a
radio to a particular channel, you have created a
resonant circuit, a tuned circuit, that responds only to that particular frequency, even though the antenna is
completely immersed in a C of electromagnetic energy of a wide range of frequencies.
So this concept of resonance is very central to any wave-like or periodic phenomenon.
When you can create resonance, you are exploiting
periodicity to magnify, or as scientists like to say, to amplify an initial stimulus.
Resonance can amplify an initial stimulus,
just as if you're in the right-shaped cave and you make a sound, it will echo and
boom throughout the cave. Now
Lawrence,
Widerow could never get his designs to work, and Lawrence thought he knew what was wrong, and that he could make cyclotrons that work.
He arrived in Berkeley as a young assistant professor with a small research budget,
believing that he knew how to make the cyclotron approach to particle accelerator work, and he was fortunate in having two
outstanding, outstandingly gifted graduate students, David Sloan and M. Stanley Livingston.
I'll just call him Stanley Livingston. Sloan and Livingston became
Lawrence's right-hand man.
Rather, shortly thereafter, left him and sort of seeded in American universities
approaches to building better and better particle accelerators. But we start in Berkeley in 1931 with
Lawrence's original design, which it is almost comical to describe, it was five inches in diameter. The first cyclotron
was five inches in diameter.
Charge particles were injected at the center of this five-inch diameter disk, and
they spiraled, as they spiraled out to the circumference,
they were accelerated to higher speeds by periodically boosting the charge particle with an
electrical signal,
just like pushing a child on a swing.
The output was 80,000 electron volts, also a joke. Now, it was only five inches in diameter,
but the support equipment
would have filled half of a good-sized room.
So it was not, I mean, the heart of the machine was only five inches.
That's the cyclotron part, but the part that gets you to charge particles and the pumps and the power supplies,
that was very substantial, and most of that stuff was contributed by companies to
as a donation. Sometimes it was obsolete equipment because in those days you really had to work on a shoestring.
