And in his own laboratory at the end of the 1920s, two physicists, John Cockroft and Ernest Walton,
build the kind of atom smasher that you used to see in science fiction pictures in the good old days.
These were gigantic, spark-generating devices that filled cavernous rooms
and generated gigantic sparks that crackled and that were supposed to be evidence
that we're tapping into deep energy sources here.
They built what are called electrostatic generators.
They generated, using static, built-up gigantic charges of electrical energy, generated a spark,
and then accelerated those particles, achieving very modest energies initially in 1930-1931,
achieving only 400,000 electron volts of energy, which is just a little bit less than the energy level of an electron.
However, and you wouldn't think that this would be worth very much, however, in 1930,
George Gamow, who in the last lecture I referred to as having piggybacked, so to speak,
the Big Bang Theory of the Universe on top of Hans Bethe's theory of how stars form,
George Gamow published a textbook in physics in which he pointed out a peculiar consequence of quantum electrodynamics.
Remember, in quantum theory, all descriptions are probabilistic.
And Gamow pointed out that there is a small but non-trivial probability,
according to quantum theory, but not according to classical physics,
that a weak meandering particle could actually get past an energy barrier,
and, for example, that a 400,000 electron volt particle could actually get into a proton accelerating at only 400,000 electron,
could actually get into a nucleus, when it really should have had a lot more energy than that.
Now, of course, the probability is pretty low, but it can happen.
This came to be called this phenomenon, whereby a particle that doesn't have the energy to get from point A to point B,
because in order to do that, it has to climb, let's say, an energy hill,
and it hasn't got the energy to get over that hill.
Nevertheless, sometimes it appears on the other side of the hill.
This is called tunneling, quantum tunneling, and it is a very well-known phenomenon,
which, in fact, we now use on an engineering basis in certain kinds of semiconductor devices.
This can be used and applied, this tunneling phenomenon,
but it was first brought to the attention of scientists that such a possibility existed
by George Gamow in his 1930 textbook.
Cockroft and Walton then decided, let's have a go at it,
and with a mere 400,000 electron volt beam of protons,
they were able to artificially transmute aluminum.
That was the target specimen, and this was in 1931.
Now, to do serious work, they knew they had to get up into the million electron volt range,
and so they started to scale up their machines.
Their machines were physically extremely impressive,
but they weren't actually that expensive to build,
which is kind of a British specialty,
doing a lot with relatively little in the way of resources.
So these were physically impressive machines, really room-filling,
and they made a lot of noise, and they generated a lot of ozone,
so you could smell it because the sparks were flying all over the place,
but they were relatively inexpensive,
and as I say, they immediately started to scale up to the magic figure
of millions of electron volts, at least a million.
That was considered the big leagues.
If you could get up to a million volt, then you were competing with nature,
because nature was, radioactivity was in the million electron volt range,
so then you were up there with, at least you were up there with nature.
Meanwhile, back in the States, a number of teams of people
were working on particle accelerators.
One of them at the Carnegie Institution at Washington, D.C.,
which was a major source of funding for scientific research
before the days when the government took over.
A lot of that were a job after World War II.
Merle Toove and Gregory Bright at the Carnegie Institute in Washington, D.C.
built a particle accelerator that achieved a million electron volts
before the Cockcroft-Walton team did in cabbage,
but the beam was so weak that it turned out not to be very useful for research,
and that turned out to be a dead end.
What happened in the early 1930s, a man emerged as Mr. Adam Smasher.
Ernest O. Lawrence was hired by the University of California at Berkeley,
traveled out there as a young assistant professor with a promise of grants to do research,
and Lawrence carried with him a secret, so to speak.
That is to say, he had been reading papers published by a European electrical engineer,
named Ralph Witterow, who had an idea for building a particle accelerator
that was called a cyclotron, in which, by periodically boosting a charged particle,
you could cause it to go faster and faster and faster.
You could accelerate it to higher and higher speeds.
