So, it was laughable compared to what Cockroft and Walton, I mean, their first machine was
400,000 electron volts.
His is only 80,000 electron volts.
But almost immediately, in 1932, Lawrence and Livingston, with Sloan's help, scaled
up the cyclotron to 11 inches and achieved a million electron volts.
That was in 1932.
By 1939, Lawrence had scaled up the disk part to 60 inches in diameter and achieved 10 million
electron volts.
Now, Lawrence was a serious scientist, but he was also a terrific showman.
And he understood that in America, bigger is almost always applauded as better.
He did lots of research in his lab, where he had graduate students who did lots of research
in his lab, applying what was happening in these machines.
But Lawrence's focus tended to be to get the next round of grants to build the next bigger
machine.
And the way to get it was to advertise that the next is going to be another world-class,
world-beating, world-record-setting machine.
So in 1939, he proposed a 184-inch diameter cyclotron that would reach 100 million electron
volts.
Now, you're talking serious atom smashing.
And the Rockefeller Foundation, in spite of the depression and the possible imminence
of war, awarded him the largest grant that they had ever done, over a million dollars,
to fund the building of this 184-inch machine.
World War II intervened, and the machine was built, but it was co-opted by the war effort.
One of the applications of the cyclotron at Lawrence's laboratory was the discovery
of the element plutonium by Glenn Seaborg.
Plutonium was discovered to be another element that was, in a certain demonic sense, ideally
suited for the release of nuclear energy.
It also turns out that the cyclotron principle was recognized as a means by which one could
separate uranium-235 from uranium-238.
That an adaptation of the cyclotron principle could be used to separate these two isotopes
of uranium because they don't differ in their chemical properties.
They only differ slightly in their mass and, of course, in such nuclear properties that
you don't want to be playing around with on a regular basis.
So the question is, how do you separate the two?
I mean, this would have been a formidable task for anybody who wanted to build an atomic
bomb was, how do you get the U-235?
Because not only is it less than 1% of naturally occurring uranium, but it also is almost identical
in its physical behavior.
So the technique that was used was, one technique that was used was to convert the uranium
ores into a gas and then to rotate them in a centrifuge like a gigantic cyclotron, rotate
them faster and faster and separate off the heavier elements which spin out further out
onto the circumference.
And if you do this over and over again, you can increase the concentration of the remaining
uranium from less than 1% to the percent that you need for bomb material, which I believe
is something in the 90% range.
One of the reasons for being concerned about nuclear proliferation is that the spent fuel
from a nuclear power plant, which in the American-style power plants, the uranium that's used as fuel
cannot be used as a weapon.
But in the spent fuel, it's much easier to extract the uranium from there than it is
to go out and make it by buying a war and putting it through this expensive process
of separation.
So the 184-inch cyclotron was adapted for war work during the war.
At the end of the war, it turned out that Lawrence's design was flawed, not his fault
in a certain sense, but when you start going fast enough, all of a sudden somebody taps
you on the shoulder, Mother Nature taps you on the shoulder and reminds you of the special
theory of relativity, that once matter starts approaching a significant fraction of the
speed of light, you have to take the theory of relativity into account.
And in fact, in particle accelerators, in which nowadays particles are accelerated to
way over 99% of the speed of light, the particles start behaving as if they have huge masses,
as if the mass of the particle you were accelerating was enormous, even by ordinary standards.
The mass of a truck, the mass of a small building, and it takes more and more energy to make
them go any faster than that.
