You could, when you smash particles together in the bevetron, the energy released was great enough to create antiprotons.
So now we had what I referred to in an earlier lecture as a complete vindication of Dirac's bizarre prediction based on a mathematical fact,
namely negative solutions to an equation, that there really is an anti-counter part to all of the charged particles in the universe.
That the electrons and protons and concurrent theory quarks and anti-quarks that matter has a complement.
Matter and antimatter annihilate each other on contact so you don't find lots of antimatter floating around in nature.
If there wasn't any at the beginning of the universe, it mutually annihilated matter that it confronted, converting it into photons, into energy,
and the universe that's left is whatever excess of matter there was over antimatter, if in the beginning they were almost equal amounts.
Of course, if there were exactly equal amounts of both, there'd be no universe.
So the bevetron was the, the bevetron created the antiprotons.
And now this creates a kind of a feeding frenzy because you see everybody wants to build bigger machines and find even more exotic particles.
The nature of the bevetron that you had a fixed circular beam suggested, fixed in the sense that it had a constant diameter,
suggested that, well, what if I built two beams rotating in opposite directions and I smashed them together?
Then I automatically double the energy, roughly.
This concept of colliding beams was piloted, a demonstration accelerator was built by at Stanford University in collaboration with Princeton University in 1965,
and this then became the standard, so to speak, colliding beams.
Let me just refer very briefly to the fact that particle accelerators are useless without two bits of ancillary equipment.
Detectors, when you smash the particles together, something has got to tell you what happened, and information processing.
Now these both, especially detectors, are a fascinating story in their own right.
Louis Alvarez, who later became famous for postulating that the dinosaurs were made extinct by the collision of an asteroid,
about a 10 kilometer wide asteroid with the Earth.
Louis Alvarez, for example, for the bevetron built a bubble, what's called a bubble chamber, which is analogous,
which does the same kind of job much better that the photographic emulsions did with the cosmic rays.
It was 72 inches in diameter, which sounds modest.
Okay, it's six feet in diameter, but the ancillary equipment required three million watts of electrical power just to keep the detector going,
that one detector, and a fellow named David Nigren for an accelerator built at Stanford called a linear accelerator,
a straight line, multi-mile long accelerator, still functioning one of the world-class machines,
also pioneered by a student of Ernesto Lawrence, David Sloan, who liked linear accelerators better than circular ones.
Livingston and Lawrence liked the circular ones better.
The Nigren built a detector for the Stanford linear accelerator that took him 10 years to build.
It is now standard equipment on all world-class accelerators around the world.
It's called a time projection chamber.
And the information processing, well, nowadays millions of events take place inside accelerators,
and they have to be analyzed using computers, and it's a very complex process.
A global particle accelerator race took place between the 1960s and the 1970s
that kept pushing the accelerator size and energies higher and higher until in the 1980s,
the European Center for Nuclear Research and Fermilab in the United States were the only two heavyweights left standing,
and each of them had particle accelerators in the trillion of electron volt range.
The Fermilab machine was 1.8 trillion, the CERN machine was 1 trillion,
and we were going to build a 15 trillion volt machine called the Superconducting Supercollider.
It was going to cost somewhere between 8 and 11 billion dollars, and in 1994 Congress bailed out.
So that CERN was left standing, and they are in the process of upgrading their machine
to a 7 trillion electron volt accelerator, which is 27 kilometers in circumference.
The machine is 27 kilometers in diameter. Our machine would have been 53 kilometers, about 53 miles, I'm sorry.
And a huge machine, we're talking about huge devices, billion-dollar machines, gigantic teams of scientists.
The one team that in 1995 at Fermilab discovered the sixth, and we think the last,
the last quark involved 440 scientists who collaborated on that experiment,
and where everyone is looking forward to the return of CERN in 2005-2006,
because their machine is just powerful enough to reveal the presence,
to make for a fraction of a second, 10 to the minus 23 seconds maybe,
a particle called the Higgs boson, which we will talk about in a subsequent lecture,
as the key to understanding whether our current theories work or not.
In the next lecture, we'll talk about how quantum electrodynamics was practically applied.
