Lecture 7, Matter and Energy, Learning by Smashing
Welcome to our third lecture on quantum electrodynamics, the working phase of quantum theory.
Today this lecture we're going to focus on atom smashers, a very colorful and certainly
picturesque and big budget phase of elementary particle physics, the study of the nature
of matter by destruction.
It's a fascinating concept but it already is present when we think of the whole concept
of fission that emerged out of an understanding of radioactivity.
It was a fairly natural extension of the study of radioactivity to think that well
we will discover interesting facts about the construction of matter by breaking open the
bits of matter that are available to us and that means breaking open the nucleus.
Smashing particles together, smashing particles into the nucleus to break the nucleus apart.
This happens in radioactivity, the nucleus breaks apart, it releases alpha, beta and
gamma rays and the pieces that result after the nucleus fissions, after the nucleus breaks
apart are available to inspect and to study, well now it's become a new element and we
can study that process.
We can now, by the early 1930s, we can also artificially induce fission.
We now know that by using neutron beams, we can cause atoms to break apart and we can
study the remains.
As early as 1919, 1920, Ernest Rutherford, who at that period of time had just formulated
his hybrid theory of the neutron, which we talked about in a previous lecture, was already
asking physicists, somebody out there, to build an atom smasher, to build a machine that would
break nuclei apart so we could study them, because radioactivity is not the optimal tool
to use.
Radioactive decay releases gamma rays, alpha rays and beta rays, which can be used as probes.
You can target them against a specimen in order to disrupt the atoms in the specimen,
but the average energy associated with radioactive decay, while it is significant at the atomic
level, it's not really enough to be seriously disruptive to do the kinds of smashing that
would be revealing of the structure of atoms that don't want to just split apart.
They're stable.
Also, it's difficult to get an intense enough beam from radioactive material.
The most intense beam would come from radium, but radium is extremely rare, extremely expensive,
and to get a large enough bit of radium to actually be able to use that portion of the
beam that you could focus as a probe would be very difficult.
Let me just mention for a moment the kind of energy units we're talking about here, because
it's just easier to refer to those units when we start talking about atom-smashing machines.
The unit that physicists use to discuss the energy of particles is the electron volt.
This is the energy equivalent of mass.
Remember E equal mc squared, we can express mass in terms of energy or energy in terms
of mass.
The energy equivalent of the mass of an electron is half a million electron volts, approximately.
Half a million electron volts.
The energy equivalent of a proton, which weighs 2,000 times as much as an electron, is a thousand
million electron volts.
So the energy of radioactive particles released during radioactive decay is in the low million
volt range.
So about twice the mass of an electron, but not energetic enough to do serious atom-smashing
as we came to understand that term.
So in the 1910s and 1920s, Rutherford is pushing people to build atom-smasher.
