Well, this was rather odd and interesting behavior, so other people started looking at
semiconductors and by the end of the 1930s, semiconductors had been identified that there
were really two different types of them, one that sort of had an excess of electrons and
one had a deficit of electrons, so p-type and n-type they were called, and at the junction
of these two different kinds of semiconductors, interesting things happened.
If you put a p-type together with an n-type, very odd kinds of behavior at that junction,
which people started researching, but World War II got in the way.
After World War II, some people were once again interested in semiconductors, a story
in its own right, but in 1947, actually a kind of a Christmas present to the world in 1947,
at Bell Labs, William Shockley, Walter Brattain, and John Schriefer, John Bardeen, William
Shockley and Walter Brattain invented the first transistor, directly based on an extension
of Allen Wilson's work, who was based his work on semiconductors on Felix Bloch's theory
of the quantum theory of the behavior of electrons and metals, who was a student of Verna Heisenberg.
So we can have a genealogical tree from 1920s, late 1920s, quantum mechanics, to the invention
of the transistor with all of the implications that that invention has had for our world.
So the introduction of the transistor in 1947, that first one was based on using germanium,
turned out that was not the optimal material to use.
One became a replacement, and by 1950, we can pick up the story of silicon-based semiconductors,
transistors, transistors replacing vacuum tubes, and then the whole story of the computer
and semiconductor electronics industry, etc.
So that is one spin-off of quantum electrodynamics, second spin-off of quantum electrodynamics.
You will recall, I have on two previous occasions referred to, the work that Niels Bohr and Albert
Einstein did in 1917, Einstein, 1918, Bohr, characterizing orbital transitions of electrons
around their nuclei inside atoms as a random process.
And this by itself was, for a variety of reasons, a fascinating revelation, so to speak, in
quantum theory.
By 1950, it was recognized that we knew enough through quantum electrodynamics, we had accurate
enough maps, so to speak, of electrons, electron orbitals around nuclei in different materials
that you could calculate how you could pump, you could artificially force electrons to go
up to an orbital level that was unstable, and then they would spontaneously fall to
the same lower level.
You could calculate mathematically in advance which materials had these kinds of weird orbits,
and then you, this was all done on paper so far, it was a theoretical possibility that
you could pump electrons up to an unstable level.
They would spontaneously fall a causally, there's no cause, you don't flip a switch
and make them fall, they just do it.
And what emerges is a beam of photons, every electron emits a photon as it falls to a lower
energy level, and since they all fall through the same distance, orbital distance, so then
that, all those photons have the same frequency.
So that's called coherent, a coherent beam of photons means they all have the same frequency,
and that would be a very powerful thing to have, that was in 1950.
A year later, an engineering professor at Columbia University named Charles Towns, who
was working with microwave radiation, built a device which took advantage of this effect.
The unlikely sounding material was ammonia gas, which he stimulated through pumping in
electrical energy to have the atoms in, the electrons in the atoms that make up the molecules
of ammonia gas to rise up to these unstable levels, fall down, and in the process they
emitted a coherent beam of microwaves, high frequency microwaves, which in the 1950s quite
a number of companies and the military were very interested in having a reliable compact
inexpensive source of high frequency microwaves.
