You might be thinking of your oven, for example.
Now, Townes did this.
He kept the ammonia gas, and I don't know why, in a resonant cavity.
I mean, I don't know what prompted that idea, why he should have done that.
But by putting it in a resonant cavity, and when we talked about resonance,
that if you design the cavity correctly so that it's tuned to the frequency of the light
of the microwave radiation that the ammonia gas atoms are going to be radiating,
then that amplifies it, just like pushing that swing does.
And so all of a sudden, he had a device that he called a MESER,
Microwave Amplification by the Stimulated Emission of Radiation,
and the Outcoming Microwave Beam was amplified by having been generated inside this resonant cavity.
In 1958, Townes, together with a Bell Labs physicist named Arthur Shavlov,
wrote a paper in which they said,
there's no reason why you can't build an optical MESER.
That's what they called it, an optical version of the microwave.
They published the paper in 1958, but they didn't actually build such a device.
In 1960, a scientist at U's research laboratory named Theodore Mimein
actually built the first laser.
So here again, and then, of course, lasers took off from there.
This was an extraordinarily primitive device, but so was the transistor that
Shockley, Bardin, and Brattain invented in 1947.
So we have a continuous line from the quantum theory of already, of the 1920s, QED,
allowing this mapping of the orbitals and resulting in a practical device
that is very prominent in industry and in consumer products.
Third application that I want to talk about is superconductivity.
Superconductivity is a peculiar phenomenon discovered in 1911,
which is that at extremely low temperatures,
an electrical current will continue indefinitely even when you disconnect the battery.
That there are certain materials that when you get close to absolute zero,
between 4 and 8 degrees Kelvin above absolute zero,
if you create an electrical circuit, disconnect the battery, the thing will work indefinitely.
As long as you keep it cold, it takes energy to keep it that cold, the thing will work indefinitely.
No one could explain this until 1957 when a quantum theory of superconductivity
was formulated by John Bardin, same guy who got a Nobel Prize for the transistor,
got another Nobel Prize for this one.
He was now at the University of Illinois.
However, he had split with Shockley, as almost everybody who worked with Shockley did.
John Bardin, a former student named John Schrieffer and Leon Cooper,
they gave a quantum theory of superconductivity,
which immediately was translated into medical devices, military devices,
and research applications, especially superconducting magnets,
which are vastly more powerful than ordinary magnets,
and which allowed Fermilab and CERN to build the latest generation of particle accelerators
by intensifying the magnetic field that allowed them to control
much, much more powerful beams of accelerating particles.
Subsequently, in 1986, a different form of superconductivity was discovered by IBM researchers in Zurich,
and we don't know, we don't yet have a theory for how that kind of superconductivity works.
Finally, I just want to mention that we will be picking up in a subsequent lecture
the applications of quantum theory and chemistry,
but I will simply say that by 1940, Linus Pauling, who played such an important role
in the history of chemistry in the 20th century,
Linus Pauling developed a theory of the chemical bond based on quantum theory in the 1930s,
published in a very influential textbook in 1940,
and so Pauling's quantum theory of chemistry became a fundamental tool
that, in principle, allowed chemists to use quantum theory to calculate chemical reactions in advance,
to what would happen in chemical reactions,
to calculate the properties of molecules that they had not yet made.
Now, the equations were too difficult to solve then,
but with supercomputers, that quantum chemistry became a reality in the 1980s.
Thank you.
Thank you.
