Our relationship to scientific knowledge claims will be very different if they are revelations of truth or if they are pragmatic accounts of experience.
When the scientists come to the public for resources, when they want us to teach what they say is the truth, it makes a difference if we agree that the object of science is the truth,
an externally existing independent reality, or we're talking about interpretations of experience.
So these are not merely abstract philosophical questions.
But let's talk about seriously practical applications of quantum electrodynamics.
And in particular, I want to talk about three that affect us in our daily lives, as it were.
You remember that quantum mechanics was formulated by Heisenberg and Schrodinger in 1925 in two different theoretical formalisms.
Heisenberg's matrix mechanics, Schrodinger's wave mechanics, which were in 1926 shown to be two sides of the same coin.
And so the term quantum mechanics refers indifferently to either one of those.
And that was before quantum electrodynamics, 1925, 1926.
By 1927, people started applying quantum mechanics to sort of practical problems in physics and chemistry.
In particular, the behavior of electrons in metals seemed like a natural thing to study.
Because remember, quantum mechanics in its earliest phases was focused on the interactions between electromagnetic energy, photons, and electrons.
In metals, electrons are very mobile.
So most electrons are very good conductors, right?
So the study of behavior of electrons in metals would seem to be a natural kind of application.
And Verna Heisenberg had a graduate student named Felix Bloch that studied with him in the late 1920s.
And that applied between 1927 and 1929.
Bloch applied quantum mechanics of the late 1920s to the behavior of electrons in metals.
And in particular, metals that had a particular structure, they're called lattice structure, like a lattice that you might grow roses on.
And what Bloch discovered was that contrary to quantum mechanical expectations, or maybe that's too strong,
that quantum theory itself predicted that the energy levels of the electrons in these metals would take the form of bands,
continuous bands of energy, but the bands were separated by discrete gaps.
Exactly what that means is irrelevant.
The story line is what's important here.
A British physicist named Allen Wilson went to study with Felix Bloch in 1930 approximately, 1930, 1931.
And Wilson took Felix Bloch's theory of band gaps in the way electrons behave in metals, and he looked at semiconductors.
Semiconductors are interesting materials.
What's interesting about semiconductors is that they're neither conductors nor insulators.
You could have called them semi-insulators.
I don't actually know why they were called semiconductors rather than semi-insulators, but that's what they were called.
They're sort of in between being conductors and insulators, and applying Bloch's analysis of the behavior of electrons in metals to semiconductors.
All by itself, by the way, this is kind of an interesting revelation of the way scientific research goes on in a university setting.
A really good professor doesn't want his or her graduate students to replicate their work.
Wilson didn't study the behavior of electrons in metals with a lattice structure.
That's what his teacher did.
He was looking at a related problem, a different problem that his professor had not studied,
but which he thought he could apply the conceptual tools that his professor had invented to this new problem.
So he was looking at semiconductors, and Wilson in the early 1930s gave a characterization of semiconductors that called quite a bit of attention to them,
that these are very interesting materials.
And he claimed that they were materials in which there was what's called a band gap, that there was this sort of a gap from the point of view of energy,
that there was a gap that suitably excited electrons could cross.
Without the suitably excited electrons, the material behaves like an insulator.
If you've got a supply of suitably excited electrons, they will jump over the gap and then it turned out the semiconductor becomes a conductor.
I conduct.
