Lecture 9, Matter and Energy, The Newest Theory, Quantum Chromodynamics.
Welcome back to our continuing discussion of quantum theory. In this lecture, we're
going to talk about the rise in the 1960s of quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the
strong force that holds the nucleus together. And then in the next lecture, we're going
to sort of round off the history of quantum theory by talking about the rise in the 1980s
and 1990s of the unification of the various underlying forces of nature referred to as
the standard model. But first, the rise of the strong force in the 1960s. We have been
talking about quantum electrodynamics using that as the name for the phase of quantum physics
that developed in the 1930s and 40s after P. A. M. D. Rock's introduction of his relativistic
theory of the electron and his textbook of 1930, which triggered a kind of a new paradigm
for physicists and chemists working in areas to which quantum theory could be applied. And
we talked about some of those applications in the previous lecture. In 1946, physicists
confronted one of the problems with quantum electrodynamics that I described earlier,
which was that the theory is riddled with infinities, with tricky little mathematical
infinities that need to be discarded, but in a non-arbitrary way, if at all possible.
And three physicists independently came up with solutions to this problem. In 1946, the
American physicist Julius Schringer and Richard Feynman, and really independently, the Japanese
physicist Sinitaro Tomonaga, who was working in the wreckage of Japan after World War II
and somehow managed to maintain enough contact with what was going on in physics in the western
world that he too formulated a solution to this problem. And the solution is a, it's
really a kind of a mathematical trick, and given the name renormalization, the approaches
looked very different, but they turned out to be mathematically equivalent, which is
again one of these startling developments. You recall that in 1925 Schrodinger and Heisenberg
had come up with independent solutions to the crisis that early quantum theory found
itself in in the 1920s, when spectroscopic data no longer matched the original formulation
of quantum theory, and their approaches looked totally different, and in 1926 they turned
out to be mathematically equivalent. Here again, Feynman and Schringer had come up with
what looked like radically different approaches to solving the problem, and they turned out
to be the same solution, and that was the case for Tomonaga as well. But notice what's
happening here. In the case of Dirac's relativistic theory, which generated negative solutions to
his equations, which he interpreted physically, and that led to the prediction of the existence
of antimatter, and that was discovered, and also led to this theory that the zero energy
level was rich with virtual energy, and so protons could sort of pop out of that. Photons
could sort of pop out of that. In the case of these infinities, physicists had no qualms
about not interpreting those physically. How come the equations generate all these infinities?
Just a mathematical problem. Let's get rid of it. It's not relevant to us in physics.
So I guess you have to have a lot of, obviously one does have to have a lot of intuition,
but there's a sense in which physicists use their intuition in ways that perhaps could
be considered non-logical. Maybe that's the nature of intuition, to be non-logical. And
the infinity problem went away, and quantum electrodynamics from 1946 on was implemented
and used far more intensively than it had been before. The interesting little anecdote since
we're talking about Schwinger and Feynman sort of repairing a problem with Dirac's theory.
Dirac married Schwinger's sister. Dirac was an extraordinarily quiet man. I had only one occasion
to meet him, but he was an extraordinarily quiet man for reasons that I won't go into.
He had a psychologically very abusive father, and so he spoke very, very little.
He was very shy, extremely shy. He wound up marrying Schwinger's sister, and a European
physicist came to visit them some time after they got married, and he visited them at home
and Dirac led him into the house, and they sat and they chatted for quite a while, and
Schwinger's sister, Dirac's wife, was sitting on the couch as well. And it was quite a while
according to the visiting physicist, perhaps an hour or so, before Dirac realized that
he hadn't introduced his wife. So he just casually said to the physicist,
oh, this is Schwinger's sister, and went on. Subsequently, Dirac claimed that,
well, eventually he said, and it's my wife, whom I married, but the story sounds better
when you say it was Schwinger's sister.
