Now, in 1964, when Gelman first published this theory, he proposed that there were three
quarks to which he gave the names up, down, and strange.
We only need up and down quarks together with electrons to account for all ordinary physics
and chemistry.
Those three particles, up and down quarks in the appropriate combinations, will give
you protons and neutrons.
The electron, of course, would then combine with the protons and neutrons in order to
make all the atoms that we're familiar with, and the laws associated with protons, neutrons,
and electrons, as for example, in quantum electrodynamics, would allow us to account
for all of the ordinary physics and chemistry.
When you get to higher energy levels, for example, if you want to understand what goes
on in the interiors of stars, how stars work, and you remember that Hans Bader's 1938 theory
began to give us an understanding of the fusion processes that go on inside stars, if you
want to understand what's going on in the upper atmosphere when cosmic rays collide
with the upper atmosphere.
Then you're going to need to use the quark theory much more intensively, then you're
going to have to involve the strange quark.
Let me step back for a moment to make a comment about these names, which clearly are whimsical.
That is to say, calling the eight-fold, the classification scheme the eight-fold way,
all right, that's kind of cute.
Calling the particle omega, that's kind of cute.
But then calling the, calling particles quarks, calling the quarks up, down, strange, and
there are three more to come, charm, top, and bottom.
Calling the particles that hold them together, gluons, and giving them color, saying that
they carry a color charge, and then Gelman gave the name, he's responsible for all of
these names, gave the name quantum chromodynamics, chromo meaning color, quantum color dynamics
to the whole theory of the strong force, that's what it's known as, QCD, quantum chromodynamics,
that's explicitly whimsical.
Now why is that?
Are physicists making a joke out of this?
Now as a matter of fact, it's a very important and serious point here.
Earlier quantum theory, especially between 1912, Bohr's quantum theory, the atom, and
the 1920s, continued to use 19th century physics names for quantum level phenomena.
One of them being, for example, the spin of the electron, that particles have a spin.
Now they don't really spin.
Quantum particles spin, and we understand what spinning means, but when you use these
names at the quantum level, that generated all kinds of conceptual problems that physicists
had to escape from in the 1920s and 30s.
The quantum level is, remember what Bohr said in 1929 about complementarity, that the quantum
level is beyond our experience.
When we assign names from our experience that have connotations from our experience
to the quantum level, we are guaranteed to create conceptual problems that we have to
say, well, it's called spin, but it doesn't really spin.
None of the things associated with spin, like the angular momentum associated with spinning,
for example, don't worry about any of that.
It's much better to give these whimsical names that have no connotations in physics.
The fact that somebody thinks, that's pretty funny, calling a particle charm or top, couldn't
you think of a better name than that?
So in 1964, this theory, quantum chromodynamics, begins to give us a radically new theory of
matter, a quantum theory of matter.
Now quarks are really peculiar particles.
Quarks have mass, they have spin, we're stuck with that, and they have fractional charge.
They don't come in whole electric charges like electrons.
They have fractional electric charges, which is why you have to have multiple quarks in
order to get an electrically neutral proton or neutron.
In order to put it together, you've got to have the right balance of quarks and anti-quarks
with charge in order to get whole charges.
