Or is information a name for ideas, and that there's no substantiality to that.
That's an issue in its own right.
Okay, so now let's start this something of a roller coaster ride.
In the 1950s, already in the 1950s, Schringer, who we met in the last lecture,
the Pakistani physicist Abdul Salam and the British physicist John Ward
tried to unify the weak and electromagnetic forces.
Now, that makes a lot of sense, because QED, the theory of the electromagnetic force,
and the theory of the weak force are natural allies in the sense that the weak force
is associated with electrons, and QED is the theory of the electron,
and of the interaction between electromagnetic energy and matter.
So it made sense to attempt that, but in fact the attempt failed.
It was, so to speak, premature. It was intellectually premature.
In 1961, Sheldon Glaciao, American physicist named Sheldon Glaciao,
revisited the work of Schringer, Salam and Ward, creatively reformulated it,
and predicted the existence of a carrier of the weak force.
Now, this is very important, because as we've discussed a couple of times now,
in quantum theory, every force has a carrier.
The photon is the carrier of the electromagnetic force.
The gluon is the carrier of the force that holds the nucleus together,
and that holds protons and neutrons together, I'm sorry,
that holds protons and neutrons, and all other hadrons made of quarks together.
The gluon is the carrier of that force.
The graviton, I referred to earlier, is the projected or hypothetical predicted
carrier of the gravitational force, which we may detect any day now,
since we now have gravity telescope in full operation,
and gravity wave telescope in full operation.
What's the carrier of the weak force?
That had not been identified.
And Glaciao, in unifying electromagnetism and the weak force,
predicted the existence of a carrier of the weak force,
and he said that this would be a family of particles with the ungainly name
of intermediate vector bosons, IVBs.
Now, if you didn't like the whimsical names that Gelman kept giving to things,
this is your option.
I personally prefer whimsical to intermediate vector boson,
but there's a reason for that.
A boson is the name of a certain type of particle,
like photons of particles that don't mind being identical and next to one another,
whereas the other class of particles called fermions must have differences between them
if they are going to cohabit the same system.
So that's why they're called bosons, and intermediate vector is too technical to get into.
But he predicted there would be three in this family.
One of them would have positive charge, one would have a negative charge,
one would have no charge.
It would be electrically neutral.
They would all have mass.
Now, this theory of Glacials was picked up and worked on over the next ten years
by Glacials, by Abdul Salam, by another American physicist named Stephen Weinberg,
and then in England a British physicist named Peter Higgs
and a Dutch physicist named Gerardus Tuft.
Very difficult to pronounce that correctly, I'm sure Dutch listeners will object to it,
but they were very important contributors to this as well,
but Glacials, Salam, and Weinberg, who received the Nobel Prize for this,
over the next ten years formulated a satisfying theory that they called the electroweak theory,
which unified electromagnetism and the theory of the weak force.
And in doing this, they used three concepts in particular that I want to call your attention to
because they are extremely revealing of, again, the way the minds of scientists work
and in particular for us, of course, the minds of physicists.
The unification effort employs three devices.
One of them is a mathematical technique invented in 1918 by a physicist named Hermann Weil,
who was trying then, in 1918, to unify the general theory of relativity with Maxwell's electromagnetic theory.
