Classical electrodynamics, pre-quantum electrodynamics.
Now, his effort failed, and there's nothing re-embarrassed about that.
We still don't know how to integrate general theory of relativity into quantum physics,
but in the course of his failed effort, he invented a technique that is called gauge theory.
It is really, it should be called scale invariance theory.
That is to say, as a rule, you have, whatever equations you come up with,
must observe the following condition, that when the scale changes, the size, the ratios change,
the laws of physics don't change in that phenomenon that you're describing.
So unification theories have to be scale invariant,
and the Glacier Weinberg and Salam borrowed this technique from Hermann Weill's 1918 failed attempt.
The second technique that they use is group theory.
Group theory is a 19th century abstract mathematical invention by a young Norwegian mathematician who died in his 20s,
and it's almost like a mathematical game of, at the time, no conceivable physical significance.
But group theory is a fundamental part of unification efforts in that you invent mathematical groups
that the relationships among the mathematical entities in the group would be parallel
to what you think the physical relationships are out there in the world.
And then you go look at the data to see if, in fact, it works.
If it doesn't, well, make up another group.
Until you get a group that maps on to the data in a way that matches what you think makes sense as a theory.
Now this is really interesting, right? We've seen this a number of times now,
and we're going to be talking about this explicitly in the next lecture.
How is it that we can use mathematics in this way as a source of insight into physical reality
when it seems as though mathematics is a free invention of the human mind?
The third technique that's used by the unification theorists is something called spontaneous symmetry breaking,
a forbidding name for something quite simple.
First of all, let's focus on symmetry.
Part of the unification effort is to assume that nature deep down at the most fundamental level is symmetric.
Now the world around us is loaded with asymmetries.
For example, photons and intermediate vector bosons, the photons part of the electromagnetic theory,
intermediate vector bosons part of the weak theory, we've now united them.
So photons and boson and intermediate vector bosons are kissing cousins, if not siblings.
But there's a tremendous asymmetry between the two because photons don't have any mass,
and IVBs, as I will call them, IVBs have mass.
So even right in front of us, we're looking at a major asymmetry.
Ah, but there was a prior symmetry.
Now how do physicists know this?
I mean, remember when we talked about just in the last lecture, the 200 plus elementary particles that had accumulated by 1960,
and physicists, too many.
Can't be that many elementary particles.
Nature's simple.
Of course, what physicists mean by simple is not necessarily the same thing you mean by simple in your life,
but nevertheless, there is a presumption that nature is simple and that complexity can rise out of simplicity,
that a complex situation does not require a complex organization,
that you can have fundamentally a small number of elements that can concatenate to quite complex situations.
We're going to be talking about that two lectures from now with regard to mathematics, chaos theory, complexity theory,
but we'll see this again, of course, when we talk about DNA,
in which the multifarious manifestations of life that surround us are all based on what in a certain level is a pretty simple chemistry
for the alternation of four different bases in DNA, regardless of what the organism is,
is enough to program the manufacture of the tens of thousands of proteins out of just 20 amino acids.
And that's a pretty simple set of building blocks for all living things.
So here we see a kind of, some of the prejudices, if you want to call it that,
some of the conceptual beliefs of the physics community, simplicity, but here's symmetry.
Now, the clever idea, which was borrowed by Weinberg and Salam from a 1961 effort by a Japanese physicist,
named Yoichiro Nambu, to come up with a theory of superconductivity.
