Lecture 10 Matter and Energy Unifying Nature
Welcome to the climactic lecture on quantum theory, the one in which we are going to see
the attempt in the last decades of the 20th century to unify what had been identified in
the 1950s as the four fundamental forces of nature.
And we have already reviewed these, the strong force that we now have a theory of, thanks
to Gelman and Zweig and their collaborators, the theory of quantum chromodynamics, which
matter is composed of hadrons and leptons.
All hadrons have built up out of quarks held together by gluons.
Leptons are a family in their own right, have nothing to do with quarks.
Most prominent members the electron.
And with six quarks and the battery of, and six leptons and the gluons holding the quarks
together, we've got a theory of matter that accounts as far as we can tell at this point
by the end of the 20th century.
For all the phenomena that are known to us, we've got the theory of electromagnetic force
in quantum electrodynamics and we have the theory of the weak force that is roughly speaking
covered by quantum electrodynamics and Fermi's theory of beta decay from the early 1930s.
We want to put these together and we want to put them together in a way that is physically
real, that is to say we don't want a taxonomic system.
We want to say that there was a time when these four forces, I've set gravity aside
for the moment, when these four forces were, did not exist.
When a mother force existed, a single force existed in the universe, which in some sense
collapsed or disintegrated, went through a series of collapses that resulted in the
forces that we experience, namely the strong, the weak, the electromagnetic and the gravitational
force.
The analogy we might think of here, it is a weak analogy but it has some value.
If you start off with steam, well there's a certain set of laws that determine the behavior
of water vapor in the form of steam.
As the steam cools, it becomes a liquid.
Well now there are different laws that determine the behavior of liquids.
As the liquid cools, it eventually freezes into a solid and you've got now a different
set of laws that you have to take into account.
It's in a certain sense the same stuff but it has gone through two phase transitions.
That's what scientists call that, a transition from the gaseous phase to the liquid phase,
from the liquid phase to the solid phase and it's not arbitrary that different laws
apply at different phases of this same stuff.
Now something like that is what unification theorists are looking for.
That is to say that there was a point at which the universe had an energy level so high that
a certain set of laws were appropriate and a single force was present and then as the
universe cooled it went through a series of phase transitions at which out of for example
at approximately 10 to the minus 43 seconds after the big bang, the force of gravity froze
out but the other three forces, the strong force, the electromagnetic force and the weak
force, they were all, they did not exist yet.
There was a single force associated with them and then at a later stage as the universe
cooled further it went through another phase transition out of which came the electromagnetic
force, the weak force and the strong force so that the forces as we know them can be
seen as sort of the debris of a collapse of a kind of phase transition.
That's the kind of unification we're looking for here, one that is physically real and
that is going to come back as it has for a couple of lectures now in terms of the question
well matter, we mean by reality solid stuff like matter.
Is energy real, well certainly over the last 150 years we have increasingly come to take
energy seriously as a real thing.
Does it make sense to say that objects that we used to think of as material objects are
in fact knots of energy, that doesn't scare us anymore, well maybe matter, maybe quarks
since everything else is made of quarks and electrons, if quarks and electrons are knots
of energy, well okay seems like we could live with that but by the end of this lecture we're
going to have to confront the question of is information real in the same way that energy
is real.
