The energy level of the Fermilab accelerator had reached 1.8 trillion electron volts.
And finally, after 12 years of trying, the Fermilab team found the top quark.
They had to examine 16 million collision events in order to identify a literal handful of candidates for the top quark.
16 million collision events.
In fact, while they announced the discovery in 1995, the data had actually been taken several years earlier.
It took several years in order to process the data that had been collected during the 1993 run at the accelerator
in order to find out that they had in fact observed the top quark.
And as I mentioned at the close of the last lecture, the size of the team that discovered the top quark
is all by itself quite interesting and revealing about something about the evolution of science in the 20th century.
You know, we have this sort of romantic image, especially from the late 19th and early 20th century, of the lone genius.
You have this figure of you have an Einstein working here, you have a Bohr working there, you have an Ernst Rutherford working here.
And yeah, we vaguely know that in some cases, not Einstein's, that they had graduate students, that they had a lab team, etc.
But we tend to, it's part, I think, of a cultural prejudice of ours, we tend to focus on individual heroism.
And we think of the individual genius who makes these intellectual or cultural or artistic breakthroughs, the Picasso and Einstein, etc.
But the team that discovered the top quark was 440 strong.
The paper had 440 co-authors on it from 35 different institutions in over a dozen different countries.
Physics, by the end of the 20th century, had become highly collaborative.
And not just physicists involved here, there were physicists, there were mathematicians, and there were computer scientists and engineers
who were associated with building the detectors, with processing the information, and the announcement of the top quark was sort of completed quantum chromodynamics.
This was in top quark 1995, but the fact is between the formulation of the strong force theory, quantum chromodynamics, in 1964,
to the end of the century, the strong force has so far resisted all of the challenges that have been mounted against it.
It doesn't mean that there are no problems. There are certainly problems that the strong force has not been able to resolve fully.
One of them has to do with the fact that neutrinos, when Gell-Mann formulated the Gell-Mann and Zweig, first formulated quantum chromodynamics,
before it even had that name, back in 1964, they thought the neutrino had zero mass.
In the mid-60s, observations of neutrinos coming from the sun suggested that neutrinos in fact had some mass.
This was initially highly controversial. Things went back and forth for a dozen years or so, but at the close of the 20th century,
it is generally agreed that neutrinos have some small amount of mass, and so far quantum chromodynamics is not able to explain that phenomenon,
to account for even the very, very small mass that neutrinos are assigned.
So that is certainly a problem. There are other problems having to do with the actual energy of protons,
but by and large the quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong force by the year 2000, was pretty firmly in place,
and we now had a platform on which to attempt unification.
Now, that makes sense logically. As a matter of fact, as we will see as we move into the next lecture,
the attempt to start unifying the forces of nature actually begins in 1961, and even earlier than that,
but the successful attempt begins in the 1960s just in parallel with the formulation of the theory of the strong force,
to start uniting the forces of nature, and the first pair of forces that we attempt to unite will be to unite the electromagnetic force
and the weak force, and why that should have been the first choice will be the starting point for our next lecture.
