Quarks and anti-quarks, unlike matter and antimatter,
combine constructively, not destructively.
They're very happy together, quarks and anti-quarks, so to speak.
Quarks are much, much smaller and much, much lighter
than protons and neutrons,
or any other hadron that is made up out of quarks.
Well, the much smaller part we can live with,
because we know that the nucleus is much smaller than
the total volume of the atom,
and then we learned in the 1930s that protons and neutrons
are actually much smaller than the nucleus.
So the fact that quarks are much smaller than protons and neutrons
doesn't scare us, but they're much lighter.
So where does the mass come from?
You recall that in the early 1930s,
a major question that physicists confronted was,
what are we going to do about the fact that atoms weigh more
than the electrons and protons that they're made of,
something that they had known since the 1910s,
and they sort of had vaguely said,
there must be some electrically neutral stuff in there
that gives it the extra weight.
In the 1930s, that stuff became the particle called the neutron.
Here the explanation is very different.
Here the explanation is that quarks move so rapidly
that through the relativistic effects,
they acquire the proton,
particles like protons made up out of combinations of quarks
seem to have more mass than they, in a certain sense, actually do,
that the bits and pieces, the quarks,
that are the constituents of the proton,
weigh, if you could quiet them down and put them on a scale,
they would weigh much less than the proton.
But because they're not quieted down, they're whirling around,
and they're moving so rapidly that relativity theory needs to be applied to them,
that's where the mass comes from.
This turns out to be very relevant as we move into unification theory,
and we begin to recognize that we should uncouple in our minds
the concept of mass from solidity,
because mass can be quite deceptive.
We have now, in 1964, three quarks,
eight gluons in three colors,
six leptons,
and we can, in principle, build particles out,
we can build all ordinary physics and chemistry out of this,
but in fact we can't account for everything that there is to be accounted for
from just these three quarks,
and we are going to, to telegraph it,
we're going to have to acquire three more quarks.
In 1973, at the Stanford Linear Accelerator,
in a team led by a physicist named Burton Richter,
independently and at almost the same time at Brookhaven National Laboratory,
at their particle accelerator,
in a team led by Samuel Ting,
discovered a fourth quark, which was given the name Charm,
that was, that was in 1973.
In 1977, at Fermilab,
Leon Letterman discovered a fifth quark.
Letterman discovered a fifth quark, which was given the name Bottom.
I don't think this had anything to do with Shakespeare's,
it's a summer night's dream.
It was in anticipation that there might be a top quark around somewhere.
I happened to be visiting Fermilab at that time,
and coincidentally was, was present
when Letterman got a telegram from the particle accelerator team
in Hamburg, Germany, confirming his discovery of the,
of the, of the bottom quark.
That is to say, confirming, they had confirmed the experiment he did
at Fermilab with his team,
whose results he interpreted as a new quark.
They were able to replicate that resonance and get that,
that same result, and I remember asking him,
well, do you think quarks are real?
Back in 1977, you could, you could ask this question.
And I said, do you think quarks are, are real,
or is this another intellectual construct?
And he said, well, you know, when, when, when Gelman said there were three,
I thought they were real.
Four, that was okay also.
If I'm right, and there are five, then there have to be six.
Six are too many.
So there must be something more fundamental than quarks.
I don't think he has that opinion today,
that was his off the cuff response at the time.
So the bottom quark was discovered in 1973.
In 1977, it took another 18 years
and major upgrades to the particle accelerators at Fermilab and CERN
by, by the, by 1995 when the top quark was discovered.
