And in that same year, at Brookhaven, using the Cosmetron Accelerator that we've described,
the Omega particle was described.
That was a name given to the particle by Gelman in advance of its discovery, again somewhat
whimsically, based on the Biblical phrase in which God is described as the beginning
and the end.
In Greek, I am the alpha and I'm the omega, alpha being the first letter of the Greek
alphabet, omega the last.
And so he called that the Omega particle because it would be the last particle in that particular
family.
Now this is kind of interesting for the reason that perhaps has already struck you.
How can a classification system predict existence?
If I classify books according to, let's say, the Dewey decimal system and maybe in the
Dewey decimal system, 891.325 would be the number attached to a biography written by
someone and published in a certain year.
Now that doesn't mean that that book exists.
It just means that if that book existed, this would be the number that the classification
system tells us that we have to assign to it.
And yet here we have a classification scheme, and this came up again in the table of the
periodic elements, and in Bohr's 1922 quantum version of the periodic table where there
were gaps and we said, well there must be something to fill in that gap.
Well that suggests that this classification scheme has a connection with reality that
goes beyond mere classification, as in, for example, the Dewey decimal system.
Well over the next few years, Murray Gelman, who plays the pivotal role in the rise of the
strong force theory, and a scientist at CERN named George Zweig independently developed
a theory of the strong force going beyond this classification scheme to a theory of the strong
force in which they assume that protons and neutrons are not elementary particles.
Now we already know from the 1930s that the neutron is at best an unstable particle because
outside the nucleus it disintegrates into a proton, an electron, and a neutrino.
But the proton, that sounds pretty elementary, but what happened at the Stanford Linear Accelerator,
one of those linear cyclotron machines that was built by a student of Ernesto Lawrence,
David Sloan inspiring that design, and that machine, which continues to exist in upgraded
form right into the early 21st century, has been the source of major developments.
It's a roughly two mile long linear accelerator.
They had been smashing electrons into protons and the protons disintegrated.
The protons came apart.
That was the clue to Gelman and Zweig that protons were not elementary particles and
they proposed that a radically new theory of matter, the new theory of matter goes like
this, and this is the one that at the beginning of the 21st century still holds the field,
that there are two families of particles.
One family are called leptons and the most famous member of that family is the electron.
The electron and all other members of the lepton family, of which there are six members,
the electron is the one that we know best, but there are six members to that family,
three normal sort of particles with mass in charge and three neutrinos, one that is associated
with each one.
So we've got six leptons.
They only respond to the electromagnetic force and the weak force.
They don't respond to the strong force at all, that has nothing to do with them.
And then there are hadrons.
That means every other kind of particle belongs to the family called hadrons.
All hadrons are made of quarks, some combination of quarks.
Doesn't matter how many hadrons they are because we can make as many as you want out of legitimate
combinations of quarks.
The quarks are held together by particles called gluons, gluons glue quarks together
and there are eight gluons.
In 1964, the mathematician Oscar Greenberg realized that gluons had to come in different
styles, so to speak.
They had to have certain distinctions and so he assigned them one of three different
colors and so the gluons, there are eight of them.
They come in three different colors and the color is called a charge, so they have color
charge which has nothing electrical associated with it.
So now we're beginning to see a picture of how matter is constructed.
It's constructed out of leptons and hadrons.
Hadrons are all made out of quarks which are held together by gluons.
Eight of them, six leptons.
I've left for the moment, open the question of how many quarks are there.
