In 1953, Abraham Pius, a refugee physicist here in the United States, and Murray Gelman,
an American physicist at the California Institute of Technology, both independently published
reviews of, spoke at a conference and gave reviews of the state of quantum theory up
to 1953. And using two very different lines of reasoning, they both came to the same conclusions
in which they abstracted from the previous 30 or 40 years of quantum physics a recognition
that there were, in fact, quantum theory was dealing with four fundamental forces, which
I've already telegraphed in previous lectures, that the theory of there's a strong force
holding the nucleus together. There's the weak force that is responsible for the stability
and instability of the neutron is related to, is related to the release of electrons when,
in radioactive decay, that there's the gravitational force and there's the electromagnetic force.
And that, in effect, what physicists have been doing is been treating these forces in
a compartmentalized way, and the ideal would be to treat them in a unified and integrated
way. Now, this becomes then, starting in the 1950s, a goal for physics. But we're not ready
for that yet, because for one thing, while we have a theory of the electromagnetic force,
namely quantum electrodynamics, while we have a kind of patched together theory of the weak
force through Enrico Fermi's 1934 theory of beta decay that we've already mentioned, and QED,
which together kind of cover the weak force, and let's call that a theory of the weak force,
and we set gravity aside because we don't need gravity at this level of physics,
we don't have a theory of the strong force. And that's what has to be put in place before,
in a certain sense, we can begin the process of unification. Now, as a matter of fact,
as we'll see in the next lecture, that process actually overlapped the rise of quantum chromodynamics,
namely the theory of the strong force, but we will talk first about the rise of the theory
of the strong force, and then cover unification. In 1962, the same Murray-Gelman, now nine years
older, Gelman and an Israeli physicist named Yuval Naiman proposed a solution to what had
become a really irritating problem for physicists, and that was that by 1962, because of the explosive
growth in the power of particle accelerators, which we've discussed before, that the number of
so-called elementary particles found from smashing atoms together had now exceeded 200. There were
over 200 elementary particles, and that seemed ridiculous to physicists, that you can't have
over 200 elementary particles. Gelman and Naiman proposed a rather elegant way of organizing
the 200 plus elementary particles into eight families of particles. In fact, Gelman, who
has an impish sense of humor, called this the eightfold way, which, borrowing a term from
the Buddhist theory of virtue, the Buddhist doctrine of the way to virtue, the eightfold
way is a way of organizing all of these 200 plus particles into families. At one level,
that's like the Dewey Decimal system in the library. What is the big deal there? Well,
Naiman and Gelman predicted that since there was a gap in one of their families, they predicted
the existence of a particle that would complete that family line. That particle had never been
observed, and they were saying something like this, if our classification scheme is valid,
that particle should exist. Mendeleev had said things like that based on the periodic
table, where there was a gap in the table, and said, well, you know, there must be an
element that fills this gap.
