We recently talked about the theory of superconductivity for which
Bardeen, Cooper, and Schriefer received the Nobel Prize.
Nambu was trying a different approach to the theory of superconductivity, which failed.
But by the way, he came up, he invented an idea that sometimes symmetries spontaneously break.
Sort of like a pencil that's balanced on a point, it can't stay there for very long.
Unless, I guess, you had a computer-controlled set of motors that were balancing it.
The pencil's balanced on it. At a certain point, it falls over.
So at some point, it spontaneously falls over, and now it's in a totally new energy situation.
So the idea is that there are physical systems that can be in a symmetric condition
that spontaneously generate, they collapse into an asymmetric result.
And so what Weinberg and Salam did was to take this into Gleischau's
electro-weak unification theory, take this concept.
And so photons and IVBs are now the asymmetric debris from the collapse of an earlier force.
What I've been trying to suggest to you is that debris takes many forms.
Wiles' gauge theory was debris of a failed effort.
Nambu's spontaneous symmetry breaking was debris of a failed theory attempt.
Group theory for mathematics, while not debris, just is borrowed wholesale and plugged in here
and used in a way that, whether mathematicians like it or not, that physicists feel makes sense for them.
So there's a sense in which there's a kind of a collage effect.
I don't know what you want to call it.
So mixing and matching and picking up pieces of intellectual tools.
These are intellectual tools that these physicists have used in order to construct a theory.
Now the name of this force, the name of this force of which is the symmetric condition
that the IVBs and photons are the asymmetric debris from, is the Higgs field,
named after this British physicist Peter Higgs.
The carrier of the Higgs field force is a particle called the Higgs boson.
The Higgs boson is the holy grail of particle accelerator physics
because if the Higgs boson turns out to be real,
that will provide a powerful confirmation, not just of the Glacier-Weinberg-Salaam
electro-weak unification, but the entire line of thinking, this entire mode of reasoning,
which led to this bold prediction.
Furthermore, and this touches on something that we were recently speaking about,
furthermore, the prediction is that the reason why hadrons have mass
is because they interact with the Higgs field.
And maybe that explains lepton mass as well.
That mass is a name for an energy interaction with this invisible Higgs field.
It's there, but it has frozen into invisibility as the universe cooled
approximately 10 to the minus 12 seconds after the Big Bang.
We've got to get back to that energy level in order to see the Higgs field
and find a Higgs boson, and that's what the upgrade to CERN is all about.
That's what the superconducting supercollider in the United States was supposed to be all about,
but we abandoned that because of the cost.
When CERN comes back online in about three years,
they will have a 7 trillion electron volt accelerator, which should be just enough
to find the Higgs boson, and that will be a tremendous prize.
Again, not just because it says Glacier, Weinberg, and so on.
Everybody thinks that that unification of the electroweak theory is correct
because it will validate an entire approach,
and so we can be more confident about what has been built using that same approach
on top of the Glacier, Weinberg, and so on unification.
Because in the 1980s, beginning in the 1980s, and then really completed in the 1990s,
there was a next step of unification,
was linking the quantum chromodynamics, the theory of the strong force,
to the electromagnetic and weak force.
And now this is called the standard model in physics.
It has withstood substantial challenges.
As with quantum chromodynamics, there are problems,
and I mentioned the neutrino mass as one, but none of them are considered to be killers.
So we now have, into the 1990s, we now have the beginning,
a really solid basis to say that we are in the process of unifying the fundamental forces of nature.
