going beyond that and saying that what kind of symmetry existed at that time?
So they're emerged in the 1980s and 1990s, especially in the 1990s.
This whole effort got a second life.
Something called string theory and loop theory.
There's a quantum loop theory of gravity, quantum string theory of gravity.
It is tempting to at least wonder if these two rival approaches are not perhaps the same approach mathematically.
That when they mature enough, someone will come along and show, you know, you guys are really talking about the same thing.
Analogous to the way Schrodinger and Heisenberg, Gelman and Pius, Feynman and Schringer,
and now maybe it would be nice.
But both of them are saying that the universe is built up out of.
The fundamental elements of the universe are either loops, multi-dimensional loops or multi-dimensional strings.
Now, obviously a loop is a closed string.
And the advantage of the loop to loop theorists is that you can characterize loops in terms of the wave, the periodicity.
What kind of waves that you can set up, the loops can have a kind of wave structure to them.
And in both cases at the moment, the preferred number of dimensions is 10.
That when these loops or strings first came into existence, at the very, I don't even know what to call it,
at the instant after the Big Bang, there were 10 dimensions to the physical world.
But as the universe cooled, seven of those dimensions essentially froze and are invisible.
It's not that they don't exist anymore, they just don't function anymore because they're frozen out of physical activity
by the fact that the universe has cooled from hundreds of millions of degrees down to the very comfortable temperature that we currently experience.
So actually the microwave background radiation is 2.73 degrees Kelvin,
whereas it started out when the universe was about the size of a golf ball in the hundreds of millions of degrees.
And that may be an underestimate.
So loop and string theory, 10 dimensions, they freeze out through this kind of, again, it's a kind of symmetry breaking as the universe cools.
That's what drives the breaking.
But these are rival approaches that have some overlapping features.
There is a third approach that I want to call your attention to because I think it is one that's particularly peaking.
And that is to say, let's get away from thinking of the universe in terms of things that it's built up out of,
even if they are such abstractions as strings and loops.
Let's talk about the underlying relationships, the underlying process, the relational structure of reality.
The underlying, as I said, relational structure or process of reality.
Now this group, which has actually done quite a lot of interesting physics that has begun to attract attention of other physicists who don't like this approach,
has been inspired specifically by the black hole theories of the Hebrew University physicist named Jacob Bekenstein and Stephen Hawking of Cambridge University.
They had developed, especially Bekenstein, provoked the notion that black holes have a certain entropy associated with them.
Entropy is understood by us in some sense as a measure of information, as a result of which, according to this third group,
it is tempting, bizarre as it may sound, to interpret the universe ultimately as an information structure.
That's why I asked the question before, all right, if you're going to grab me that energy is real, will you grab me that information is real?
Real enough to be the universe? Energy, okay, maybe energy is the universe.
Could information be the universe?
Could the universe be a holographic projection?
And this is talked about seriously by a number of physicists associated with this group.
For those of you who are old enough to appreciate this question, I will leave you with this question.
The rest can look it up on the internet.
Is it possible that our universe is a cosmic Burma Shave sign in some far greater scheme of things?
