Sometimes, scientists made important contributions by putting them on the right track, but overwhelmingly
scientists, physical scientists, played a marginal role in the introduction of the innovation,
although they then came in afterwards in order to improve it dramatically, in the case of
the telephone, for example, enabling, well, using physics in order to solve problems of
long-distance telephone service in the 1890s and early 1900s.
In 1902, 1903, Fritz Haber, a German chemist named Fritz Haber, later notorious for having
developed poison gases for the German army in World War I, Haber invented a process for
synthesizing ammonia from atmospheric nitrogen.
On the face of it, this may not make you excited, but it turns out to be the basis of the entire
artificial fertilizer industry, which is obviously important in terms of global agriculture,
and it also enabled eliminating salt peter from explosives manufacture.
This is very good if you have to import salt peter, as all the great nations did, they
got their salt peter from guano formations in Chile.
So the ability to manufacture, to synthetically manufacture a critically important ingredient
in explosives was of great military significance, in fact, in a kind of a bizarre twist.
We in this country, at the end of World War I, built the Muscle Shoals Dam in Muscle Shoals,
Alabama, to generate the vast quantity of electricity that was going to be needed in
order for the American military to get the explosives they needed because we had become
involved in World War I.
By the time it went into operation, the military was scaled back in the early 1920s, and we
didn't need all of that, and Roosevelt converted that into the Tennessee Valley Authority.
So in a peculiar chain of events, the Tennessee Valley Authority of considerable importance
in the history of the electrification of the United States, and politically also very
important, owes its existence to Fritz Haber's process of synthesizing ammonia from atmospheric
nitrogen.
In 1907, a Columbia University chemical engineering professor named Leo Bakland invented Bakelite,
which triggered a rosin-based synthetic industry, one branch of the plastics industry.
In 1910, synthetic rubber was made for the first time.
Synthetic rubber was made by chemists.
I'm not going to make an encyclopedia out of this, but in 1935, two very important events,
the invention of nylon by a DuPont chemist and on another plane altogether, the invention
by a chemist of the first synthetic drug, the sulfa drugs, called sulfonamide drugs,
which actually also go back to some of the chemistry associated a hundred years earlier
with the invention of the first synthetic dyes from Koltar, a Gerhard Dormach who invented
the first sulfa drugs, and the importance of this was not just that they were a powerful
new medical tool, the invention of sulfa drugs, synthetic materials, not natural medications,
played a significant role in shifting Western medicine away from a homeopathic model to
what is called an allopathic model.
That is to say, homeopathic alternative medicine today would probably be a closer name.
The idea that the way that we deal with disease is by using treatments that we invented begins
in a certain sense with the first synthetic drugs, and followed subsequently of course
by the antibiotics which are produced by us, but have an organic basis, sulfa drugs are
really synthetic drugs.
These give us some idea of the kinds of things that chemists were able to do with chemical
science, the way they were able to transfer knowledge in chemical science.
At one level, it doesn't look like a formal science in the same sense that physics does,
but in the course of the century, I stopped at 1935 with this little inventory, it was
in the 30s that Pauling developed a quantum theory of the chemical bond, and so we would
expect that if this quantum theory of the chemical bond is a fertile introduction into
the chemistry of materials, of ideas and theories brought in from physics, that later
in the 20th century, we will see a significant change in that chemistry will start to look
more like physics, and in fact, that turns out to be the case.
Having said that, let me talk a little bit about the way that chemistry assimilated other
developments from physics that changed the character of chemical science, so that in
a certain sense it really did evolve, in a certain sense it mutated by incorporating
techniques and ideas other than quantum theory that emerged first in physics, so one of these
was the technique of x-ray crystallography.
