computer graphically speaking, you don't actually see it, but it's reconstructed on the computer,
to see at the atomic level the kinds of bonding that Pauling's theory describes theoretically.
Now, this is called spectroscopy, mass spectroscopy, and historically, until the 1960s,
chemists could only study reactions using various kinds of photographic techniques,
high-speed photographic techniques, in the range of seconds, tenths of a second,
in some rare occasions, milliseconds, they could actually separate the different,
what the molecules that were involved in the reaction were doing.
But in the 1960s, using lasers, it became possible to look at reactions at the nanosecond level.
That's a billionth of a second.
Now, reactions actually happen faster than that.
In the 1980s, something called femtosecond spectroscopy was introduced.
A femtosecond is 10 to the minus 15 seconds.
Now, we've talked a lot about particles whose lives are very short,
and I, in the last lecture, I referred to 10 to the minus 43 after the Big Bang,
and 10 to the minus 12 when the Higgs field froze.
So what does those numbers mean?
Here is a technology you can go into a scientific supply store and buy
that functions at the 10 to the minus 15th second range.
And at that level, using high-speed lasers and computer-controlled electronics,
it is possible to watch chemical reactions in real time.
And that is an extraordinarily powerful tool.
If you put that together with the quantum theoretic model of bonding,
we begin to see how chemistry is moving in the course of the 20th century
towards a much more formally structured, much more theoretical science
than it had been in the 19th and early 20th century.
Chemists carried many of these techniques into biology, by the way,
because in the course of the 20th century, as we will be talking about
when we talk about the history of molecular biology,
chemists, in the course of the 20th century, biology became increasingly centered
on biochemistry, a development that began in the late 19th century,
but in the course of the 20th century, chemistry became increasingly
central to biology, to explaining biological processes
because biology became increasingly interested in what was happening
at the level of the cell and within the cell as opposed to previous biological research,
which was at the level of organisms interacting with the environment
to parody it a bit, you know, collecting butterflies
and observing how animals breed and so on.
Now, by bringing chemistry into biology,
biologists were also bringing physics into biology
because chemistry was assimilating tools and ideas from physics.
So as chemistry moved in, it brought physics into biology as well,
which we will see changes the character of biology.
So chemists acted as hosts in a certain sense for what was happening
to their science in the course of the 20th century.
Let me, because this is going to turn out to be very important later,
so we need to provide a bit of a foundation for it later
when we talk about the genetics in the 20th century
and, of course, the discovery of DNA as the carrier of the genetic code.
At the beginning of the 20th century, in 1900,
one of the theories that dominated biological thinking,
and it turned out to be a major obstruction to progress in a certain sense,
was what's called a colloid theory, which was the idea that organic molecules are short,
which required, which taught that organic molecules are short.
They can be made into weak chains, but they're really quite short.
The colloid theory denied the existence of long molecules.
We think of DNA as a great example of an extraordinarily long molecule.
Here, molecules were considered to be short,
and that had dramatic implications for chemists working,
trying to synthesize substances.
If you think that the molecules you're working with are short or long,
it actually makes a difference, even if the short ones can be changed.
Colloid theory was obstructive also because it focused on the cytoplasm
outside the nucleus as the key to understanding life,
and that was an obstruction in terms of our understanding of the gene
in which the nucleus is critical plays perhaps a central role.
In 1920, a chemist named Hermann Staudinger entered into a very vicious controversy
by arguing that there were such things as macromolecules,
long, rigid chains of molecules,
and in fact, he was wrong about that,
a German chemist named Hermann Mark,
one of the founders of modern polymer chemistry,
said that Staudinger's right about macromolecules, but they're flexible chains.
