In a covalent bond, an electron is shared between two atoms.
That the electrons orbit now somehow binds those two atoms together.
And Pauling used quantum theory to explain the circumstances under which,
depending on the energies of the outermost orbital electrons in atoms,
an electron will, so to speak, jump ship from one atom to another
and form an ionic bond between the two.
Because now one of those atoms will have a deficit of an electron,
be therefore positively charged overall.
And the other one will have an extra electron, will be negatively charged overall.
So there will be a weak electrical bond between the two.
And the circumstances under which you will get a covalent bond
and how an electron, speaking anthropomorphically,
would find it advantageous to its energy level to want to share,
to have a complex orbit that binds to atoms.
So that's what the covalent bond is about.
And as I said, by 1940, Pauling's theory of the chemical bond,
based on quantum theory, was the dominant model in chemistry.
And we're going to come back to that at the end of the lecture.
But I want to talk about some highlights of the evolution of chemistry as a science
in the course of the century that have nothing whatsoever to do with,
well, almost nothing whatsoever to do with quantum theory.
In modern terms, chemistry is, in 1900,
does not look like what we would think of as a physical science,
primarily because chemistry in the early 20th century
had almost no mathematical theories associated with it.
Chemists used thermodynamics in order to describe the mathematical formulations,
the equations of thermodynamics to discuss the flow of energy
in chemical systems and reactions to account for energy transfer
in chemical reactions.
And one of the triumphs of 19th century chemistry was the conviction that chemists acquired
that chemical reactions have a precise quantitative character,
that substances combine in fixed proportions,
which early in the 19th century was not at all universally accepted.
But that's relatively modest in terms of mathematics
when you compare chemistry to physics in terms of the role that mathematics plays.
So relatively speaking, chemistry was much more descriptive than physics.
When they talked about molecular structure and chemical reactions,
there was much more description and often pictorial description
than there was mathematical models.
On the other hand, chemists could do a lot more with what they knew,
could do a lot more of practical significance with what they knew
than physicists could do until later in the 20th century.
So for example, on the eve of the 20th century, in the last third of the 19th century,
chemists, chemical scientists whose work was transferred to industry
or working in industry or in industry funded research centers,
in the case of Germany after 1865,
had created the artificial dye industry, which was a source of great wealth,
and Germany was the dominant source of study of chemistry as a science
and also of artificial dyes, displacing Britain where the first artificial dyes were invented.
The pharmaceutical industry, which actually turns out to have been a spin-off
of the artificial dye industry initially, the cellulose-based synthetics
and explosives were all industries deeply indebted to chemical science.
In fact, chemical engineering as a discipline did not exist until the early 20th century.
So chemists as scientists, this was probably the first industry,
the first group of technological innovations creating globally important wealth and power
was clearly based on science because scientists played at best a marginal role
in the development of the steam engine and its various manifestations in railroads and ships,
for example, in the telegraph, in the telephone, in the electricity industry,
and in the automobile and the airplane.
The introduction of those innovations were overwhelmingly done through non-scientists.
