This turns out to be critical to our understanding of proteins which are folded macromolecules.
They're not rigid chains and Mark himself played a critical role in the development
of the modern plastics industry because they're all polymers of various kinds and played a
central role in many plastics like polystyrene and polyethylene and so on that have become
part of the fabric, so to speak, of everyday life.
So Stadinger's theory, as I said, was viciously controversial in the 1920s.
The controversy was resolved with an instrument, the ultracentrifuge, invented by Theo Svedberg,
which in somewhere by the early 1930s, he was already making prototype models in the
late 1920s, established that his first molecule, hemoglobin, had 66,000 atoms in it.
The ultracentrifuge is a device that whirls around at an astonishingly high rate and is
able to pull apart materials that are, by spinning them around so rapidly by the sample
material and it's a very good, in fact today, it's a standard laboratory device for calculating
the molecular weight of very large molecules and so Svedberg's instrument in a sense shifted
the debate, it was all over, the controversy was over, there are such things as macromolecules
and that became pivotal to the growth of polymer chemistry and in fact an understanding of
proteins which are related substances and it was critical to our ability to understand
the role of protein in biological and cellular metabolism and that we have such a theoretical
foundation, it was put in place between the 1920s and the 1930s. An example of how mathematics
has come into chemistry is that in 1960, Paul Florey, F-L-O-R-Y, Paul Florey was formulated
a mathematical theory of the structure of polymers, which sort of illustrates the point
that I've been trying to make that in the last part of the 20th century, in the last
third of the 20th century especially, as quantum theory started to be used more directly
in chemistry as the, here we have a mathematical model for the structure of polymers so you
can calculate in advance what structures, what polymer structures you will get without
doing the reaction. So that's an example of the evolution of chemistry in the course,
in the course of the century. All of this was supported by another family of instruments
which began in 1931 with the invention of the electron microscope and the electron microscope
was systematically improved right into the 1960s and was able to get down to the level
of seeing structures that were only a couple of atoms wide but only in two dimensions and
could not handle biological materials. In 1981, a new type of microscope that took advantage
of quantum theory was invented called the scanning tunneling microscope which was able
to get just almost down to the imaging single atoms and in 1986, 1987, the atomic force microscope
also based on quantum theory was invented, again a standard tool today, an off the shelf
item which can image single atoms in three dimensions and can also process biological
materials without first killing them. So you can have, so this becomes a powerful supporting
tool for the progressive scientization so to speak of chemistry and let me conclude by
coming back to quantum theory. Pauling 1940, 2000 computers have now become powerful enough
that they can solve the complex quantum mechanical equations associated with multiple atoms
sharing electron bonds in complex three dimensional configurations. Couldn't handle DNA yet but
supercomputers by the end of the 20th century were able to model meaningful chemical reactions
and so quantum chemistry became a subdiscipline that a growing number of chemists were working
in that allows you to calculate bond angles and to calculate properties of molecules before
you actually make them. The implications of this for the development of new drugs by
pharmaceutical companies for designing molecules with specific properties is tremendous and
this becomes I believe the platform that chemistry will build on in the 21st century.
Thank you.
