that it is a privileged language, that when you have a mathematical theory,
your theory is better than if it's not a mathematical theory,
and that it is closer to reality, even though people were well aware of these controversies
over what the relationship between the two was.
Now, I also said that mathematics has a long history associated with the notion of right reasoning.
And that's a second dimension to this understanding of the role that mathematics plays in 20th century science.
This conviction that mathematics embodies right reasoning,
that if you want to reach conclusions that are true and that are true about reality,
then mathematics is, in some sense, a guarantee that mathematics is, in its logical structure,
is right reasoning, and this is an idea that goes way back to the ancient Greeks.
It is why we continue to teach Euclidean geometry.
Obviously, high school students have no practical need for Euclidean geometry.
What we think they do have a practical need for is the experience of deductive reasoning.
It is, I believe, a cultural myth, but nevertheless, we continue, as the ancient Greeks did,
to believe that, at least some of the ancient Greeks believed that deductive reasoning
is the right form of reasoning in terms of reaching truth with a capital T.
It is only deductive reasoning that allows you to reach truth with a capital T.
Inductive reasoning can only allow you to have probabilities, opinions, beliefs.
Knowledge requires deduction, and Euclidean geometry is an example of deductive knowledge.
This is why it was so shocking in the middle of the 19th century
when non-Euclidean geometries were discovered or invented,
because it severed any necessary connection between deductive reasoning and reality.
Even if you had right reasoning on your side that did not guarantee that the conclusions you reached,
it did not guarantee, I emphasize that, that the conclusions you reached would be true.
It had been presumed that under appropriate circumstances, presumed not just from the ancient Greeks,
but right through the founders of modern science in the 17th century,
carried through into the 19th century, that under the appropriate circumstances,
working with the right premises, generalized from the right set of data,
that you use deduction, and then you could confidently say, this is the truth.
So any scientific theory that had that model.
So now we have an idea of where this prejudice comes from,
that mathematics is the language of science,
that mathematics is the language of right reason,
and in the 19th century we begin to have serious challenges to one question.
What is the connection between mathematical truth and physical reality?
We no longer can have confidence that there is a necessary connection between the two.
That's over, non-Euclidean geometry all by itself did that.
What is the connection between the two?
Now we're going to step back and look at the mathematics community in this period of time,
because as this question became real for scientists who were using more and more sophisticated forms of mathematics
to formulate increasingly sophisticated theories like the general theory of relativity,
like quantum mechanics, which are totally beyond the comprehension of anybody
who has not taken specialized mathematical training,
aimed at understanding the way mathematics is used in those theories.
So scientists are questioning this.
Within the mathematical community at the end of the 19th, the beginning of the 20th century,
they too were challenging the question, what is the basis of mathematical truth?
In the wake of non-Euclidean geometry, but also in the wake of a number of other developments
in 19th century mathematics, which I have referred to earlier,
especially the invention of something called set theory by George Cantor in the last third of the 19th century,
which involved a whole mathematics of infinities.
In fact, Cantor was most famous for proving that there were different kinds of infinities,
which no one had ever thought of before, that some infinities are bigger than other infinities,
that there is a hierarchy of infinities, and that you can have an algebra of infinities,
and that it's important to understand these infinities in order to understand set theory,
which becomes a critical part of mathematics in the 20th century.
So Cantor's work, because of the infinity, is not a well-defined concept in mathematics
until Cantor was very controversial.
