First suggested in 1912, as we've discussed before by Max van Lowy, as a way of proving that x-rays were really electromagnetic waves.
And this became a, by the 1920s and 1930s, this became a kind of a standard laboratory tool for figuring out the molecular structure of any substance that you could crystallize.
X-ray crystallography. If you could make a crystal out of something, then you could use, you could bounce x-rays off the crystals, and then you could calculate the way the angles through which x-rays of a specific energy were deflected
and reconstruct where the atoms in those crystals must be in order to get that kind of a deflection pattern.
So we see, again, it's a mode of reasoning in science in which, by indirection, we infer some underlying situation from its consequences.
You remember Rutherford having his graduate students bounce helium nuclei off gold atoms and then inferring the solar system model of the atom.
This is a very typical mode of reasoning. So the assimilation of x-ray crystallography into chemistry was very important in terms of being able to give structural analyses of complex molecules.
Eventually, in 1953, perhaps the most famous example of the use of x-ray crystallography, which we'll be talking about in a later lecture, was it used to uncover the structure of DNA.
That was the critical tool that was used in order to visualize the double helix structure of DNA. A second tool developed in physics is called the mass spectrometer.
This has some similarities to Lawrence's cyclotrons, but 10 years earlier than Lawrence's first cyclotron, in 1920, the mass spectrometer was introduced, which allowed chemists to calculate atomic and molecular weights.
This was obviously a very important tool. Now you've got a tool for structure, a tool for weight, the story of the mass spectrometer, which comes into chemistry from physics where it was invented in order to prove a hunch on the part of a British physicist named Aston that there was such a thing as isotopes.
We grew up with isotopes, but in 1900, nobody really believed that there were isotopes, but there were a problem with the fractional atomic weights that were measured for elements.
If you believe that somehow the elements were all built up out of some fundamental unit, then how can you have fractional atomic weights? Aston's hunch was that you could have two atoms of the same element that differed only by weight and not by the number of what we subsequently called protons in the nucleus.
So the atomic number, which is determined by the number of protons, and that dominates the physical properties and the chemical properties of the atom, stays the same, but it gets an extra, again, in 1920, they didn't know there was a neutron.
It gets an extra neutron. Actually Aston could have used Rutherford's 1920 hybrid neutron hypothesis and say, well, it's got an extra neutron in there.
And in fact, Aston's advisors, when he was a graduate student, urged him not to devote himself to this. It's a waste of time. He's going to destroy his career. But in fact, he persevered and he was right.
Other people, of course, whose names we don't know, did ruin their careers by pursuing problems that their thesis advisor told them were dead ends. But in his case, he won.
So mass spectrometry, a very, perhaps the most familiar chemical tool introduced in the 1940s, is something called chromatography. It's a technique for identifying what the constituent molecular groups in a complex molecule are.
And this technique was introduced in the 1940s and has become a standard chemical technique, allowing fairly rapid identification of composition of complex molecules of the kinds of subunits that are present in a complex molecule.
And perhaps most exciting from a technical point of view, the development in the 1960s, and then again with a big burst in the 1980s, of a tool that allows chemists to actually watch chemical reactions at the atomic level in real time, to actually see.
