This effort, in spite of having been improved upon and repaired and extended in the 1920s by a number of British mathematicians, is not convincing.
But in the process, something very important was learned. The attempt to reduce mathematics to logic fails.
Mathematics really is, in a certain, a branch of knowledge in its own right. It uses logic, but it cannot be reduced to logic.
Second school of thought. So logicism had it shot. It actually generated extremely important tools.
Remember the kind of tools we talked about in unification theory? Tools that Frege and Russell generated continue to be used by logicians and mathematicians to this day,
and will be for a long time to come, but logicism as a program seemed, was perceived as not a success.
One of the greatest mathematicians at the turn of the century was David Hilbert, a German mathematician named David Hilbert.
And Hilbert believed in what is called the formalist interpretation of mathematics.
The formalist school of mathematics holds that mathematics is a kind of logic game.
That in fact said, Hilbert, there is no necessary connection between mathematics and physics to pick just one science between mathematics and empirical experience.
The connection is totally empirical. If you happen to find some part of mathematics that fits, so use it.
But mathematics is just a game in which we freely invent all of the terms, all the operations.
We invent what a number means. We invent what multiplication means, what addition means, squaring, roots.
And then we follow the logical consequences of it.
So mathematics is a logic structure, but it's not reduced to logic.
It's a kind of a game in which we are free to invent any combination of ideas that we want and define them in any ways that we want.
Then we see what the consequences are. That's what mathematicians do.
They explore the logical consequences of mathematical ideas.
In 1900, speaking at an international conference of mathematicians in Paris, and then in Bologna in 1929,
Hilbert formulated a set of 23 problems that he challenged the mathematicians of the world to solve,
which he thought were the 23 most important problems facing mathematics,
and which, by the way, would prove that his formalist interpretation of mathematics was correct.
Many of the best mathematicians of the 20th century have made Hilbert's problems their research program.
And almost all of those problems have in fact been solved.
My view of it is a little sort of backwards on this.
You become identified as one of the best mathematicians of the 20th century if you have solved one of Hilbert's problems.
So it's hard to decide which is the horse and which is the carriage here.
I want to emphasize Hilbert's interpretation of mathematics because it was the solution to two of his problems
that undermined the formalist interpretation, analogous to the way Russell undermined Fraga,
but also wound up having a tremendous influence on 20th century science.
Two of those problems, one in which Hilbert called for someone to prove that mathematics was complete and consistent.
All he was really interested in was arithmetic because he believed that from arithmetic we can generate the rest of mathematics.
If we can establish formalism in arithmetic, then it will work for the rest of mathematics.
So someone has to get out there and prove that mathematics is consistent and complete.
That is to say that the logical operations on the term mathematical terms in arithmetic will never lead to a contradiction.
So it's logically consistent and complete.
That is to say that all of the things that you can deduce from the axioms definitions and postulates are in fact deduceable.
Any true theory can be deduced.
And the second problem was, we'll talk some more about that and make it a bit clearer,
the second problem was to prove that there is some kind of what he called an effective decision procedure
for solving any problem in arithmetic or any problem in mathematics, but let's just settle for arithmetic for the moment.
Now an effective decision procedure meant something like a mechanical decision procedure.
In modern language, we would call it an algorithm, a series of steps.
If you go through this series of steps, then you will generate the solution to any mathematical problem that you are given.
Once you understand the terms of arithmetic, the meanings of numbers and multiplicate, etc.,
any problem you want, well, if you want to multiply two numbers together, do the following.
And there is a fixed procedure that you can follow that will allow you to solve any problem in mathematics.
You will generate every theorem, which means every true statement in arithmetic,
by following what Hilbert called an effective procedure.
