And I had referred a couple of times to the invention of symbolic logic, which also pulled attention towards the properties of relationships rather than the properties of things.
So all of these together at the end of the 19th century created a kind of crisis of confidence among quite a number of mathematicians as to what is the nature of mathematical truth.
We've been going for over 2,000 years developing western mathematics on the assumption that, well, mathematical truth is a corollary of the deductive form of mathematical reasoning.
But now that we know that there's no necessary connection between deductive reasoning and absolute truth, then what is the nature of math?
What is the status of mathematical truth?
And there are three schools of thought on this that I want to describe briefly because I think that there is a qualitative lesson here that will be very important for us in terms of understanding science,
but also even more fundamentally for understanding what it means to say, as I will be saying in subsequent lectures, that the very concept of rationality changed between 1900 and 2000.
That we did not mean by rationality in 2000. The same thing we meant by rationality in 1900, and that's a really foundational change in the sense, oh, rationality is rationality.
How could rationality change? So that's why I am embarking on this very brief view of these three schools which are called logisticism, formalism, and intuitionism.
There were other interpretations of the basis of mathematical truth. They did not withstand the primary campaign, sort of metaphorically speaking,
and they dropped out because they did not attract sufficient support. They could not be critically defended against pretty obvious arguments.
But these three remained very influential.
At the end of the 19th century, a German mathematician named Gottlob Frege embarked on a quite startling project.
Frege wanted to reduce arithmetic to logic. The mindset was, much of mathematics is based on arithmetic. Arithmetic is really logic.
So all of that mathematics is really logic. There is no such thing as mathematics. There is only logic. And mathematical truth is logical truth.
He believed that all of the rest of mathematics, whatever could not be reduced to arithmetic, could be reduced to geometry.
And he thought that in geometry, something called intuitions operated that could not be strictly reduced to logic, he was going to save that for later.
But he set out on a many year-long project of proving that all of mathematics that is based on arithmetic could be reduced to logic.
Notice, when I say reduced, I mean, it's eliminated. You could still call it mathematics, but really, once you understood the logical structure,
then you would see that all of the rest, all of that branch of mathematics, and there are only two branches, arithmetic and geometry, according to Frege.
Frege's book, in which he argued the reduction of arithmetic to logic as he was sitting forth and writing his next book on geometry, was read by Bertrand Russell,
a young British mathematician, logician, philosopher, polymath, and Russell sent Frege a little note that utterly destroyed Frege's project.
He asked Frege how his system could account for a self-referential paradox.
One form that it takes would be, and Russell kind of liked this, was, who shaves the barber in a town where a barber shaves everybody who doesn't shave themselves?
I'll let you unpack that, but it is not immediately obvious how to respond to that. And in fact, Frege saw that he could not.
That simple reference totally annihilated Frege's reduction of arithmetic-based mathematics to logic, and he acknowledged that in his next book, but he persisted in his project.
He had nothing else to do, basically. Russell picked up where Frege left off and said, OK, Frege blew it. He didn't say that, but Frege failed in this.
In fact, all of mathematics can be reduced to logic, and Russell and Alfred North Whitehead, in the second half of the first decade of the 20th century,
published a multi-volume work called Principia Mathematica, in which they attempted to reduce all of mathematics to logic.
And then mathematics goes away. It's just logic.
