In 1931, Kurt Girdel, prior to coming to America and becoming a member of the Institute for Advanced Study, which was created in Princeton in 1933,
Girdel proved that the consistency and the completeness of any axiomatic system as simple as arithmetic, and remember for Hilbert,
arithmetic was the key to axiomatizing all of mathematics, you begin with arithmetic, Girdel proved that you could not prove the consistency and the completeness of arithmetic.
And he proved that you could not do it using logical tools that were developed by Frege and Russell, a technique that he borrowed from George Cantor's set theory.
So, again, we see something about how math, how science and mathematics works.
He took, he plucked out of Cantor's set theory a mathematical technique, which for those of you who are, have some mathematical training is called diagonalization.
It has to do with the diagonal terms in a matrix.
Now, he took this tool from Cantor's set theory, he took various logical tools that Frege and Russell had developed, and he used the self-referential paradox constructively
to put together a proof that when you work your way through it is dizzying, so it's good to have some anti-vertigo pills nearby, but it's beautiful.
And it's by no means obvious, but it is certainly convincing that it is, it is provable, it is provable that you cannot prove the truth of all arithmetic statements within arithmetic.
If you want to have an axiomatic system, fine, but you can't close it.
You can only close it by having a higher level axiomatic system in which your arithmetic is embedded.
But now you have to worry about axiomatizing that system, and since it's more complicated than arithmetic, it's going to be vulnerable to exactly the same problem.
You go up to, no sense going up to that second level, it can't be done.
So Girdel's proof, which is called the undecidability proof, Girdel's undecidability proof is a philosophical shock analogous to the discovery of non-Euclidean geometries in the 19th century,
or invention depending on your attitude towards mathematical objects as I just ran through.
This is, again, it's a kind of an abstraction that it's easy to toss off as just some ridiculously esoteric thing,
and in fact, it has not had a great impact on subsequent mathematics, except in mathematical logic, where his proof technique has been extremely fertile.
It doesn't change the overwhelming majority of mathematicians' attitudes towards their work,
but it does show us that the formalist interpretation of mathematics is not possible, as the logistic wasn't,
and most mathematicians, while recognizing that there's some truth to Brower's intuitionism, don't believe that intuitionism is correct either.
Now, since those were the only three horses running in the race, and none of them won, was there a race?
Well, that's a very philosophical question, but we certainly are left dangling with respect to the question of, what is the nature of mathematical truth?
Well, best not to ask, keep plugging ahead and using mathematics in this unreasonably effective way, in which it continues, as we will soon see,
to be extraordinarily fertile for describing experience, for predicting new kinds of experiences that no one had anticipated,
in spite of the fact that we do not understand the connection between mathematics and reality.
In 1936, one of the constructive byproducts of Goerdl's proof was that a British mathematician and Alan Turing used Goerdl's proof,
incorporated Goerdl's proof, into a line of reasoning of his own, in addressing the second problem that I told you about of David Hilbert's,
which was the business of the effective procedure. Is it possible to have a mechanical decision procedure that, if you step through it,
will correctly solve any mathematical problem that you're given, and, for starters, any problem in arithmetic?
So Turing proved that you could not do it, that no such effective decision procedure existed. That's the end of formalism.
