recursion. It's a very important idea that has become central to a number of 20th century
sciences. I don't want to spend much time on fractals, and this may seem like a bizarre
way to put it, but Pixar animation is heavily indebted to fractals. The increasingly sophisticated
computer graphics that movie makers are capable of is a practical application of this extraordinarily
abstract branch of mathematics, as I said, created as a distinct branch of mathematics
in 1951 by Benoit Mandelbrot. Third area of mathematics that we need to mention is what
is commonly called chaos theory, but really probably should be called complexity theory.
is an attempt to describe mathematically systems, physical systems, that don't behave nicely. Systems
that are turbulent and look chaotic. The weather is an example, is a classical example, and
they're called chaos chaotic systems, but if they were really chaotic, you couldn't describe
them mathematically. If they were really chaotic in the sense that anything could happen next.
That's not what chaos theory really means. Chaos theory applies to systems in which the
evolution of the system over time is not predictable because of the sensitivity of the system to
minute differences in the initial conditions. That a system, such a system is called non-linear.
That means that for a given input, there is a co-related, there is a closely co-related
output, small input, small change in the output, large input, large change in the output. In
a non-linear system, a small change in the input could lead to a very large change in
the output, and a large change in the input might lead to a small change in the output.
Non-linear systems are much more complicated than linear systems, and it becomes, in fact,
one of the characteristics of second half 20th century science is that we have become
increasingly sensitive to non-linear and non-equilibrium systems, and perhaps the computer is what
has enabled us to add this level of complexity to nature. I think it is of fundamental importance
that 20th century life and physical science have shifted from the 19th century notion
of equilibrium as the norm, and that whenever there's change in a system, the system wants
to get back to the norm. One of the things that complexity theory, chaos theory, has
shown us is that there are many systems that can remain on a non-equilibrium basis through a kind
of self-organization. This was pioneered by the chemist Ilya Prigargin, who received the Nobel
Prize in 1977 for his work on non-equilibrium thermodynamics, and it has important implications
for life, because if this showed us that the class 19th century idea of entropy is not a death
sentence for the universe, that within nature it is possible for self-organizing systems
to maintain themselves far from equilibrium by absorbing energy from their environment
and transforming it in ways that sustain non-equilibrium, so that dynamism, change, is not a disturbance
from the norm. Dynamism can be the norm, and when we reach the discussion of plate tectonics
and geology, then that will become very clear when applied to the planet. There is one other
area of mathematics that I need to mention that has turned out to be extraordinarily
fertile for science in the last third of the 20th century, and that is something called
network theory, which was, in its modern version, triggered by two Hungarian mathematicians
who had been schoolboy friends, and Paul Erdöschen and Alfred Renni. They, in a certain sense,
started modern network theory. The important thing about network theory for us is that
it is a theory of relationships. The nodes turn out to be of no significance. The structure
of a network has properties independently of the relationship, and those properties
all are critical to the way the network behaves. Neural networks, gene networks, protein networks
in cells, it is the structure of the network that has consequences for how proteins work,
not understanding the individual proteins. When we start looking at, and you can hear
in this an echo of the many times I have pointed out, how relationships have increasingly
become the focus of science in the course of the 20th century, not things and their
fixed properties, but relationships as, in some sense, the underlying reality that sustains
the universe. And when you apply this network notion to genes and to proteins, as we will
see, you need to do, then you begin to realize that this mathematical abstraction has considerable
physical power.
