Hilbert mathematics lives on, especially his contributions to multi-dimensional, in fact, infinite dimensional geometries, which is a fundamental part of quantum theory.
But his philosophy of mathematics is not defended by many people. There are some, but people who believe that they have improved upon it and they have patched up holes.
But by and large, formalism, as Hilbert conceptualized it, was dead by the end of Turing.
Turing, in order to prove this, and we're going to set aside the proof with a paper called Uncomputable Numbers, which is readily available, Turing used as part of his proof an imaginary machine.
He imagined the following machine, which would be an embodiment of a mechanical decision procedure.
This machine is very simple, extraordinarily simple. It acts on itself in accordance with a set of instructions that are built into it.
So the machine takes the form of what we would today call a read-write head and a long strip of tape.
In fact, for purposes of this mathematical proof, it's an infinitely long strip of tape.
The strip of tape moves forward one square. The machine reads it, sees what's written on it. It's very simple. It's either a zero or a one.
It's not reading English sentences. If it's a zero, then it's got instructions. Well, if it's a zero, then move one box to the left.
If it's a one, move two boxes to the right. Whatever the instructions happen to be.
And then the instructions may say, change the zero to a one, advance the tape one unit, change whatever written there.
You can get the idea. And using this extremely, conceptually extremely simple machine, Turing was able to do the mathematical proof.
Now, if that's all, then it would not have been a big deal.
But my guess is that even if you've never heard of Turing before, you have already recognized that conceptually Turing invented computer science.
He invented the computer and computer science. Now, what Turing recognized was that his proof, his disproof of Hilbert's problem, his proof of the negative of Hilbert's problem,
had as a corollary that given an algorithm, given an effective decision procedure, you could, a machine like this could solve any problem that you gave it.
For which there was an algorithm, an effective decision procedure. So what he proved was that there can be no effective decision procedure for arithmetic.
But if you give me a problem and an effective decision procedure, so if you know in advance that this kind of a problem can be solved by following the following sequence of steps,
this weird machine, imaginary machine could solve any such problem. And that's what a computer does.
A computer can solve any problem for which you can write a program.
As long as you can write a program for the solution, the computer will come up with the right solution if all the bits and pieces are working correctly.
Turing did not know that in parallel in the United States, two different individuals, a very sophisticated mathematical logician at Princeton named Alonzo Church,
and a European emigre, wildly underemployed in New York City of the Great Depression named Emil Post, had effectively come up with the same ideas.
At about the same time, within a year or two, Post probably the earliest church, probably at about the same time, eventually all of this came out.
But Turing is the man that gets the credit. The machine is called a Turing machine by people in the computer industry.
And Turing also, of course, could not know that in the immediate future lay World War II when his imaginary machine would be converted into a real machine,
a stored program electronic digital computer, and that it would have the impact that it has had on our lives and, of course, also on the practice of science
since computers began to spread through society primarily in the 1970s and 1980s, society and research labs.
Turing himself during the war worked on a kind of an analog computer that was used to break the code of the German High Command.
It's a very well-known story, very famous story, the Enigma Code, and he was one of the key players at Bletchley Park,
which was the home of British cryptographic service, and they used something that is legitimately called a computer in order to keep up with the variations on the Enigma Code
that the German High Command used so that they could consistently break the code and inform Allied High Command of what the instructions that they were sending out.
