Then any time you saw a Cepheid variable anywhere, you could look at the star, measure its apparent brightness at its maximum,
and then adjust the scale to how bright it would be if it were this close to us, and you could estimate how far away it was.
That's assuming that all Cepheid variables are just as bright as one another at their maximum.
And that was an assumption that she suggested.
Harlow-Shapley took this together with a database, we would call it today, of correlating the brightness of stars and their temperature and color,
which two astronomers independently had worked out, and he was able to estimate the distance to an object close to the Milky Way,
which is called the Large Magellanic Cloud, which is a cloud of gas and a cluster of stars that's sort of trapped by the Milky Way.
It's a kind of a slave micro galaxy to the Milky Way, and we have actually in the early 21st century discovered that the Milky Way seems to be
sucking stars from the Magellanic Cloud as a large and a small one directly into the Milky Way in a couple of hundred million years.
Those clouds may not be there, but what Shapley measured was that the Large Magellanic Cloud is 100,000 light years away.
This was in a certain sense the first truly cosmic scale, and people were staggered.
He was also able to use this technique to estimate the size of the Milky Way, and roughly speaking the Earth's position in the Milky Way,
which was nowhere near the center, but all of this was very rough.
This catapulted Shapley to astronomical fame, and he left to become director of the Harvard University Observatory,
which in the early 20th century was a very prestigious place to be.
Unfortunately for Shapley, George Ellery Hale was not satisfied with the 60 inch telescope if we needed to have a more powerful telescope,
and so he talked the Carnegie Institution into adding a 100 inch telescope to the 60 inch on Mount Wilson.
That telescope, even in the early 21st century, is still in operation and still doing valuable work,
in spite of the no longer pristine clarity of the Southern California skies.
And in 1919, that telescope went into operation, and since Shapley had left,
they hired a young man by the name of Edwin Hubble to become the director of the observatory.
Shapley was deeply committed to the idea that there was only one galaxy in the universe, that the universe was the Milky Way.
In 1920, in a public debate in New York, Shapley defended this view against an astronomer who represented a minority opinion
that these nebulae were also galaxies, that they weren't just fuzzy clouds of gas associated with the Milky Way,
but that they were other galaxies like the Milky Way.
In 1924, Edwin Hubble, using the 100 inch telescope, was able to identify individual stars in the fuzzy nebula called Andromeda,
and to show that the Andromeda nebula was in fact a galaxy which he estimated to be about a million light years away from the Milky Way.
Actually, that's too low. But all by itself, it's an astonishing discovery, except that it's not nearly as astonishing as the fact that he said,
and by the way, there are thousands of other galaxies, and within the next few years, millions of other galaxies out there
distributed over a vastness of space that is, in human terms, inconceivable.
So Hubble now is, so to speak, the man of the decade in astronomy, and the universe, in terms of scale, has undergone a kind of,
has a tremendous expansion in our minds, in terms of scale, but also Copernican in that, gee, we're not the only show in town.
It's not just that there's another galaxy, there are millions of other galaxies.
So if Copernicus made us feel, gee, he took us out of center stage, we've lost our specialness, we're not privileged in the Copernican universe,
in the Copernican solar system, what happens now when we're just, we're somewhere out in the sticks of one galaxy among millions of galaxies?
