It was only in the, near the middle of the 19th century that a German astronomer named Friedrich Bessel was able to use this principle of parallactic displacement to actually calculate the distance to a star.
A star in the constellation Cygnus, he determined, was 6.2 light years away from the Earth.
6.2 light years. Now a light year is about 6 trillion miles.
It's the distance that light can travel in a year.
Light's moving 186,000 miles a second.
If you whip out your calculators, you can do another multiplication.
You'll come up with about 6 trillion miles.
So 6.2 light years, or it means that the star was between 37 and 38 million, roughly speaking 38 million, or 38 trillion miles away from the Earth.
A very large distance, but that was the closest we could come to estimating something like a scale in the universe.
That's how far away at least one star was.
What we meant by the universe by the early 1900s was the Milky Way.
The Milky Way was considered to be the universe.
It was a galaxy.
It was the only galaxy.
There were lots of fuzzy glowing clouds in the sky, but they were believed to be clouds of gas.
Glowing clouds of gas, they were called nebulae.
They had a fuzzy character.
They were nebulous, and so they were called nebulae.
And as I say, they were believed to be glowing clouds of gas within the Milky Way.
So there was only one galaxy in the universe.
There was an infinite amount of space.
Within this infinite, dark, empty space, there was the Milky Way, and we were somewhere in the Milky Way, which in 1900 was where was unknown.
Now, the story starts to become interesting.
There was a world-class solar astronomer in the United States named George Ellery Hale, a patrician, a New England patrician,
who was in addition to being a world-class astronomer, a tireless promoter of astronomical science in the United States
at a time when the federal government didn't give a nickel for astronomy.
He was great at talking to the new rich and getting them to memorialize their names by making major contributions to science.
In 1900, the largest telescope in the world was the largest refracting telescope in the world.
It was in the United States and had been paid for by a Yerkes family of Chicago,
and it was unwieldy and not adequate to what Hale wanted to do.
He talked to Carnegie Institution in Washington, D.C. into funding the construction not only of the world's largest reflecting telescope,
a 60-inch telescope, but a build-in entire observatory on Mount Wilson in Southern California
because of the pristine clarity of the sky in Southern California back in 1900, if you can believe that,
even though Los Angeles was already growing exponentially.
He installed there a man by the name of Harlow Shapley, who became the director of the Mount Wilson Observatory
and had access, therefore, privileged access to the 60-inch telescope.
Fortunately for Shapley, a woman at Harvard University who was severely underemployed for her genius named Henrietta Levitt,
as many women in science were in those days, Henrietta Levitt made quite a startling discovery.
There are certain stars whose brightness varies on a regular basis.
They have a certain period in which they become dimmer and brighter, dimmer and brighter,
and Henrietta recognized that this type of star, which is distributed in the sky,
well, they're called C-fied stars, so they're called C-fied variables because their brightness varies.
This kind of star could be used as a yardstick for calculating distances if you knew the absolute distance
using the parallactic displacement technique.
If you could calculate the distance to one C-fied variable, then, and you knew its brightness,
so then you could say, oh, then you could establish how far away that star is
and what the brightness of a C-fied variable should be at that distance.
