After the war, Turing worked on the first generation of electronic stored program digital computers in England
and was associated with pioneering work on such computers parallel to the work that was being done here in the United States
and then in the early 1950s committed suicide.
In the wake of his prosecution and conviction for homosexuality, he was found dead in his room
and snow-white-like there was a bite taken out of an apple.
The authorities said that it was strict nine poisoning that was in the apple and that that's how he died
although in fact no autopsy was ever done and he was being closely watched by British intelligence
since his conviction because they considered him to be an unreliable security risk.
So without being conspiratorial, I won't say anything else except that his death seemed to be rather sudden and surprising
even though he was of course depressed about having had his lifestyle which was rather flamboyant
ever since his young adulthood so stigmatized, he was so stigmatized and his movement so carefully watched.
So Turing launched computer science.
Now I want to focus on a couple of aspects of the use of computers and the implications of computers
because I don't need to tell you much about those, we live with them all the time.
One is the use of computer simulations in science.
At the end of the 20th century computer simulations were ubiquitous in the, not just in the physical sciences
and the life sciences but in the social sciences as well.
And this is another version of looking at mathematics as a surrogate for reality.
We look in the computer simulations for clues as to what the real world is like.
So we are again repeating this often intuitive conviction we have
that mathematics somehow captures features of reality.
And computer simulations being used by geologists for example to simulate what the earth,
the processes going on beneath the crust of the earth, the mantle, the convection currents in the mantle
that drive the plates apart as we will see, the continental plates apart as we'll see in a later lecture.
This is all studied because you can't get beneath the mantle, this is all studied in computer simulations
into which we plug a tremendous amount of data that's been collected by instruments
primarily from shock waves, from measuring the way shock waves spread,
earthquake shock waves spread throughout the globe.
And then we construct these computerized movies that simulate what's going on
and then people study them and say now that, now I can do an experiment to test that.
So you're looking into, that's a mathematical construct.
That computer simulation may look like a movie on your screen, but it's a mathematical construct.
So that's one way that computers have influenced the practice of science across the spectrum
from physics to economics and archeology, that computer simulations are what we turn to.
They define often the use of the computer in science defines what kind of a problem you will address
because without the computer you wouldn't even attempt many kinds of problems
because you couldn't do it, you couldn't process it.
What would you do with 16 million events if you didn't have computers to process that data?
How would you be able to find patterns that would allow you to identify the top quark
as we went through a couple of lectures ago?
So the kind of problem that you address is influenced by having computers
of a particular capability available to you.
And in fact one of the things that has happened is we can now avoid simplifying problems.
We can address problems in greater complexity because of the computer.
Having the computer is an aid.
Historically you always had a simple, I'll imagine that it's a weightless rope
and a frictionless surface and so on.
Now we can actually include as much complexity as the computer can handle.
Second way that computers have been interestingly involved in our reasoning is
since the 1980s and a famous theorem called the four color map theorem,
the mathematicians have been using computers as part of mathematical proofs.
Many mathematical proofs are very complicated and if you could run through
hundreds of millions of calculations you could resolve some point.
Well no one's got the time to do that but a computer can do that.
So you have mathematical proofs in which one stage is input to a computer,
output from the computer.
