What happened in the universe over that period of time?
And just a year or two after Beta published his theory, George Gamow built on it his first formulation of the Big Bang theory of the universe,
which is that the universe originated in the explosion of an initial concentration of all the matter that there was into a single, unstable, gigantic ball,
which then erupted several billion years ago. The numbers are a little difficult to pin down, of course,
but by 1939 it was considered to be probably more like four or five billion years than two to three.
And that theory kind of stood there for a while in 1939 and would be resumed by Gamow with collaborators in the late 1940s.
He and a young man named Ralph Alfer and Robert Herman together started working on Big Bang theory in the late 1940s.
Gamow had an impish sense of humor and at one point when he was working with Alfer, and since his name is Gamow,
and he was good friends with Hans Beta, wanted to publish his Big Bang paper with the author's name Alphabeta Gamow.
And so he talked Hans Beta into allowing him to put his name on the paper, even though he was not a co-author of the paper,
although subsequently Beta, I turned out that Beta had read the paper and made some comments, so it was not unethical, it was kind of a joke anyway.
So the first paper was published under Alphabeta Gamow, but Beta was not really a collaborator, this Robert Herman was,
and over a period of roughly speaking 1946 to 1949, Gamow, Beta and Gamow, Alfer and Herman formulated this theory of the Big Bang origin of the universe.
They were stumped, however, by the fact that building up atoms, building up the elements from this primordial explosion, they could not explain that.
That was, that process is called nucleosynthesis, it's the synthesis of nuclei, of more and more complex nuclei out of available electrons, protons and neutrons,
and given the state of quantum theory in the late 1940s, there was no explanation that was satisfactory, that Gamow, and so the Big Bang theory went into a kind of a comatose state.
Concurrently, Fred Hoyle, Thomas Gold and Hermann Bondi, three astronomically oriented physicists, came up with an alternative to the Big Bang theory called the steady state theory.
They rejected the idea that the universe had a beginning, they had to accept that it was expanding, that was an observational fact, but they rejected the idea that the universe ever began,
so they had a theory in which hydrogen atoms popped into existence every now and then in order to maintain the density of the universe at a constant rate, even though it continues to expand.
So for them, the universe was pretty much, except for local disturbances, the universe was pretty much the same over time and wasn't a kind of an equilibrium condition.
And Hoyle especially hated the Big Bang theory. He was the one who named it, making fun of it. It did not have the Big Bang theory until Hoyle around 1948 called it that, the name stuck, Gamow and his collaborators didn't mind it, the name stuck,
but it turned out to be, and as a matter of fact, most scientists were sympathetic to the steady state, because for science, absolute beginnings are a real problem.
Most scientists didn't want there to be a beginning, in part because of the theological implications. People would say immediately, oh, this proves that there is a God, much better to have an eternal universe that was, it's always been there.
But of course, Hoyle and his colleagues come up against the same problem. How do you build up the atoms consistent with quantum theory?
Hoyle was visiting the United States in 1954, and he recruited a brilliant young physicist named William Fowler to look into this nucleosynthesis problem together with two British physicists, the Burbages, Jeffrey and Margaret Burbridge, and they in fact wound up solving this problem and getting a Nobel Prize for it.
The upshot, however, was startling. That is to say, the result was unexpected, because instead of firming the steady state theory, the Fowler-Burbridge nucleosynthesis theory wound up being gobbled up by the Big Bang people, and the Big Bang theory in the 1960s emerged triumphant over the steady state theory.
So life is full of surprises, even within the hallowed precincts of theoretical physics. How this happened, how the steady state theory, which looked triumphant in the 1950s, which succeeded in generating a nucleosynthesis theory, wound up being trumped by the Big Bang theory, will be the subject of our next lecture.
