In the mid-1920s, Hubble, who had a very strong work ethic, started a new line of research.
In 1914, a little-known American astronomer named Vesto Schleifer had read a paper at
an astronomy conference in which he shared with his colleagues a curious observation
that he had made.
He measured the spectra from a dozen stars.
Now you remember we talked about this spectra business, it means measuring the distribution
of frequencies of light and then correlating those frequencies with specific elements.
Okay, so now you look at the light from a star and then you can say, oh, look, there's
the helium line, there's the hydrogen line, there's the lithium line, whatever.
But there was something wrong with these spectra.
They didn't match the laboratory spectra.
All of the frequencies were just a little too low by exactly the same amount.
So if you looked at the hydrogen lines and you expected them to be at 10, 15, 20, they
were all at 9, 14, 19.
They were too low, they were a little too low.
Now there is, he didn't know what to make of this.
And in fact, Slifer's observation was pretty much ignored.
As far as I know, it was totally ignored.
He worked for a highly eccentric astronomer named Percival Lowell, who had become famous
at the end of the 19th century by claiming that he had seen canals on Mars and that therefore
Mars was populated and there was intelligent life on the planet Mars and this stimulated
lots of science fiction stories, including H. G. Wells' novel, The War of the Worlds,
which Orson Welles then made into that famous radio program in the 1930s.
By 1914, Lowell was considered a crank and so Slifer, who worked for him, seemed to have
been caught up in the undertow of Percival's vanishing reputation as an astronomer.
But in the mid-1920s, Hubble revisited Slifer's paper.
He went back and looked at those 12 spectra and then he started taking his own spectra,
gaining the light from stars in the new galaxies that he had discovered.
And he built up between 1924 and 1929, perhaps a hundred or so spectra, maybe as many as
250 by the early 1930s.
But remember, there are millions of galaxies, each one of which he thought had millions
of stars, but in fact has hundreds of millions of stars and even billions of stars per galaxy.
He only measured a couple of hundred at most and he said that this is a universal phenomenon.
Except for the galaxies closest to us, they all display this shift towards the low frequency.
All the lines are shifted and the shift is towards what's called the red end of the spectrum,
the lower frequencies of light, which is visible light is red, the highest one is violet.
There is an effect in physics called the Doppler effect, which affects wave phenomena.
When a sound is emitted by an object that's moving away from you, it is as if the wave
gets stretched, the sound wave gets stretched and the sound emitted strikes us as having
a lower frequency than if the object is at rest.
So imagine a locomotive that sounds its whistle as it moves away from you, then the faster
it moves away from you, the lower the tone of the whistle is going to sound.
If the locomotive is coming towards you, then it's as if the sound waves get compressed
and the frequency sounds higher so that that same sound, if the locomotive is sounding it
as it's coming into the station, sounds like it has a higher frequency, when it's going
away it sounds like it has a lower frequency, this is called the Doppler shift and the shift
in these frequencies of light means that all these stars must be moving away from us.
