Lecture 16, The Universe. How do we know what's out there?
Welcome back to the universe. Although strictly speaking, it's not the same universe that
we left at the end of the last lecture, but it's the only universe we're in that we know of.
How do we know about the universe? We've made some extraordinary theoretical claims about the nature of the universe between 1900 and 2000.
How do we know this? What backs up? What is the empirical basis for these theories?
And they all do have substantial empirical basis. I want to devote this lecture to talking about instruments.
Instruments are truly important. They tend to get overwhelmed when one does intellectual history by ideas.
Typically because the people who do intellectual history are fascinated by ideas and they think that ideas are the most important thing out there.
But our ideas are demonstrably correlated with the kind of instruments that we use that interact with those ideas that stimulate new ideas
and that cause us through what we learn using those instruments to develop ideas along one line rather than another.
So I want to talk about astronomical instruments analogous to the way that we talked in previous lectures about the particle accelerators
that were the background for quantum electrodynamics and the transition to quantum chromodynamics and the standard model of physics
just as we talked about instruments in chemistry that were interwoven with the intellectual evolution of chemistry in the 20th century.
So now we're going to talk about the quite surprising range of astronomical instruments that underlie our theories of the universe.
And so as a starter, instead of reviewing the ideas in the previous two lectures, just remind you of the kind of chronology we're talking about here
within the framework of the Big Bang model, which at the end of the 19th century, at the end of the 20th century,
adjusted for what we, but not economists mean by inflation, then that is the reigning model.
So there was a beginning event, an origin event, not exactly Gamow's Big Bang, but the real Big Bang that took place,
and I can't say anything more about that, at about 10 to the minus 43 seconds after the Big Bang, the loops and strings of supersymmetry,
one or the other of those, or the holograph projection, if we take that view, manifested itself, let's say we'll go with the loops theory of gravity
or the string theory, manifested themselves in their full ten-dimensional generality.
At 10 to the minus 36 seconds when the universe was 10 to the 28th degrees Kelvin, the supersymmetry broke.
And we had the gravity on the one side, we had probably something like the Higgs field force on the other,
and the loops or strings, if they were the ultimate reality, were contracting down into the three-dimensional range.
At 10 to the minus 35 seconds, the universe underwent the inflation in doubling in size 100 times effectively instantaneously.
Around 10 to the minus 20 seconds after the Big Bang, you can't blink when you're watching a universe evolve, photons popped out of a quantum vacuum.
At about 10 to the minus 10 seconds, quarks and leptons first appeared.
So that means that somewhere between 10 to the minus 10 and 10 to the minus 20, typically this is sometimes put at about 10 to the minus 12 seconds after the Big Bang,
the Higgs field broke apart so that we now had hadrons and leptons in addition to photons.
If CERN does its job properly, we may get a glimpse of the reality of this Higgs field.
And so mass also appeared now because, remember, mass is a consequence of quarks and leptons, particles interacting with the Higgs field.
At about 10 to the minus 4 seconds after the Big Bang, protons and neutrons appear.
The universe is cooling very rapidly because of the inflation.
Because of the inflation, 2 to the 100th power, the universe is cooled very rapidly.
And so we get down to an energy level where protons and neutrons can exist.
They are caught and frozen out. The quarks are now sort of trapped in patterns that we know of as protons and neutrons plus all the other hadrons.
At about 100 seconds after the Big Bang, you get the first elements, hydrogen, helium and lithium, a little bit of lithium, mostly hydrogen and helium.
The galaxies are about 90% hydrogen, 9% helium and 1% all the other elements. That's a general rule.
