And that was considered embarrassing by a number of scientists.
And so it's not impossible, we won't know it yet, until the deliberations of the Nobel Prize Committee,
which I kept secret for 50 years, are revealed.
But it's possible that that was a reason that militated against oil being left off,
even though he started the whole thing by recruiting Fowler and the Burbages to work on nucleosynthesis.
Anyway, here we are in the early 1960s, and nucleosynthesis is in,
and a physicist, a brilliant physicist at Princeton, Robert Dickey,
decides it's time to revisit the Big Bang Theory, because if we've got nucleosynthesis,
in spite of the fact that it supports steady state, it also supports, maybe this is the key, to the Big Bang.
And especially, he has a group of graduate students, two in particular that I want to call attention to,
although it's probably unfair to some of their colleagues that these two happen to, so to speak,
make it bigger than the rest, Jim Peebles and Dave Wilkinson.
They put Peebles to work on reexamining this nucleosynthesis and Big Bang question,
and Peebles worked out for himself the microwave background prediction.
This is in 1962, 1963, and came up with a figure of,
well, the energy of the microwave should be about 10 degrees Kelvin.
Now, it is accepted by all historians of this that Peebles, a man of high integrity and high achievement,
had never read the Gammao papers.
He subsequently admitted that as a graduate student, he should have done it, he didn't do it,
he just got caught up in solving the problem for himself, and so it was news to him later
to discover that Gammao's team had already made such a prediction.
I said they predicted five degrees. Actually, in several different papers,
they had figures ranging from five to 25. They didn't know exactly what parameters to assume.
Peebles came up with this 10 degree figure, and then he and Dickie and the other members of their team,
astrophysics team at Princeton, started thinking about,
well, how would we actually do this experimentally?
Meanwhile, back at Bell Labs, there were two physicists, Arno Penzius and Robert Wilson,
who were assigned the task of developing an antenna that could communicate
with satellite telecommunication satellites.
Now, there weren't any telecommunication satellites to speak of,
but Telstar was about to be launched, and then we needed to be able to communicate with that.
There had been a predecessor of Telstar called Ecostar that was launched in 1960.
Ecostar was essentially a Mylar balloon, and you could bounce radio signals off Ecostar,
but it was just a dumb balloon. It didn't have any electronics or anything in it.
Now, so that means you really have to have a super sensitive antenna to pick up those bounced off signals.
They're not going to be received, amplified, and retransmitted.
They're just going to bounce off the balloon.
And so Bell Labs had developed an extremely sensitive antenna,
and Penzius and Wilson started their work for Telstar with that antenna.
It makes a lot of sense.
And so setting up the antenna, they've got to calibrate it.
Calibrate it. They want to make sure that they've got a baseline of, you know, this is neutral,
no signal being received, so that when they pointed at the satellite and they get a noise,
they say, oh, that's not a noise, that's the signal.
Well, they discovered that no matter what direction they pointed this exquisitely sensitive microwave antenna
because Telstar was going to be broadcasting in the microwave range,
no matter what direction they pointed this microwave antenna,
they kept getting the same hissing sound, which they didn't do it at the time,
which turns out to correspond to an energy level for the microwaves of about 2.73,
if you're really a nitpicker, 2.728 degrees above absolute zero.
2.728 degrees Kelvin.
They were not doing physics. They were not interested in the Big Bang,
but Penzius, they got to know the prize for this anyway,
Penzius read the journal, the physics journal,
in which Peeble's article was published predicting this microwave background radiation.
And he told Wilson, I think we found it.
So they called up Dickie at Princeton and said, we've made the following observation,
does it make sense to you?
Unfortunately, to Dickie and Peeble's, it made too much sense.
They were scooped, and Penzius and Wilson, as I said, were the ones who got the Nobel Prize,
and established the existence of the microwave background radiation,
which resurrected the Big Bang theory in a big way,
because this was an extraordinary experimental confirmation of a prediction made by that theory
that is not part of the steady state theory.
