Lecture 15, The Universe. What is the universe?
We're in mid-universe here, and as the not-so-old saying goes, you ain't seen nothing yet.
There is a lot more expansion to come, but at the moment, let's recall where we are in
the early 1950s, when there's a rivalry between the Big Bang theory of Gamow and his collaborators
that stalled in the late 1940s because of a lack of a theory of nucleosynthesis. We've
got the steady-state theory of Hoyle, Bondi, and Gold that has successfully accounted for
nucleosynthesis by the early 1960s through the theory of Fowler and the Burbages. Meanwhile,
in the background, George Ellery Hale has not been quiet. We left him with the 100-inch
telescope installed on Mount Wilson. He immediately began... That's a bit of an exaggeration actually
because World War I and his attempts in the 1920s and 30s to organize American academic
scientists as a national resource. We'll talk about that later. But he became aggressive about
building a 200-inch telescope. Carnegie had had pretty much enough by this time of funding
telescopes, and so he turned to Rockefeller. They didn't want to collaborate with the Carnegie
institution, and they wanted their own place, and so they wound up with, in cooperation, in
loose cooperation with the Carnegie institution, building another observatory in Southern California
on Mount Palomar, where a 200-inch telescope was prepared during the 1930s, a major task to
make such a mirror, a 200-inch mirror, and to have the surface be as perfectly shaped as is
necessary. Because of World War II, that telescope did not go into operation until 1949. Hubble,
by now a somewhat senior astronomer, was made director and given privileged access to that
telescope, but in fact he almost immediately retired, then died shortly thereafter, and his
successor was a protégé of his named Alan Sandage, who inherited what you might be called
first dibs on the 200-inch telescope, which he had for essentially the rest of his working life as
an astronomer, quite an enviable position. He also inherited the mantle of Hubble, of defending
Hubble's view of the universe, and the way that Hubble estimated distances in the universe.
Fortunately, he inherited a person as well, an astronomical, it's difficult to know what to
call him, craftsman, technician, not a professionally credentialed astronomer, but a brilliant
astronomer who had worked with Hubble from the beginning and who worked with Sandage for the
rest of Sandage's career, fellow named Milton Humason. And already in the early 1950s,
Sandage revisited Hubble's calculations and kept pushing the age of the universe back,
so that by 1960, it had gotten up to approximately 11 billion years and was climbing, eventually
Sandage would announce an age of somewhere between 18 and 20 billion years for the age of the
universe, which put him in substantial rivalry with a younger generation of astronomers who argued
that Hubble's technique for measuring, and the one that Sandage felt committed to improving upon,
but maintaining, was incorrect. And this rivalry in the 1980s and early 90s became quite nasty
personally on a number of occasions. But finally, in the late 1990s, around 1998, 1999, a team of
astronomers using the Hubble Space Telescope, led by a woman astronomer named Wendy Freeman,
pretty much established to everybody's satisfaction that the universe is 13.7 billion years old,
give or take a couple of hundred million years. And Sandage seems to have accepted that. That's
just background information. We want to pick up the story of what happened to the steady state
theory, which looked like it was poised for triumph in the early 1960s. Well, two things happened
to it on the way to success. One was called quasars, and the other was the microwave background
radiation. One was really a kind of a misunderstanding. And the other was the killer of the steady
state theory, and it made the Big Bang Theory.
