And over the next decade or so,
radio-telecopy astronomers, radio astronomers,
we'll call them, discovered hundreds of atoms
and molecules floating around in space,
including organic molecules and hydroxyl molecules,
which is water without one hydrogen.
So it's OH, it's an OH molecule.
Interstellar space is, so to speak, loaded,
obviously not loaded, but they're all over,
including organic molecules like formaldehyde, for example.
And so this has significant implications
for trying to understand the origin of life,
perhaps, that organic molecules were part of the Earth's,
were part of the Earth's formation,
and in fact, certain kinds of meteorites
are, when we analyze them, we discover even amino acids
in them that formed through the excitation processes
floating around in space.
So radio and radio telescopes are much larger
than ordinary telescopes and typically much cheaper.
So more laboratories, more people can get involved,
more institutions can get involved with radio-telecopy
than with the very biggest optical telescopes.
So in the 1950s and 60s, there was a tremendous spurt
of interest in radio-telecopy.
In the 1960s, there was a 250-foot wide radio telescope
at Juddrell Bank in England, which was very important
in terms of tracking the Apollo missions, for example.
So for those people who don't believe
that we ever did land on the moon,
one of the strongest corroborating evidence
is that the British astronomers, who had no stake
in the matter, corroborated that the radio signals
from Neil Armstrong were, in fact, coming from the moon.
America had built a 1,000-foot radio telescope
in Puerto Rico in a place called Atacibo,
but it was not steerable.
The Juddrell Bank telescope could be steered,
could be focused, pointed to any point
in the wide range of points in the heavens,
but the Arecibo dish is fixed in place
so it can only look straight up
but has done extraordinarily variable research.
There's a very interesting story here, obviously,
but from our point of view, we just want to understand
that radio telescopes were a critical new window
on the universe, but at the same time,
they told us that the universe was different
than we thought it had been.
The US in the 1970s became operational by the 1980s,
built a massive radio telescope in New Mexico,
which is important for a reason that you'll see in a moment.
It is 27 80-foot-wide telescopes
arranged in a Y configuration over miles of the desert,
and these 27 telescopes,
actually 28 there in case one breaks down,
they can wheel in a new one,
a replacement while it's being repaired.
27 telescopes are connected
using the interferometry principle.
Remember, Michelson interferometer,
a device for exquisitely synchronizing,
measuring distances between two objects
by overlapping light rays.
So using the interferometry principle,
which was pioneered at Cambridge University in England
in the 1960s, this array,
which is called the very large array in New Mexico,
is the equivalent of a single radio telescope dish
20 miles in diameter, and radio telescopes
that are effectively even bigger are being,
are in place because they link interferometrically
telescopes in the United States and Australia and Japan.
So radio telescopes have extraordinary resolution,
much greater resolution in radio frequency waves
than the analogs in optical telescopes.
So this was a big deal.
We knew about that cosmic rays in the 1930s
represented matter coming into the Earth from outer space,
but now radio telescopes opened up,
as I said, a new window on the universe,
and new windows kept opening after World War II,
especially in the 1960s as we went into space
with the first generation of rockets and satellites,
we discovered that there were x-rays
coming from outer space,
that there were gamma rays coming from outer space,
that there were neutrinos coming from outer space,
and of course there was the sudden,
especially in the 1960s,
a sudden interest in the general theory of relativity
which had predicted that there should be gravity waves
and a particle called the graviton coming from outer space.
So these became, these pushed us in the direction
of developing instruments that could begin to tell us
about the nature of the universe in terms of
these kinds of aspects of the behavior
of whatever it is that the universe is made of.
