That telescope is already in operation but has not yet detected any gravity waves.
If a supernova were to explode in our galaxy, we would certainly be able to detect it.
Since that happens about three times a century, we hopefully will get one soon to justify this massive effort.
An even bigger telescope is being planned between NASA and the European Space Agency to be put in space.
The planning for it, the project begins in 2004, the launch time is 2011.
The idea is to put three spacecraft in orbit 500 kilometers above the Earth, so roughly speaking 300 miles within range of the space shuttle.
These three will be placed several million miles apart and then light signals will be bounced between the three using the interferometry principle.
They'll be overlapped and we will be able to detect even smaller changes in the shape of space
and hopefully this will nail the graviton and establish another prediction yet of the general theory of relativity.
In case you think this is crazy to do this, the United States must be crazy to fund such experiments.
The Japanese, the English, the Germans, the French, the Italians and the Australians all have radio telescope projects.
The Australians provide information, data processing facilities.
All of the others have built and are putting such telescopes, gravity wave telescopes into operation.
I want to close this discussion of instruments by returning to optical telescopes because, as a matter of fact, optical telescopes are alive and well
and in fact thoroughly rivaling in their capabilities any other kind of telescope and the improvement in optical telescopes since the 1960s has been really astonishing
even though we use that word so many times, at least I do, in talking about what's going on in 20th century science.
But remember I said that the 200 inch telescope topped out because nobody could build a single mirror that was bigger than 200 inches
and could maintain its shape and just was totally unwieldy.
Well, at Mount Hopkins Observatory, they pioneered a segmented mirror.
Computers come to the rescue and to make a long story short, in Hawaii on the peak of monarchy volcano
there is an observatory complex funded privately by the Keck Foundation where there are two 10 meter telescopes.
Each telescope is 10 meters in diameter, so it's approximately 300, each one is approximately 395 inches in diameter.
Each of those is made up of six segment mirrors.
The shape continually adjusted by computers to the equivalent of a billionth of an inch of a perfect single mirror
and that complex has been improved upon in the 1990s by what's called adaptive optics, that is to say computer controlled focusing
where there is a laser beam, creates an artificial guide star in the atmosphere
and hundreds of times a second the computer refocuses the telescope to adjust for the atmosphere's turbulence
which puts a limit on resolution of any other kind of telescope
and two other smaller 2 meter wide telescopes on each side all linked together by interferometry
have created the world standard in 21st century optical telescopy.
This is so good, this telescope is so powerful that once the adaptive optics were activated
we were able to see a star, a planet pass in front of a star 153 light years away
exactly at the time predicted by astronomical theory.
I do not want to leave out the fact that we are not alone in this effort,
that the European community has a consortium operating in Chile called the European Southern Observatory
there is something called the Inter-American Telescope Astronomy Consortium
all of them have telescopes comparable but not yet at the level of the tech observatory
and there's a whole host of detectors, remember in particle accelerators
that are behind these optical telescopes allowing us to interpret this data
but this is the armada of instruments that support the kind of theorizing that we described in the last two lectures.
