And the first galaxy formed about a billion years after the big bank, so about 12.7 billion years ago.
When we talked that way, we were talking about observations made by the great observatories,
launched by NASA into space at a considerable public expense in the course of the 1990s.
The space infrared telescope facility is particularly interesting because the idea of being of infrared
rays from distant stars, 13.5 billion years reaching us, being able to develop an instrument,
which by the way uses superconductors in order to cool detectors to just a few degrees above absolute zero
so that they can respond to the most subtle infrared signals is quite an extraordinary achievement.
It's based on a technology developed by Frank Lowe of Kid Peak Observatory in Arizona in the 1970s
and he progressively developed this technology, which is now standard in satellite technology.
So we've got optical, we've got radio telescope, we've got x-ray, and I've mentioned the gamma ray telescope,
one of the great observatories, the Compton gamma ray telescope, one of the members of the great observatory series.
I want to talk a little bit about neutrino telescopes.
Neutrinos emerged out of the controversy over the nature of beta decay you remember from the early 1930s
and Pauli's prediction in 1930 that there was a particle in the nucleus that emerged during the radioactive decay
that Enrico Fermi gave the name neutrino to.
And at that time, of course, it was a completely theoretical entity.
In 1965, 1966 at Savannah River Complex of the Department of Energy,
where the Department of Energy manufactures tritium to use in thermonuclear warheads, or used to,
the scientists there observed the neutrino for the first time.
And some, about 10 years later, in an attempt to actually detect neutrinos,
which are very, very difficult to detect for reasons we've discussed,
a tank of chlorine gas, a large tank of chlorine, not gas,
a large tank of chlorine was buried in an old gold mine, homestead gold mine,
and there was the fur, and so the neutrinos were detected for the first time.
And not only were they detected, but it looked as though the neutrinos emitted by the sun
in the course of the fusion of hydrogen and to helium were changing their nature,
were oscillating, as they say, which suggested that they had mass, which was very disturbing.
Subsequent neutrino to theory at the time.
Now it's just a fact that has to be accounted for.
Subsequently, more sophisticated neutrino detectors were built,
and I want to just mention two of them.
In Japan, in the 1990s, the supercamiocondate detector,
which is made up of 11,000 photomultiplier tubes,
embedded in 50,000 tons of ultra-pure water,
and which was able to detect the neutrinos emitted in 1987.
This was, I'm sorry, I said 1990s in the 1980s,
detected neutrinos emitted by the supernova of 1987.
The United States has, in Antarctica, two interesting neutrino detectors.
One currently called Amanda under the South Pole,
which is a mere 677 bowling ball-sized detector
buried underneath the South Pole,
but we are constructing something called the Ice Cube.
5,000 detectors buried in a cubic mile of Antarctic ice
to shield the detectors from anything except neutrinos.
So neutrino detectors, including others in Canada and Sudbury, Canada,
which became operational in 2001, that's a serious business.
Understand, because neutrinos are fundamental to many fundamental processes in the universe.
And the last kind of telescope that I want to call attention to is the Gravity Wave Telescope,
which I've already referred to earlier,
and which became operational just at the turn of the 21st century.
The Gravity Wave Telescope, again, uses the interferometry principle,
has four mile long arms,
and at the vertex there is what's called a test mass,
a mass of exactly known dimensions,
and similar test masses at each end of the arms,
and these are mirrored, and light rays bounce off of these,
and those rays are overlapped according to the interferometer principle,
and can detect a change in the shape of space on the order of 10 to the minus 16 centimeters,
the diameter of a single proton.
