This, of course, was at a time when the world was considered to be nearly 80 to 100 million
years old.
The British physicist Lord Kelvin, one of the most eminent physicists of the late 19th
century, aggressively asserted that the processes responsible for the energy radiated by the
sun could not possibly be more than 200 million years, allow for more than about 200 million
years for the age of the sun, and maybe less than that, and allowing for the formation of
the solar system and the cooling of the earth, the earth, it seems as though the earth was
only 80 to 100 million years old.
This was devastating for the Darwinian theory of evolution by natural selection, which in
fact by 1900 was comatose.
It was in worse shape than the Big Bang theory was in 1950, and we'll talk about how it
came to be resurrected, but it was also devastating for geology.
It said this is all the time that geologists have to work with, and this is the nature
of the earth.
It is simply passively cooling down, and geology has to account for surface features
like why mountains form, and why the continents have the positions and shapes that they do,
in terms of a theory adjusted to constant cooling.
Of course, in 1896, radioactivity was discovered.
In 1903, Marie Curie had shown how much energy is released by radioactivity, and this changed
the game completely, because now we know that the earth was, to a degree we did not understand
quantitatively, loaded with radioactive material that released vast quantities of heat.
In 1913, a British geologist named Arthur Holmes published the first absolute dating
scale for the earth, for geology, in which he showed that using radioactive decay measurements,
one could say that certain rocks were about a billion and a half years old.
This changes geometry dramatically in two ways.
First of all, the timeline for the formation of the earth's geology changes, but also the
earth is not in some sense now a passive victim of cooling, a dead end process approaching
equilibrium, the earth has a heat engine inside it.
This is long before they understood how hot the core really was, that the earth has a
heat engine inside it, which they attributed to radioactivity, only partly correctly, that
radioactive materials deep inside the earth provided a constant source of heat, so that
the earth is geologically active, not just locally with the occasional earthquake or
volcano, but the earth is geologically active because it's got a source of energy that is
constantly pumping energy into the earth and rising up to the surface of the earth, which
in those days was the job, that was what the job of geologists was to explain, was the
surface of the earth.
Making evidence was challenging the American commitment to an effectively equilibrium earth,
in which it was believed that the major formations, the continents, the oceans, and mountains
on the continents, were at or approaching, in the case of mountains, which were much
younger in many cases than the land masses around them, that they were approaching equilibrium
by adjusting the density of the materials deep below the so-called roots of the mountains.
This theory was referred to as the isostasy theory.
All that we need to know about it is that it assumes that all geological features, the
ocean floor, land masses, mountain masses, are either at or approaching an equilibrium
balance of force.
They are at or approaching rigidity.
But evidence was accumulating that was challenging this.
For example, it became clear that the Scandinavian region was rising, was in fact vertically
rising, and this was attributed to the melting of the glaciers, that the glaciers had been
such a huge mass sitting on the land that they actually depressed the entire land mass
of, let's say, Sweden and Norway.
It's called the Finno-Scandian uplift, so the entire region of Denmark, Sweden, Norway,
and Finland all showed evidence of having sunk under the weight of the glaciers and
were now still responding, bouncing back from the melting of the glaciers.
So that showed that continental masses were capable of some motion vertically.
Furthermore, a closer study of the rock mass, rock strata in the Alps, suggested because
of what's called folding, that when the mountains were formed, that there are layers of rock
that are folded over older layers of rock.
They don't just form in a vertically neat way, they're folded over, which suggested
that when they were forming, there was some lateral force which was pushing on them, which
caused them to form at an angle like that, to fold.
This suggested to a growing number of Europeans that something maybe the continents are not
fixed in place.
