using instruments that we have, we obviously can't look down there, but
indirectly, again, through this global network of seismic sensors that have been
put in place in the course of the 20th century, because earthquakes mean so much
to so many countries, here's an area in which international collaboration is
easy. There are tens of thousands of seismic sensors all over the earth on
the ocean floor, on continents everywhere, and they're linked together and
there's a very open sharing of this data, so scientists are able to build up, we'll
talk about this, using a version of CAT scans that we know mostly from
medical applications. The same technology builds up a three-dimensional picture of
what's going, of what the structure, the inner structure of the earth is, and you
can, and scientists can see something like storms inside this, inside the
liquid core, which is trying to pass the heat of the, of the solid core up and
away, trying to get away, to speak anthropomorphically. The, so we have a
1400-mile diameter solid iron core surrounded by a 1400-mile thick liquid
shell of, of liquid core. Above the liquid core sits the mantle. The mantle is 1800
miles thick. I want to shift now to the surface of the earth and get back to the
mantle core, liquid core interface in a, in a little while, but we'll start working
our way down. The continents and the ocean floor, I had already described, are made
of, are essentially a rock, are rock and essentially rigid. The continents tend to
be made of rock that is rich in silicon, silicon oxides, they're called silicate
rocks. The ocean floor, not surprisingly, now that we know how the ocean floor is
formed and continually renewed, is basaltic. It's lava. It's a, it's essentially
cooled lava. And they sit on top of this not solid, not viscous material called
the asthenosphere, which then sits on top of the, top of the mantle. The ocean
floor material that gets pushed down, pulled down under the, sinks under the
continents in the process called subduction is, because it's cold, it's ocean
floor material and the ocean temper, the average ocean temperature is quite low.
The, that rock is, is cool. And as it gets pulled down, it is much cooler than the
rock that it experiences in the asthenosphere. And certainly when it gets
down to the mantle, even though it's being heated up, there's always a
substantial temperature difference between the, the ocean crust that's being
subducted and the, and the, and the material in the mantle, which is lava
material. And so it sinks. Now, the mantle actually has, even though it's just, it
looks to the, to the untrained eye, like a, just a mass, an 1800 mile thick mass
of lava, actually has internally a, a barrier at about the 400 mile mark. So
that the ocean crust material, by the time it gets to this 400 mile mark, which
distinguishes an upper mantle from a lower mantle, it has melted and it begins
the process of circulating back up again. Some material, for reasons that are not
currently understood well. Some ocean crust continues down, unmelted through
the material and only, so to speak, completes its melting process when it
hits the, the interface between the mantle and the liquid iron core. That
re-interface is, is only about 120 miles thick. And it is considered by, by a
geologist to be the most dynamic and chemically reactive place on the earth.
Amazing that we can know that, that thousands of miles beneath the surface,
there is 120 mile band separating the liquid iron core from the mantle. It is
the most chemically reactive and geologically active dynamic place on
the earth. And in fact, it is thought that it has a topography with mountains
and valleys and stuff that not, that would not look all that different if you
profiled it from the surface of the earth. What's happening here is that the,
that the liquid iron core has convection currents that are carrying the heat of
the solid core up, but the liquid iron can't move into the mantle. So at that
interface, the heat can only be transferred by conduction. It can only
move across the liquid iron core mantle interface by conduction. That's a very
weak, slow and inefficient process.
