that maybe the continents are capable of some motion.
Now, this line of thinking was captured in 1915.
This line of thinking was captured in 1915 by a German scientist named Alfred Wegener,
who was a physicist, really, and who proposed a theory that he called continental drift.
Based on three observations, the jigsaw puzzle fit of the continents,
which had been already observed in the 19th century, that if you kind of play around with them,
it looks as though Africa and South America are a natural fit for one another,
and then if you play around with North America, and you don't worry too much about Central America,
and Europe and Asia, you can get the Eurasian landmass,
you can get the continents to sort of fit together too closely for it to be an accident,
or at least that's what Wegener thought.
Second bit of evidence.
As a matter of fact, if you look at the rock strata on either side of the English Channel,
if you look at the rock strata on the European coast and the North American East Coast,
the North American West Coast and Asia, Western Africa and Eastern South America,
if you compare the geological formations, they look like they've been torn apart.
They are similar in many places.
Third observation.
If you look at fossil plants and animals, old fossil plants and animals,
100 million or more years old, then you find startling similarities
between fossil plants and animals, especially in South America and Africa.
Wegener said that these three observations suffice to justify the hypothesis,
or he thought it was a theory, that the continents in fact have drifted,
that they have not always been in the positions that they are now,
that in fact there was a time when all the continents were together,
and something is at work in the earth that's forcing them apart.
They move around, they collide with one another,
and that this is what geologists need to use as their working research model.
The European reaction to Wegener's hypothesis was muted.
That is to say, not a big deal was made about it.
He did not make many converts.
The American reaction to it was extraordinarily hostile.
American geologists, with very few exceptions,
and all of the big names were on the side of the violent hostility,
said no to the theory and no to Wegener.
That Wegener discredited Wegener as a scientist
and dismissed continental drift as a fairy tale.
In 1928, Arthur Holmes, the same geologist, British geologist,
who when he was a young man, a new, just out of graduate school,
published that first absolute time scale for geology,
published a paper in which he hypothesized that we needed to take seriously
the idea that continents could move.
And he could explain it, he thought,
by suggesting that what was causing the continents to move
was convection currents, I'll explain that term in a moment,
convection currents deep below the continents
that were bringing lava, they were bringing magma, molten earth,
up through the mid-ocean floor, forcing the ocean floors apart,
and that that's what was powering, that was the engine
that was powering the motion of the continents.
One major objection to this line of thinking
was that even in the early 1900s, people were studying earthquakes, seismic waves,
and what they saw was that seismic waves propagated through the earth,
as if the earth were rigid.
And therefore they said it's ridiculous to believe
that beneath the surface of the earth is any liquid.
The earth is solid all the way through because of the evidence from seismic waves.
Now, I think most of us, if we think at all about the earth,
realize that beneath the crust of the earth there is a molten mantle.
