It's called the mantle, the molten region below the other 1800-mile thick molten mantle.
But in the early 1900s, it was stubbornly believed on, I shouldn't say, that's not fair perhaps
to them, that certainly the people who believed this remained stubborn in their belief that
the Earth had to be rigid all the way through because of seismic waves.
The reason why they were stubborn all the way through is because increasing evidence
suggested that, you know, you can have a fluid that behaves like a rigid body, but is not
rigid.
It just flows very slowly.
Glass is an example of this.
Glass is actually a kind of fluid, a super fluid.
Medieval windows, for example, medieval stained windows, because seven or eight hundred years
have passed.
The glass has flowed down, and so the tops of the windows are very thin and the bottoms
are much thicker.
They're so thin that they're extraordinarily fragile and are very, very easy to break.
They have to be supported, embraced.
Glass flows, but it flows very slowly.
When you're dealing with multi-billions of years, when you're dealing with flows that
take place over hundreds of millions of years, so you don't need to have a liquid-like water
no one's saying that the continents are supported by something like water.
They're supported by a viscous liquid that is chemically, physically, like a super fluid.
So that seismic shock waves are transmitted as if it were a solid, the same way glass
ordinarily behaves like a rigid object, and yet it is capable of enough flow to provide
the explanation of the geological phenomena.
This was Holmes' publication in 1928, and as far as Americans were concerned, he had
completely, this was just nonsense, this was science fiction.
And in fact, only a minority of European geologists seemed to have recognized that this was a
valuable line to follow.
In 1923, and again in 1928, a Dutch geologist named Minez invented a new kind of magnetometer,
a new kind of device for, I'm sorry, gravitometer, a new kind of device for measuring the acceleration
due to gravity, which enables you to measure the massiness of stuff that you could use
on board a ship, so it was not sensitive to the rolling of the ship.
And he was taken on a voyage by a Dutch submarine around the world in 1923, and in 1928 an American
submarine took him on an undersea voyage, and he was mapping the strength of the Earth's
gravitational field on the ocean floor for the first time, and what he discovered was
that the ocean is not in equilibrium, that the ocean is geologically active, it's nowhere
near equilibrium, which was a major blow to the isostacy theory.
The consequence of this, when World War II broke out, was quite interesting.
The Navy turned to geologists for help in submarine warfare, and they got enough help
that the Navy sort of also supported some research on the side, and the kind of research
on the side that needed to be done was research on, that geologists wanted to do, was research
on the strength of the gravitational field of the Earth deep in the ocean, they wanted
to map that really well, but they also wanted to do research on the magnetic field strength
of the Earth.
We're talking now, we're now in the World War II area, World War II era, and immediately
after the war, attention started to be focused on mapping the magnetic field strength of
the Earth.
A corollary of Holmes' idea that the ocean floor is constantly being refreshed, so to
speak, by magma that's welling up from the mid-ocean ridges, pushing the old ocean floor
out and pushing that against the continents, that suggests that you should be able to see
you should be able to see magnetic field stripes, let's call it that, on the ocean floor because
the new ocean floor will have a different magnetization than the old ocean floor for
the following reason.
In the course of the 1930s, the idea began to be taken seriously that the Earth's magnetic
field has actually changed.
In 1900 it was assumed that the Earth's magnetic field was a constant, it's always been there
and it's always been the same, why would it change, it's another example of equilibrium
type thinking.
