Lecture 18, The Earth, Subterranean Fury
The plate tectonic theory account of the earth is fascinating in itself and also fascinating
for what it reveals about the evolution of scientific thinking of the thinking of a community
of scientists over a period of a hundred years in which we have several generations
of scientists and their graduate students succeeding one another and we get some feeling
of the way that commitments to ideas and to theories can sometimes create tensions between
those ideas and theories and accumulating data. It is not as easy as sometimes people
make it out to seem, scientists themselves make it out to seem, that scientists are prepared
at a moment's notice to adjust their theories to facts. What they will attempt to do is
often to retain their theories in the face of what seem to be new facts that don't fit
by adjusting the theories or by re-examining the facts or denying that the data in question
have the validity that requires them to change their theory. So plate tectonics I think because
it's not mathematical for us because we can describe it qualitatively of getting a feeling
for what plate tectonics tells us about the earth. What is the current in the year 2000?
What is the thinking of the geological, the earth science community about the nature of
the earth is a worthwhile venture because it reminds us as I said in the last lecture
that Copernican revolutions do not just happen in astronomy. The idea of a Copernican revolution
is a change, is a fundamental change in the way we think about things. So it is used metaphorically
to refer to a fundamental shift in perspective. In the case of Copernicus of course it meant
a shift in perspective from the earth being the center of the universe to the earth being
just another planet rotating around the center of the universe which is still pretty special
since the sun was conceived by Copernicus to be the center of the universe but within
by the time we get to Newton there's no center to the universe and so that specialness is
lost as well. But metaphorically speaking then any radical change in perspective that
has sort of value connotations associated with it is called a Copernican revolution.
The first term used metaphorically in this way I believe by the 18th century philosopher
Emanuel Kant. So because of that I want to share with you a quick overview of what the
earth is conceived to be by earth scientists as we turn into the 21st century. The core
of the earth is solid iron at least 90% pure at a temperature of 6,000 degrees Kelvin.
This is comparable to the surface temperature of the sun. This is an astonishing amount
of heat which is largely residual heat from the formation of the earth. Rock is a very
poor conductor of heat. If you want to get rid of heat conduction is not a good way to
do it through rock. The way to a much more efficient mechanism for transporting or dissipating
heat is convection currents which is a sort of waves in which material can move and carry
heat away from the solid core. The core however being solid can have waves of current working
through it so the heat of the core can only get out of the core by conduction up to the
edge of the core to the limits of the core which is 1400 miles in diameter. The core
of the earth is a solid ball of iron under extraordinary pressure at 6,000 degrees. It
is surrounded by a 1400 mile thick band of liquid iron obviously also under tremendous
pressure obviously also extremely hot and that the heat of the core starts to become
dissipated in the liquid shell that surrounds the core. The liquid shell that surrounds
the core has convection currents inside it so in other words the material of the liquid
iron is not smooth. It is roiled by these upwellings of liquid iron that form in geological
terms storms within the liquid iron shell. It is almost as if they have weather patterns
which can be detected.
