applied also in the general theory of relativity and in quantum theory that is
to say each of those theories told us about interrelationships that we had
not appreciated before in the case of the general theory of relativity that
space, time, matter, and energy are intimately interconnected. Even now,
early in the 21st century, it is a controversy among physicists whether
matter is a name that really belongs to the curving of space or whether matter is
what causes space to be curved. Which came first? It's a chicken and egg kind of
chicken and egg kind of question, but at a minimum what we know from the general
theory of relativity is that space, time, matter, and energy are intimately
connected and you can't talk about one of them independent of their influence on
the other and the other influence on them. Analogously, remember we talked
about the question in quantum theory about whether quantum theory violates
the special theory of relativity's restriction on the transmission of
information or a signal faster than the speed of light. According to quantum
theory, especially now after the experiments in the 1980s of Allen
Aspect have been replicated over and over and over again, the universe is
interconnected at the quantum level in far more complex and subtle ways than
anyone had anticipated prior to the last third of the 20th century. We don't
understand yet the nature of those interconnections, but it's the sense of
a system which is continually sensitive to the relationships among all of its
elements, even apparently in violation of the restriction of the special theory
of relativity. So that you can change something here and have an instantaneous
adaptation over there, as in the case of the entangled photons that I described
in an earlier lecture. So the notion that the earth is a system becomes a
fundamental theme in late 20th century science and of course in earth science,
one of its manifestations was the environmental movement and within the
environmental movement the notion that we have to recognize that there is no
single aspect of the earth that can be treated in isolation, that you cannot say
I am only polluting locally. You cannot say that I will do my thing and not
worry about the impact of others on me or my impact on others. We saw this in the
case of the ozone hole, which was quite an extraordinary social phenomenon as
well as a physical phenomenon. They just say the reaction that well we really are
destroying the ozone and the ozone which from the 1920s had been appreciated as a
barrier, happy barrier between us and ultraviolet radiation that is extremely
harmful to life and at our stage of evolution highly mutagenic, which is
certainly associated with skin cancer, but at the level of plants for example
would have devastating consequences for agriculture. The reaction to the ozone
hole that we actually stopped producing CFCs and that maybe the ozone hole will
repair itself, the evidence at the moment is unclear, is one illustration of an
eruption of systems thinking into the public consciousness. We are currently
experiencing a second eruption over the whole question of global warming. Is it
the case that human activity has either caused or is intensifying the warming of
the atmosphere, which is an empirical fact. No one can deny that. The only
question is whether we're contributing to that or we can say well, you know, our
emission of carbon dioxide gas is negligible and so it is of no consequence.
We are wrestling still with the complexity of acknowledging that we're in a
relationship and most of us feel much more comfortable with being able to
uncouple and say it's just me. When you're in a relationship your obligations
and your behavior is much more complicated than when you're not, whether
it's a social relationship, personal relationship or when the kind of
relationship we're talking about is the relationship of the elements of the earth
to one another and hit by element here, I don't mean atomic element, I mean ocean,
atmosphere and earth. What we need to look at, what we need to look at in the
next lecture is the notion that the earth itself is only one node in a much
larger network, much larger system which extends extraterrestrially.
