The planet Jupiter has shielded the Earth through much of its history from asteroid-like particles and comets that, especially in the early solar system,
regularly rained down towards the sun from a belt of particles, a belt of rocky objects like asteroids and comets that we now know surrounds the solar system
beyond the orbit of Pluto. It's called the Kuiper Belt.
This is a very wide belt made up of hundreds of thousands, millions, perhaps tens of millions of rocky objects and comets that routinely course through the solar system.
In the early history of the Earth, we were regularly exposed to collisions with these objects, but far fewer of them made it to the Earth than would have made it, if not for Jupiter.
Jupiter shielded us because of the massive Jupiter. Its gravitational field attracted those objects.
In 1979, the physicist Luis Alvarez postulated and subsequently was vindicated after he had been considerably criticized, especially by geologists,
that the Cretaceous extinction 65 million years ago, which killed off the dinosaurs and which allowed the evolution of mammals to take the form that it has,
was precipitated by collision with a comet or asteroid. The crater left by this impact has subsequently been discovered on the northeastern coast of Mexico,
sticking out into the Gulf of Mexico. Here's an example in which the history and fate of the Earth were significantly affected.
The extinction of over 90% of land animals, land life forms at that time, 65 million years ago, and creating the ecological framework within which mammals could evolve
without being eaten by dinosaurs who as predators were far superior to what any mammal of the period could have coped with, had it not been beyond the sort of rodent stage of size.
So beneath the threshold of indifference of your average dinosaur. This led to the suggestion that the five known mass extinctions since multicellular life first appeared on the planet approximately 600 million years ago
were all caused by these kinds of collisions. And there is some evidence that this is in fact the case, although we'll see in a moment that some recent speculation has challenged this.
So here we have the sun has played a critical role, Jupiter has played a critical role, comets have played a critical role in the history and fate of the Earth,
and the moon has, in two ways, one that we're pretty confident about, that is to say the moon stabilizes the Earth's orbit and its axial rotation.
The Earth, the presence of the moon stabilizes the Earth's orbit and rotation. Second, it is believed that the event that created the moon, which is still a subject of some controversy,
thinned the Earth's atmosphere so that it was not as thick as it is believed the primordial atmosphere was.
So that we did not get into a greenhouse effect like Venus's atmosphere, which is extremely dense, and became extremely hot, approximately 900 degrees at the present.
A little too warm for comfort. So the moon has played a critical role in the history of the Earth.
So here we have some ways, this is hardly exhaustive, but some ways in which the history of the Earth, the history of life on the Earth, and the fate of life in the future on the Earth,
are connected with dynamical processes that are part of the structure of the solar system.
Let's just say a little bit about the way in which the Earth is a node in the cosmic system.
Now, we have talked a good deal about this in earlier lectures, but the Big Bang theory makes it very clear that the only reason we're here is because the solar system formed relatively late in the life of the universe to date.
That is to say, if the solar system had formed when the universe was young, a mere billion, two billion, four billion, five billion years, there would not have been enough heavy elements floating around in space for a planet like the Earth to form and to be rich with the kinds of elements that allowed life to evolve.
In fact, the solar system is approximately five billion years old.
