Lecture 19, The Earth, Solar System Citizen
Welcome to the capstone of our three lecture overview of Earth Science in the 20th century.
At the end of the last lecture, we saw two ideas emerge that are core ideas for all of
the 20th century sciences, namely dynamism and system.
In the case of the Earth, as the plate tectonic theory became the dominant paradigm in Earth
science in the 1970s and 1980s especially, we began to realize that the Earth as a system
is kept in a state of dynamic interaction among the geosphere, the so-called physical
planet from the crust down, the oceans, the atmosphere, the biosphere, all forms of life
on the planet are in complex dynamic interaction, the dynamism being fed by the intense heat
of the Earth's solid iron core, which is forcing all of that turbulence we discussed in the
last two lectures, and energy inputs from the sun, which are charging up the atmosphere
and the oceans, and when you put all of this together, we began to realize especially in
the 1970s and 80s and 90s that the Earth was a system in which all of these major subsystems
dynamically interacted with one another, kept in a non-equilibrium state by these energy
inputs from the core and the sun.
So the concept of dynamism, of constant change being the norm, of non-equilibrium, that there's
no plateau that we are moving towards, which was a kind of a 19th century idea, and the
idea of a system.
In particular, we're familiar today with the term ecology, which was actually coined in
the 1880s by the German biologist Ernst Hegel, it was not used in its modern sense until
the 1920s, and the phrase ecological system, meaning a comprehensive look at plants, animals,
and environment in mutual interaction is a 1930s introduction, that's when we first began
to do that, and in fact, it's only in the 1960s, partially triggered by Rachel Carson's
book Silent Spring, that we added human activity to the loop.
We kept ourselves out of this system, so to speak, as if, well, the whole planet's a system,
but what we do doesn't really matter much, it was in the 1960s that we began to realize
the extent to which human activity on the planet is also changing these dynamic interactions.
And so in 1969, the creation of the Environmental Protection Agency and the passage of the Clean
Air and Water Act signaled a broad public perception and acceptance of the idea that
our behavior cannot be ignored, that we too are part of the system.
In this lecture, I want to focus on the Earth as a subsystem.
The Earth is a system, we've talked about that.
The Earth as a system, however, is also a subsystem, it is an element in a nested hierarchy
of systems that are far more complex.
The first step up, so to speak, is the solar system.
The Earth is a node in the solar system, it is only really in the post-war period and
especially since space science began to mature in the 1960s and 70s, that we really understood
the extent to which the Earth is an element in a broader system that the history and the
fate of the Earth are connected with the history and the fate of the solar system.
There are lots of intermediate hierarchies that we're going to sort of skip over, like
the Milky Way, because the solar system is part of the Milky Way system, which is itself
part of a system of galaxies called the local cluster, which is itself part of a larger galactic
cluster system.
We're going to jump to the highest system of all, the universe as a whole, and we'll
take two quick looks at the sense in which it is not merely literary to say that the
Earth is an element in a broader system.
