Which is where Voyager 1 happens to be at present and sending back its data at a primitively
slow rate.
Imagine trading in your DSL line for a 100-bit per second modem.
That's about the rate at which Voyager 1 is sending back data, but it builds up over
time and it's a probe with pluck, you might say.
So 1958 was when it began, incredibly, as early as 1960, the first generation of satellites
of practical value were put into orbit.
We take this tremendously for granted, but for a hundred years for sure people thought
it was lunatic to talk about leaving the earth.
And then in the space of two years we went from putting up a grapefruit, the Russians
okay, a basketball.
We put up a grapefruit and in 1960 we launched three satellites, Transit, Tyros, and Echo,
that were the first global position-fixing satellite, which then became the whole commercial
global positioning system network that we have today.
The Tyros was the first weather-observing satellite.
Everybody watches the weather from space on the weather channel.
And EchoStar, which was barely a telecommunications satellite, an aluminized ball that you could
bounce radio waves off, quickly became the commercial electronic telecommunication satellites
that anchor telecommunication systems around the globe.
And in 1972, Landsat was launched, beginning the Earth-observing satellites, which collect
both very detailed information about land and water and the characteristics of land
and water, and that is now also a commercial operation, and it has been in fact for decades.
So very quickly we put into orbit satellites that have matured into valuable commercial
operations.
The Russians put the first space station into orbit in 1971, Salyut, Americans followed
in 1973 with the short-lived Skylab, but it is fascinating that in spite of being incomplete,
that just 30 years later, the International Space Station went into operation in 2000
to round out a century in which, in 1900, space travel was Jules Verne and 13 ages.
In 2000, there's an International Space Station that has been continuously manned ever since
2000.
The first crew occupied the space station, it is not yet fully complete or fully operational,
it will take several more years of construction to add laboratories and experimental facilities
and to extend the crew quarters so that more visiting scientists can work, but that is,
I think, an astonishing accomplishment.
Second type of technologies that we have used to explore the Earth's position in the Solar
Solar System have been scientific satellites and space probes, not practical value, but
the research ones, and we've talked about quite a number of these in earlier lectures,
the astronomical ones, climaxing in the four satellites in the great observatory series
of NASA, starting with the Hubble Space Telescope in 1990, and then in 2003, the satellite infrared
telescope facility, which gave us a glimpse of what we believe to be the first stars and
the first galaxies that were formed after the Big Bang, an infrared glimpse of those
events.
So there's a whole box full of scientific satellites that have given us information,
and then there have been space probes that have left Earth orbit and that have explored
the inner planets, Mars, and the outer planets all the way out to the Kuiper Belt, Mercury,
of course, but Venus, in particular the Russian Venera satellite that went through the atmosphere
that and actually crashed onto the planet, but meanwhile radioed back data telling us
what the atmosphere was like, what it was made of, what the temperature was, the American
Magellan mission of 1990 to 1994, which mapped using a special kind of radar, mapped the
surface of Venus, missions that we have sent to Mars, like the Viking landers of 1976,
followed by the rover of 1996, and then in 2003, 2004, the European Space Agency and NASA
landing probes on Mars and having rovers that are wandering around, collecting information
from about the soil and potential water, signs of water having been in Mars past, and perhaps
even discovering that at one time there was life.
