Lecture 20, Science and Society, Science Organized, Adopted, Co-opted
We've reached a point in our survey of the sciences in the 20th century when we need
to step back and look at science, so to speak, from the outside.
What I said in the initial lecture was an outside view of science, science in relation
to society.
We have referred many times in the previous 19 lectures to aspects of this relationship,
but it's time, I think, to focus on it in this and the next lecture on the way that
the relationship between science and society changed in the course of the 20th century.
It evolved, but to say it changed significantly enough that it is reasonable to use evolution
as a metaphor for the nature of this relationship.
Research costs money.
All of the kinds of wonderful adventures that we have experienced on this odyssey, vicariously
experienced on this odyssey, the particle accelerators, the orbital satellites, etc.,
that's what the late Senator Everett Dirksen would have called real money.
I estimate that perhaps a trillion dollars in current dollars were spent on this kind
of scientific research since World War II, and you have to ask, well, where did this
money come from, why was it spent, and what impact did it have on the practice of science,
the organization of science, the practice of science, and the content of science.
It's not necessarily manipulating theories so that they took one form rather than another,
but what areas did we develop theories in because that's where the money was.
At the moment, for example, the National Science Foundation and other government agencies are
putting a great deal of money in this first decade of the 21st century into nanotechnology,
and so all of a sudden there's a tremendous amount of research being done on this aspect
of material science and of the quantum physics that supports it.
Remember that in the 19th century, federal funding for science in the United States was
a no-no.
There was a prevailing attitude that basic research, that the pursuit of knowledge for
its own sake, was an elitist activity, and that therefore it should be funded by private
individuals, that it was inappropriate to use public funds to support the pursuit of
knowledge for its own sake.
When you come to applied knowledge, well, in a capitalist society, if someone's going
to apply it and make a profit from it, they should support it, the public should not support
it.
There were a limited number of areas in which, in the 19th century, the federal government
in the United States supported science, and that was mapping the country, exploring the
resources, exploring the coast, and mapping the coastlines of the country, so there was
a national interest in that, and in infectious diseases.
The only other area that sometimes had some implications for basic science was setting
regulatory standards.
The first regulation of industry in the United States was in 1853 regulating high pressure
steam boilers, and then setting standards for industry, so those were considered legitimate
uses of public funds, but the standards for industry was an early 20th century development
with the creation of the National Bureau of Standards, renamed the National Institute
for Standards and Technology in the 1980s, so basic research did not exist in the United
States in the 19th century, it was considered not politically acceptable.
On the other hand, from 1800 on, the United States rapidly industrialized, and especially
in the last half of the 19th century, it was clear that the fate of the United States was
to be an industrialized nation.
We industrialized, we made the shift from primarily agricultural economy to a primarily
industrial economy faster than any European nation, and so industrialization became a
primary center of American prosperity and social activity in the last third of the 19th
century, and that had dramatic consequences for science, indirectly and underappreciated
consequences that we will now talk about.
In 1862, Congress passed the Morrill Land Grant Act.
This act had been proposed several times in the 1850s and was rejected or vetoed, rejected
by Congress, vetoed by the President, but with the South in secession, because the South
was the one that the Southern representatives were against it, with the South in secession,
Congress passed the Morrill Land Grant Act, which gave large tracts of federal land to
any state that would create a college that taught the mechanical arts, engineering colleges.
