In the 19th century, it took many years before scientists acknowledged that meteorites came from outer space.
This was considered a nonsensical idea for decades, and it took quite a bit of time before it was accepted that we here on Earth were receiving material from outer space.
Of course, it's routine for us, and in the 20th century, especially since the 1930s,
we have begun to realize that the Earth is continually bathed in matter and energy,
not just from the solar system, but from the Milky Way, and even from beyond the Milky Way.
It was in the 1930s that we discovered, through balloon lofted instruments, you remember in an earlier lecture,
that cosmic rays aren't rays at all, they are the nuclei of atoms propelled across interstellar space by stellar explosions
and reaching our atmosphere, interacting with the molecules in the high atmosphere,
and creating cascades of debris particles that bathe us 24 hours a day, seven days a week.
So cosmic rays, in the mid-1930s, radio waves were discovered,
and now we realize the extent to which the Earth is continually bathed in radio frequency radiation from the entire universe.
Literally, now that we understand the microwave background radiation, quite literally the entire universe is, so to speak,
radiating and radiating through us, as well as all the other stars and planets that there are.
In the post-World War II period, when we went from balloons and sounding rockets to satellites and space probes,
we discovered that the Earth is continually bathed in x-rays, in gamma rays, in neutrinos,
which are, in fact, the most numerous particles in the universe, and floods of neutrinos,
or through us, through our bodies and through the Earth continually.
And we believe gravitons, gravity wave particles, the carriers of the gravitational force,
which we have not yet detected, but there's general confidence that since the general theory of relativity predicts them,
and it's been right and everything else, that it'll be right on this too.
And as we discussed in an earlier lecture, the NASA has already put into operation in 2002
a gravity wave telescope that has yet to detect a gravity wave, but we certainly hope as taxpayers that it will.
In addition, we have discovered, especially in the first satellite that we ever launched, a tiny little thing in 1958,
the Van Allen radiation belts, which we discovered are protecting the Earth from constant streams of charged particles
that flow from the Sun out into, throughout the solar system, and that these radiation belts funnel into the North and South Pole,
creating the auroral effects at the poles, and essentially protecting the Earth from these charged particles.
During periods of solar storms, the magnetic field is often overwhelmed, and sometimes there's leakage through,
and there is damage to electric utility networks and to communication systems, especially those that are now placed in orbit.
That's one level in which the Earth is not a standalone planet, but that it is in fact integrated into processes
that are solar system-wide, galactic, and in fact universal, truly cosmic.
There's another sense in which the Earth is a node in the solar system, and that is the way in which the history and fate of the Earth
have been influenced by the solar system, moving out from the Sun.
The Sun's radiation, the particular spectrum of radiation, the set of frequencies that the Sun radiates, includes ultraviolet light.
Ultraviolet radiation from the Sun would be extremely harmful to living things if the full extent of the Sun's ultraviolet radiation
reached the surface of the Earth. As early as 1930, a chemist named Sidney Chapman realized that ozone in the upper atmosphere
was created when ultraviolet photons from the Sun struck atmospheric oxygen in the upper atmosphere and created ozone in the process
absorbing those ultraviolet photons and not allowing them to pass through to the surface of the Earth.
That doesn't obviously absorb all of them, but it absorbs enough so that in fact that ultraviolet radiation is blocked
before it can destroy living cells. That's why we're so concerned about the loss of the ozone layer, because the thinner the ozone layer,
the more ultraviolet radiation reaches the surface of the Earth. In human beings, this manifests itself in much higher skin cancer rates
and considerable concern for increased mutation rates, especially in crops, for example.
There's a sense in which the Sun and the Earth's upper atmosphere have created a shield against certain of the frequencies of light from the Sun
that would be harmful to life on the surface. We'll come back to this when we talk about how come the Earth's atmosphere is oxygen rich
when we move on to talk about evolution.
