We recall George Ellery Hale, who was this tireless promoter of scientific research in
a private foundation, in the world of private foundations and big-givers.
He had gotten money from the Yerkes to build the world's largest refractor telescope, from
Carnegie to build the 60 and 100-inch reflecting telescopes, from Rockefeller to build the
200-inch Palomar telescope.
Well, in World War I, George Ellery Hale tried to convince the government, the president,
to organize the nation's academic scientists as a resource.
This was on the eve of the before we entered the war in 1915, 1916, anticipating the possibility
that we would enter the war.
And he was not successful.
The committees that met eventually decided that what we needed to do was to organize
industrial corporations and their engineers in support of the war.
And Edison was put at the head of that.
He turned out to be an extraordinarily ineffective administrator.
And Henry Ford, of course, was prominently associated with that committee.
And the idea was that we cannot give public money to academic scientists.
We can, however, contract with corporations to provide specific services through the scientists
and engineers that they have working for them.
Hale managed, nevertheless, to get scientists onto an advisory committee.
And they wound up doing very valuable work that was acknowledged after the war that, son of a gun,
physicists could actually be useful, and especially it was in the development of tools
for primitive submarine warfare of those days.
In the late 1920s and early 1930s, as it became increasingly obvious that the well-being of the United States
was going to depend on technology and the belief that technology was anchored in science,
Hale tried one more time to create a national research council that would be jointly funded by government and industry.
And he got a group of corporations that were willing to contribute to this.
In the early 30s, President Roosevelt agreed that the federal government would be a partner in this,
but in the mid-1930s, this effort collapsed during the Depression.
A number of the corporations pulled out and the attempt to create a national research council in this country failed.
I focused on the United States because in the second half of the 20th century,
the United States became the dominant figure in scientific research in the world.
But in the first half of the 20th century, the dominance in science belonged to Germany.
Germany in the last third of the 19th century, after the unification of Germany under Kaiser Wilhelm and his prime minister, Bismarck,
Germany, Bismarck especially, championed the idea of creating federally funded, their version of federally funded institutes,
Kaiser Wilhelm institutes, for doing research in science and in technology and for transferring that knowledge to industry.
So Germany developed a university model and a government-funded research institute model that was extremely generous
and created avenues for transferring that knowledge to industry and the military.
And by the, by 1920s, 1930s, there was, I think, with apologies to all the other nations of the world,
no doubt that Germany was the absolute world leader in physics, chemistry, mathematics and organic chemistry,
especially in life science, pharmaceuticals, and the transfer of this kind of knowledge to industry and to the military.
The United States, Britain, and then, secondarily, France, resisted this model and did not want and were therefore,
in a certain sense, grossly unprepared for World War I.
Germany was overconfident in World War I that it had created the military superiority based on its high-tech military of the time,
but they were very confident in World War II that they were dramatically superior because of their use of scientific knowledge
into driving technological innovation with military applications.
And so the United States and Great Britain had to play catch-up at that time in the late 1930s, the beginning of the 1940s.
The British just wanted to ride out the rise of German militarism in the 30s and did not make any substantial changes in their science, technology, infrastructure.
The United States the same, wrestling as we were and as everybody was with the Great Depression.
