The universe we believe is 13.7 billion years old at present, that means that we came in
in middle age, 8.7 billion years after the Big Bang.
The timing was very important.
The fact that we came in, that the universe has, as we believe, the characteristic that
it has, that it began in that primordial inflationary explosion, as we've discussed,
that the laws of physics took the form that they did, that galaxies, that stars and galaxies
evolved as they did, the hydrogen burning stars generating helium and heavier elements
as they burned up and exploded and spread these atoms through the universe, that's why it's
only because we came in when we did that we're here.
It is also speculated that the formation of the solar system itself was caused by a supernova
explosion not too far away.
The shock waves from that explosion is what sort of pushed the cloud of gas and dust that
the solar system condensed out of into forming the sun and the planets.
Very recently, in 2003, it has been suggested that one of the five mass extinctions, that
one of the five mass extinctions of life since multicellular life appeared on the earth,
the so-called Ordovisian extinction of approximately 480 million years ago, 450 million years
ago, when two-thirds, biologists say two-thirds of all life forms died on the planet, that
extinction was triggered by a supernova 10,000 light years away in a very interesting way.
The radiation from that explosion excited the sun so that the sun flared in a particular
way which can be modeled in a computer and the effects of the change in the spectrum
of the sun's light changed our atmosphere, affected the atmosphere in a way that essentially
shut down photosynthesis, shut down the availability of photons of a frequency that cells that
can perform photosynthesis could use for energy and that that's what caused the Ordovisian
extinction.
So here we have another example in which events in the 10,000 light years away have been
significant for the evolution of life on earth.
So here is at least a quick sense in which this concept of system cannot stop at the
earth.
We cannot think of the earth as a system and say, OK, that's as far as we have to go.
In order to understand ourselves, in order to understand the planet, we have to understand
how the planet fits into how it is an element or a node in a network of relationships that
at a minimum extend through the solar system and more generally through the cosmos.
But we can, I think, consider ourselves very fortunate to at least be able to explore the
network of relationships in the solar system that the universe, that the earth partakes
in.
Now, how have we done that?
Well, I've already referred to a few of these, namely high altitude balloons that starting
in the 1930s lofted instruments into the upper atmosphere in order to collect information
about radiation and particles of matter that were coming into the earth from extraterrestrial
sources and after World War II sounding rockets that carried instruments higher instead of
100,000 feet carried them up to 60 miles, up to 100 miles.
And then the sort of climactic event, well, climactic is perhaps the wrong term.
The watershed event in space science in our ability to explore the relationships between
among the earth and the planets is, of course, Sputnik.
Sputnik 1 and Sputnik 2 in October and November of 1957, followed by the U.S. Vanguard and
Explorer satellites in 1958.
That began the period of space science.
That began the period in which we acquired the capability to actually extend our senses
into and throughout the solar system, quite literally from the sun at the very moment
now in 2004 out to the Kuiper Belt.
