And this was also a revelation to the, not just the military, but to non-specialists
that you could have used mathematics to develop plans for action that turned out to be valuable.
This was the context within which von Neumann and Morgenstern's book on game theory in 1943
was found a very congenial environment because operations research was a context within which
mathematical decision theory, that's what game theory really is, finds a natural home.
And the only other piece that I'll mention was the development of techniques for manufacturing,
penicillin in huge volume, and at very low cost. That was also an OSRD.
So Vannevar Bush was the czar of the organization, the focusing of scientific expertise on problems
for the government, the military especially during World War II. But Vannevar Bush's importance
in terms of the nature of scientific research in the 20th century and the relationship between
science and society perhaps lies with the fact that at the very end of Roosevelt's life, although
he didn't know it at the time of course, he was authorized to write a report on what America's
science policy should be after the war. And he wrote a report called Science, The Endless Frontier,
in which he mapped out the prospect that America's future was critically dependent
on technological innovation, which was itself critically independent on sustaining basic
science. That we had to, we could not go back to the pre-war policy. That we had to create an
infrastructure in which the government subsidized basic scientific research at universities.
And from that would come the knowledge that would inspire new technologies which would
generate prosperity, well-being in the health care area and industrial and military security.
Roosevelt died before he got that report. It was received by Truman. Truman and his advisors
accepted that. And one manifestation of that report was the creation of the National Science
Foundation. And between 1946 and 1950, when the National Science Foundation was actually
put into business, there was a vicious political battle which went right back to World War I.
Public funds should not be used to support these people. And if they do, if we're going to do it,
then we should, Congress should be the ones to say you can use the money to do Project A,
Project B, not Project C, etc. We're not, we're not giving you a blank check,
and you and your buddies will decide what you're going to do research on. You know,
the life cycle of Hymenoptera or why people park one way rather than another way as
William Proxmire liked to make fun of. In the end, after a nasty battle during which President
Truman, who strongly supported the creation of the National Science Foundation, had to veto
one bill and have another withdrawn because he said he would veto it, eventually the National
Science Foundation was created as a peer-reviewed institution in which scientists themselves
made the decisions as to as to how the money that was given to them would be spent. Now,
as a matter of fact, the budget of the National Science Foundation has never been a major factor.
It's the psychology of the thing, you see, that it's peer-reviewed. The Department of Defense
spends much more, during the Cold War, spent vastly more on research, basic and applied research
than the National Science Foundation did, but they said, we'll give you money to do X.
Whereas in the National Science Foundation, Congress gives them a budget,
and then they decide how to spend that money. Broadly speaking, in fact, they have a certain
track record that the money is divided up among a number of directorates, and obviously,
if Congress got really upset, they could intervene. The only time in recent history that they have
was in the early 1980s when they wanted the National Science Foundation to support engineering
research because of the perceived threat to the American economy from Japan.
