To give you an example of what I mean when I say we resisted the model, a nation that
did not resist the model, a nation that saw what Germany was doing early and emulated
them with the Japanese.
The Japanese were a samurai culture in the 1860s, but in 1905 they felt they had learned
enough that they went to war with Russia.
And to the world's surprise, the Japanese Navy sank the Russian Pacific fleet in a single
battle of Tsushima Straits in one hour because of the superior technology of their warships.
This was the platform on which Japan became a world military and industrial power in less
than 100 years.
Well, actually probably about 75 years.
So that's an example of a country that emulated the German model, which brings us to the eve
of World War II and the events that transformed the character of science, of the conduct and
organization of science in the 20th century.
First, a massive shift of technical expertise from Germany to England and the United States
as largely as a result of the German persecution of Jews and socialists so that those German
scientists and mathematicians who were politically or morally hostile to Nazism or who had no
option but to flee the country overwhelmingly fled to the United States and Great Britain.
This transfer of expertise is of incalculable proportions.
It changed the character of American science.
These people overwhelmingly went into American universities where they began training generations
of graduate students in the style of research, the intensity of research, and the latest
techniques of research that they had developed in Europe, typically in Germany or in Eastern
Europe where their universities emulated the German model or where they actually had studied
in Germany and then gone back to Czechoslovakia and Poland and Russia.
So this massive transfer of expertise is underappreciated, but it becomes critical when you start running
down the list of names, and I won't go through them, but I've already referred to people
like John von Neumann and Hans Bethe and Edward Teller, and of course Einstein himself
and Kurt Girdel, is very, very dramatic.
Second, in 1940, Vannevar Bush, who was then President of the Carnegie Institution in Washington,
D.C., a former MIT professor and a pioneer of analog computers in the 1920s that he developed
in order to solve problems for the electric utility industry, Vannevar Bush went to President
Roosevelt and did what Hale was not able to do in the time that Hale wanted to do it.
That is to say, he convinced the president to organize the nation's academic scientists
on behalf of what looked like the coming participation of the U.S. in this current,
in the then current European War.
The president created an Office of Scientific Research, I'm sorry, the National Defense
Research Council with Vannevar Bush as the head.
Within a year that had become the Office of Scientific Research and Development with
Vannevar Bush as the head, and he began to organize a network of the finest scientists
in the country into committees to look at specific problems with military applications.
The most famous, of course, is the Manhattan Project that resulted in the atomic bomb,
but perhaps to many people in the military and to military historians, perhaps of much
greater significance was what went on at MIT's radiation laboratory called the Rad Lab,
where radar was developed through multiple generations of extremely much of much improved
versions of radar, and not only radar, but various kinds of electronic countermeasures
to counter the Japanese and the German radar as they developed radar in the course of World
War II. So there was a kind of battle behind the scenes of electronic countermeasure technologies
that went through many, many generations of development, even in the four short years
of our involvement in World War II. So MIT's Rad Lab, sometimes talking of, it was the Rad Lab
that won the war. It was the atomic bomb that ended the war, at least it ended the war in Japan,
but what won the war was the electronics developed through the Office, under the aegis of the
Office of Scientific Research and Development, and a lot more. For example, operations research,
which is now we call systems analysis, and you know how seriously I think the idea of systems
underlies a great deal of 20th century scientific thinking, operations research was a mathematical
technique developed during the war in the first half of the 1940s that was applied to military
tactics and operational tactics and planning, including such things as bomb patterns, for example.
