Nature looks as though it were designed because everything looks like the spider builds exactly the kind of web that traps exactly the kind of insects that the spider's digestive system is capable of digesting.
Surely somebody had to design that.
What Darwin's idea said was that the appearance of design can emerge out of a random process.
Third, radical sub-idea within the idea of evolution, especially as Darwin promoted it, is what nominalism, that is to say the attribution of reality only to individuals and not to class terms.
So for Darwin, the transmutation of species, which was a radical idea in the 19th century because many people had previously thought that each species was created by God and that the species had a reality to it, therefore, that was exemplified by individuals.
For Darwin, there were no species. There were only individuals. There were only populations of individuals.
And therefore, when you talked about transmutation of species, you weren't violating God's plan. You were saying that over long periods of time, groups of individuals start looking different from what they had looked like in the past.
And here is a process that can explain how populations of individuals can acquire new characteristics.
They always acquire new characteristics, generation after generation.
Remember, Darwin had no clue as to the underlying process that we know of today as the DNA process that explains why it's almost impossible.
It is effectively impossible for the offspring of parents to be genetically exactly like the parents, that the underlying process is rich with errors, so to speak, with the opportunity for recombination of genetic material
so that a certain amount of it leads to a nonviable embryo, and then a certain amount of it leads to genetic diseases, as to say, characteristics that are not helpful to survival, and then there are some that do increase the ability to survive.
And those are the ones that are picked out over long periods of time, so to speak, by this process called natural selection.
Underneath all of this, there's the idea also that there is a struggle for survival.
If there's plenty of food for everybody, you're not going to get evolution.
It has to be the case that there is a survival advantage to a characteristic, and then you get a new population over time that possesses that characteristic.
The fourth idea, sub-idea of evolution that made it so radical, was complementary to contingency.
That is to say, the idea that in time real novelty emerges.
It was a principle of 19th century physics that if you knew all the relevant information at any given time about the behavior of matter, you could predict with unlimited accuracy the future of the universe.
Darwin is saying that, no, no, no, in time new things are going to happen that are unpredictable and that you cannot guess.
The latest version of this is the late Stephen Jay Gould's insistence that if you ran the tape of light backwards, today I guess we would have to say the DVD backwards,
then you would get a completely different story. Let's try it again.
There is no causal mechanism that made it the case that the kinds of plants and animals and birds and reptiles and insects and mammals that evolved had to be exactly the way we know them.
They could have taken many other forms depending on different circumstances, especially if a comet missed us instead of hitting us, if a solar flare happened or didn't happen.
So this idea of novelty emerging in time. This is an extremely exciting set of ideas.
In some sense, it's a liberating set of ideas and between 1860 and 1900, the intellectual community of Western Europe and the United States largely embraced these ideas.
What is ironic is that by 1900, in biology, Darwinian evolution was essentially comatose.
Most biologists believed by then that evolution was correct. That is to say, they believed that all life forms had kinship relationships,
that in fact life had evolved from a common ancestor to all the different forms that we see. That part was accepted.
It was the mechanism that Darwin had proposed that was rejected because in 1900, the physics community, led by Lord Kelden, who we've seen before in this course,
insisted that based on our understanding of chemistry and physics, the sun was only one to two hundred million years old,
the earth, therefore, could only be at most something like one hundred million years old, life on earth could only be eighty to one hundred million years old.
That's not enough time for Darwinian evolution by natural selection.
