Second, if you're going to base the evolution of life on the emergence of new characteristics,
those characteristics have to be handed down from generation to generation in order to
accumulate if they give a survival advantage.
The prevailing ideas about inheritance in the 19th century, Darwin's own, what's called
blending theories of inheritance.
So imagine a community in which all giraffes have short necks.
And then a giraffe with a very long neck is born.
Wow, that's terrific.
Now he gets much more to eat.
But when that giraffe has to mate, who's the giraffe going to mate with?
Everybody else has got a short neck.
According to a blending theory of inheritance, that giraffe mates with a short-neck giraffe.
Their offspring will be somewhere in between.
And who's that one going to mate with?
Well, highly probable that, remember, it's just a random generation that that one long
neck giraffe came along.
It's not as if you have a whole bunch of them pop up at one time.
And you can see how over a couple of generations, this long neck will be swamped, the mutation
will be swamped.
That's the term that's used.
And the norm will be restored.
Darwin did not have what is called a discrete theory of inheritance, where characteristics
could be inherited discreetly regardless of who you, the characteristics were of who
you mated with.
That's what we understand to be Mendelian genetics.
Mendel's theory, gene theory, is that there is a discrete transmission of characteristics.
So the lack of a theory of inheritance was crucial.
And even among Darwin's supporters at the end of the century, in 1900, there was tremendous
disagreement about whether evolution could actually work by small variations, accumulating
over time as opposed to big variations, that there were big jumps.
And as a matter of fact, you did have a community of short neck giraffes, and all of a sudden
you had a subpopulation with long necks, and they're the ones that survived.
So Darwinian evolution was in a kind of comatose condition in 1900, and it was rescued by two
developments, first by the discovery of radioactivity in 1896, which we saw in our first lecture
on earth science.
And Arthur Holmes, a British geologist in 1913, published the first absolute time scale
for the history of the earth in which he showed using the decay of radioactive elements as
a marker that there were stones that were one and a half to two billion years old.
That gave, all of a sudden, we now had the earth had to be at least two billion years
old if there were solid stones already around.
So somewhere between two and three, and we now believe somewhere between four and four
and a half billion years as the age of the earth, that begins to give Darwinian evolution
the time that it needs.
So between 1900 and 1915, all of a sudden, time was given back to the Darwinians.
The second thing that rescued Darwin was the recovery of Mendel's discrete theory of inheritance,
which happened in, the story sounds nice, in 1900, four men in four different countries
working independently, all of them recognizing that evolution needed a discrete theory of
inheritance, discovered Mendel's, Gregor Mendel's 1865 paper in a journal.
He had published it in an obscure journal, it got very little attention at the time,
but starting in the late 1880s and through the 1890s, more and more people started reading
it because they were looking for a discrete theory of inheritance.
It's not that they stumble upon it and therefore adopted it, they were already looking for
the discrete theory of inheritance and rediscovered Mendel's work.
One of these men was the British biologist William Bateson, who in 1903 invented the
term genetics, and in 1909 invented the word gene to describe the atom of inheritance,
and it was Mendelism that after a brief vicious controversy that we will discuss in lecture
24, by 1910 led to a growing consensus that Mendelism was correct and by 1920 led to the
recognition that Darwinian evolution and genetic theory were very compatible and that in fact
they mutually reinforced one another.
