is an encounter with experience in which we at least try to remove the kinds of subjective
prejudices that create ideology rather than truth.
The argument is whether this can really be done.
So the shift of dominance to the American scene made science much more political than it had been before.
Engaged the university with science in ways that it had never done before.
When President Eisenhower left office, he delivered a speech which in some sense was reminiscent of President Washington's speech
when he left office and President Eisenhower however warned against what he called the military industrial complex.
That is to say that we had in responding to the Cold War created an environment in which even with the best of intentions
the military and corporations had gotten into a symbiotic relationship
which could easily lead to both of them pursuing initiatives for self-serving interests
not necessarily in the government's interests, in the public's interests.
That warning should have included the universities.
That the government, that it was a military academic industrial complex
because increasingly in the 1960s and 1970s the federal funding from the Department of Defense and the Department of Energy
for direct or indirect military applications was flowing into the universities and transforming them.
It was flowing into the universities to a degree that required universities to become dynamic in the area of science and engineering.
And we will see shortly in the social sciences as well.
The universities had been a pretty placid place.
In the philosophy classroom at the beginning of the 21st century a medieval philosopher would have felt quite at home.
Obviously this is not the case in the science and engineering classrooms.
So that the universities historically from the very first western universities in the European universities in the 12th century
at Paris and Bologna right through to the post-World War II period
universities were kind of quiet, stable places in which curricula didn't change much.
It was in the 19th century and really in the last third of the 19th century
that what we think of as a university today with different departments and elective courses and majors and so on
that began to emerge just in the last 20 years of the 19th century
and that was a response to the need to incorporate engineering as a legitimate college curriculum
and to teach science and math to a wider range of students.
The university became a dependent as I said in the last lecture of the external funding
because in order to do research you needed to have labs, you needed to have faculty, you needed to have graduate students,
you needed to have majors that you could use your faculty to teach
and then what happens when innovation pushes that particular kind of research out of fashion?
Then you've got to build new labs, hire new faculty, so you need the input,
you need to continually receive a revenue stream that allows you to do this
and in fact what emerged unsurprisingly was 40 to 50 universities
that are the dominant research universities in the United States in terms of federal funding
and they are in a sense critically dependent on this external funding.
Science has become politicized in other respects as well.
That is one not just politicized in requiring to nurture a relationship
with external funding sources in order for science to continue to be practiced
but also in terms of government science relationship.
President Eisenhower recognized the need in the wake of Sputnik
for a Presidential Science Advisory Committee, PSAC as it came to be called
which President Kennedy implemented and used very intensively
in order to provide the President with science policy advice from educators and researchers
so that we would not be blindsided again as we were by Sputnik.
And PSAC however was perceived politically in President Nixon's administration
because PSAC promoted the nuclear test ban treaty
and because PSAC opposed the anti-missile defense plan that the Nixon administration supported
and also opposed the supersonic transport which at the time was proposed to be funded by the government
and in a fit of peak President Nixon disbanded PSAC.
