Lecture 22, Life, the Evolution of Evolution
Welcome back to what I have repeatedly called our intellectual odyssey, the survey of the
evolution of scientific ideas in the course of the 20th century, but our subject today
is the idea of evolution itself, and paradoxical though it may sound, the evolution in the
course of the 20th century of the idea of evolution.
That idea was introduced in the 1850s, in effect made public in 1858, 1859, jointly
by Charles Darwin and Alfred Russell Wallace, taking a term which had previously been used
by biologists to mean a kind of deterministic development, as for example in the development
of an embryo from fertilization through to the fetal stages to a neonate, which was considered
to be a deterministic process, but Darwin and Wallace redefined the term evolution,
as they redefined it.
That new idea of evolution, which became, which was broadcast, so to speak, intellectually
speaking in the 1850s, has proven to be an exceptionally powerful idea, not just in biology,
but throughout across the sciences.
And as I warned in our very first lecture, it's important to keep the words evolution
and development separate.
They are not synonyms.
Evolution is a particular type of development, because for example some development is causal
deterministic.
Evolution as defined by Darwin and Wallace is not a causal, is not a deterministic process.
As defined by Darwin and Wallace, evolution, the idea of evolution goes like this, continuous
small random variations between parents and their offspring.
They use the term spontaneous, not random, but we're more familiar with the term random.
That means a causal.
There's no reason why the offspring of bacteria, the offspring of mammals or reptiles or birds
are always just a little different from their parents.
But Darwin's idea was, I'll keep using Darwin even though it's not fair to Wallace, but
it's easier, Darwin's idea was that over very long periods of time, the cumulation of continuous
random small variations subject to natural selection would explain the entire sequence
of fossils and show that all the forms of life on earth, plants, animals, birds, reptiles,
insects, everything alive came from a common ancestor.
That over very long periods of time, this process, the fact that variation is a natural
phenomenon, that it is random, that some of those variations are going to increase the
survival capabilities of the children relative to the parents and relative to their peers,
and that those capabilities will then develop in the community and you'll have individuals
that after a few generations start being very different from their great grandparents, for
example, although I'm compressing the timeline here.
That is the idea of evolution.
It is tremendously bold idea for a number of reasons.
First of all, it brings into science and scientific explanation contingency, chance, randomness
at a time when science in the middle of the 19th century was at the peak of its materialistic,
deterministic hubris.
When it believed that all natural, when scientists, physical scientists believed that all natural
phenomena were completely determined by antecedent events, that everything we saw was
an effect of a cause and that the relationship between cause and effect was a tight one.
That given the cause, the effect had to take the form that it did.
And here was Darwin in the 1850s introducing contingency into a fundamental natural phenomenon,
life itself.
Now we have seen in earlier lectures that in parallel to what Darwin and Wallace were
doing, physicists were being forced into using probabilities in order to explain such phenomena
as the behavior of gases, the volume, pressure, and temperature relationships of gases.
And so the science of thermodynamics, also a product of the 1850s, and the kinetic theory
of gases in the 1850s and 60s also were bringing probabilities into science.
So contingency was one of the bolder aspects, one of the bolder sub-ideas within Darwin's
idea of evolution.
The second was that Darwin's idea of evolution explained design without a designer.
