Right, so the scientization of medicine is a reflection of a public attitude.
In World War I, psychology became, got a tremendous boost from the fact that the United States
Army needed to test recruits to quickly find out if they were intellectually capable of
functioning in the Army of 1916, 1917, and the year before we entered the war.
And the Stanford Binet IQ test, which subsequently has been of such influence and controversy,
was really a test to screen out people who were mentally substandard.
It was not intended to be an index of intelligence so that you could compare someone who was
above average, way above average, way way above average.
It was really to screen out people who were way below average and who would be a problem
in terms of literacy, for example, and being able to follow orders and to recognize what
time it was.
So it's interesting how that became the basis for what is still a preoccupation with testing.
It was the Stanford Binet test used and publicized so widely in the Army during World War I,
and then subsequently incorporated into our educational system.
That became a platform for the preoccupation, some might even say the obsession, with testing
that we continue to live with and continue to wrestle with.
But it also created a career path for testers, for lots of people to study psychology at
the university.
Analogously, in the 1920s and 1930s, we see a tremendous increase in the study at the
university of social science, political science, economics, management science, and this is
indicative of what has been called, in fact, the kind of second industrial revolution,
the shift of American economy from an industrial, a manufacturing base to a service base.
Now, this shift was already manifest in the early 1920s, that is to say, the growth of
employment in manufacturing was now exceeded by the growth of employment in the service
sector of the economy.
It took another 25 years until 1927 before those two curves actually crossed, and in
absolute numbers, the number of people employed in the service sector exceeded the number
of people employed in the manufacturing sector.
But this is not just a statistic.
When you say that the number of people employed in the country are in the service sector,
well then that has implications for the kinds of people that you're looking to hire.
Starting in, it was manifest by the early 1920s that we were hiring lots of managers
and bureaucrats.
Employment was growing, corporations were growing, industry was not hiring nearly as
many people to cut metal as they were people to shuffle paper and to be able to read and
understand and analyze and be accountable for what was written on the paper.
The industrial corporation is based on an army of middle managers.
So the universities then were given the social task just as in the 19th century, at the end
of the 19th century, the engineering college movement was pulled by the need of industry
for engineers.
So the need of society, the need of companies and the government for people who could provide
this service function pulled the universities into creating a much broader base population.
So many more students, and to be crude about it, once they're there you've got to teach
them something.
It's still not clear what we should be teaching them, should you teach them only what they
want to know in order to get a specific job, well most high school students graduate not
knowing exactly what it is they want to know, or should you make them educated.
Well what does that mean to educate them?
This is a perennial issue, but I don't mean to be facetious about this.
This is very important for understanding why we have so many students, so many Americans
who have college degrees and who have studied various, you have to major in the field.
You cannot go to college and graduate college without majoring in something.
So once you have a major in psychology, a major in social, so you need professors to
do that.
So now it's not just the physicists and the chemists and the mathematicians who are expected
to do original research, but the people in linguistics and history and literature and
sociology and psychology and anthropology and archaeology, well we second class citizens.
We have to do original research also, we are our resources.
