Welcome back to our discussion of the evolving relationship between science and society in
the 20th century. And I hope the recognition that one of the most important developments
in the history of 20th century science was its changing relationship to society. This
was not merely an external change. This can be and has been by many people, especially
by many scientists, dismissed as merely an external matter of no consequence for science
proper, as if the inside of science could be insulated from, buffered from the outside
of science, the organization of science, the practice of science, and the kinds of research
programs that scientists engage in, the kinds of problems that they were able to address,
the resources available to pursue research, all changed dramatically, especially in the
second half of the 20th century, as the scale of science grew dramatically. And this was
associated with the shift of dominance in scientific research to the United States in
the post-World War II period. One element of that was the shift of expertise, the massive
transfer of intellectual expertise from Europe to primarily the United States, just before
World War II and shortly after World War II. But a lot of it had to do with developments
right here in the United States, and especially the rather peculiar notion in the world at
that time that post-secondary education was a natural expectation for everybody. The G.I.
Bill of Rights had a tremendous impact on American society in a way that's not generally
appreciated by creating a mentality in which there was an expectation that everyone who
wanted to could go to college. This is completely out of sync with what college represented
prior to World War II, and a leadest experience in Europe, in Europe. In the United States
in the course of the 20th century, post-secondary education increasingly became something like
a political right of Americans, and we still have something like 70 percent of high school
graduates who go on to community or four-year colleges, two or four-year colleges, and of
course many of those two-year college people transferred to four-year colleges. So this
created an environment which also contributed to increasing the scale of science in terms
of the scale of the scientific community, the number of people who were trained in the
sciences in part to train others, but with expectations to do research. So this shift
of dominance to the United States created a whole new approach to science big in scale.
So the rise of what Mary Jo Nia is called big science. Big science is heavily funded
science, transferring the World War II experience with the Office of Scientific Research and
Development to the post-war period. So the war on cancer, the war on AIDS, the Apollo
project, the International Space Station, the idea that you could have a massive scientific
project, the Apollo project, project Sherwood, which we don't hear much about because it
did not successfully conclude, but since 1954, the attempt to harness fusion to create
as a source of electric power, which I referred to in an earlier lecture, project Sherwood
sort of dwindled into obscurity, and now the United States is kind of a tag along on an
international effort to build such a fusion power research. But the United States set
a new model, and in the course of the U.S. influence after World War II, science went
global to a greater degree than it had been before. That is to say, one recognizes today,
everywhere in the world, that there really is only one science. In the 1960s and 70s,
the kind of intellectual ferment that I was talking about at the end of the last lecture,
the science wars as they were called between those people who were claiming that scientific
knowledge was not objective, that it was subjective and laced with intellectual and
value prejudices characteristic of the capitalist West dominated by European, Caucasian, males,
and in a capitalist framework. That attitude continues in the political rhetoric of many,
but around the world there is a firm recognition that there is really one science. If you want
to be a scientist, then the way that you do science is the same as the way everybody
else does science, and that what we mean by science is this really European invention
that emerged in the 17th century and whose 20th century character we have been following
at the intellectual level, but the social level is also fascinating. There is no feminist
science, there is no Marxist science, there is no black science or Islamic science or
Jewish science or Christian science. At some level, what we mean by science
