This was a very significant event psychologically, because it turns out
scientifically to have been completely wrong. That is to say, the model of the
atmosphere was wrong, we now know, the model of the ocean was wrong, and the
molecules that he thought were available were wrong. Nevertheless, and this is a
quite fascinating thing about science, when in 1969, a meteorite fell in
Australia. They found in that meteorite amino acids just like the ones that
Miller had made in his laboratory at the University of Chicago in 1953.
So, red herrings come in many forms. In the 1950s and after, radio astronomers,
and this also we've alluded to, radio astronomers began to discover that
throughout space, quite complex organic molecules were floating around, again
the result of the debris of supernovas and chemical interactions among particles
colliding in interstellar space, forming quite complex compounds, including,
for example, the cyanogen radical, which is very important in biologically
speaking, and OH minus, the water ion, and formaldehyde, something as
complicated as formaldehyde. So, we began to understand that in fact there were
lots of organic molecules floating around in space when the Earth formed,
they were part of the formation of the Earth. Then in 1977, we had the first
discovered hydrothermal vents, you remember that from the plate tectonic lecture,
it was a crucial moment in the emergence of plate tectonic theory.
Hydrothermal vents along the mid-ocean ridges where mantle material bubbles up
and causes superheated water to force its way through the ocean floor, and very
mineral-rich clouds of material pour out of these vents. And what we discovered
to everyone's amazement was that these vents are surrounded by dense colonies
of organisms that deep on the ocean floor, under miles of water, never having
anything to do with the sauna with oxygen, are flourishing down there.
And this has led in the 1990s to the speculation, after finding at these vents
fossil bacteria three and a half billion years old, that it is possible that at
these vents life first formed through a process in which iron and sulfur-based
molecules, and they are, it is a fact that critical molecules in all living
things, those associated for example with the denocene triphosphate, the energy
source for all living cells, involve iron and sulfur, that iron and sulfur-based
complex molecules through a process of repeated interaction, formed self-organizing
and self-replicating chains, which eventually became the first cell.
So we're not quite as vacuously hand-waving as O'Parran and Haldane in the 1920s.
We've got some very interesting computer models, but this is, it's very interesting
that we have this origin of life question has moved from spontaneous generation
to well under control conditions, spontaneous generation clearly happened.
I'd like to focus before talking about the picture of evolution that we currently
entertain, I'd like to focus your attention briefly on the idea of evolution again,
and in relation to developmental sequencing, because this is going to come up in the next
lecture when we talk about human evolution, and in subsequent lectures when we talk
about anthropology and archaeology and even political science and economics,
when you collect lots of objects and you can put them in some kind of chronological
sequence, the question comes up, is there a real relationship or is it just the case
that B happened after A, C happened after B, but there was no causal connection between them.
So developmental sequencing, you find lots of human bones, is there a relationship
among them? Darwin of course, Darwinian evolution, evolution is an interpretation
of developmental sequencing. Darwin said, look at these fossils, look at, I can put these
fossils in a sequence which shows how they branched off from a common ancestor, how they
evolved over long periods of time, taking those fossils out of geological strata, dating
the geological strata, this rock stratum is on top of this one, so it had to be younger
than that one, etc., and these are the fossils that I found, you create a sequence and then
evolution is one interpretation of developmental sequencing. It is a dynamic interpretation
in the sense that according to Darwin's idea, evolution is driven by forces.
