the force of excessive reproduction, by random variation, by the struggle to survive,
so that it's constantly in a non-equilibrium condition.
Natural selection forces non-equilibrium situations.
So evolution is a dynamical idea, and it is a fundamentally historical idea
in the sense that without understanding the history of a system,
without knowing the history of the system,
you cannot understand how you got to the present,
and it's historical in the sense that you cannot predict the future with unlimited accuracy.
So those are going to recur as important aspects of the idea of evolution in other sciences.
But now let me just give a quick sense of what evolutionary biologists think actually happened.
So the first single-celled organism, life form, are called prokaryotes, bacteria that have no nuclei.
And prokaryotes we know from fossil remains seem to have emerged about 3.5 billion years ago.
They do not use oxygen, and they still exist.
There are still prokaryote communities, webs, mats that are just slightly underwater
in swampy regions of the earth.
But a mutation happened, and some prokaryote developed the ability to do photosynthesis.
Now this apparently happened maybe 3 billion or 2.5 billion years ago
at a time when the earth's atmosphere was overwhelmingly carbon dioxide.
It was the activity of these mutant prokaryotes eating the carbon dioxide
that converted the earth's atmosphere into oxygen-rich atmosphere.
Because in photosynthesis carbon dioxide is absorbed, digested, and oxygen is released.
So the fact that there is an oxygen-rich atmosphere for life to evolve in as we know it
is because of this mutant prokaryote that happened to acquire the ability.
And of course at that time that's great.
There was an unlimited food supply.
The atmosphere was overwhelmingly dominated by carbon dioxide.
So we now had photosynthesis converting the atmosphere into oxygen.
Remember what happened with the sun's ultraviolet radiation creating the ozone shield?
There was no ozone shield when the carbon dioxide was dominant gas in the atmosphere.
So it was now that oxygen shielded life on the earth from the ultraviolet radiation
that otherwise would have destroyed more complex life forms on the earth.
And a second mutation happened.
This is also hand-waving, but this is the story.
The second mutation was that ATP, a dinosine triphosphate, and mitochondria developed.
Let us say some prokaryote that could do photosynthesis actually developed this molecule called ATP,
which is the battery, so to speak, the energy source of all living things.
The next mutation was a cell, a single cell that created a nucleus in which it had its own DNA,
which it handed down generation to generation,
and it captured the ATP mitochondria prokaryote as a kind of a slave and contained it within the shell.
All of this happened between three and a half billion years ago and 600 million years ago.
For all of that time, there were only single celled organisms.
Subsequently, multicellular organisms took over,
and only in the last 600 million years have all life forms as we know them developed.
Now, this idea was scandalous to many people and still is.
The Scopes Trial in Tennessee was 1923,
but in fact, even at the turn of the 21st century in America,
there are a dozen states that prohibit or severely regulate the teaching of evolution in high school biology classes.
So it is still a scandalous and threatening idea for many people.
In 1975, the eminent biologist Edward O. Wilson published a book called Sociobiology,
in which he applied the concept of evolution to all of human culture and human values,
and that again became intensely scandalous, provoked a tremendous political response.
So that's another thing to keep in mind in terms of recognizing that evolution is still a rich and controversial idea.
And finally, there's the recognition that within biology,
there is no universality that natural selection can actually do the whole trick.
