Now, the gene represents something like an atom, it is analogous in biology to the atom
in chemistry and the atom in physics.
Let's just hold that thought for a moment, because this theory of inheritance, this Mendelian
theory of inheritance did not please everybody, and in particular it did not please Carl Pearson
at the University of London and his collaborator, Weldon, they became the nucleus and the journal
that they controlled became the center for what they considered loyal Darwinian evolutionary
theory which insisted on continuous small variations that then would spread by natural
selection and create new populations with new kinds of characteristics.
And they rejected Mendelian discrete theory of inheritance and they rejected mutation
theory with the jumps that they represented and of course the downplaying of natural selection.
Unfortunately, there was tremendous personal bitterness between Bateson and Pearson and
this for a decade prevented these communities from cooperatively working and recognizing
what eventually became clear between 1910 and 1920 that there was no real conflict here,
that as a matter of fact each needed what the other was doing.
But this is too a fact about science and not for the first time have we seen this kind
of a phenomenon, the opposition to continental drift you may recall in the United States
went on for over 50 years, the strongest possible opposition to any kind of geological research
was explicitly based on continental drift but then all of a sudden in the 1960s it becomes
it emerges it has a legitimacy of plate tectonics, of course there's new research but an argument
can be made and has been made that the data that was necessary to convince the Americans
was there they just chose not to read that data in a way that supported the idea of what
we have come to call plate tectonics and what Alfred Wagener called continental drift.
So this idea that personal rivalries can get in the way of the idea of scientific research
and progress.
Science is not this disinterested pursuit of truth only, there's an interest as well
and for a decade the personians who promoted themselves as the loyal Darwinians and the
Batesonians-Divrisians who were perceived or were cast in the role of the anti-Darwinians
and I must be said that they did to some extent embrace that goal but in fact in 1909 and
1910 a critical change took place and it had to do with the developments in sort of classic
biology using much improved microscopes and paying attention to cellular division.
By doing so people had begun to recognize that in cell division a crucial role is played
by tiny little objects that we call chromosomes, that chromosomes which are in the nucleus
of a cell play a critical role in reproduction and it was thought in the transmission of
characteristics.
In 1909 this observing chromosomes in the course of cell division revealed that what
we call now genetic recombination when the chromosomes separate and recombine in all
forms of sexual reproduction whether it's bacterial sexual reproduction or mammalian
sexual reproduction when in the course of cell division the chromosomes divide and then
recombine there are all kinds of opportunities and in fact there are many occasions when
bits and pieces of the chromosomes break off and reattach themselves in different places
or switch from one of the chromosomes in the pair to the other chromosome in the pair
and so this is called recombination.
You can get new kinds of characteristics out of this recombination.
Thinking along these lines in the context of an aggressive debate over Mendelian genetics
naturally suggests that somehow what we mean by genes are on the chromosomes and in 1910
T.H.
Morgan and his laboratory at Columbia University later he moved to Caltech.
Recombination founded what was probably the single most fruitful research program in the
biology in the first half of the 20th century and that was fruit fly research.
So it was a fruitful line of research and it was the study of fruit flies because many
of their chromosomes are extremely large.
