The name that was given to this female is of course Lucy, very famous, Australopithecus
afarensis, that is her official biological title.
That is to say she was not a hominid, she was of the type that preceded the emergence
of hominids, and afarensis refers to the Ethiopian site in which she was found, not in Tanzania
but in Ethiopia.
It now seems to be the case that Lucy is the type from which all hominids descended.
That is to say that Australopithecus afarensis in eastern Africa evolved into the hominid
genus, and the name for the first generation of hominid is erectus or ergaster, but homo erectus
is easier.
So the first hominid evolved approximately 2 million years ago from this Australopithecine
ancestral line.
Now there are Australopithecus remains all over Africa, and that is not so to speak controversial.
What becomes significant is the idea that there was a moment when the hominid line began,
and that moment seemed to be about 2 million years ago.
What is interesting, especially interesting, is that as soon as, almost geologically speaking,
as soon as hominids emerged, they started traveling.
They migrated out of Africa, they migrated out of Africa into Asia, at least into Asia.
Now hominids emerged somewhere around 2 million years ago.
For 2 million to 3 million years before them, there were various species of Australopithecine
creatures who were sort of pre-hominated human ancestors.
This was 15 million years after what became the hominid line had diverged from the common
ancestor of gorillas, chimpanzees, orangs, and humans.
So that was 20 million years ago.
15 million years after that common ancestor, the Australopithecine creatures emerged, and
2 to 3 million years after that, hominids emerged.
And immediately we find, Mary Leakey found, distinctive tools used by homo erectus.
In 1991, and again in 1999, the bones of homo erectus were found in caves in Georgia.
Not Georgia in the United States, but Georgia, the now independent republic, formerly part
of what was formerly the Soviet Union.
And this reinforces the thesis that homo erectus migrated out of Africa and populated Asia.
A different line eventually evolved into Neanderthal and populated primarily Europe.
About 180, 170, to 180,000 years ago, Homo sapiens evolved.
There is, in 2003, two partial skulls with jaws were discovered in Ethiopia again that
are almost perfectly Homo sapiens and are dated to about 175,000 years ago.
So now, Homo sapiens evolved in eastern Africa approximately 160, 170,000 years ago, and they
too, pretty quickly, began to migrate out of Africa.
Now all of this was speculative reconstruction, putting together fossil remains in speculative
sequences until 1987, when Rebecca Kan and Mark Stone King applied an insight from genetics
to paleoanthropology.
I have referred, in this lecture and in the preceding lecture, to the emergence of ATP
and mitochondria as a mutation that took place in early prokaryotes, the non nuclear
single cell bacteria that preceded the evolution of eukaryotes, bacteria with a nucleus and
with a captive ATP wielding mitochondria.
Now it is a fact about mitochondria that they have their own small circle of DNA.
