Lecture 24, Life, Genetics, from Mendel to Molecules
Darwinian evolution needs time.
It needs lots of time in which to work.
Time that in 1900 didn't exist according to the physicist because the earth and the
sun were simply not old enough based on the knowledge of that time.
But as people began to understand the phenomenon of radioactivity, then all of a sudden time
came back.
Time for Darwinian evolution.
But in order for Darwinism to become the dominant paradigm that it has become, we also indicated
that it needed a theory of inheritance, a discrete theory of inheritance that could
allow spontaneous variations to accumulate in a population and not be swamped.
So first let's note that genetics, as we understand it, is just one type of a theory
of inheritance.
There are other types of theory of inheritance.
So theory of inheritance is not synonymous with genetics.
Genetics is just one of them.
And what we mean by genetics, thanks to William Bateson in 1903, is the name for Mendelism,
Mendelian genetics, the Austrian monk Gregor Mendel, who in 1865 published the results
of the experiments that he had been doing with raising peas and crossbreeding and looking
at the ways color and skin texture changed as a function of generations, looking at the
patterns that he got, came to the conclusion that there was something in the plant that
was something in the seed that contained the determinant of the properties like skin
color, color and skin texture, whether they were smooth or wrinkled, for example.
So when we think of genes, we're thinking of discrete transmission of properties and
discrete determination of properties, that there is something in the seed, that there
is something in the fertilized egg that will determine the physical properties of the organism
as it matures, and that there is something in the seed that will, in the adult organism
that will be passed on to the next generation of seeds that contains the determinant of that
property.
So that is effectively what Mendelism proposes, and because Mendel published this in a fairly
rather obscure journal in 1865, that's not the whole story, because Mendel was corresponded
with some of the leading biologists in Europe, and they knew about his work, so that in fact
they sort of dismissed it as not significant in the 1860s and 1870s, but as I mentioned
in the first lecture in this series on the idea of evolution, in the late 1880s and throughout
the 1890s, a number of biologists began to recognize that evolution requires a discrete
theory of inheritance, and they were looking for a discrete theory of inheritance, did
what any graduate student today would do, and that is a literature search, and various
people, at least four that we know of, four whose subsequent careers called attention to
them, but there may have been hundreds for all we know, rediscovered Mendel's paper,
and from four different countries, Corrin's, Chermok, DeVries, and Bateson, so from Austria,
Germany, Holland, and England, Bateson, who coined the term genetics, who coined the term
gene, I mentioned in 1905, to refer to this discrete determinant and transmitter of physical
characteristics, Bateson happened to read Mendel's paper while he was traveling to give
a paper at a conference in 1900 on crossbreeding. DeVries had discovered it earlier because
he had developed and in the late 1880s published a major textbook on mutation theory, and he
was the great champion of mutations as the key to evolution, not natural selection acting
on continuous small variations, but mutations, which essentially replace natural selection,
and so in 1900 it is a fact that the 20th century begins with a core of biologists defending
a Mendelian theory of inheritance, which we have come to call genetics.
