How long would it take for that variation to become normal in a population?
How many generations would it take before everybody had it?
And Norton's tables would also allow you to see how quickly a gene would be removed
if it had a negative survival advantage.
These tables were published first in 1915.
By the end of the 1910s, had convinced just about everybody
that genetics and Darwinian evolution were hand in glove.
Now what's interesting about this is that something similar was happening in physics
because these mathematical models are based on no understanding whatsoever
of the underlying biological process.
Nobody knows how genes work.
These mathematical models are purely empirical descriptive.
They have a statistical empirical character.
They're not based, as for example, most of a 19th century mathematical physics was based
on an attempt to model using mathematics what was believed to be a physical process
because we want to understand the process.
The geneticists were saying, well, you know, there are people who are studying the process
and that took quite a while to straighten out until the 1950s really,
but we can look at the consequences of the process and we can model that mathematically.
Now that should remind you of quantum theory in the 1920s
where Heisenberg, for example, developed his version of quantum mechanics,
ignores the underlying processes.
We're not interested in what the underlying processes,
even Bohr's work between 1912 and 1920 of the quantized orbital electrons
and how that theory could explain spectroscopic data,
that there was no attempt to really understand what's really going on there.
These mathematical models work.
And so we have, I think, an interesting intellectual climate.
I don't believe there was any influence whatsoever at the time between quantum physics,
which was a radical theory in physics in the 1910s, brand new and very radical,
and what was going on in biology.
Mathematics was still compared to physics very, very weakly employed in biology
and yet we see, for whatever reason, we see analogous kinds of conceptual responses.
So between 1910 and 1920, we have a growing conviction that genes are real,
what really nailed it down for the overwhelming majority of biologists.
And it's not clear that it should have done it for them,
but I think in science generally, it often is the case
that when you look back at a theory that has been established as dominant,
there is some moment when you can say this was when everybody got on board.
But if you actually say, well, why did they get on board then?
Was that such a compelling evidence?
Well, it wasn't logically compelling, but apparently at a certain point
people felt that they wanted to get on board.
This is obviously a very subjective interpretation, and they used that as an excuse.
But in 1927, Hermann Müller did subjected fruit flies to x-rays
and was able to induce mutations artificially, was able to create mutant fruit flies,
and then by looking at their chromosomes, was able to convince just about everybody
that chromosomes were indeed real and that they were physically located
on the chromosomes.
I had indicated earlier that the next step in the development of genetic theory
was the extension in the 1920s of these genetic patterns to populations,
studying populations rather than studying individual variation.
And here, too, we see a phenomenon that we have seen before in the history of physics.
In the 1920s, three men working independently and working on three different grounds.
Let's say they did not share almost any fundamental commitments in biology.
Their conceptualization of the genetic process was fundamentally different,
and what they were interested in modeling was different,
and yet the three men, R.S. Fisher, Sewell Wright and J.B.S. Haldane,
came up with functionally equivalent mathematical models of the spread of genes in populations,
the spread of genetic mutations in populations.
