This work was all published in the late 1920s and early 1930s, by 1930-1931.
All of them had published major textbooks, very influential, using very sophisticated mathematical models, by the way.
And this, too, is like what we saw in quantum mechanics in the mid-1920s,
when Heisenberg and Schrodinger, in 1925, both formulated versions of quantum mechanics
based on fundamentally different physical principles that turned out to be functionally equivalent and inter-translatable.
Which was quite a shock at the time to Schrodinger, who thought his theory was much prettier and closer to the truth.
And so, by 1930, we've got a really viable population-based genetic theory
that understands that a source of variation, of biological variation,
is recombination, that the sexual reproduction process itself contains the key to understanding where variation comes from.
So genes are real. Now the question is, what are genes?
We have to step back now.
The 20th century inherited a prejudice from late 19th century biology, which was that the key to life was protoplasm.
It was the stuff that's in the cell, not particularly the nucleus, and in fact the extra nuclear material in the cell,
that that is the key to life and the key to understanding life.
And in the 1890s and very early 1900s, in particular, people had, chemists and biologists had discovered enzymes.
And it was thought that enzymes are the key to life, that studying enzymes will give us the key to life.
In 1907, the German chemist Emil Fischer made a major contribution to biology
by showing that proteins are built out of amino acids.
Amino acids are a particular kind of molecule. They come in a number of different types.
There are 20 different amino acids that make up every single protein in the human body.
There are over 10,000 different proteins in the human body and they're all made out of building blocks like Legos of amino acids.
And in 1907, Fischer showed that that's what proteins were made of, that proteins were structured.
They were long molecules built up out of amino acid 1, 3, 7, 11, then maybe 15, 13, whatever.
And that he was able to synthesize them. Anyone could make amino acids and then you could put them together
and you could build synthetic proteins that some of which actually did exist in the human body and others did not.
Because those 20 amino acids can be combined in millions of ways.
It turns out that we only have 10,000 of those millions actually at work in our body.
He was not sure that proteins and enzymes were identical.
In fact, we know that enzymes are a specific class of proteins.
They are proteins that act as catalysts in reaction.
They don't get changed when they engage in a precipitated reaction, whereas most proteins are changed by the reaction.
Hormones are another class of proteins.
So proteins, as far as Fischer was concerned, proteins is where the action is.
Understanding proteins is the key to understanding life.
Now, when we talked about chemistry quite a while back, the history of chemistry in the 20th century,
one of the important developments in the history of chemistry was the argument in the 1920s of whether large molecules had fixed structures.
And John Stottinger was the chemist who fought the battle and ultimately was vindicated in part through the invention of the ultracentrifuge
by Theo Svedberg in the late 1920s, which proved that molecules could be very, very long and had very specific structures.
Proteins are exactly that kind of structure.
And the next step in biochemistry and genetics from 1925 to 1950 was trying to discover the structure of complex molecules
now that it came to be believed, it's only believed in the 1920s, that large molecules had a precise structure
as opposed to sort of a fortuitous combination of things that they actually had a very precise structure.
But proteins work in the body of the cell, not the nucleus.
