genes were thought to be associated with chromosomes which are in the nucleus.
So it's not clear, we're talking 1920s, 1930s, 1940s, what the relationship is between studying proteins and genetics,
especially because as early as the 1860s, a German biologist by the name of Friedrich Miescher,
had claimed that there was a nucleic acid, that there was a molecule that is chemically speaking an acid,
in the nucleus of a cell that seemed to him to play an important role in reproduction and inheritance.
He said this already in the 1860s.
Development was relatively slow, so to speak, except for the identification of this nucleic acid as DNA.
In the 1930s, DNA was studied and dismissed as relatively uninteresting,
because it seems to be just a mix of four different types of bases and it doesn't go anywhere in particular, so it was set aside.
It was set aside in favor of arguing that genes make enzymes.
One gene makes one enzyme, then the enzyme does the work in the cell.
This was a theory developed by George Beedle and Edward Tatum in the early 1940s.
Beedle was particularly proud that this definitively linked biology and biochemistry.
It's called the one gene, one enzyme theory, and it was very productive as a research program, but it turns out to be wrong.
In 1944, Oswald Avery and his collaborators were able to prove without any doubt that DNA,
I shouldn't say that because some people doubted it for another 10 years,
that Oswald Avery was able to establish for most biologists that DNA in the nucleus of the cell was the carrier of inheritance.
So proteins are out as the key to inheritance and the key to life.
What's in is DNA.
Now, in between 1925 and the late 1940s, after Avery's experiment was publicized,
there were a number of technical developments in biology and in chemistry that became critical to understand
why we were all of a sudden able in 1953 to discover the structure of DNA.
And these are another example of how what we know reflects how we know.
We've seen this happen in science after science.
The instruments available to us are a profound influence on the kinds of theories that we formulate.
In the 1920s, I told you, we had for the first time a consensus that large molecules had a precise structure,
a precise chemical structure and a precise spatial structure that the atoms in the molecule were arranged in very fixed ways.
X-ray crystallography as a tool for studying structure became available in the 1920s as physicists were using them to study the structure of crystals
and in fact various obscure quantum phenomena.
But it's not easy to crystallize biological molecules.
Between 1925, 1926 and 1950, biologists learned how to crystallize biological molecules without warping them.
Then they could start studying their structure using X-ray crystallography.
And in fact this is what happened.
In 1950, 1951, Linus Pauling used this technique crystallizing proteins and studying them using X-ray crystallography
to announce that all proteins had the same structure which he called an alpha helix, a single helix, not the double helix.
Between 1951 when he announced this and 1953, DNA was crystallized.
In 1953 Pauling in his laboratory at Caltech and Watson and Crick in their laboratory in Cambridge
used X-ray crystallography to study crystallized DNA and of course because Pauling stumbled, Watson and Crick beat him to the line
and announced that they had discovered the double helical structure of DNA.
Four years later, Matthew Mezzelsen and Frank Stahl established that DNA reproduces by the two helices separating
and each creating a complementary helix because of the way that the base pairs are structured in the peeled apart DNA
and that essentially, by 1957, essentially sealed the course of genetic theory since 1957.
That is the model, that genes are carried by the DNA.
So what happened to the protein?
Well, what do genes do?
Genes on the DNA make proteins and we'll talk about that in the next lecture.
Thank you.
