Lecture 26, Life, Molecular Medicine
Molecular biology inevitably leads to molecular medicine.
The history of medicine, especially the history of medicine in the 20th century,
is a subject in its own right, not exactly a science, but inseparable from science,
not exactly an art, but inseparable from art in the classic sense of technique.
And so we can't devote any attention to the history of medicine per se,
but I think that in this lecture it would be valuable to see how the same intellectual influences
that underlay the move to molecular biology also are at work in the shift of attention within medicine
to what I have called molecular medicine.
Medicine in the 20th century has itself become scientific in ways that it had not been prior to the 20th century
and reflects similar influences of physics and chemistry to the influences that were at work in research biology, for example.
The work of physicists and chemists and the instruments that physicists and chemists have developed
for their own purposes have been adapted to the uses in the medical community,
as we will see in the last part of this lecture especially.
But let's understand that medicine in the 20th century, building on a foundation of science,
is associated, whether it's causal or not, is another story,
is associated with very dramatic changes in the lifestyle of the public in developed countries.
For example, in 1900, less than 60% of women reached the age of 50 in the United States.
In 1900, less than 60% of women in the United States reached the age of 50.
In 2000, it's well over 95%.
The life expectancy in the United States in 1900 was 47 years and a few months.
Today, it's in the high 70s and, of course, probably around 80, closer to 80 for women and maybe 77 or so for men.
But these are dramatic changes which are having profound demographic consequences for society as we enter the 21st century
and medicine is associated with this and the competency of medicine is associated with this,
although the extent to which so high-tech medicine can affect public statistics to that degree is a subject of controversy.
So we have talked about molecular biology in very abstract and fundamental terms,
but what is striking and it's analogous, in my mind at least,
it is analogous to the speed with which we went from the first satellites,
which were almost toys to increasingly competent spacecraft and satellites and research satellites and space probes.
The same thing happened, an analogous thing happened in the wake of Watson and Crick's discovery of the structure of DNA.
We are, I think, a bit complacent about the speed with which this very abstract, fundamental work in molecular biology
has begun to enter the mainstream of medical practice.
It was 1957, just four years after Watson and Crick discovered the double helix structure of DNA
that Arthur Kornberg identified the enzyme responsible for sticking the bases together inside the base pairs together
that are the genetic code, the double helix is held together by base pairs that are the key to the protein manufacture.
So Kornberg discovered the enzyme that will allow you to loosen those bonds
and in 1972, Kornberg discovered or invented the basic techniques of recombinant DNA
of how you could disassemble and reassemble DNA molecules.
You could cut them using Kornberg's enzyme and then you could put them together again in new ways.
Now, Berg was between 1972 and 1975, Berg became increasingly concerned about the dangers that this represented
for perhaps releasing new kinds of organisms, bacteria and viruses with modified DNA
that existing organisms did not have defenses against and so he rallied the biological research community of the United States
and in a very seminal moment managed to get them to a conference at Asilomar on the California coast
to talk about the ethics of recombinant DNA technology.
This was in 1975. Berg himself unilaterally announced that he was stopping all research in this area for at least the next year.
