In one place, in this chain, one link is warped, and because of that, there's an uneven electrical charge.
That uneven electrical charge means that the red blood cells are puckered on one side.
Instead of being discs, circular discs, they're puckered, they're sickle-shaped.
Because they're sickle-shaped, they bulge and they can't fit through the narrow capillaries of the blood vessels.
They have no trouble in the big blood vessels, but when you get down to the narrow blood vessels,
they can't fit through, and so the person who suffers from this disease is not getting enough red blood cells distributed throughout the body.
But it's all because of the shape, the structure of the red blood cell,
which is a function of an electrical charge maldistribution, all caused by a missing amino acid.
So that is an example of what I mean when I talk about explaining life processes in terms of structure,
reducing the illness of an individual to the shape of the red blood cells
and their inability to flow smoothly through narrow blood cells.
So there are now three strands to molecular biology.
I'm not talking about the three-fold cord anymore. There are three strands to molecular biology.
One is chemistry, and we've talked a good bit about that and how that feeds into molecular biology.
We talk a lot about structure and how that feeds into molecular biology.
The third strand is information.
Molecular biology, so to speak, has three legs that it sits on to change metaphors.
The chemistry leg, the structure leg, and an information leg, which only emerged in the 1950s and after,
and it reflects a second wave of physicists moving into biology, taking an interest in biological problems.
And this manifests itself very strongly in the case of Watson and Crick and the discovery of DNA.
Crick was trained as a physicist himself.
Watson was trained in a laboratory under Max Del Brooke, who was a physicist,
who moved into biology under the influence of Niels Bohr and Erwin Schrödinger,
the founders of quantum mechanics, because Bohr thought that probably the study of life
is going to have to require a conceptual revolution analogous to the quantum mechanical conception revolution.
It turned out not to be right about that, but it inspired lots of physicists to look for it.
And Schrödinger, while he was in exile, I shouldn't say that, after he had left Germany during the war and was in Ireland,
wrote a book called What is Life that was a powerful influence on many, many scientists who read that as young people,
as college students, for example, graduate students, high school students,
and decided to devote themselves to careers in life science.
And many of these are people who trained also in physics, who would have gone into physics and switched to life science.
In 1948, particularly, there was a book called Cybernetics by Norbert Wiener,
which had to do with apparently purposive behavior displayed by machines
because of self-control mechanisms based on feedback loops.
Very similar to the notion of inhibition that we saw developing in Sherrington,
and self-control mechanisms in Henderson and Cannon's work.
We'll talk more about this in another lecture.
And also in that same year, there was published the foundational paper of modern information theory by Claude Shannon, Warren Weaver.
All of a sudden, at the end of the 1940s, the early 1950s, so to speak,
almost providing, almost preparing the way for Watson and Crick's discovery of the structure of DNA, the DNA molecule,
we had this focus in physics on information.
Information as a principle of reality, analogous to structure.
That information also was a kind of structure.
And when Watson and Crick discovered the structure of DNA, the question was,
okay, well, what does this mean?
Because I had used in an earlier lecture the reference that DNA in the 1930s was considered a dull molecule.
It didn't look very interesting because all it had was the sequence of the same four bases running through the whole molecule,
and it looked kind of uninteresting.
In fact, even today, they all just say that the overwhelming majority of the base sequences
and base pair sequences in DNA are what they call junk DNA.
They don't seem to do anything.
I find that hard to believe, but at the moment, we don't know what they do, and so they're called junk DNA.
