And they found the structure, so now what?
What does it mean?
What does it do?
It's beautiful.
We now know the structure of DNA.
DNA is the genetic material, whatever genes are, they are somehow on the DNA, but what
did they do?
And it was George Gamow, the physicist whose name also has come up many times in this course,
and the father of the Big Bang Theory for one.
But George Gamow, who sent a note to Crick shortly after the publication of the pioneering
paper by Crick and Watson on the structure of DNA saying, you know, I don't know if you
guys have noticed, but if you take those four base pairs, three at a time, that exactly gives
you 20 different codes, and there are 20 different amino acids.
Could there be a connection between the base sequences and the amino acids?
And initially Watson and Crick dismissed this, and what the hell does he know?
He's just an old physicist.
But Crick and Leslie Orgel, subsequently in the 1960s and 70s together with lots of other
people, especially Francois Jacob and Jacques Monot, in France worked out the code.
Yes, indeed, it turns out that DNA is an information structure.
DNA is an information structure, it is a code book for manufacturing proteins, and it does
this in an extraordinarily complex and convoluted way that you really have to wonder, I mean,
who was behind this.
But nevertheless, it works well enough so that we're here, and we're doing this, and
we're talking about it.
So we were able to get this far.
The DNA is an information structure.
It contains information that allows the manufacture of specific proteins, and as Monot and Jacques
all pointed out, specific proteins at specific times.
And that means that there has to be some kind of regulator, monitor genes that shut down
the activity of other genes, because you don't want all the proteins being made all the time.
You want specific proteins made at specific times, which suggests that there must be some
kind of form in charge of this very spiritualistic notion.
There must be some plan or overview built into the genes which get the timing right.
Now, that tells us something very important.
When we first started talking about genes, you remember that I said that the gene was
analogous in the early 1900s, the gene was conceived of as analogous to the atom in chemistry
and physics.
It was the atom of inheritance.
But Monot and Jacques's work, in particular, revealed to us that this can't possibly be
true, that whatever genes are, they act through networks, that individual genes can't act
all by themselves, so to speak.
If there is such a thing as an individual gene, and that's a very interesting question
at the end of the 20th century, are there really individual entities called genes, or
are these discriminable regions of a complex network?
It's the network that triggers the manufacture of this protein at this moment, that protein
at that moment in one cell, these proteins in another cell, another set of proteins,
because it's the same DNA, effectively, in all cells.
But in bone cells, the DNA structure causes the manufacture of these proteins, etc.
So DNA is an information structure, but that seems very unsatisfying at a certain level.
Okay, it's the code for making proteins, and then the proteins go on and cause certain
cellular processes.
But has this answered the question, what is life?
Is this what we are?
Is this what an organism, it is an organism, the sequence of base pairs.
The sequence of base pairs may cause the organism to have the physical characteristics that
it does, but is that what, and that becomes a severe disconnect at the end of the 20th
century between genetics at the level of molecular biology and the classic concerns
of biology.
What is life?
We are not looking at organisms, we are not looking at organisms in interaction with
their environment when we look at them at the molecular level, and yet the molecular level
is very rich.
It's taught us tremendous amount, even from the point of view of human evolution for example.
So there are serious questions that have emerged at the end of the 20th century with regard
to what sense we are to make of this revelation that life is an information structure.
This is a theme that echoes what we saw at the end of the lecture on cosmology, the quantum
theory of gravity advocates, some of whom are beginning to say that the universe is
an information structure, that a kind of holographic, a curious kind of holographic projection,
an information pattern, and that when you have the information structure you can build
the universe, just as when you have the information structure you can build the baby and then
also operate the baby so that it matures into an adult and then has all of the infirmities
that the adult is heir to.
Is this now what biology has come to, or do we need to put this in a broader context?
