There was now a strong consensus by the end of the 1920s going into the 1930s that biological
molecules are just very long molecules, but they have a very precise structure in terms
of their chemical composition and a very precise shape, a very precise spatial organization.
Now this of course had been central to one of the great 19th century chemical discoveries
was the importance of spatial arrangement to the chemical and physical properties of
molecules.
We now transfer that to biology in the late 1920s and 1930s.
As all of this other work that I've been talking about of reducing biological and psychological
phenomena to chemical and physical phenomena is going on, we have chemistry increasingly
recognizing that structure is the key to physical and chemical properties.
The combination of the two in the 1930s is what gives birth to molecular biology.
Ah, if we're going to give chemical and physical explanations of biological and eventually
of psychological phenomena, we'll see that beginning to emerge mostly in the late 1940s
and after with artificial intelligence research and cybernetics, but chemical and physical
phenomena we now want to explain structurally.
So at that level we're now talking about reducing biology to the structure of molecules.
That if we understand the structure of molecules, we will understand life processes.
We will understand mind and we'll take this subject up in a later lecture when we talk
about cognitive science and artificial intelligence research.
That is the logic that underlies Warren Weaver's use of the term molecular biology in 1938.
It is a recognition of the convergence of these lines of research, of these kinds of
thinking that I've just described.
Let me give you a one concrete illustration of what I mean when I talk about reducing
processes to structure, life processes to structure, and I think it's a very pretty
one.
Linus Pauling's name has come up many times in this course.
He is a giant of 20th century science, his theory of chemical bonds based on quantum mechanics
which he developed in the 1920s and 30s by 1940 and his textbook became sort of the standard
of the field.
And throughout the 1940s Pauling focused research and tried to urge others to do research looking
at the molecular basis of the antibody antigen reaction.
That the production of antibodies by our immune system to antigens that enter into the blood
stream is, he wanted that to be studied at the molecular level, that we will understand
this reaction when we understand the structures of the molecules that make up the antibody
and the antigen.
Now subsequently he was proven completely right, it's almost like a lock and key arrangement.
It is the spatial arrangement of the atoms in the antigen molecule that allow them to
hook on to specific cells and infect them.
If you can block that, if you can change the spatial arrangement then they can't get a
purchase anywhere, so in a certain sense it's that simple.
In any event Pauling himself did not in the 1940s succeed in unlocking that particular
key but he did give in 1949 a beautiful explanation of sickle cell anemia, a pernicious disease
and he showed that the disease is the result of a single error in amino acid of a single
protein that there is a specific protein, therefore all proteins are made up of a string
of amino acids.
There's one amino acid in this string of this one protein that's wrong, it was an error,
the DNA in that individual in synthesizing that protein gave instructions to add amino
acid A, to amino acid B, to amino acid G, to amino acid H and it said I instead of H
as if it could talk.
Now what happens because of that?
What happens because of that is that the red blood cell that this protein manufactures
now has an uneven distribution of electrical charge because the wrong amino acid is in
that sequence.
