The molecular approach focuses quite narrowly on molecular processes, and as we shall see very shortly,
on structure as the cause of the processes associated with the living phenomena.
Structure itself, of course, is not live.
Structure is a static phenomenon, or what we will see called dynamic equilibrium.
Structure, spatial arrangement, as a determinant of the kinds of properties
that manifest themselves ultimately as physiology, is really quite startling.
It is an example of what came to be called reductionism.
That is to say the reduction of life phenomena to physical-chemical phenomena
and ultimately to structural relationships among forces and particles.
And this is, even today, quite a strong controversy in the sciences
as to whether there are distinctive life phenomena or whether, in fact, one can reduce in principle.
One can reduce biological phenomena, psychological phenomena, even sociological phenomena.
Remember my reference in the previous lecture to E. O. Wilson's book, Sociobiology.
Even sociological phenomena can be reduced to biological phenomena, which reduced to physical phenomena.
So reductionism versus vitalism is an important debate that rings throughout the period,
roughly speaking, 1850 through the end of the 19th century,
although by the time that Weaver was talking about molecular biology in 1938,
the pendulum looked like it was stuck on the side of reductionism.
That the reduction of organisms and organs and physiological processes to studying molecular processes.
Now how did we get to this state?
Well, it was at the turn of the century that Ivan Pavlov, who was already a famous physiologist in Russia,
began his series of experiments on conditioned reflexes.
In 1902, first publication, first presentation of his research in 1903,
and then this became not just the focus of his research for the rest of his life,
but the laboratory that he created at the university in St. Petersburg became the center for the study of conditioned reflexes
and the view that, in principle, all human behavior is a manifestation of conditioned reflexes.
Complex conditioned reflexes.
This is one step towards a mechanistic interpretation of life,
but it was reinforced by many other steps that converged in the first few decades of the 20th century.
So the very influential German emigre biologist to the United States, Jacques Loeb, in 1912,
published a book called The Mechanistic Conception of Life,
which argued very strongly for a materialistic, mechanistic reduction of biological phenomena to physical phenomena.
Concurrently, people were beginning to study animal behavior and finding mechanistic reductions of animal behavior,
which were translated into human behavior.
So in 1911, Edward Thorndike, for example, published a book called Animal Intelligence,
which together with Pavlov's work on conditioned reflexes, led John Watson in 1913 to publish the founding text of behaviorism,
which argues that human beings don't act, they react.
They react to external stimuli.
They react to environmental stimuli and that all behavior, all behavior, not just itching and scratching,
but that all human behavior, political behavior, social behavior, intimate behavior, religious behavior,
all behavior is a response to external stimuli and can be shaped and conditioned.
Watson himself sort of in the 1920s drifted off the scene when we talk about psychology in the 20th century,
we'll look at this a bit further, but in the 1910s, behaviorism, together with Pavlov's work on conditioned reflexes,
a growing body of research on the sort of mechanistic character of animal behavior, including such things as learning and memory.
Concurrently, William McDougall at Harvard had developed a philosophy called instinctualism, which argued that human behavior was instinctive,
but also driven from essentially unconsciously that our behavior is not a function of free will or choices that we make,
but a different kind of response to stimuli from inside, instinctive.
This, of course, is also the period of Freud and the view that the unconscious is what drives all of our behavior,
that we are not agents who decide to do one thing rather than another.
Something in us makes us want what we want, hate what we hate, and then we sort of, our ego discovers this almost after the fact
and finds us and we find ourselves wanting this, liking that, disliking that.
