So, this is one line of thought that reinforced the mechanistic conception of life.
Another was increasingly sophisticated physiological studies that were able to use 20th century
physics and chemistry to make plausible arguments for the machine-like character of human being.
Well, Sherrington in England, for example, did a pioneering work on the physiology of
neural networks, for example, reflex actions.
So the neurophysiology of reflex actions were studied in great detail by Sherrington,
showing how you could sort of forget the fact that there's a person that's behaving,
and what you could isolate was the beautiful physical circuit, so to speak, that is associated
with this reflex action, as if you were dealing with an extremely cleverly designed machine,
because that's what you were dealing with.
Sherrington in particular highlighted the importance for muscular action of inhibition,
until Sherrington, the thought was that we needed to understand how we energized muscles
in order to move.
But Sherrington pointed out that it is also critically important to inhibit motion, otherwise
you get the uncontrollable movements that are associated, for example, in one case with
Parkinson's disease.
Inhibition, and we'll see that this turns out to be an important theme also in understanding
how DNA works, that anywhere you've got action stimulated, something has to be monitoring
that action and inhibiting overaction, and there has to be what we will see come to be
called a feedback loop.
So we have Sherrington's work in England, and here in the United States at pretty much
the same time, a little bit later, at Harvard University Medical School, L.J. Henderson
and Walter Cannon did analogous pioneering studies on self-control mechanisms within
the body, Henderson specialized in the blood, and the way that the blood maintains itself
in the face of all of the kinds of insults and circumstances that want to sort of change
the temperature and make up of the blood, how the mechanisms by which the blood maintains
itself in a relatively, fluctuations in the blood are very narrow range, and Cannon introduced
to describe this introduced the term homeostasis, how the body essentially maintains what both
Henderson and Cannon called dynamic equilibrium, which is almost an oxymoron.
Equilibrium means a status quo kind of a situation, dynamism means there are forces
at work that cause change, well the dynamic equilibrium would be like keeping a pencil
balanced on its point.
That would be an example of dynamic equilibrium.
You have to work very hard to keep a maintained dynamic equilibrium, and the body does work
very hard.
It requires lots of energy in order for the healthy body to maintain itself in what's
let's call it its normal state.
That requires quite a lot of energy, and so if we put all of this together, if we put
together the lobe, mechanistic conception of life, Pavlov's work, Watson and McDougal
and Thorndyke, not to mention lots of other people doing work on animal behavior, because
it was easier to work with animals for ethical reasons and social reasons than human beings.
Together with the physiological work of people like Sherrington and Henderson and Cannon,
why you can see how between 1900 and the 1930s we have a growing body of scientific work
that supports the view that ultimately all human behavior, physiological processes, psychological
processes look like they are moving in the direction of becoming explained by a physical
and chemical processes.
Now at the same time, and this is where, no this is a three-fold chord, at the same time
we have already seen, and I'm not going to repeat it in detail, that within chemistry,
there has been between 1900, and especially Emil Fischer's work in 1907 identifying proteins
as having a structure built up out of amino acid building blocks, and that you could synthesize
these, and then Staudinger's work in the 1920s that macromolecules had fixed structures.
In chemistry, you had a growing emphasis on structure as the key to chemical properties.
