I don't see depression. What I see is a malfunctioning gene for the serotonin transport that happens to manifest itself in the big creature as depression, but it reduces to a structural problem having to do with the gene with the way this gene codes for it's not doing a proper job in providing serotonin transport.
And that may be analogous to Pauling's description of sickle cell anemia because of a structural problem. It's manifesting itself at the molecular level as a structural problem.
And similarly, proteins have been identified that seem to be associated with schizophrenia. The gene that produces a protein called New Regulin, it seems to be strongly associated with growing body of evidence that it's associated with schizophrenia.
So here we see anorexia, schizophrenia, depression, suicide, more and more attention is being focused on molecules and their, and that means their structural features and these behaviors.
Now I want to do two things with the rest of this lecture. One, to give you an overview of a beautiful case study by Lewis Gallambos and Jay Esuel that indicates the way that the pharmaceutical industry has moved from 1900 to 2000 in the direction of molecular medicine.
And then to talk about how medical imaging in the 20th century has moved in the direction of molecular imaging. And let me start with this case study which they built around a small Philadelphia-based pharmaceutical company that was started by H.K. Mulford just around 1900 in Philadelphia.
And it was started up on the idea of building a small, high quality, high tech for the time pharmaceutical company that's specialized in bacterial vaccines. We're more familiar with the idea of viral vaccines.
But at the turn of the 20th century, in the early 1900s, bacterial vaccines were the primary tool for dealing with bacterial infections and Mulford invested quite cleverly, recognized that he needed to invest in knowledge in order to create products that would give him a competitive advantage.
So what he did was he hired faculty from medical school, especially the Pennsylvania Medical School and Pharmaceutical College and later on the veterinary school, he hired faculty members to be research consultants to help in the development of bacterial vaccines, keeping them always up to date,
providing complete what he called use kits so that the customer got everything in the package that was necessary to actually use the vaccine with the patient and very cleverly with accompanying literature that carefully provided all the information that was deemed necessary for the user in order to use it and to explain to the patient exactly what was going on.
And Mulford's thrived for several decades, focusing on increasingly competent bacterial vaccines and also some serum antitoxins, which were popular at the time.
In the 1920s, the company sort of lost its edge and sharp and dome, a company that sold so-called ethical drugs that non-biological drugs wanted to get into the biological market, so they bought Mulford's company.
They bought Mulford's company in order to get his network of customers and to get his technology. And so the company became part of sharp and dome. And the CEO of the company, a new CEO of the company, recognized that the initial success of Mulford was because of the focus on research.
And so they invested, sharp and dome invested in the 1930s, a great deal of money in research in the latest technology, which starting in 1935, we've already talked about this in a previous lecture, Gerhard Domach invented Sulfa drugs, Sulfa S-U-L-F-A, not have nothing to do with the compound Sulfur, Sulfa drugs were a response to the observation that certain synthetic dyes.
Kill bacteria.
