These lectures are part of the Great Courses series.
They are produced by The Teaching Company.
These lectures are titled, Science in the 20th Century, a Social Intellectual Survey, Part
3, Lecture 25, Life, Molecular Biology.
We continue in this lecture to trace the threefold chord that I have been talking about of evolution,
genetics and molecular biology that became intertwined in the course of the 20th Century
and have become dominant themes in contemporary life science as we enter the 21st Century.
In this lecture, I want to focus on molecular biology and rather than just provide a laundry
list of accomplishments, I'd like to talk about some of the central ideas of molecular
biology and how they have been influenced by and have had an influence on physics, chemistry
and biology generally.
The term molecular biology was, as far as I can tell, first used by Warren Weaver than
the president of the Rockefeller Foundation and a scientist in his own right who will
come upon in a later lecture as one of the co-authors of the founding document of information
theory in 1948.
Warren Weaver, in a talk, used the expression molecular biology in 1938 which reflects that
already by 1938 he had recognized that an emerging trend among biologists was to focus
on molecular processes of life.
Now we are so used to this, we were raised in this environment that it's necessary to
maybe take a step back and think about what the implications of this are.
The word biology was invented in the early 19th Century only based on the Greek word
bios for life and so biology, the study of life and the implication for the people who
invented the term was to identify a special discipline for studying the special phenomena
associated with life because for them life was special.
That there was something fundamentally different between the inanimate and the animate and
while they were talking here about early 19th Century naturalist scientists, although
the word scientist itself did not exist in 1810 when the word biology was first introduced.
These naturalists were not looking for a religious soul, they were looking for a natural phenomenon
that in a sense was functionally equivalent to at least the physical aspects of what the
soul did, of what living things did.
And so a generic term for this force that was associated distinctively with life was
vitalism, or in French Elan Vital as Henri Berkson put it, that vitalism represented
the view that there was something distinctive about living things, that this vital force
manifested itself for example in the direction of embryological development, that in the
direction of metabolism, cell theory was introduced in the 1840s and 50s, so the physiological
processes, the fact that living things seemed to have intentional functions, that the organs
functioned in specific ways, etc., that these were all guided it was believed by some kind
of vital force, this was not mysterious, this was not religious, this was not mystical
spiritual, this was a physical phenomenon, but it was distinctive of living things.
In this sense biology in the early 1800s was out of step with the rest of physical science,
because the rest of physical science as we have seen repeatedly was materialistic, deterministic,
mechanistic, and so there was a strong push from the side of physical science to interpret
this vital force physically, chemically, mechanistically, and in the course of the 19th
century chemistry and biology became intertwined and increasingly people in biology by the
second half of the 19th century were trained also in chemistry, but they were always looking
at life as a distinctive phenomenon, they were interested in studying the processes
of life and typically this brought them to the level of organisms and organs.
