And Domak followed this observation up, identified the dyes that seemed to have the most potent antibacterial qualities without having any obvious side effects, and he got the Nobel Prize for that.
Although he was not allowed to collect the Nobel Prize because at the time Hitler was upset with the Swedish Nobel Prize Academy because they were giving Nobel Prizes to people that Hitler deemed unworthy of the prize.
So Domak was not allowed to go to Sweden to collect the prize. After the war, he was able to go and collect his prize at a special ceremony. However, the rules of the Academy do not allow giving the cash award.
If you don't get the prize within a certain narrow time limit, you don't pick up your prize. So after the war, when he probably could have used the money, he did not get any money for it, but he did eventually get the prize.
But he did stimulate the creation of a new pharmaceutical industry based on sulfa drugs which were antibacterial. But be careful, I don't want to call them antibiotics because that was five years later that large-scale production of streptomycin and penicillin, which we identify as antibiotics.
Of course, the sulfa drugs are also antibiotic in the sense that antibiotic means anti-life. So they're all antibacterials, but sulfa drugs are not what we ordinarily think of as antibiotics because they are based on chemicals and in particular based on synthetic eye chemistry.
So a sharpened dome focused on sulfa drugs and then by the end of the 1930s on the new field of antibiotics, mass-producing penicillin and streptomycin, and then doing research on blood products, developing a very original technology for freeze-drying blood which preserved it.
And then World War II happened and that was a tremendous boom for the company because the Army needed blood supplies for obviously to treat wounded soldiers and this technology, which subsequently became a consumer food processing technology, instant coffee being an example, right?
Dehydration and freeze-drying. That technology was developed by a sharpened dome during the war and so between the blood research and the antibiotic manufacture and the and sulfa drugs, this was the line of development that sharpened dome followed.
And then after the war, when they had this tremendous body of knowledge about antibiotic production, they were forced so to speak by market pressures and government pressure to move to viral research because of the polio scares after World War II.
Especially in the late 1940s and 1950s, polio epidemics in the United States, polios caused by a virus, made the government push pharmaceutical companies into finding a response to polio.
So they moved into viral research that made them attractive to Merck and Merck was a pharmaceutical company that actually was a supplier of fine chemicals to companies like sharpened dome and Merck decided they needed to integrate and to become more active in the pharmaceuticals because it looked like there was a lot more money to be made in pharmaceuticals than just in being a supplier to the pharmaceuticals company.
So at the time this was described as a merger, but in fact it was a takeover as we see by the fact that the name Merck sharpened dome rather eventually became just just Merck and Merck again invested heavily in research in viral vaccines.
And this was in the mid-1950s initially, became involved in the mass production of polio vaccine, continued to invest further in viral vaccines, moved dramatically and made a big commitment to recombinant DNA technology in the 1970s and 80s and in fact interestingly by the 1990s was now again making bacterial vaccines which made Mulford famous at the beginning of the century.
They had moved from viral vaccines in the 1970s and 80s, now in the 1990s they're making bacterial vaccines again, but these are bacterial vaccines that using recombinant DNA technology piggyback on viruses to deliver them.
