And this was perceived as a serious intellectual problem by the end of the 19th century, in part because the growing social influence and power of physical science
made people who were studying social science want to be included in the category science.
And in Germany in particular, the term Wissenschaft, which doesn't mean exactly knowledge, what it means is something like systematic scholarly knowledge.
A systematic methodology for acquiring knowledge was used to define two branches, not two of Wissenschaft, natural systematic knowledge,
namely science, but meaning science, so to speak, of the hard kind, and Geisteswissenschaft, the human sciences.
And the question that came up over and over again, the issue that this raised was, how can the human sciences, how can Geisteswissenschaft be on an intellectual par with not two of Wissenschaft?
We are going to see this come up again and again as we look at the social sciences.
It continues to be an issue for social sciences that they must have a clear methodology that will allow them to say, this is why we are a science as opposed to a collection of anecdotal materials.
What is it that makes a science?
We begin with anthropology because, conceptually at least, that seems to be the first of the human sciences.
The question that anthropologists deal with, all orient around what it means to be human.
What does it mean to be human?
How can we study this question scientifically?
How does being human manifest itself in the world?
So at one level, well, we have a kind of an empirical methodology in which you simply collect, you go around the world collecting information about the way people live.
What's on the face of it would not seem to be a science.
It may be interesting, it may be valuable information, but it does not have explanatory power and we associate science with explanatory power because we are, for whatever reason, intellectually and psychologically overwhelmed by the successes of the physical and life sciences.
So we ask sciences to provide us with explanatory power, not just lots of information.
This goes back to an old issue in the sciences having to do with natural history methodology.
Natural history refers to just collecting specimens.
So if you collect a specimen of every butterfly type in the world, you'd have a heck of a lot of specimens, but you would not necessarily understand anything about butterflies, but you would have one of each of them.
So that is one approach to studying nature, collecting specimens from a causal explanatory methodology, looks at those butterflies and tries to understand why butterflies are the way they are.
So for example, I've referred to this before, developmental sequencing and the evolutionary interpretation of developmental sequencing of fossils is a way of, so to speak, converting a collection methodology into an explanatory methodology.
And that's what we begin to see with anthropology.
Anthropology early in its history and it was born, so to speak, in the 19th century, especially in the last third of the 19th century when Europeans started traveling around the world collecting information about primitive cultures.
Culture became the focus of anthropology.
Ah, now we know anthropology is the science of culture.
Anthropology's object as a science is to study culture.
Now we have to ask, what is the methodology by which we're going to study the culture and what is a culture anyway?
Is a culture a thing? Does it have a status in the world of a thing? Is it real that it can exercise forces or is it a name like species or style?
We recognize Renaissance style painting and distinguish it from Baroque style painting, but style is not a thing.
Style doesn't force anyone to do anything.
It's very difficult to define style precisely and yet we can use the term as a discriminator quite easily.
So what is culture? Do cultures develop lawfully?
Are cultures, is there some force at work within cultures that causes them to develop over time in one way rather than another way?
These would be the kinds of questions that now make up the intellectual content of anthropology
and in the course of the 20th century we'll see I think a fascinating evolution of the science called anthropology.
