In the 1980s, beginning in the 1970s, a number of very prominent anthropologists defected
from the white-steward materialistic interpretation of culture, and two of the most famous of
these are Clifford Geertz and Marshall Solans.
Both of them had previously been hard anthropologists, and they decided that this materialistic deterministic
approach to culture, with its emphasis on the role that technological systems play in
a culture, in driving a culture's unfolding, they felt that that missed fundamental features
of culture.
And this should remind us a little bit of what I said about the way that molecular biology
seems to miss something important about life.
For Solans and Geertz, cultures are symbol-producing systems.
That the key to a culture is the meaning of the symbols to the people in that culture.
And you can't get that from just looking at material artifacts.
That in order to understand a culture, you have to understand what the artifacts mean
to the people who are members of that culture.
And that can't be read from things, it can only be obtained from the people, directly
or indirectly.
So Geertz and Solans in the 1970s, and especially in the 1980s, generated a more humanistic
anthropology focusing on cultures as symbol-producing systems.
In the 80s and 90s, there was a reaction to this, saying that, look, we've got to get
back to, this is more like the Boas soft stuff, we really need to get back to hard anthropology.
And in the 1990s especially, there was a kind of updated version of the White and Steward
approach to anthropology that now used materials from cognitive science and this ecological
anthropology approach to once again try to apply hard science concepts and methodologies
to understanding culture.
It boils down to an updated version of materialistic determinism again.
And this became a serious enough issue that in 2002, on the 100th anniversary of the American
Anthropological Association meeting, which was supposed to be a happy celebration, 100
years of the American Anthropological Association, a group walked out and founded a rival group,
the Society for Scientific Anthropology, as a way of protesting that at the age of 100,
the American Anthropological Association had been essentially co-opted by, had been co-opted
by humanists and we are the scientific, we are the scientific anthropologists.
Let's take a very brief look at the material side of anthropology because we see as an
issue here, should we, if we're studying culture, should we be studying material remains, should
we be studying the networks of personal and social relationships like kinship relationships
within the culture, should we be studying the technologies, well, archaeology is that
science which looks at the material side of anthropology.
And we will see something now very similar happening in the evolution of archaeology
between 1900 and 2000.
Archaeology too is a science that was, that began in the 19th century in the sense that
systematic collecting of ruins and artifacts began in the second half especially of the
19th century and by the 1900 it had become scientific in the sense that there was a group
of people who now were inventing methods for collecting artifacts in ways that would allow
us to date them and compare them objectively as opposed to simply digging around and finding
an old Greek jar here and a broken Chinese horse here.
Now we have some sort of scientific approach to collecting materials.
So archaeology begins in a way that we just described as a kind of a natural history approach,
collecting stuff, collecting data.
Of course we're trying our best to do it systematically so we know which stuff is older than which
stuff.
If you have a gigantic hole in the ground then unless you're very careful you won't
know which materials are on top of which other materials and you won't be able to say well
this is older than that.
So you have to be, you have to have an objective approach, you have to have a method for unearthing
the past and given the prejudices of the time, we were talking about European archaeologists
after all.
The focus was on classical and biblical archaeology and on either art or texts.
And this sort of natural history approach to archaeology dominated the period from roughly
speaking 1900 through the 1940s.
After World War II, archaeology also decided that we need to be more explanatory and we
need to be more scientific.
