Chomsky is a major, a major influence, like Keynes in economics, like Einstein in physics,
like Boas in anthropology, sociology, and linguistics, a major influence.
And in addition to that, one must point out that his quite left-wing politics and his
devotion to his critique of American foreign policy, since the 1960s especially, has the
two, his linguistics and his politics together, have made him what some people have calculated
to be the single most cited intellectual in America and quite possibly the world.
So Chomsky's theories are still, still loom over all of linguistics, but in the, but
not surprisingly perhaps in the 1980s and 1990s, there were, there began to emerge a
kind of resistance to Chomsky, a critique of Chomsky, very daring thing to do because
one characteristic of Chomsky, unlike almost all of the other people that, that I've mentioned
is that Chomsky will go anywhere to debate anybody who disagrees with him, unlike his
teachers, Elec Harris, who simply shrugged his shoulders at people who, who argued that,
that he was wrong, Harris was, was a genius in his own right and a very influential linguist.
But Chomsky's attitude is that if there's a major figure around, he'll, who disag, who
says he's wrong, he'll go there and debate him, and he is a brilliant, a brilliant speaker
and a brilliant debater.
So Chomsky's work looms over linguistics still at the beginning of the 21st century,
but there are clearly, there are clearly now emerging post-Chomskyan linguistic schools.
Not surprisingly, one of these is let's get semantics back in the game.
We've had enough of syntactics.
In fact, meaning is what linguists need to explain, how people understand the languages
that they use, while Disso-sur made a distinction between what he called parole and lang, parole
is the noises we make, and long is the underlying abstract linguistic structure.
Chomsky made a distinction between competence, the neurological, hardwired capability, and,
and performance, the noises that we make.
But when you come right down to it, we don't want to explain long and competence.
We want to explain how people communicate using language.
How is it that we learn, how is it that we know what we mean when we talk to one another?
And from that perspective, we need to understand semantics.
So semantics is back.
A second thing that has come back, second theme that has come back, is the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis.
You remember the Sapir-Whorf hypothesis, based on Boaz's approach to linguistics, was that
each language encapsulated a way of experiencing the world.
Now a more sophisticated version of this is being defended by George Lakoff, among others,
namely that languages do reflect the way we experience the world, and looking at our language
as an expression of bodily awareness.
Looking at how language has an overwhelmingly metaphorical character, not just obvious metaphors,
but that many of the central words in every language that we don't think of as metaphors
are, in fact, metaphors, and that they derive from our biological experience, from our bodies,
from the way that our senses are organized.
And Lakoff, together with a number of collaborators, published many studies, and other people have
done this as well, that are bringing the study of linguistics into biology, cognitive psychology,
and even genetics, that is, say, looking for the genetic basis of language, which would
be very consistent with Chomsky too, and studying language using the tools of cognitive psychology,
as well as biology.
And a third line of research that has emerged after Chomsky has been to what's called relational
grammars.
That is, today, the study of languages that sort of does justice to, that treats equally
the form and the content, the substance, the rules of the language without preferential,
without setting some aside.
So instead of saying it's either semantics or syntax to look at a language holistically,
so to speak, and that has become one line of linguistics research trying to sort of
go beyond what Chomsky taught us with regard to language.
So if we look back at linguistics in the 20th century, starting from De Sorsur, language
as a social phenomenon, as a closed network of relationships, focus on semantics, we've
come quite a long way from the behavioral view that it was essentially a psychological
phenomenon to Chomsky's view that it's a neurological phenomenon, and now at the end of the 20th
century, trying to regroup and return to a richer conception of language as a social
phenomenon.
