That the meaning of the word cat is strictly a function of the relationship between the sound cat and all of the other sounds that you can make in the English language.
And that's what we learn as we acquire a language. We learn the rules, so to speak, for those relationships.
We get a feeling for that network of relationships, and then we make the appropriate sounds in order to achieve the objectives that we have when we speak.
So for disasseur, a language is a network of relationships. It is a closed network of relationships in the sense that no word has a meaning because of anything outside language.
Now it is of course a fact that people use languages to refer to what is beyond language, but that is irrelevant to understanding why a sound in a language has the meaning that it does.
For that you have to understand the network of relationships that that sound has to all the other sounds in the language.
This should sound similar to us to the very bizarre notion in the general theory of relativity that the mass of an object is in a certain sense a function of the total distribution of mass in the universe,
which we saw back in the second lecture when we talked about the general theory of relativity. Einstein made mass not an absolute thing, but a name for a certain kind of a relationship.
And so the mass of an object is directly and indirectly a result of the way that object fits into the total system of objects in the universe.
Analogously, disasseur is saying, although he did not get it from, he said this before the general theory was published, but that's what's revealing about this.
This is an idea, so to speak, in the air, that the meanings and values of the language are a function of internal relationships.
That's what it means to say that a language is a closed system of relationships, a closed network of relationships.
I'm using system and network almost synonymously here.
For disasseur, a language was a social fact, and here we see something that we're going to come upon when we talk in a later lecture about sociology,
an echo of the ideas of Emil Dorkheim, the great French founder of modern sociology, and Dorkheim considered society to be a reality,
not as a thing, of course, but a reality in the sense that social relationships could exert forces on us,
that we behave in the way that we do in a society because we are not physically forced to do one thing rather than another,
but we behave in that way because society, we have internalized relationships that cause us to behave one way rather than another,
to dress one way in one context and one way in another context, and we do that because we have internalized social forces, so to speak.
Analogously, disasseur thought that language was a social fact that caused us to behave in the way that we do linguistically,
so it had a social reality that we acquired, that we internalized as infants and as children through which we recognized the appropriate relationships
among sounds so that we speak English, we speak Swahili, we speak Hindi, whatever language represents the social fact that we have internalized.
For disasseur, the focus of linguistics, therefore, was on semantics, on the meanings of words as opposed to syntax, grammatical rules.
Of course, syntax is important, the grammatical rules are important, but what disasseur thought that linguists needed to explain primarily was semantics,
and for him, semantics was, as I've said before, a function of the closed network of relationships that were associated with the language.
This is also very similar to the contemporary ideas of David Hilbert about mathematics, you remember, as a closed system.
Remember Hilbert's formalist interpretation of mathematics, that mathematics was a closed system of logical relationships.
So again, we have in the early 1900s, the first decade or decade and a half of the 20th century, we have in a number of fields the idea emerging that truth, that mass,
that language is a closed network of relationships and we don't need to specify things or absolute entities in order to explain truth, mass, linguistic meaning.
Those can derive from networks of relationships.
So disasseur's ideas were broadcast and became quite influential.
