We see collection as an important motif
in 19th century study of nature and culture generally,
collecting lots of languages
and studying them in their historical development.
Not surprisingly, in the second half of the 19th century,
there was an evolutionary interpretation
of this historical development.
After Darwin, it made a lot of sense to see languages
as evolving over time, and it was also the case
that 19th century linguists were interested,
saw languages as systems that a language
had a coherent structure.
And an analogy here was drawn with the work of Georges Cuvier,
a French biologist of the turn of the 19th century,
who was responsible for the first reconstruction
of extinct animals from bones that were found,
that were being dug up.
For example, saber-toothed tigers and later dinosaurs,
how from a non-representative selection of bones
can you reconstruct the original animal?
And Cuvier developed a formula that assumed
that all the different parts of the skeleton
are coordinated with one another,
that if you have a hip bone of a certain size,
that it implies a thigh bone of a certain size,
that it implies, et cetera,
so that there's a certain systemic character to a skeleton.
And so 19th century linguists were historically oriented.
They tended to look at the history
as an evolutionary development,
and that languages had a systemic character.
As a young man, Dessauceur made his mark in linguistics
by predicting the existence of a vowel
in an extinct language that had never been found
in written records that survived,
that reflected that language.
And subsequently, he was proven correct.
He predicted that given the structure of this language,
there must be such a vowel,
even though we've never seen it
in the fragmentary records that have survived,
and that vowel was subsequently discovered.
This is an example of what it means
to take a language as a system, right?
If it's a system and there's a missing piece,
you should be able to say,
well, something has to fit in this.
It's like a jigsaw puzzle with one piece missing.
You can identify what that piece has to be like
from the space that is left empty.
In 1906, Dessauceur was asked to teach
a general course in linguistics,
or course in general linguistics,
rather than the specific languages
that he was interested in doing research in.
And over a period of five years,
he taught this course three times.
Then, unfortunately, he became ill and died.
But in 1916, two of his students collected the notes
from other students who had sat through those lectures
and published a small seminal book
called The Course in General Linguistics
by Ferdinand Dessauceur.
He did not, in fact, write that book.
It was put together by his students.
And this is the book that really, in some sense,
can be said to begin the modern linguistics,
but it is also very important to us
because what Dessauceur announced,
quite surprisingly, I think, to his students at the time,
because there was not much of a hint of this
in his earlier work,
was a theory of language as a closed system of relationships.
Dessauceur argued that the focus of linguistics
should not be on historical development.
It should be, which is called diachronics in languages.
The study of languages over time,
but synchronics, take a language as it is
and try to understand its structure.
And in particular, where do meanings come from?
Where does the meaning of the word cat come from?
Classically, it was thought in some intuitive way
that the meaning of cat has something to do
with a feline out there
that you could point to ostensibly and say cat.
Now, what Dessauceur argued,
and initially this may sound strange,
but in fact, it makes quite a good deal of sense
once you've thought about it some more,
is that all linguistic meanings
and all linguistic values,
which is associated with the way that we understand
and interpret the sounds that we hear in a language,
all linguistic meanings and values
derive from relationships among
the sounds and signs of a language.
They have nothing whatsoever to do
with what language refers to.
