So, there is a difference there between Marx's conception of the evolution of society, because
it has an ultimate equilibrium state in which everybody will live without conflict and that
will be an equal, that's heaven, if one can use that term in connection with communism.
Whereas from a Darwinian perspective, of course, there is no goal for evolution because it
is only a quasi-deterministic process and it has no specific goals.
It has a fortuitous dimension.
It's interesting that Marx was so impressed with Darwin's origin of species that he wanted
to dedicate Capital, which he was working on at the time, to Darwin.
But Darwin had enough trouble without being the dedicati of Capital and so happily that
was not part of his fate.
But Marx saw what he was, his theory of society, as consistent with Darwinian evolution, except
of course for this very major difference.
John Stuart Mill, a very, very important British intellectual, was an inductivist and an empiricist
as a philosopher and as a theoretician of science.
His theory of society claimed, appropriately, that we should be looking, empirically, we
should be looking for the principles that underlie the relationships that actually exist
in a society.
So that a science of society would take the form of identifying the relationships in an
actual society and then looking for the principles of association that underlie those relationships.
And then that's what the task of a sociologist should be.
In his time, extremely influential British intellectual, who has subsequently more or
less disappeared, was Herbert Spencer, who, following Darwin's publication of the Origin
of Species, adopted with a vengeance the evolutionary concept and published a massive and massively
detailed, but really not scientific by our perspective, evolutionary theory of the universe
and especially of society, which was materialistic and deterministic, but clearly had an evolutionary
character.
And these are the primary social theorists that precede Emil Durkheim, who, in the last
decades of the 19th century and the first decades of the 20th century, was the major
theoretician of society in Western Europe.
Durkheim's view, which we have already encountered in De Sassure, was that society was a reality
in the sense of being a network of relationships that cause the members of that society to
behave in specific ways.
So there is a society, is a web of relationships, or a network of relationships, and a primary
objective of every society, that every society has, among its characteristics, communicating
to its members a sense of solidarity, a term that he used quite a good deal.
And he used this model to investigate various forms of social behavior, from religious behavior
to political behavior, and Durkheim was in this sense a major intellectual innovator.
At the turn of the century, giving us a model of society, which was focused on, which was
focused on relationships, as opposed to, and this is difficult for us to feel as seriously
as it was felt at the time, as opposed to taking seriously the reality of society as
an entity out there, somehow, a platonic entity that existed independently of its manifestations.
So in political science, when we talk about political science next, the analogous term
would be the state.
It is difficult, especially for Americans, who think of government as the state, to realize
how Europeans in the 19th century thought of the state as a reality quite apart from
the government, that the state was almost a mystical entity that was, in fact, the source
of power and authority.
Analogously, society was looked on in the 19th century, also in this kind of platonic
way, as having an existence, an abstract real existence independently of its concrete manifestations.
Durkheim pulled the concept of society down to earth, so to speak.
