Lecture 29, Humanity, Culture, Linguistics
One challenge confronting the social sciences from the perspective of their scientific character
as we've discussed in previous lectures is that the subject matter that they attempt
to explain incorporates value judgments and that's a challenge because if you're trying
to do more than describe phenomena, if you're actually trying to explain phenomena, then
how do you explain why people make the value judgments that they do?
That seems to be beyond the purview of science as it had been conceived from the 17th through
the 19th century.
Science was descriptive and explanatory with regard to matter and energy, but when it came
to trying to explain value judgments, that seemed to get into all these questions of
free will and determinism and motives, etc.
And so that becomes one problem that the social sciences have to deal with, namely that their
subject matter incorporates value judgments.
A second challenge that the social sciences have to deal with is methodological objectivity
in the sense that when you are studying material that incorporates value judgments, then is
it really possible to take a neutral methodological stance and merely collect data and attempt
to explain it?
For example, if you are studying a totalitarian state from the perspective of a political
scientist or an anthropologist or a sociologist, can you simply explain why torture is being
used without taking a position that this is wrong?
So that there's a methodological challenge that to somehow run along a very narrow line
between being scientific and neutral about the material that you're studying and having
an agenda with regard to that material, having a kind of a reform agenda with regard to that
material.
Now, of course, from the perspective of the postmodernist that we discussed in a previous
lecture, physical science also has an agenda and it is also an interpretation of nature,
not a uniquely correct description and explanation of natural phenomena, but of course the physical
scientist can test this.
So anthropologists, political scientists, sociologists, historians, economists all have
these two challenges to contend with because in all of those cases their subject matter
is valuational and they also have a strong, there is a strong tendency to have an agenda
with regard to the material, to have an attitude, to personally have value judgments about the
subject matter that you're studying.
This seems not to be a problem that non-clinical psychologists have to cope with, that it's
a psychological theorist can describe human behavior without necessarily taking a judgmental
position with regard to that behavior, although we'll talk more about that in a subsequent
lecture, but archaeologists and linguists would seem to be free of this problem.
The archaeologists, because they are studying the way people have lived, do not have to
take a judgmental or are not tempted to take a judgmental position with regard to it in
so far as interpreting their work and linguists typically do not have judgmental attitudes
towards the languages that they study.
And in this lecture we're going to be talking about linguistics.
Modern linguistics can be said, I think, in a significant way to begin with the work
of Ferdinand de Saussure in the first decade of the 20th century.
De Saussure not only influenced many subsequent intellectuals and not just linguists, but
he also changed the direction of linguistics.
18th century linguistics was interested in the origin of language.
19th century linguistics was interested in the historical development of language, and
it was really in the 19th century that we see the origin of a science devoted to collecting
lots of languages.
