Durkheim made it concrete in the sense of saying a society is a network of relationships.
And we studied that network of relationships to understand how it communicates solidarity
to its members so that we all feel that we are part of this society, of a society, this
society, and then also how it shapes our behavior, often in quite subtle ways.
A good illustration that I once saw in a book was that the overwhelming majority of
males in our society automatically put on pants, trousers, slacks, shorts, and that
if you had to go give a lecture as an academic, and somehow you discovered that you did not
have any pants to wear, but your wife or significant other had left a dress in the
closet that would fit you, the overwhelming majority of men would rather skip the lecture
than show up wearing that dress.
Why?
Because this is not a choice that they have made.
This is a reflection of social influence, I don't want to use the term conditioning
as too strong, but has different connotations.
So Durkheim created this theory of society based on a network of relationships that can
exercise forces in quite subtle ways.
Notice this is exactly what the Sorcerer said about language.
Language is a social reality in exactly the same sense.
He forces us to make the sounds that we make.
As a child, you hear, you're told, you say, ball, mama, dada, and we not only respond
to making those noises, but by making lots of other noises, as Chomsky points out, that
we recognize will work and will accomplish our ends in that particular society.
But of course, if we're transplanted to Hungary in an area where nobody speaks any English,
we're in deep trouble.
Natural responses to speak louder, but that won't get you very far.
The first great 20th century, clearly 20th century sociologist was the Italian sociologist
Vilfredo Pareto, a wildly underappreciated figure in sociology and economics today, but
in the first half of the 20th century, extremely influential, and that influence has carried
forth forward after the World War II and under different names, especially new welfare
state economics and a number of other ways in which Pareto was prescient.
Pareto's theory of society was that contrary to Durkheim, that there was no reality to
the words.
The word society was just a name for an aggregate of individuals.
Furthermore, Pareto was quite radical in arguing that human beings were not rational, that human
beings behaved willfully and emotionally, but they were not rational.
They behaved in ways that were, we would say, John Dewey would say, oh, you should have
read my book on pragmatism.
You should read my writings on pragmatism.
Human beings behave in ways that they want to and that work for them, but they are not
classically rational creatures.
So Pareto developed a naturalistic theory of society.
It was naturalistic in that he believed, he used what he called a logical, inductive,
empirical method that was based on induction rather than classical, rationalist modeling
using deduction because he didn't believe that human beings acted rationally.
They didn't act logically in the deductive sense.
However, and this echoes later developments in quantum theory, and we saw this in population
genetics, quite interesting, this convergence of ideas.
He argued that a society, a large population of individuals, the behavior of a large group
of people, even though each one is acting willfully, non-rationally, we can predict
the behavior of the whole population using statistics and probability theory, even though
we can't predict what the individuals are going to be doing.
Now isn't that interesting that he published in the early 1900s, this came out in multiple
volumes in Italian, then translated into English, but at the same time that we were discovering
that radioactive decay is a random process, but every element has its own half-life.
At the same time that we were discovering in quantum mechanics that electrons change
their orbit randomly, however, give me enough electrons and I'll predict exactly how many
will change their orbits in any given time.
And here we have in sociology the idea that a population's behavior is predictable even
though the individual's behavior is not predictable.
Now look at it from another perspective, there's no need for us to assume that human beings
are machines in order for social behavior to be predictable.
The idea that the only way that social behavior is rational is if individual behavior is rational
is incorrect.
