And again, with an implicit social reform agenda.
So in the period roughly speaking, 1910 to 1950, American social science was very strongly focused on empiricism with an agenda, with a values-driven agenda.
Perhaps the most famous single research product of this period was a longitudinal study,
a long-term study, a 15-year study of the community of Muncie, Indiana by the Lins, Robert and Helen Lind.
They disguised the town by calling it Middletown, but everybody in America who read it knew what it was.
And between 1924, when there was tremendous optimism, and then by 1937, the last piece of the work that they published,
tremendous despair that the American dream had evaporated, that there was no, it seemed to be no hope,
the depression did not seem to be lifting.
Nobody knew that World War II was going to rescue America from the depression.
That very, very important social research product called Middletown, and still in print, and still valuable to read.
After World War II, the American sociology initially in the 1950s shifted to a functionalist perspective,
and the primary spokesman for this perspective was Tolka Parsons.
Again, as with linguistics, the functionalist approach is that what we're interested in in studying a society,
is to identify the relationships, the elements of the society, the functions that they perform in the society,
and the relationships among those elements.
So the functional elements and the relationships.
It's just like structuralism, it's just like functionalism in linguistics.
And just as functionalism in linguistics, remember the last lecture,
the Prague School of Functionalist and Linguistics, morphed into structuralism,
trying to find the underlying rules for those, for the relationships among the functional elements of the language.
So in sociology, structuralism in the 1960s and 70s, when that structuralist wave hit that I spoke about when we talked about anthropology,
Claude Levy's Strauss's influence in the 1960s and 70s, when that structuralist wave hit, in sociology,
it struck a resonant chord because they were already committed to functionalism.
So in the 1960s and 70s, sociology became organized around a structuralist motif,
looking for the underlying structural rules in every society that manifest themselves as the relationships among the functional elements of a society.
In the 1970s and 1980s, sociologists perhaps more than any other sociologists and political scientists,
perhaps more than any other group of scientists, embraced postmodernism.
Obviously, not everybody, but it seemed at the time, as though everybody had fallen into postmodernism,
that is to say had fallen into this critique of the modernist notion of rationality, of reason, of progress,
and so the anti-establishmentarianism of the 1960s and 70s was reflected in an intensive embrace of the sociology of knowledge position
that Mannheim had initially laid out pretty gentilely because what made it radical in the 70s and 80s was to include science and technology,
to include science and technology as part of the sociology of knowledge and that they too were ideologies,
that they were not purely neutral descriptions of reality, that technologies were not sort of neutral inventions
and then it's up to us what we do with them, but that they come already bearing values,
that they come already bearing value judgments, conceptual in the case of science and practical in the case of technology.
It may well be the case that guns don't kill, people kill, but guns are designed to kill.
And that's an important feature of being a gun as opposed to being a banana.
You can't kill people with bananas too, it's just more awkward.
Finally, after the 1980s, finally for us, in closing, at the end of the 20th century,
there was a kind of fragmentation of sociology analogous to the fragmentation that we saw in anthropology,
that is to say there were humanist branches that stuck with the post-modernist critique,
there were those who wanted to get back to a more scientific approach, a harder approach to social science,
using the tools of cognitive science, applying them to social studies,
and so there has been a kind of methodological fragmentation, naturalistic approaches, humanistic approaches.
At the moment there is a diversity of methodologies, as we enter the 21st century,
a diversity of methodologies characteristic of sociology,
clearly a shift away from the radical post-modernism of the 1970s and early 1980s,
but sociology is in a transition state today.
