That is to say, it matches means to ends that we are constantly looking for, we are looking
for effective behaviors in constantly changing environments.
What we need to understand in order to understand society is that the members of a society behave
in ways that represent what to them reflect effective responses to constantly changing
environments.
We have to understand the logic of that process, of how people recognize what constitutes a
goal for them and what constitutes an appropriate means to that goal and how they assess the
effectiveness and constantly balance their means and ends.
So pragmatism is in that sense instrumental.
Pragmatism is also deeply committed to contingency, we saw that term in the case of evolution,
to contingency, to chance, so it's not classically rational and deductive.
It assumes that not only human behavior but that the world as a matter of fact, as far
as we can talk about the world, has a contingent character.
Pragmatism is optimistic.
It is deeply committed to the idea of progress that by being good instrumentalists we can
get more effective behaviors that we can come closer to what we consider positive outcomes
of our behavior and so we can make ourselves better, we can make our environments better.
Europeans at the time and later made quite a lot of fun of this naive American commitment
to the idea of optimism and maybe more important than anything else, philosophically speaking
pragmatism is committed to process rather than thing that it puts the emphasis on processes
and therefore rejects dichotomous thinking either or thinking and we'll come back to
that in subsequent lectures but it is a major theme in 20th century thinking to get away
from classical atomism to process relationship and because of relationships the structure
of relationships and that's why we keep hearing the term structuralism, functionalism and
relationships and networks.
Before hitting post-World War II sociology, I need to bring in two other themes.
Before World War II in Germany and the United States, so in Germany an intellectual sociological
school that eventually had to migrate to the United States because of the Nazis in the
1930s called the Frankfurt School of Sociologists made a very sharp critique of capitalist society
and along sort of intellectual Marxist lines although they had no political agenda of their
own and had no suggestions as to how to make things better but in particular one member
of the school Carl Mannheim was influential for formulating a sociology of knowledge
that is to say Mannheim argued that knowledge is a social construct that what we call knowledge.
Now he accepted science and mathematics as not vulnerable to this but all other forms
of knowledge he claimed were in fact not neutral and objective but what he called ideological
they reflected value judgments and prejudices and commitments that derived from the social
and cultural environment so that he thought that science was outside the framework of
this.
Now what happened between the 1930s when Mannheim formulated sociology of knowledge and the
1960s when Thomas Kuhn triggered the rise of post-modernism was the argument that science
is also vulnerable to this that scientific knowledge is also a social construct and that's
of course what precipitated the science wars of the 80s and 90s.
Meanwhile American sociology beyond Dewey became deeply committed to what I pointed
to earlier in the last lecture to a social reform agenda while doing social science
especially the University of Chicago School of Urban Studies that studied social phenomena
scientifically but with a clear implicit social agenda studying poverty in American cities,
studying suicide, studying the black ghetto, studying the communities of immigrant workers,
an analogous series called the Yankee City series of social studies studied mostly northern
but not exclusively northern cities and especially the assimilation of immigrant populations
but it also included the assimilation of let's say Scottish immigrants into the Appalachians
so it was not exclusively northern the whole series of publications each one sharply focused
on a specific community.
