Now, at the end of the 20th century, Daniel Kahneman will win the Nobel Prize in Economics
for 30 years of research, arguing that human beings are not rational decision makers.
This is an echo of Pareto's early 20th century argument that in social relationships and
in economics, human beings are not rational creatures.
Now, what makes this so extraordinary is that overwhelmingly 20th century economic
theory was dominated by the assumption that human beings behave rationally.
All economic models assumed that human beings know what's in their best interest and they
pursue what's in their best interest, and that's what makes them rational.
Economic models based on that, if human beings are not rational, are clearly flawed, but
we'll take that up in a subsequent lecture on economics.
Contemporary with Wilfredo Pareto, an early 20th century sociologist of enormous influence
was Max Weber.
Max Weber, the German sociologist whose most famous book is called The Protestant Ethic
and Capitalism, the related capitalism to the rise of Protestantism, and for Weber was
a humanistic sociologist, that is to say contrary to Pareto who had a naturalistic
theory of society, Weber believed that societies were the product of human beings and that
human beings were the only source of meaning and value.
For Durkheim, society is a source of meaning and value that human beings internalize.
Weber's view, human beings are the source of meanings and value and they sort of project
that onto social institutions.
This should remind you of the discussion that we had in anthropology at the very time that
Weber and Durkheim and Pareto are talking this way, Malinowski and Radcliffe Brown in
cultural anthropology are arguing is a culture the projection of human biological and psychological
needs or as Radcliffe Brown says is a culture, a set of rules that its members have to internalize
and that in a certain sense forced them to become orthodox in that particular cultural
environment.
So this is an echo of that.
A humanistic sociology focused on individual human beings as the source of all meanings
and values.
Like Pareto however, Weber believed that human beings acted either emotionally or out of
a sense of tradition but not rationally.
That human beings acted and what he meant by tradition was also very close to what do
we meant, what the American pragmatists meant by habit that is to say they acted in ways
that worked, that have worked in the past.
So they tend to project, we tend to behave in ways that we know in a given situation we
will act in ways that in the past have worked for us.
And so again we have a model early in the 20th century that social behavior can be an
aggregate of individuals who behave on the basis of emotion and tradition rather than
rational responses to the situation in which they find themselves.
His writings on capitalism were particularly influential because what Weber emphasized
was that capitalism was one form of social organization in which the values of efficiency
and rationality were raised to primacy.
Now notice making rationality a primary value goes against our very nature according to
Weber because according to him we are really emotional and traditional kinds of creatures.
Making rationality, imposing rationality on people as a dominant value and imposing efficiency
as a dominant value represents one type of social organization.
Where does that come from?
It's not sort of speak natural to us and so that's why he related it to the Protestant
ethic and whether he was right or wrong it turned out to be a very important model.
Meanwhile we've got US sociology which typically, and I say typically we've already seen it in
the case of anthropology, we've already seen it in the case of linguistics and we're going
to see it again in the case of psychology and economics that American sociology was
in this period the first half of the 20th century deeply committed to empiricism, to
field work and the figures, important figures in this school include John Dewey and the
American pragmatist movement.
The pragmatism is not only a philosophy, it is a theory of society and in particular
it's a theory of society that says that human behavior is instrumental.
