and that power flows out from the center.
Authority is legitimated from the center.
And of course, classically, the state
is more than just power and authority.
It also embodies in some sense
the ideals of the society,
the purposes of the society flow from the state.
So when we look at political science
in America and Great Britain
at the beginning of the 20th century,
there is already an implicit revolutionary transformation
of feeling as well as thinking
when we see quite casually the substitution of government,
elected government for the state.
Because for us, the government is a kind of negotiated deal
among various special interests.
And we do not invest the government
with the source of authority and meaning and value
that the state had.
We do not see the government as the source
of the organic unity of the American people.
And the question is whether there is such a thing
as the organic unity of the American people,
of whether in a pluralistic democracy,
is there such a thing as any other unity
than a pragmatic unity, a functional unity?
But even given that, political scientists want to know
how do you get that?
How can you get a functional unity
out of such a pluralistic system?
So organic unity is not a concern of ours.
It's not a goal.
What we've got is a kind of a negotiated commonality
that evolves over time because circumstances change.
And so what makes us common,
what gives us our commonality as Americans,
changes over time,
not just with the makeup of the population,
but also with the circumstances in which we find ourselves.
Are the times good?
Are the times bad?
Is it peace time?
Is it wartime?
Are there threats?
Is the color code orange?
Is the color code red?
Is the color code green?
Then we change our attitudes towards the relationships
among ourselves.
And so it has an instrumental dimension.
Remember, we talked about that.
This is the pragmatist view that behavior
is always keyed to looking for effective responses
in constantly changing environments.
So political science in this kind of environment
is very different from the political science
in an environment dominated by a conception
that the state is the source of power and authority.
We agree to making the government a legitimation
for power and authority.
But we do not automatically assume
that all power and authority flows from the government.
So we have a pluralistic society.
And to a certain extent, this applies to Great Britain
as well.
We have a radically, aggressively pluralistic society
in which we legitimate special interests forming
and pursuing their interests.
And then these special interests are in effect competing
with one another.
And yet, instead of fragmenting the country somehow,
even under such stresses as the Great Depression of the 1930s
and World War II and the Vietnam War conflict
and the anti-establishmentarianism of the 1960s,
the commonality has survived.
And this is, in a certain sense, a great puzzle
and problem for political science.
How can functional unity emerge from this kind
of deliberate fragmentation from party politics,
from the aggressive pursuit of special interests?
Can a pluralistic democracy like that be viable?
This from 1900, especially from 1910 to 19 World War II,
the framework that dominates political scientific thinking
in the United States.
And a particularly interesting character to focus on
is a mancusen, a fellow born in Manchester in England,
Harold Lasky, who came to the United States as a young man,
became a faculty member at Harvard University in the 19
teens, and became one of the great champions
of American pluralism.
He worked out a political theory which
was from the beginning based on a society that
was pluralistic, aggressively promoting special interests that
had to negotiate coexistence, for example,
in the way that we take for granted here in the United
States.
