Lecture 32 Humanity, Society, Economics
Perhaps the single greatest accomplishment of economists in the course of the 20th century
was to create a new reality. In 2000, we all take it for granted that there is such a thing as the economy,
which in fact, if we think back to the last lecture, now becomes something like what the state was in 19th century Europe.
We achieve a reality to the economy as if it were a thing and that the thing had to be fed.
The thing had to be groomed. The thing needs to be pampered. The thing needs to be adjusted.
It may need surgery. It may need therapy of one kind or another.
But we talk about the economy as a reality and this was not the case in 1900.
Historically, the term economy in modern English, say from the 17th century on,
economy was used to refer to a well-ordered whole, no specifically commercial implication.
So for example, we talk about home ec, at least when I was in high school, home economy.
A well-run home, we talked about the economy of the home.
So the term economy through the 19th century referred broadly speaking to any well-ordered whole.
And in the 20th century, economics becomes a name for trying to understand how the commercial structure of a society can be a well-ordered whole.
So economics is about the integrity or the unity of the sum total of commercial relationships in a society.
And like sociology, 20th century economics is deeply indebted to developments in 19th century economics.
In particular, to what happened in the closing decades of the 19th century, what's called the marginalist revolution.
The discovery independently by at least three people to who we would now call economists, although at the time that was not a name that was applied to them,
of the principle of marginal, of diminishing marginal utility, which is that simplistically put,
but that $100 is worth less to someone whose income is $100,000 than it is to someone whose income is $50,000 than it is to someone whose income is $10,000.
So although it turns out to be the case that when it comes to taxation, millionaires are exquisitely sensitive to any attempt to tax that last $100 higher than the lower,
but nevertheless in economics there is this principle of diminishing marginal utility was discovered by a British thinker named Jevons
by an Austrian thinker, Carl Minger, and by a Swiss thinker named Leon Walras, whose father also happened to be an economist.
And these three people, Jevons in England, Carl Minger in Austria, and Walras in Lausanne, Switzerland, Vienna, Lausanne,
and subsequently London, became major centers in the 20th century of economic thought based on a response to this marginalist revolution.
Now, Jevons, Minger, and Walras were not the inventors of economic theory.
At Adam Smith in 1776, his book The Wealth of Nations is considered a defining moment in the history of economic thought, although before him, for example, the Scottish thinker David Hume,
philosopher David Hume, published very profound works on economic relationships.
But Smith, David Ricardo, and John Stuart Mill were probably the leading economic thinkers in the late 18th, early 19th century,
and they conceptualized the notion of economics as a science, the goal of economics being to discover the conditions of equilibrium in the commercial structure of a society.
Equilibrium being what they consider to be the balanced circulation of goods and income.
