So, Jevons, Manger, and Walrus all were very active in mathematics, and in fact, Jevons
developed a quite innovative theory of probability that was quite influential in the late 19th
and early 20th centuries, and Walrus developed a set of algebraic equations that actually
was able to predict how, from a chaotic start, an economy in which supply and demand were
determined by using this principle of diminishing marginal utility would move towards an equilibrium
state over time in competitive markets.
These algebraic equations were then used to solve, to determine what the conditions
would be in order to achieve this equilibrium state.
So, again, we see that 19th century thinking and early 20th century thinking was sharply
oriented towards equilibrium as the norm, stasis as the norm, as opposed to change being
the norm which is associated with non-equilibrium, and we've talked quite a lot about that.
Now, at the beginning of the 20th century, now we move into the 20th, the beginning of
the 20th century, the most prominent economic theorist in the English-speaking world was
the British economist Alfred Marshall, who was a kind of throwback to Ricardo Smith
and Mill.
That is to say, Marshall chuckled at the marginalist revolution and said, you know, that's wonderful
intellectual stuff, but too mathematical, too deductive.
In fact, economic value judgments are based on objective realities and they do reflect
real costs.
So, in effect, he was trying to undo the marginalist revolution, so to speak, and go back to real
costs, objective values, but look at the way supply-demand relationships using very modest
mathematical techniques, mostly intuitive arguments, qualitative arguments, to look
at supply-demand relationships in actual markets, and this concrete approach dominated British
thinking until the 1930s.
Meanwhile, you had Minger in Vienna and Walras teaching in Lausanne, and they turned out
to influence quite a number of important people.
Minger in Austria had as a student Joseph Schumpeter, who in the 19 teens was totally
apparently disinterested in these broad economic theories, but identified what for him were
the engines of economic growth.
He wasn't interested in stability.
What he was interested in was instability, especially the instability that pointed towards
growth.
What determines growth?
Joseph Schumpeter in the 19 teens identified entrepreneurship and technological innovation
as engines of economic growth, and in a certain sense, this is a little unkind, but in a
certain sense he sort of drops out of sight for the next 50 years, until all of a sudden
the 1960s rediscovered Joseph Schumpeter's as a prophet of entrepreneurship and innovation
as engines of growth, the Silicon Valley phenomenon, and what he called the creative
destruction of technological innovation, how new technologies destroy, but build even more
on what they destroy.
So the automobile destroyed the horse-drawn vehicle industry, but it replaced it with
the automobile industry.
The digital, the cordless phone industry undid the previous types of telephones that
were sort of plugged into the wall and stayed there, and then the cell phone affected the
cordless phone, etc.
So you have constant destruction, which looks wasteful, and Schumpeter was very, wrote a
good deal about what seems to be the wasteful dimension of capitalism, but he gave a positive
spin to it, that this is the means by which economic progress, so Schumpeter was a product
of the Manger School, although he was not interested in the broad economic theory of
that characterized Manger's work.
Walras had as a student the Italian Vilfredo Pareto, who we saw in Sociology as influential,
and Pareto was equally influential, and perhaps even more influential, in economics.
Pareto was Walras with a social conscience, or at least certainly greater social sensitivities,
and so what Pareto did was to take Walras's algebraic techniques and add to them social
concerns.
In fact, instead of just individuals optimizing their economic decisions.
