So that echoes the rise of functionalism in sociology.
And as we saw in the last lecture, when Tolkien Parsons promoted a functionalist methodology in sociology in the 1950s and 60s,
that morphed into a structuralist approach.
So to in political science, in the 1970s and into the 1980s, we have a move towards a functionalist, structuralist view of political institutions
that has as its goal understanding the way they interact constructively, ideally constructively, although of course in any given time,
institutions, depending on who leads them, may be in conflict with one another, so that doesn't let them do their job.
So that's how it's only if you have a system-level consumption, that is to say if you have some idea that ideally institutions are interrelated in the following way,
can you say that some institution is not functioning well? Otherwise, how would you know it?
You can only make these kinds of judgments if you have a system-level view of the network of relationships.
In the 1990s, a school of political science emerged that was called neo-institutionalism.
Now, this was, as we saw already in anthropology, an attempt to apply harder techniques, methodological techniques,
in part borrowed from economics, namely game theory and the theory of rational decision-making, or rational choice theory as it's called,
which is using mathematical techniques, especially applying them to the electoral process, in order to understand the way that political power gets implemented.
And voting registration, neo-institutionalism also has reflected prevailing ideas that the political structures in a society, in fact, never achieve equilibrium.
That it is a mistake to think that the goal of a society is to achieve political equilibrium or stability in the sense that the state was supposed to be a guarantor of stability.
The goal is dynamic equilibrium, or as some political scientists call it, equilibrium plateaus.
That is to say, that short-term equilibrium that is always going to be upset by changes in the environment.
For example, the dot-com implosion of the late 1990s that undermined the prosperity balloon that had blown up in the mid-1990s.
And now, naturally, there have got to be political adjustments to that economic problem.
And so you can't expect that the same equilibrium state that everybody was happy about politically in the late 1990s is going to survive the transition to the 21st century,
given that it just so happens that right around 2000 plus or minus a year, you had this economic collapse.
So neo-institutionalism sees the political system as an open-ended process in which interactive relationships are constantly negotiating themselves into some kind of functional unity.
And this really sounds very much like what Harold Lasky was arguing in the teens and 1920s.
And in fact, it not only sounds like it, that's what Lasky was saying, that the American system is an open-ended dynamic process that has no equilibrium state,
that the political process is a non-equilibrium condition, and that what you look for is, if anything, something like a functional stability that evolves over time.
By the way, in this regard, the United States and to some extent Great Britain and a considerable extent Great Britain are out of step with Europe and even with the rest of the world in terms of our conception of the relationship between the individual member of society and government institutions.
We have much less respect for them than the Europeans have. Whether they admit it or not, we tend to be, we tend not to think first of what the government wants us to do, what the government expects of us.
And that still creates some tension between policies, especially foreign policies in the US and in Europe.
Thank you.
