For this trio, even though they had different conceptions of what would accomplish this equilibrium,
there was a shared notion that economic values were objective and that they were keyed to
real costs, which to them meant the cost of production, the cost of raw material, the
cost of labor, the cost of equipment, that there were real costs that determined prices
and that of course affected supply and that the values associated with the marketplace
were objectively determined.
So the goal was to define the conditions that would give you a stable economy, although
at the time people didn't use the word economy in the way we do, as I said before, that would
give you a stable economy and stability was marked by this balanced circulation of goods
and income based on objective values that underlie economic decisions and real costs
that can be calculated quite objectively.
The Marginalist Revolution was a revolution conceptually because it meant that economic
decisions had a subjective character, why?
When you make an economic decision, you are taking into account this principle of diminishing
marginal utility, depending on how valuable something will be to you is a function of
where that purchase stands or where that sale stands in relation to all your other purchases,
your available income and in the case of the manufacturer until their overhead cost and
so on.
For example, if someone comes along and offers to buy 10,000 widgets from a factory that
manufactures 100,000 widgets a day and from those 100,000 they are already making a certain
profit, they may be quite willing to sell that marginal 10,000 for a much lower price
because they will say, well my overhead costs are already being paid on these, my profit
margin on those 10,000 out there is much higher than my profit, I'm not going to average everything
out and say no, that's how much I need.
So the Marginalists, as they were called, the Marginalists argued that the actual costs
that are associated with economic decisions are opportunity costs.
What are the opportunities that I'm giving up by buying this at this price, by selling
this at this price, so that when you're looking at supply-demand relationships you cannot assume
that everything is as valuable to everybody as it has different values to different people.
So there's a subjective dimension to values and you can't use real costs to calculate
supply-demand relationships, you have to use opportunity costs.
Opportunity costs involve subjective value judgments as well, so at the demand end, at
the supply end, opportunity costs and subjective factors.
Now that complicates the whole attempt to find an equilibrium condition, it now becomes
much more complex, so it's not surprising that Jevons, Walras and Manger all used more
elaborate mathematical models in order to discover what would be the equilibrium condition
in which supply and demand are balanced in competitive markets given the principle of
diminishing marginal utility.
Now utility here is a code word that economists use throughout the 20th century and it really
means benefit.
It's a funny word, there's no reason why it should be called utility, but that's the
term that's used.
The utility is the profit to me of making that purchase at that price, the utility to the
seller is the value to me, the benefit to me.
The assumption is, the assumption that underlies all of this economic theory is that the buyer
and the seller are each out to maximize their self-interest.
That they know what their self-interest is, that's why it's important that markets be
competitive and that people be informed.
So one assumption of the 20th century economics is that buyers and sellers have information
that is relevant to the purchase decision, to the sale decision, of course that's rarely
the case in the real world, but that's the assumption.
So if the buyers and sellers have information about the marketplace, then the more information
they have, the more rational their decision will be because they know what's in their
best interest.
So I can maximize my utility as a purchaser and I can maximize my utility as a seller
to use that language.
When I'm maximizing utility, I'm maximizing my perceived benefit, what is a benefit to
me.
