Lasky was a member of the Harvard faculty until 1919 when there was a traumatic, for
the people at the time, a police strike in Boston.
And as a Harvard faculty member, Lasky publicly sided with the police that they had a right
to strike.
And the president of Harvard University felt that this was not appropriate for a faculty
member to express solidarity with the working class, let alone with the policeman on strike.
And he had to leave Harvard.
So it was not all that painful because he went back to England when he went to Oxford.
But Lasky remained in the 1920s and 1930s a major influence in England championing the
American system and a great influence on some of the most important juridical thinkers of
the United States.
Now that's important because of course it is Supreme Court justices and at the state
and federal level that in effect are the ultimate sanctions of power and authority relationships
in the state.
So for example, three individuals in particular who were throughout their careers deeply influenced
by Lasky's ideas and they in turn were major influences in American political institutions
where Roscoe Pound, who studied at Harvard Law School for a couple of years, never got
his degree, went back to Nebraska, was an amateur botanist, but then he became a faculty
member at Harvard and for about 30 years was dean of the law school and an advisor to the
most politically powerful people in the country.
And Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr., extremely influential political thinker known as the
great dissenter really as he should have been called the great loose cannon, quite a character.
You never knew how he was going to vote on anything.
You could not classify him as either a liberal, a conservative or even an anarchist.
He was really unpredictable.
In each case, he looked for what seemed to him to be the right outcome.
He was not committed to legal principles as determining outcomes.
He was a pragmatist.
And in fact, as a young man, he was part of the circle of Boston intellectuals that created
pragmatism as a as a philosophy.
He was also a great hero of the Civil War.
He was three times wounded and two times nearly killed, both all three times sent back into
combat.
And to the end of his life, he kept he kept in his closet the two of the uniforms that
he was wearing when he was nearly fatally when he suffered near fatal, near fatal wounds.
He was really a kind of a giant of a of a character and very important in in arguing
that law is not based on principle, it's based on a negotiated pragmatic compromise between
social circumstances and legal principles.
You can't evade your responsibility to recognize what people currently value and say that,
well, we can't use that we have legal principles that determine the outcome of a case.
And that's why he seemed to be such a loose cannon and Felix Frankfurter, who was typically
called a liberal on the court, but a very influential legal thinker in his decisions and in his
writing, very good writer and also very influential.
So last key was was a direct influence on these as well as others.
And his his focus was pluralistic democracy works behind the scenes in American society
in the especially in the teens and 1920s.
It is not as well known that there was a core of intellectuals, intellectual elitist who
do not believe that pluralistic democracy could work.
And they believe that behind the scenes, OK, let everybody vote.
But behind the scenes, an intellectual elite needs to advise political leaders and control
public opinion through what can be graciously called white propaganda, you know, like white
lies as opposed to black lies.
White lies are OK because they're not obviously vicious, but they get you what you want.
So a kind of white propaganda, which would take the form of civics curricula for children
and high school students to condition them to sort of, we would say today, perhaps brainwash
them so that they were good citizens and that they accepted the status quo and that they
accepted authority because these people and among them such a brilliant writer and critic
as Walter Lippmann, for example, were deeply suspicious of this pluralistic democracy,
that if you let special interest form and slug it out in the electoral process, that
the country is always going to be fragmented and there will be no unity, the country will
not be able to achieve even a functional unity.
And it's interesting, I think we should be very interested to know that so many intellectuals
between 1900 and 1950 were really anti-democratic.
