In the 1950s and 1960s, political scientists made a shift to behaviorism as a methodology
for studying political institutions and the political process.
So instead of trying to formulate a theory of pluralistic democracy that was stable and
moving from this late 1930s to the early 1950s concern with corporate capitalism, by the
in the second half of the 1950s and through the 1960s, the influence perhaps of behaviorism
in psychology and in linguistics and in sociology affected political science as well.
So political science evolved to a new stage in which the proper task of a political scientist
was to study the way actual political processes worked.
And a very interesting question that political scientists began to ask from a behavioral perspective
quite descriptively is how come the United States and Great Britain weathered the Great
Depression as the same kind of pluralistic democracies that they had been before, whereas
as a matter of fact, as Mark Mazauer has shown in a study of European political institutions
from the end of World War I to the beginning of World War II, that almost all of the countries
that implemented liberal democracies at the end of World War I regressed into conservative
political governments by the time of World War II, Mussolini in Italy in 1922, Hitler
in Germany in 1933, and Franco in Spain in approximately 1937, 1938, depending on when
you want to say that he was actually in control of the Spanish Civil War ended, are just examples.
But in fact, it was true that conservative governments were put into power in almost
all of the countries that after World War I had implemented liberal democracies.
Examples of economic collapses after World War I or everybody's suffering in the 1930s
through the global Great Depression, but the United States and Great Britain for all
of the suffering did not change their political institutions.
And that one could argue that liberal democracy in fact expanded its political power and its
political base in the 1930s and 1940s as exemplified in the United States, for example, by the
growth of the Democratic Party when the unions in the 1930s shifted their allegiance from
the Republican Party to the Democratic Party.
So that became this behavioral methodology was very prominent in the 1950s and 1960s,
but then as we've already noted, and we haven't even gotten to psychology yet, by the 1970s
behaviorism was imploding in psychology.
And it also imploded in anthropology, sociology, and political science.
People so to speak shook themselves and said, oh, just woke up from a very bad dream behaviorism.
That's not that's not the way to go.
And what is what is the way to go?
And what emerged was not surprising.
You could probably guess, but a looking at political institutions as a network of mechanisms
by which a society organized itself and achieved whatever its goals happened to be.
So that we now take a look at political institutions, not as atomic, the Federal Reserve Bank over
here and state judiciaries over here and the Federal Trade Commission over here, but we
look at political institutions in their functional interrelationships.
They're trying to understand the functional interrelationships among institutions that
give them the, that allow them to anchor relationships of power and authority in a pluralistic democracy,
for example, as applied here in the United States.
So this was a 1970s conception in which we see the notion of a network, but we also see
the notion of a system.
That is to say there is a wholeness, there is a holistic integrity to the political institutions
of a society.
You can't just look at individual pieces and study them behavioristically and say, okay,
let's describe how the Federal Reserve Bank works.
So-and-so goes to work in the morning and this is what they do at their desk and this
is the way, this is the committee meeting process and so on.
Now we're saying, no, no, no, what we want to understand every institution in a society,
every single institution is a node in a network and what we want to understand is what are
the underlying relationships and the underlying systemic character, how do they all fit together
so that it's not just a collection of institutions, but they actually have a functional unity,
a functional wholeness to them, right?
