They did not trust democracy in the same way that some of the founding fathers did not trust democracy
and were very suspicious that especially the more uneducated people came to this country,
the more the country would simply become anarchic.
And so that's why I say in the first half of the 20th century,
political science was interested in what might be called applied theory of democracy, practical theory.
How the heck can this country work?
Now, there's another piece to this.
Special interests don't just mean that the environmentalists get to have their say
and that the people who are against fluoridating the water that they get to have their say,
there are corporations here.
And in the course of the modern industrial corporation was invented in the 1880s
and it was invented right here.
And by the World War I, corporations dominated the marketplace,
they dominated the economy and therefore they were very powerful political institutions.
They looked like they were merely commercial institutions,
but in order to protect their commercial power, they naturally had to exercise political influence.
Now, starting in the 1890s, the potential for corporations to abuse, so to speak, the public unity
was recognized in our antitrust laws, which beginning in the 1890s in the early 1900s
and Justice Oliver Wendell Holmes Jr. in the early 1900s was a member of the United States Supreme Court,
put there by Teddy Roosevelt, who had a say on U.S. steel and standard oil, et cetera, as monopolistic corporations.
But the corporations even, they did not roll over and play dead just because those antitrust laws were put on the book.
They figured out ways to pursue their special interests.
Everybody's allowed to pursue their special interests in a pluralistic democracy.
They have their own special interests.
Now, you may say, well, there's an unbalanced weight here between some grassroots movement in Wisconsin and General Motors.
And that led to in the mid-century, especially in the Depression and in the recovery after World War II
to another focus in political science.
Is corporate capitalism compatible with a pluralistic democracy?
Or is it the case that behind the scenes, instead of an intellectual elite with their white propaganda,
that you will in fact have a corporate conspiracy that really controls the country,
that they are the true power centers in the country.
So you have elected officials, but it doesn't matter because the corporations get what they need.
And their argument is, if we go away, the public well-being disintegrates.
So you have to make sure that we are allowed to pursue, you know, as misunderstood as it may have been
when the CEO of General Motors was being interviewed, was being interrogated by the Senate in the early 1950s
as a potential secretarial appointment, said what's good for General Motors is good for the country.
He also said what's good for the country is good for General Motors,
but the part that stuck was what's good for General Motors is good for the country.
There was a lot of truth to that, even though it's maybe an injustice to Wilson
and having isolated that half of what he said, it is nevertheless the case that the corporate attitude was,
if it's good for us, it's good for you because we employ you, we are the sources of wealth in the society.
And in fact, at the beginning of the 21st century, the Fortune 1000 corporations are, in some sense,
are responsible for about a quarter of the gross domestic product of the United States.
Just those 1000 corporations, and since the corporation has on an average 10 to 12 board members
and many people sit on multiple boards, a community of about 8,000 people is making strategic decisions
that affects approximately a quarter of the GDP, which is a staggering influence.
It's not at all conspiratorial, they're pursuing the legitimate interests of Proctoring Gamble
and General Motors and IBM and etc., but that's the way it plays out.
And so in the early 1950s, especially when there was still lots of support for a Marxist critique of capitalism,
many political scientists in America were asking this question of whether corporate capitalism
and a pluralistic democracy are in fact compatible, or is the democracy going to be a sham?
A particularly incisive analysis of this was C. Wright Mills, the power elite, and early 1950s.
Mills died too young and did not follow this up, did not have a long career in which he could have evolved his ideas,
but that book, still in print after 50 years, is a kind of classic epitomization of this concern of political science
in, as I said, the mid-century.
