And this led to multi-year controversy, and different universities tended to come down
on different sides of this question.
But it's a very interesting insight into what we have occasionally pointed to as the challenge
facing the social sciences in terms of dealing with values.
One of the most seminal thinkers of the London School of Economics in the 1930s was the young
man, Napole Sammelson, who got his PhD at Harvard, came back to Harvard, won the Nobel
Prize in Economics, subsequently the Nobel Memorial Award in Economics, there's no real
Nobel Prize in Economics, it's called that, but it's really the Nobel Memorial Award
that was set up independently of the Nobel Prizes.
And he was responsible, largely responsible for the bringing into economic theory in the
post-World War II period extremely sophisticated mathematical techniques, which have been prominently
part of economic theorizing ever since.
At the University of Chicago, which I believe has been responsible for five Nobel Prizes,
Nobel Memorial Awards in Economics, Milton Friedman was a lifelong, is a lifelong opponent
of Keynes in that he believed that economic output is determined by monetary policies,
not by income expenditure models.
And Friedman has been an anti-Keynesian alternative to Keynesian policymaker and an advisor to
many third world and governments or Eastern European and South American governments in
terms of a Friedman approach based on the money supply as having an effect on economic
output.
That's an alternative voice to Keynes's.
But I want to focus for the rest of this talk on the use, two things.
First of all, on the use of mathematics in economic modeling.
I mentioned Samuelson, a seminal contribution was the 1943 publication of John von Neumann
and Oscar Morgan Stern's book, A Game Theory and Economic Behavior, which became, especially
after Samuelson, the fundamental tool that economists use to calculate utility measures
because remember, the whole business of finding equilibrium conditions in an economy is based
on utility maximization, that the buyers and sellers have to maximize their utility.
So how do you calculate these utility measures to know what the appropriate, how you can
balance supply and demand?
So game theory, which led to what's called rational choice theory, and we've referred
to this before in political science especially, but economics has become the home for the
development of this mathematics, although ironically, it turns out that Leonard Savage
showed that you can reach the same utility measures using subjective probabilities, von
Neumann and Morgan Stern used objective ones, and then somewhat later, two American economists
showed that you don't have to use probability theory at all, you can get exactly the same
measure using a totally different approach, which might remind us of those fellows in
population genetics, Fisher, Haldane, and Fisher, Sewell Wright and JBS Haldane, who
took three different approaches to population genetics and came out with the same functionally
equivalent equations.
The most dramatic turnabout, I think, however, in economics has been in the last 10 years,
perhaps, when there has been a significant impact of work begun in the 1970s by Kahneman
and Tversky, for which Kahneman was recently given the Nobel Memorial Award in Economics,
which is that human beings are not rational decision makers.
We've got all of this enormous math economic modeling based on rational man, based on people
knowing what's in their best interests and maximizing their benefit, and in fact, nobody
knows what's in there, people don't know, and they don't maximize, and so rationalist
models do not work and do not, in fact, account for economic behavior.
Kahneman and Tversky started working along these lines, showing that people are not rational
decision makers in the 1970s.
They had been preceded by Herbert Simon, also a Nobel winner in economics, who had,
in the 1950s and 60s, developed a theory of organizational behavior that was keyed to
what he called satisfying, not perfect, but good enough outcomes, and what he called bounded
rationality, which means Pareto style non-rational decision making, but it's limited rationality.
We always make decisions lacking all the information that we wished we had, but we
make them anyway because we have to make them.
That, so to speak, was the context within which Kahneman and Tversky extended that whole
idea at the end of the 20th century, work using PET scanners of all things, show that
when people make decisions, the emotional parts of the brain are the ones that are most
active, not the so-called reasoning, logical reasoning parts of the brain, and more recent
work at the very beginning of the 20th century by Daniel Gilbert and others at Harvard University
has shown that people do not, in fact, cannot identify what their best interests are, and
so we see at the end of the 20th century that economic theory is now going to have to orient
itself around at least some recognition of the non-rationality of humans.
