Lecture 33
Humanity, Mind, Classical and Behavioral Psychology
Philosophers have been trying to understand the mind
at least since the time of Aristotle.
That is to say that at least since the time of Aristotle,
philosophers have analyzed what they believed the mind was
and its capabilities and the relationships among,
for example, memory and reasoning and perception.
But scientific psychology really is a product
of the last quarter of the 19th century.
That is to say the experimental study
of mental phenomena or psychological phenomena
really in some sense begins in 1875
when Wilhelm Wundt in Leipzig really teaches,
creates the first experimental psychology laboratory
which is linked to courses that he teaches
in experimental psychology.
Wundt was a very important figure here,
not just because in some sense he established
experimental psychology as a field,
but as we will see in this lecture in the 1980s and 1990s,
the evolution of psychology from the early 20th century
introspective psychology of Freud to the cognitive neuroscience
of the 1990s in effect is a resumption
of the experimental agenda that Wundt mapped out in 1875
and in 1895 when he actually created the first research institute
at a university dedicated to experimental psychology
that also was at his University of Leipzig.
Wundt was concerned for Wundt,
the subject of psychology is consciousness.
Now that may seem obvious,
but as we will see in the course of this lecture,
it ain't obvious at all.
For Wundt, the subject of psychology is consciousness
and what we are studying as psychologists is what consciousness is
and in particular he was interested in perception,
conscious perception obviously,
he's interested in memory,
he's interested in learning,
he's interested in reasoning
and these were the kinds of,
these made up the subject matters for his experimental researches,
doing experiments that would measure how people hear,
how people see what they feel,
how they remember,
what they learn.
So Wundt is a powerful source
of a research agenda in psychology.
Given his experimental and scientific leanings,
it may come as a surprise
that Wundt's conception of human beings
was that they are willful and emotional creatures,
not primarily rational creatures.
That reasoning comes after the fact, so to speak,
it is not the essential characteristic of our nature.
Aristotle said that man is a rational animal,
not Favont,
man is a willful and emotional animal.
Notice the echoes of this in Pareto and in Weber
and then at the end of the 20th century economics
as we saw just in the last lecture,
Kahneman and Tversky having to convince their colleagues,
you know, we are not primarily rational,
we learn to reason.
We don't, deductively speaking,
of course we all reason pragmatically,
but the pragmatists too saw us
as primarily motivated by what we want
and trying to figure out intelligently how to get it.
So Wundt ended his life,
the last decade or so of his life,
he wrote a ten-volume work on an evolutionary account
of cultural psychology.
He was a rather interesting, very broad and interesting man.
He was a considerable influence on the first American
to teach experimental psychology,
which was William James,
who was William James,
brother of the novelist Henry James
and a Boston Brahmin,
also a member of the intellectual circle
with Oliver Wendell, Holmes Jr.
and Charles Sanders Purse
who created the philosophy called pragmatism
and in fact it was James
who made that philosophy famous,
although Dewey actually developed it much more intensively
and much more sophisticatedly.
James was a member of the philosophy faculty at Harvard
and he started teaching of course
in experimental psychology.
Eventually in the late 1880s
changed his faculty identification
from philosophy to psychology
and essentially the American mouthpiece for Wundt.
