So, this was quite exciting, and in fact, it led to the statement by a mathematician
who was President Laurent de Danau, a little known today, but in the 1940s, quite one of
these influential intellectuals with lots of contacts who pointed out that, well, then
the nervous system might be interpreted as a kind of computing machine.
Now, at the same time, John von Neumann, the great Hungarian mathematician, physicist
whose name pops up in quantum theory, whose name, one of the founder of game theory, for
example, in his 1943 text, we've already referred to a number of times with Oscar Morgenstern
on game theory and economic behavior, von Neumann, coincidentally, coming back from
one of his many government missions, because he was an advisor to the Manhattan Project
in Los Alamos, and he was an advisor to the radiation laboratory at MIT, he was at a train
station, and he bumped into the John Eckert, who was the co-designer of ENIAC, which in
1942 was just an idea, was a plan, and he described the plan to von Neumann, and so
von Neumann not only told the conference about this fascinating project to build a digital
electronic computer, but he also, because of his genius in mathematics, told the conference
about Alan Turing's work in the 1930s, and how such a computer could be a universal Turing
machine and, in fact, could solve any mathematical problem for which you could give an algorithm,
for which you give a stepwise procedure to go to resolve it.
Third contribution to the conference that turned out to be a lasting value, a mathematician
named Arturo Rosenbluth and Norbert Wiener, a professor from MIT, gave a presentation
on how machines could display apparently purposive behavior.
That machines could look like they were doing purposive things, and they were adapting their
behavior to their environment, and the key, said Wiener, is feedback loops.
By using feedback loops and appropriate control circuits, you can make a machine behave in
ways that you would think that machine knows what it's doing.
That machine is specifically looking, trying to do X, it is doing X, and now it's moving
on to Y, and you could, looking at it, you would think that it had the intelligence of,
let's say, an animal.
And Wiener actually dared to say that intelligence is a matter of feedback loops in the nervous
system.
In 1943, Alan Turing himself published a book called Machine Intelligence, which further
advanced the idea that maybe human reasoning that is itself a form of computing, and therefore
a computer could be said to reason.
I'm not going to go through all of the conferences, but between 1942 and 1952, especially in the
period 1946 and 1948, the participants in these conferences, who got together for several
days every year now, interacted in an extraordinarily mutually reinforcing and productive way.
In 1946 and 1948, Wiener developed this cybernetic theory so that we actually had a fairly detailed
theory of how you could use feedback loops in which the output of an action gets fed
back into the circuits as an input so that the machine, so to speak, can adjust its subsequent
behavior to come closer to meeting its goal.
Because the difference between what it has done and what you wanted it to do gets fed
back into the input and it modifies the subsequent behavior of the machine.
So how feedback loops and appropriate control mechanisms could allow you to build machines
that looked like they had intelligence.
He linked this together with the emerging theory of information that Claude Shannon and
Warren Weaver published in 1948 or developing in the mid-1940s, and Wiener used information
theory as a model for what's going on in the nervous system.
So that what we're talking about is modeling mental activity along the lines of information
theory, understanding that it can be implemented in a machine by appropriate control circuits
and feedback loops.
In 1948, Shannon and Weaver published their information theory, but more than that, they
showed that an electrical circuit could actually solve all of the classical problems associated
with one family of logical reasoning, so-called propositional logic, which is classical logic,
pre-late 19th century logic.
