They functioned here in the United States because of the political climate in Germany in the 1920s and 30s.
And then they were together.
During those four years, they sort of hammered out their common sense of what psychology as a science ought to be studying,
and then using both animal subjects and human subjects in the period 1920 to 1940, especially,
published seminal works studying such phenomena as the figure-ground distinction,
how we distinguish foreground and background, how we perceive shape, size, melody,
the way that context determined how we impose closure on experiences.
They did very interesting experiments which remain classic ones today of how we recognize movement
and how we'll impose movement on a stationary object if we change the background context, for example,
against which a dot is an illuminated dot.
We perceive an illuminated dot so that the Gestalt psychologists were very interested in selective attention
and the fact that selectivity comes from the inside.
From their point of view, therefore, the behaviors were anathema because they were saying that mind doesn't matter.
So by World War II, you had the Freudians with the unconscious, you had the Gestalt psychologists,
very still a very prominent and dynamic research program, especially as their work was advanced
by Kurt Lewin in the late 1930s and 1940s, studying group dynamics, especially small group dynamics,
and Gordon Alport's theory of personality based on Gestalt psychology.
And then you had behaviorism, which especially during and after World War II became a major theme
in not just a major theme, it was the dominant theme of Western psychology.
At some point in the 1960s, I remember being told that effectively every psychology department in England and the United States
at all major institutions was headed by a Skinnerian.
Now, Skinner didn't actually do much in the way of training PhDs,
but there were Skinnerians who trained lots of people with PhDs in psychology.
So that through the 1960s, the Skinnerian behaviorism, which dismisses consciousness as of any causal significance whatsoever to behavior,
was the dominant modality. Gestalt psychology had fallen into, well, not disrepute,
but people had lost interest in it, and Freud by the 1960s, Freudianism was being severely criticized
and has subsequently withered rather dramatically.
The hippies of the 1960s really liked Jung because his whole notion of the archetypes emerging in mystical visions
reinforced LSD experiences and mescaline, and so out-of-body experiences being stoned out of your mind
is an opportunity to experience archetypal patterns rooted in the collective unconscious.
But when that passed, so did a good deal of enthusiasm for Jung.
A recent biography of Jung suggests that he was a tortured personality and not altogether a pleasant person in his personal life.
We knew about his complex political positions.
He was believed in the 1930s and 1940s.
He was able in Switzerland to be very sympathetic to the Nazi cause,
but we now know as a result of this biography that he was also in the pay of the predecessor of the CIA
to do psychological profiles of Nazi leaders so that they could be targeted during and after the war,
so he had no qualms about playing both sides.
What happened in the 1970s is quite startling.
He was writing about as high as an intellectual movement can ride in academic circles,
and suddenly in the 1970s, in spite of the appearance of Skinner's book Beyond Freedom and Dignity,
which generated tremendous controversy because he said that notions of human value were getting in the way of making better societies.
All we need to do to get rid of poverty, to get rid of drug addiction, to get rid of crime is to shape people's behavior,
to manipulate them through behavioral engineering.
And in his book Walden II, published in the late 1940s and then again in Beyond Freedom and Dignity,
he gives plans for how you can do this.
Although, as Tromsky pointed out, all of this stuff is hand-waving and in fact very little can be pointed to
as significant human behaviors that have been modified by behavioral engineering.
In any event, what happened in the 1970s was the beginnings of what in the 1980s turned out to be an almost total inversion
of psychological theory from behaviorism to what is called cognitive psychology.
In 1967, a text with that name, Cognitive Psychology, was published by Ulrich Neisser.
In 1970, the first journal called Cognitive Psychology was published.
1976, this was a second journal, Cognitive Science, reflecting the fact that a recognition that Cognitive Psychology
really opened up a whole new scientific discipline, which was not just Cognitive Psychology, but Cognitive Science.
Well, what's this all about?
What it's all about is that mind matters all of a sudden.
