From Descartes to Freud, the assumption was that the human mind knows itself best.
The thing we know best is our own mind because we can look into our own mind.
We don't know stars very well.
We have a tough time figuring out matter and energy, the laws of matter and energy,
but anyone who takes the trouble to do so can look into their own mind.
And Freud says you can look as much as you want,
but you can't see what's really causing you to behave the way you do.
What's causing you to want what you want and hate what you hate.
That's all unconscious.
So now what is the subject of psychology?
For Freud and all subsequent Freudians, for Jung and all subsequent Jungians,
the unconscious is the subject of psychology.
How can we understand how the unconscious affects consciousness?
And Freud's famous map of the mind in which you have the ego, the id,
which is the source of all our unconscious motivations, instincts, drives,
and the superego, our moral conscience, this conflict model
in which the id is trying to get the ego to do exactly what the id wants.
The ego is the reality principle.
Hey, wait, I can't get away with this in this society.
And we internalize certain values, conscience, ethical, moral values,
that say, oh, you should be ashamed if you did that.
You must not do that.
And if you do do that, you're guilty.
So now this map, so to speak, of the mind,
needs to be put together with such ideas as his theory of repression
that we all have experiences that we cannot confront, more or less serious experiences.
And so we repress them.
We push them down into the unconscious.
Push down into the unconscious, we don't have to deal with them.
Except, Freud says, the repressed cannot stay in the unconscious
because it was conscious at one time.
And so the repressed is always knocking at the door,
trying to get back into consciousness,
and we have to exercise energy to keep it repressed,
and that can manifest itself in various kinds of illnesses.
Physical symptoms of various kinds, phobias of various kinds, always a manifest.
What happened?
And in Freud, there was a very narrow response.
It's saying, what caused that experience?
It's always childhood sexual trauma.
Now Jung was initially much younger than Freud,
was an enthusiastic Freudian,
and spent quite a bit of time in the period 1907 to 1911 with Freud,
and in 1911 effectively broke with Freud.
They came to the United States together on Freud's only trip to America.
He never liked America, never wanted to come back.
And during that trip, it became quite clear to Jung
that he was simply groomed, being groomed to be Freud's mouthpiece
and especially Freud's Christian mouthpiece,
because of the number of Freudians who were Jewish
and were attracting attention by anti-Semitic groups in Europe
that psychoanalysis was some kind of weird Jewish conspiracy or pathology.
And Jung recognized that he was, and he was probably right about this,
that the psychoanalytic movement needed a Christian at its head
and he was smart enough to be the head.
He retreated.
He also did not believe that Freud was right in focusing so narrowly on sexuality
and Freud did not broke criticism.
If you were not a Freudian, you were other.
And so Freudianism actually splintered from 1910 until the 1950s and 60s
into many groups, each of which felt that Freud had fundamentally correct insights
but that it was too narrow and needed other kinds of experiences besides childhood sexual traumas
needed to be factored into why people behave in the ways that they do
and display the kinds of behaviors that they do.
Jung in 1914 went into some kind of seclusion
and emerged in the 1920s with his own theory
which is that, yes, the unconscious is the subject of psychology
but not Freud's individual unconscious but the collective unconscious that we inherit
that every human being and in addition to their individual unconscious
has a collective unconscious deep down patterns for organizing experience,
patterns for responding to experience that manifest themselves in dreams,
in art, in mystical visions, in alchemy, in alchemical writings,
that in religion that by studying these manifestations of the collective unconscious
we can discover the archetypes, the fundamental patterns that all human beings share
because we all have a common biological evolutionary history.
That's what makes it collective.
You have an unconscious that your grandparents and your Greek grandparents contributed to.
It's collective to humanity that we all have these archetypal patterns.
One of these archetypal patterns is called the self.
So Freud and Jung shifted the attention of psychology from the conscious mind to the unconscious.
