It's because these different movements overlap, it's hard to know what's the most sensible
sequence to put them in, but I'm going to contrast this with behaviorism, which I've
already referred to in a previous lecture, was announced to the world in 1913 by John
Watson, who said that, you know what, the subject of psychology has nothing to do with
consciousness.
It has to do with behavior.
All that matters is the prediction and control of behavior.
That's what psychology is all about.
All the rest of this talk is nonsense.
It's not scientific.
It's anecdotal.
It has nothing to do with anything.
The psychologist as a scientist of the mind is only interested in prediction and control
of behavior.
It's quite an empirical notion, not unlike Heisenberg's Matrix Mechanics, as we've talked
about in the past.
All that matters is, can you predict the energy levels?
Can you predict the frequencies of photons that will be emitted?
That's all that matters.
What's really going on down there is utterly irrelevant.
I've mentioned before that Watson was influenced in this by Ivan Pavlov's work on condition
reflexes.
Although he didn't like to admit it, I believe he was also influenced by Edward Thorndyke's
work on animal intelligence, published in 1911, which also influenced Skinner and artificial
intelligence research.
We'll see that in a moment.
The idea that Thorndyke came up with two laws of animal intelligence, which is that
animal behavior is reinforced by repetition, that behavior is keyed to its consequences.
That's the first law.
That behavior is shaped by its consequences, and it is reinforced by repetition.
These seem fairly commonsensical after you hear them, but no one had articulated them
before.
So Thorndyke and Pavlov gave Watson the insights that he wove into his version of behaviorism,
which was based on a rather straightforward stimulus response kind of psychology.
Stimulus response.
We don't act, we react to external stimuli, and once we understand the patterns of stimulus
and response, then we can predict and control people's behavior.
He was a faculty member at Johns Hopkins, he got into trouble of a sexual sort, had to
leave the faculty, but he didn't suffer very much because he went to the advertising world
where he became a major contributor to using these techniques to improve the grasp of advertising
slogans on the consuming public, including the famous slogan, I'd Walk a Mile for a Camel,
for those of you old enough to remember Camel Cigarettes.
Behaviorism was relative for about 10 or 15 years, was very, very prominent, and then
sort of went into a bit of a slough until Skinner in 1938 published a work that built
on Watson's work and extended it, made it much more sophisticated, especially calling
attention to the fact that behavior, yes, it's shaped by its consequences, but those
consequences can be structured according to what he called schedules of reinforcement,
that the schedule, the rate at which you reward behavior or punish behavior will have a powerful
influence regardless of what the reinforcers are, that the rate at which you reward behavior
you want or punish behavior you don't want will have an effect on the behavior, on shaping
the behavior, and so will what he called operant conditioning, that's adaptive behaviors.
So looking at the context and using the context of the behavior that you want to shape, you
can, according to Skinner, especially in his qualitative, near the end of the dominance
of behaviorism, 1970 publication Beyond Freedom and Dignity, you can adjust a person's behavior
the same way he said that NASA adjusts the course of one of its spaceships.
There's nothing special about being human. Skinner really went quite far towards denying
that there was anything whatsoever going on inside the mind. That's totally irrelevant
as far as psychologists are concerned. Now, concurrently, and quite violently opposed
to behaviorism, was Gestalt's psychology, which picks up on and extends James's notion
of the way that the mind organizes its experience, so to speak, from the inside, that we don't
come to experience as a blank tablet. The Gestalt psychology, the word Gestalt in German
means form, so it is exactly what James was talking about. They were committed to the
view that the mind forms or organizes, it imposes form on experience, on incoming experiences
from the inside. And Gestalt's psychology is indebted to three men who were college
university students together between 1910 and 1914, Max Wertheimer, Wolfgang Köhler,
and Kurt Kothger, all of whom came to the United States between the late 1920s and late
1930s and stayed here at various colleges, the New School of Social Research, Swarthmore,
and I believe Smith.
