Except that he didn't do experiments, he only talked about what Wundt did, but he did bring
to Harvard to actually do experimental psychology, a student of Wundt's called Hugo Munsterberg,
who created an experimental psychology laboratory at Harvard and promoted and advanced Wundt's
research agenda. James himself, in his famous 1890s textbook on psychology called The Principles
of Psychology, still in print in the beginning of the 21st century, still a wonderful and
wonderfully insightful book, introduced the term stream of consciousness, added to Wundt's
agenda the phenomenon called selective attention, and took the position that consciousness had
a systemic or holistic character that came from the inside. Now James talked about this
quite qualitatively, and as I said, did not himself do any experiments. This was all theoretical
for James, but it turns out that James is now laying down a research agenda that 30 years later
will manifest itself as Gestalt psychology. Think about this just for a moment, that consciousness
reflects internal organizational principles, that consciousness has a holistic character,
it's not just a random collection of inputs from our eyes, our ears, our noses, our propriocepts,
that we experience the world in an organized way. We don't collect data and then organize it
after the fact, we immediately experience the world in an organized and structured way,
and he called attention to this as something that needs to be studied, and he certainly was
correct about that, and that too becomes a strand of cognitive psychology in the 1980s and 1990s.
So Vunt and James, in a sense, create a research agenda for one strand of psychology in the early
20th century. It is a kind of introspective psychology in the sense that it looks at
consciousness as the subject of psychology, in the case of James, the principles of organization
of experience in psychology. So the subject of psychology becomes consciousness, but with a
slant, trying to understand how the mind organizes the sensory perception so that we
experience the world in an organized way. A second type of introspective psychology is
much more familiar to all of us, namely Freudianism, and in 1900 Freud published The Interpretation
of Dreams, which sort of announced him to the world as a psychological theorist. Earlier he
had collaborated with an older mentor of his who we went into practice with initially, Joseph
Breuer, in a collection of studies called Studies in Hysteria, which first articulated the idea that
hysteria is an external response to what we will later call internal repression. Freud's famous
theory of repression emerged out of his studies of hysterical patients, most of them female,
but some of them male. The word hysteria prejudicially assumes that hysteria, that this
condition is only for women, the same prefix as hysterectomy. But Freud developed a theory of
repression in which the physical manifestations of repression can take what are called hysterical
forms, for example, glove paralysis, a loss of sensitivity in the hand that is covered by a
glove. And Freud developed psychoanalysis as a technique for releasing repressed material,
which is the source of all neurotic and psychotic symptoms according to Freud. The most important
aspect of Freud, and the one that is in a sense the most shocking intellectually and culturally,
is the insistence that human behavior is driven by unconscious motives.
