The combination of artificial intelligence research, the cybernetics movement, the maturation
of computer technologies, and the application of all of these technologies to the study
of mind brings back the question, what is the mind?
It's a very interesting trajectory we followed here.
In Wilhelm Wundt, at the end of 1875, began the study of experimental psychology.
I don't think there was anyone who doubted that the mind was reality.
James certainly not.
Freud and Jung, well, they championed the unconscious, but there was no doubt that human
beings had minds.
Behaviorism challenged the idea that the whole concept of mind was a valuable concept
in dealing with human beings.
All that really mattered was behavior, and why people behaved the way they did, what
their feelings were about what they did, were totally irrelevant.
As a matter of fact, human beings are just really very complicated thermostats.
Depending on the environmental stimulus, they either go on or they go off, but they have
of course a wider repertoire of behaviors than the average thermostat.
Cognitive psychology said that, no, mind matters, and we're back to studying perception
and memory and learning, et cetera.
In the glory of the cognitive science that cognitive psychology stimulated, this sort
of liberating rediscovery of mind, something ironic has happened.
We are developing tools that increasingly suggest that what we call the mind is a physical,
chemical activation, a network of physical, chemical activation patterns in the brain.
Not just the brain, because the nervous system, of course, extends throughout the body, and
then the whole question is whether the brain, the nervous system is an element in the system
called the body.
We artificially isolate the brain.
We even artificially isolate the nervous system, but now we're at a point where we are beginning
to be able to identify localized functioning.
For example, that the prefrontal cortex seems to be where decision making takes place, that
the medial cortex seems to be where working memory is stored, that the lateral cortex seems
to be where we make value judgments, that there are no plug-in modules that are responsible
for processing verbs, but there is a network of neurons that seem physically distributed
that seem to be responsible for the way we process verbs, and other networks that for
processing nouns, is there a kind of non-local modular architecture to the brain, which is
a complicated network of neurons?
There are 10 to the 9th, there are approximately 10 billion neurons in the brain, and each
on average has 10,000 connections.
That means we're talking about 1,000 trillion connections among the neurons in the brain.
Furthermore, in the 1990s it was begun to be realized that glial cells in the brain,
which had been dismissed as some kind of packing material, actually have an important function.
There are more glial cells than neurons, so the total number of interconnections in the
brain is enormous.
Is it really the case that what we mean by mind is activation patterns in this complex
of networks?
We can begin now to duplicate what we call experiencing the world electronically by directly
stimulating neurons, and the mind feels that it's seeing, hearing, the DARPA is back again,
again funding this particular kind of research, directly injecting electrical stimuli into
the brain that will cause the brain to have the same experience as if it were receiving
information through the senses.
There are two programs, RoboRat and RoboMonkey, they're roughly crudely called, that are beginning
to implement these capabilities for start in animals, and there are human subjects,
especially blind people who are acquiring a kind of limited vision by direct stimulation
of the visual cortex.
Once again, we find ourselves asking, what is the mind?
We don't have an answer at the beginning of the 21st century, but this is the direction
in which cognitive psychology is moving.
