and Minsky emerged as the great champion of one approach to artificial intelligence.
This approach was one which assumed that the mind was a symbol processor, that the mind processed symbols.
That meant that you had to plug in, you had to program the mind with a symbolic representation,
for example, functioning in a restaurant.
So you have to know that in this context, this is the way you deal with a waiter or a waitress,
this is the way you deal with other patrons, this is a menu, this is the way you order,
this is what words mean in a restaurant, the same word may mean something very different in another context.
That has to be plugged into the machine, and then the machine is given rules for how it should respond,
for how it should handle the symbols that are plugged into it.
The machine cannot be said to understand the symbols, it simply has them stored in the computer,
represented according to an electronic scheme.
So there's a knowledge representation framework, in fact they're called frames,
that the computer scientists have to plug into the machine, that's part of a stored program,
and a set of rules for manipulating these symbols, and then you can go up to the machine
and say, what would you like to eat today?
And I'll have pancakes with maple syrup please, the computer would reply.
Now, this approach is called top-down artificial intelligence,
because you've got to plug lots of information into the computer, and then just as you teach children,
so to speak, it looks as though that's the way you teach children.
Notice the behavioral implications here, that children, that mind acquires through mimicry,
has to be programmed, that the mind is empty and has to be programmed with everything that it knows.
Now, this line of research turned out in the 1960s and 70s to be incredibly fertile.
Almost monthly it seemed, people were coming up with programs that were doing astonishingly intelligent things.
And again, to avoid a laundry list, I will just suggest, for example,
that a program whose acronym is Sherdlu was a micro world in which simulated inside the computer
was a room full of blocks of different shapes that you might find in a children's playroom.
And you could tell the computer, put the green block on top of the red block,
and then the computer would go and find the green block and put it on top of the red block.
Put the cone on top of the red block.
So this was a primitive, but it seemed like it mimicked a kind of early childhood intelligence.
The computer seemed to understand.
There was, in 1975, this is just 12 years after LALAB started.
In 1975, a computer program called MetaDendral, because it was a second generation program called Dendral,
actually made a scientific discovery.
In 1974, a program called MISIN was the first expert system program
and it was quickly commercialized and led to an industry within software of expert systems
which surround us today, which I used very widely.
In 1979, the first medical diagnostic program called Internist was demonstrated.
These are just a few of dozens of programs that between 1970 and the early 1980s
reinforced Minsky's position, not just his position as director of the AI lab,
which was promoted as the premier center of artificial intelligence research
in the United States and therefore in the world,
but also it reinforced Minsky's philosophy of artificial intelligence,
that the mind is a symbol processor.
Now, DARPA kept funding this activity because there were very significant potential implications,
which in fact matured and were realized,
but Minsky quite correctly, I believe, recognized DARPA did not want infighting.
DARPA wanted a clean consensus that this was the way to do artificial intelligence.
And so in 1969, Minsky and a colleague, Seymour Papert,
essentially did a hatchet job on neural nets because in approximately 1959, 1960,
a Cornell university professor named Frank Rosenblatt built a machine
that implemented McCulloch-Pitt's neural net, very simple machine called a perceptron.
And he showed that, look, you know, back in 1948, McCulloch-Pitt's said
that they could build, that their neural nets would solve the problems
that Shannon's electrical circuits revealed that you could solve electrically.
We can do it using a neural net, which by the way, as we'll see in a moment,
doesn't require programming.
