So that's another set of ideas that I think deserves thinking and consideration.
Fourth point, provocative thought that I'd like to call to your attention is related to this.
Complexity. I want to talk about complexity.
Herbert Simon insightfully once defined a complex system as one whose behavior is unpredictable.
A system is complex is if after you put it all together and you put it in operation you're surprised about the way it behaves.
It turns out that for example computer programs that are more than about 100,000 lines long have unpredictable behaviors.
And at a certain point when they get more and there are many commercial computer programs that have millions of lines of code
that it's not possible for a program to be sold to the public say this is bug free because nobody knows how some of those interactions
among different lines of the code are going to be activated because some user who meant to hit the T key accidentally also hit the 7 key.
And the combination of T and 7 causes some disastrous collapse like erases the hard drive.
Now it's in the program but nobody could see that there are just too many possibilities of interconnection.
So as a matter of fact when programs even after totally professional debugging.
So a complex system but if we're increasingly interested in creating complex systems because we want the spontaneous self-organization
for example in nanotechnology or in biotechnology and that's the way we're able to do a lot of things in biotechnology
because at the nano level these molecules self-assemble.
That's why they're so cheap to use once you've identified the process.
They do all the work.
But if complex systems, self-organization, complexity, unpredictability.
We can be sure that nanotechnology and biotechnology are going to surprise us.
And the probability is high that not all the surprises are going to be happy ones.
Fifth thought-provoking idea or at least I hope the thought-provoking.
We have seen in the course of the 20th century a very complex relationship developing among science and technology.
Among theory and instruments.
It is sometimes the case that new instruments reveal discoveries that new theories are necessary to explain.
As for example when Saul Perlmutter and others discovered in 1998 that it looked based on astronomical observations
that they were not specifically looking for this but based on astronomical observations that they were making
about the strength of supernova explosions far away from us.
They discovered the acceleration of the universe, the so-called dark energy.
And then we have to have new theories to explain that.
But it is also sometimes the case that theories stimulate the development of new technologies, of new instruments.
For example, quantum theory as we saw in an earlier lecture is directly responsible for semiconductors.
The invention of the transistor.
We traced that line briefly but clearly from Heisenberg's student Felix Bloch
down to Shockley and Bretaine and the invention of the first transistor at Bell Labs in the late 1940s.
The invention of the laser right from quantum theory, superconductivity right from quantum theory.
So there is an entanglement there of science and technology that is very different from the 17th, 18th and 19th centuries
with significant social consequences for society, social consequences for technology but also for science
because science is increasingly entangled with social support for science because of its connection to technology.
Notice something interesting.
Rarely do needs have any relationship to theories.
Needs may have a relationship to technology, but almost never.
I can't think of a single case in which anyone needed a theory of anything.
The theory of relativity was not a response to a need.
You say an intellectual need but not a social need.
You could say necessity may be the mother of invention technologically but not intellectually.
And that's a very interesting thing to think about, I think.
What is the connection between the intellectual side of our life and the existential side?
