But put them together into a system and they have the properties of salt which are critical to our survival.
But our blood is mainly water. How come the sodium ions don't explode in the water?
How come the chlorine doesn't poison us when it's released as a gas if the molecule, as it does, is ionically bonded
than when the salt dissolves in our blood? How come sodium...
So the properties of table salt, the properties of salt in our metabolism are an emergent property from this simple molecule.
Neither of sodium nor chlorine has anything like the properties of table salt.
So that's an example of emergence and it is again a 20th century sensibility that has built up very slowly
and under considerable resistance because the classical tradition and especially from Descartes in the early 1600s
through the 19th century was that the world can be built up out of fundamental building blocks.
It's a bottom-up process. It's not a top-down process.
The job of the scientist is to analyze a phenomenon.
It means to disassemble it into its fundamental constituents and then build them back up again.
And what the system level people are saying is you have to understand the total picture before you can understand
how the bits and pieces fit together.
And not only that, if you focus on the bits and pieces, you will lose the big picture
because you will miss all the emergent properties. Systems have emergent properties.
We sometimes discover this to our dismay when we implement the system and it has properties that nobody anticipated.
The tax system would be an example of this.
The tax laws are passed and then only later do we discover how they can be exploited, leveraged, and how they commit abuses.
This is very typical of systems that they have properties that the individual elements don't possess.
And we are only now, in the last 30 years or so, seriously studying systems.
Third idea, dynamism, non-equilibrium.
How many hundreds of times has that word come up in the last 34 lectures?
Non-equilibrium can change is the norm. Non-equilibrium is the norm in nature.
That natural systems are very often maintained in non-equilibrium states by energy inputs.
And what we have discovered in the last 30 years, since the work of Ilya Prigachin, who was mentioned earlier,
and many others, is that systems that are maintained in a non-equilibrium condition by inputting energy to them
often spontaneously organize themselves into quite complex structures without anyone telling them to do that
or with anyone causing them to do that or instructing them to do that, to speak anthropomorphically,
that chemical systems, biological systems, inorganic systems, the development of the nanotechnology industry
over the last decade, and especially over the last five years, and projecting into the next 10 years,
is already exploiting the fact that at the nanoscale, at the level of atoms and molecules,
that atoms and molecules put in a certain condition will automatically organize themselves into carbon nanotubes.
They will organize themselves into what looks like micro-spaghetti or into buckyballs, into what look like complex soccer balls.
Nobody tells the carbon atoms, OK, now you go here, and you go here, and you go here.
You create the right condition, the right non-equilibrium condition,
and we discover that carbon atoms will self-organize into buckyballs, into 60-carbon soccer ball-looking molecules
that are hollow inside, and then you can store and transmit molecules inside those cages, so to speak.
So self-organization of complex systems.
The self-organization, when you have a system that's maintained in a non-equilibrium condition,
you can anticipate, you can often anticipate that you are going to see structure emerge spontaneously.
So this concept of self-organization, another 20th century insight, a discovery,
this combination of ideas, dynamism, energetic processes in which we don't look for equilibrium.
Through the 19th century, we look for equilibrium.
In a certain sense, we specifically killed off discovering the self-organization that comes from non-equilibrium
because everybody was looking to get equilibrium.
Let's get everything down static.
