A second area in astrophysics that can be construed as a cloud on the horizon is that
recent observations in the years 2002-2003 suggest that, not just suggest, recent observations
of telastronomers that when the universe was less than 3 billion years old, there were
already galactic clusters.
Not only were there galaxies, so we think that stars started forming when the universe
was only 100 or 200 million years old, that the first galaxies formed at about a billion,
but here we have, astronomers have discovered a modest galactic cluster, I believe that
it has something like 30-some odd galaxies in it, that goes back to less than 3 billion
years after the Big Bang.
It's much too much structure to have after only 2.5 or 2.7 billion years of expansion,
so that is another problem that astrophysics needs to come to grips with.
It's not a small problem either because the extent of the structure that we can discover
in the universe has implications for whether Big Bang and inflation are really capable
of providing a model of the universe.
So it's a small, it may seem like a small problem to non-specialists, but within astrophysics
it's a significant challenge.
And then there's the question of whether we are in fact reading the microwave background
radiation correctly because all of this theory is empirically supported by interpreting extremely
minute ripples in the microwave background radiation and from those ripples, ripples
in temperature, temperature inequalities on the order of a 10,000th of a degree Kelvin
are, that's the basis for trying to explain why there is as much structure as there is
in the universe.
If we're misinterpreting the microwave background radiation data, then really we have a whole
new picture of the universe that might emerge.
So that's one set of clouds that one can anticipate that over the next decade we will potentially
be seeing significant modifications in our conceptualization of the universe and its
origin and maybe even of its fate because according to some physicists if the acceleration
continues then at some point, although we and our grandchildren don't have to worry
about it, this will eventually tear the whole fabric of space time apart.
It will simply so to speak dissolve.
The standard model in physics, that means the combination of quantum chromodynamics, quantum
electrodynamics and electromagnetic theory, which was such an intellectual triumph in
the 1980s and 1990s, continues to be bothered by the fact that neutrinos have mass and the
standard model does not predict that they should have mass.
So accommodating neutrino mass to the standard model is a cloud within the framework of the
leading edge of quantum theory and one might say that when CERN comes back online in another
approximately three years, the Higgs boson better show up.
We've talked quite a bit about it so I won't go any further now but if the Higgs boson
is not discovered, that would be a serious blow to our confidence in not just the standard
model but electroweak theory.
On the other hand, if it does show up then that will strongly reinforce a very radical
conception of mass, that mass is an energy phenomenon.
That what we call the mass of a particle is really a function of the way one form of energy
interacts with the Higgs field, the underlying Higgs field which is still there invisibly
so to speak in the universe and serves as the background for the particles that we observe
at this phase in the universe's evolution.
We still have not seen gravity waves in spite of the fact that we're now almost two years
into the operation of an exquisitely sensitive detector and in the next five years we'll
be putting another detector up in space that's even more exquisitely sensitive but in a certain
sense gravity waves better show up because if they don't that's a serious cloud in gravitational
theory and the general theory of relativity and we can anticipate that I think by extrapolation
that a quantum theory of gravity will in the not too distant future be formulated which
will perhaps lead us in the direction of interpreting the universe as some kind of information structure
and how will we understand that philosophically and physically.
