I think this is the sixth point that I want to make,
and that is that the focus on processes and relationships
that have been so characteristic of 20th century science
in all of the sciences, the physical sciences, the life sciences, the social sciences,
there has been a shift away from substance explanations,
positing fundamental units whose fixed properties
then determine everything that follows,
but to looking at processes, dynamic processes, and to relationships.
This suggests, and here perhaps I'm being overly optimistic,
but this suggests that we are perhaps maturing away from
what John Dewey strongly categorized as dichotomous thinking,
either or thinking.
Do we really have to say either top-down artificial intelligence,
a la Minsky, or bottom-up artificial intelligence,
a la neural net theory, and its champions?
Isn't it possible that these are both valuable insights
and that the reality intelligence that we're trying to model
may be some combination of top-down and bottom-up?
Is it matter or energy?
Well, we learned early in the 20th century that it's not matter or energy,
that that was 19th century thinking.
In quantum theory we saw that matter and in it,
well actually we saw it before that in the special theory of relativity,
but we only really understood it in quantum theory,
equal MC squared suggests that it's not an either or situation.
The conservation of matter, the conservation of energy have to be combined.
It seems to be a powerful inclination of our minds
to think in these polar ways, either or.
Dichotomies, I suggest, are often misleading,
especially when you're trying to describe reality,
and I use that as a term for that which seems to be independent
of our personal experience, whatever that ultimately means,
but certainly when we use the term reality we tend to mean
that which is independent of our personal experience.
Applying those kinds of either or categories does not seem to be
a very useful approach, although one must say that for the last 2,500 years
much of Western intellectual culture has been oriented against
either I'm right or you're right.
Plato and Aristotle's writing is rich in either or thinking.
Their whole approach to studying almost any subject was dichotomous,
was to do branching, either this or that, either this or that,
and let's follow the paths down, either true or false.
That's the fundamental logic, either true or false, why?
Well this is where actually when we talked about Brower's intuition
and logic in lecture 12, that was what we were trying to say
about intuitionism, that it rejects the law of contradiction.
Why either or true or false?
Why can't there be situations which are neither true nor false?
Or some combination of true or false?
So I think that the growing focus on process,
an intrinsically dynamic situation, may well be the aid
that we need to lure us away from simplistic dichotomous thinking
to a more complex recognition that we can do better justice to reality
by going beyond dichotomous thinking.
And let me throw in one final observation that is distinctive of science
at the end of the 20th century and was not at the beginning,
and that is it's increasingly collaborative,
team-based and cross-disciplinary character.
It's increasing use of computer simulation and computer-aided calculation
which have allowed us to do something that previous generations of scientists
were not able to do, and that is to come closer to describing experience
with a minimum of idealization, previous generations lacking these tools
and taking solitary and narrowly disciplinary approaches
had to make idealizations in order to be able to explain natural phenomena.
But we at the end of the 20th century, because of all the things I mentioned
at the beginning of this lecture, the acceleration of science
to be the kind of institution that it is in our society today,
allows us to come closer to experience without idealizing it.
Thank you.
