And I use the word assault deliberately in spite of its negative connotations because I think that we do not quite grasp yet the implications of naturalizing consciousness in the sense that scientists mean naturalizing phenomena.
When consciousness is reduced to electrical signals and chemical processes, chemical reactions, when it is reduced to a structural phenomenon that we can model in a machine, what's left for our self-image?
What kind of a challenge will that pose to us?
In the course of modern science, our bodies have been naturalized.
Let's say our biological existence has been embedded in an evolutionary process that puts us, so to speak, on a par with all other organisms on the planet.
Our bodily processes have been reduced to physical and chemical processes.
But throughout the 19th century, while this was happening, the assumption was that what really makes us human is our mind and consciousness.
Freud represented an early foray into taking that special privileged character away from us by saying that the fact is what you call consciousness is less than the tip of an iceberg.
What's really important is unconscious.
What really underlies what you're conscious of is unconscious.
And even though Freud may have been wrong about everything specific that he said, and that's certainly debatable, it remains the case that this was the opening salvo in a 20th century long campaign to make scientific sense out of consciousness,
which means effectively reducing consciousness.
So even when the cognitive science displaced Schenarian behaviorism and mind was back as a reality, we saw how quickly that was transformed into explaining mind, which really means explaining it away as mind.
And while that is not necessarily the way we need to respond to that, because of all that we said before about emergent properties, etc., what if it turns out that mind is an emergent property of a particular kind of neuronal structure?
And that as soon as you put that kind of structure together in silicon or in some molecular computer or in some quantum computer, when you simulate that structure, then the machine starts talking to you.
And I said, well, what time does the game start?
And what do you think of A. Rod's trade, that does this pose a challenge for our self-image?
You bet. Copernicus took us out of the center of the universe.
Well, he didn't really, but the Copernicus, the Copernican revolution was not just astronomical, it was cultural.
It said, until then, we seem to have believed that we really were the center of the universe.
Over the last 400 years of science, our specialness has progressively been taken away from us.
Now, we still think we're special and hot stuff, but I'm talking about science.
Within the intellectual culture of our time, I think that the 21st century is very likely to be one in which consciousness, the privileged special character of consciousness, is going to be substantially diminished.
And this is why I talk about it as an assault, and it represents a kind of an ethical problem that 21st century science, a moral and cultural problem that 21st century science is going to pose to us.
I referred in the previous lecture, and I'll just say briefly again, just as a reminder, we are already committed to creating applications,
technological innovations based on self-organized, complex systems.
And these, by definition, have unpredictable characteristics.
And so we should be forewarned that these new technologies, based on self-organizing systems in nanotechnology generally and in nanobiotechnology in particular, are going to surprise us.
And as I said in the last lecture, it's very unlikely that all of these surprises are going to be happy ones.
