Let me shift to another aspect of 21st century science that we can anticipate based on what we have seen happen in the course of 20th century science.
That is to say that the science-technology-society relationship, which changed so dramatically in the course of the 20th century,
in some of the ways that I mentioned in the previous lecture about how science is institutionalized, the way it has been socialized,
the way that has been funded, the expectations that we have, the acceleration of scientific knowledge, generation of scientific knowledge,
and its connection with technology, that that relationship is now irreversible.
Society in the 21st century is going to be more entangled with science and technology.
Science is going to be more entangled with society and technology in the 21st century than it was in the 20th century.
Science has definitively lost its innocence.
The claim that we are just generating value-neutral, objective knowledge is hollow.
Scientists may continue to believe it, but from a social perspective, the pursuit of knowledge, even of abstract scientific knowledge,
is firmly embedded in social institutions and social expectations.
Science has been delighted to take this public support, and especially the public funding and the organization of public institutions
to allow scientists to do research, take that money and that support because the public perceives that science is a source of technological blessing.
But the flip side is that when there are curses, science is going to have to suffer that as well.
If in the 21st century, as many are predicting, we are going to experience calamities that will be traced back to technologies that were enabled by science,
then science is going to suffer a backlash in terms of public attitudes and social values.
I think that the price that science has paid for being washed in the praise of society for its blessings is going to be that at some point
it's going to have to bear the burden of blame for the curses.
We have seen how scientists, physical scientists, are moving towards the goal of unifying the four fundamental forces of nature that physics has identified.
The strong force that holds the nucleus together, the weak force that is characteristic of beta decay, radioactivity and beta decay,
which sounds like, oh, that's just a minor point, but actually we now know that the weak force is not at all weak.
It's actually much stronger than the strong force once you take the Higgs energy field into account.
It only looks weak because the particles associated with the weak force have fairly large masses,
and now we understand that we believe that that has to do with the underlying Higgs field.
So the weak force, the strong force, the electromagnetic force and the gravitational force.
So according to physics, if we could unify those four forces, we could explain all physical, chemical and biological phenomena at a minimum,
and of course, according to others, we could extend that to psychology as well.
So we're pursuing that unification. Unification is a motif and a powerful one.
Philosophically and intellectually, it's glorious, but I would like to suggest that there's something else going on in science,
and I say this as a suggestion to think about, that science in the 21st century has reached science in its totality.
The physical, life and social sciences, meaning by that cluster, all of the sciences as we have surveyed them
are subsidiaries, which we have not touched on, that the sciences generally in the 21st century have now reached a point at which we are doing a kind of cultural unification.
Scientific theories are beginning to unify philosophy, metaphysics, theology and science as responses to experience.
That scientific theories are reaching a degree of complexity and sophistication and power, intellectual as well as technical power,
that they touch on questions that were previously in the domain of religion, philosophy, metaphysics.
And this is a different kind of unification. It's not even an intellectual unification only, it's a kind of a cultural unification.
And I think that that, I just suggest that as a development, that looking at science in the 20th century, looking at the way they have evolved,
one can step back a bit and see perhaps a pattern emerging that 21st century science is not just unifying in physics, unifying forces,
but that the sciences are achieving a kind of cultural unification, which at the same time of course challenges a religion, philosophy, metaphysics.
And that perhaps is something that will become part of the educational curriculum of universities in the 21st century.
