Again and again, Spongebob Squarepants, I believe, is called, and we're selling here at $180,000.
We're understanding that art is no longer a collectible.
It is an alternative asset class, and it can produce significant investment returns.
Our view is really that this is an investable asset class.
You should think of it just like you think of stocks, fixed income, any other asset class.
What's wrong with making a little money off of buying and selling art?
Surely you're supporting the artist, right?
And that will make the art better, right?
Right?
Well, not exactly, but I'll get into that.
What's important that you know right now is that things have not always been this way.
It's only really been since around 2004.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
The world of investment took serious interest in the art world,
and the results have been disastrous.
Art is a dynamic form of human expression,
which can manifest itself in a wide array of mediums
from paint on a canvas to a repurposed urinal,
signed r.mut.
Art means a lot of different things to a lot of different people.
In fact, it's not even exclusive to people as we know them.
Art is a dynamic form of human expression,
which can manifest itself in a wide array of mediums
from paint on a canvas to a repurposed urinal,
and we know them.
In 2018, researchers discovered 64,000-year-old
Neanderthal cave paintings in Andalusia,
broadening our philosophical concept of art
and the human experience as a whole.
At its best, art is a means of communicating
ineffable experiences.
It's revolutionary, profound, expressive, informative.
All-inspiring or just downright amusing.
At its worst, it's a banana taped to the wall.
For this video, I think it's important to define
what art is not.
Art is not an asset class, a commodity,
a percentage of an investment portfolio
to be bought in fractal shares.
That's how I've come to treat art,
because it's something of value and value means money,
and who doesn't need more money?
But let's take a step back to understand
how we got here in the first place.
As far back in history as we can see,
people have been going through great lengths
to surround themselves with things they find beautiful.
Art not only elevates our spirits,
but also allows us to show those we invite into our homes
a little piece of who we are,
or at the very least, start an interesting conversation.
On the darker side of human nature,
collecting art is a symbol of wealth,
status, taste, and erudition.
Having a certain caliber of art
separates the initiated from the unwashed masses.
Art collecting as we know it today
really started around the time of the Renaissance.
The Medici family of Florence
became extremely wealthy through banking
during this period
and spent a fortune on commissioning
some of the most iconic works of art to this day,
including works by Da Vinci,
Paracelli, and Michelangelo.
The tradition of the uber-wealthy
buying and collecting art
has continued much the same to this day.
The act of collecting art
has traditionally been facilitated by the art dealer,
an intermediary between the buyer and seller of art,
or a person or group of people
who buy art hoping to sell it to others at a profit.
Recently, however, the lines between dealer and buyer
have blurred to the point where
most buyers think and behave more like dealers
than lovers of art.
And that brings us to the title of this video.
Art is dead and money killed it.
Not convinced?
Let's take a deeper look.
Art is dead and money killed it.
Not convinced?
Let's take a deeper look.
Art is dead and money killed it.
Not convinced?
Let's take a deeper look.
Art is dead and money killed it.
Not convinced?
Let's take a deeper look.
Art is dead and money killed it.
Not convinced?
Let's take a deeper look.
Art is dead and money killed it.
According to the UBS Global Art Market Report,
the art market was worth 64 billion in 2019,
one and a half the revenue of box office sales,
and more than three times the sales of recorded music.
So art is big business.
Great news for artists, right?
Wrong.
Your average artist is actually getting poorer
as the market booms.
75% of professional artists
earn less than $10,000 a year
from their work
with less than 3%
even managing to earn as much as the average
fast food worker annually from their art.
So where's all the money going?
Over recent years,
it's been increasingly concentrated at the top
with celebrity artists being the safest bet
for an investor looking for a return
on a piece of art.
Sales over 10 million
make up a fraction of 1%
of total art transactions,
yet represent 28%
of that 64 billion I mentioned earlier.
Smaller artists
are getting more exposure than ever before
thanks to social media,
but the sad truth is the art market today
is not interested in the quality of the work
as much as the name behind it.
And those artists at the top
are being encouraged to overproduce
as well as produce on-brand works,
which are safer investments for potential buyers.
Essentially stifling creativity
and experimentation in an industry
built on creativity and experimentation.
Big money investing
is literally killing art.
There's very little magic
in the creation of this art either.
Artist studios are incorporated
and registered as companies
with teams of assistants
pumping out works of art like a factory.
These studios behave
like companies as well,
needing to turn over millions of dollars
in profits a year
just to sustain themselves.
Galleries are no different.
Demanding more work from artists
and almost never questioning
the quality or significance
of the works they are buying,
simply assessing how much of a return
they might get for it.
China has recently entered the art market
in a big way.
For many of China's super wealthy,
buying art with a newsworthy price tag
is a great way to show that you've arrived
economically speed.
The bigger the price tag, the better.
The work itself could matter less.
It's not all about flexing though.
Due to laws put in place
by the Chinese government
to prevent the devaluation of the Yuan,
buying art and selling it overseas
is one of the best ways
to get substantial sums of money
out of mainland China.
Art museums are also increasingly
part of the real estate projects
in mainland China.
In an attempt to draw attention to the project,
as well as qualifying developers
for special discounts on buying land
from the government.
Art's ability to be bought
in one currency and sold in another,
and its relative mobility
compared to say real estate,
makes it an extremely attractive
store of wealth.
This has led to the rise of free ports,
where art is essentially stowed away
in strong boxes,
tax free, and customs duty free.
Works can be bought and sold
over and over without ever being
taxed as long as it remains in the free port.
If all of that sounded shady to you,
that's only the legal side of things.
I'm not even getting into money laundering,
which itself is a huge industry in art.
Today's art market has transformed
into a dull, dispassionate
alternative investment,
with gallery owners noting that their customers
are less and less eccentric art lovers
and more often cold, rational investors
with no interest in art.
Music
There has been a notable shift
in the past 15 years
in how we appreciate art.
Social media has shifted the focus
from the artwork to the art viewer,
putting yourself in the center stage
with the art serving as a mere pretty backdrop
for your Instagram picture.
It may seem harmless,
but this trend has actually had a significant impact
on what modern art looks like.
Art installations have shifted
from works to be marveled at and pondered on,
to experiences to be photographed.
The success of installations,
such as Infinity Mirrors by Yayoi Kusama
and The Rain Room by Hannes Koch
has led to the creation
of an entire pop-up exhibits,
such as the Museum of Ice Cream
and the Color Factory,
designed for the specific purpose
of being the backdrop of your new profile pic.
In a narcissistic society,
any product, such as art,
is simply a tool to enhance the status of the user.
The experience of visiting an art museum
or exhibit has become the soulless pursuit
of the perfect picture,
with little room for reflection
or appreciation of the art of this play.
I guess it begs the question,
do we the consumer even deserve creations of true genius?
Would we overlook pieces of truly challenging art
to line up for a cheeky selfie
with an uninspired work made for Instagram?
Do we even have the attention span
to stand still long enough
to be moved by a piece of art?
Can we blame the art industry
for selling out to the bankers
when we, the consumer, are too self-obsessed
to see art as more than a backdrop for a photo?
The fact of the matter is,
we're all guilty of taking genius works of art for granted,
looking over minute details
painstakingly made by artists devoted to their craft.
We care more about the glamour
and celebrity personality behind the work of art
than we care about the state of the art world
and where it's headed.
When are we going to get bored
with the shallow vapid experiences
and just sit still and genuinely admire something?
The academic side of art is shunned and dismissed
as pretentious,
while new artists and art consumer
proudly towering having no foundation
in their appreciation of art.
Visceral reactions are powerful,
both without an understanding of the significance of a work.
They often ring hollow.
We, the consumer of art, need to do better.
I hope all that doom and gloom didn't put you off to this message,
because ultimately, this is a message of hope for greatness.
Looking at the inner workings of the modern art market,
it's hard not to conclude that art is dead,
but that would be ignoring all the lesser-known artists
devoted to their craft,
putting their heart into creating meaningful works of passion.
They likely won't make headlines for an eight-figure sale
or find their way onto a t-shirt at Urban Outfitters.
They may never even make it into an exhibit or gallery,
but I challenge you to value their work like it's the Mona Lisa.
Seek out art that challenges you and let it move you.
Support small artists,
and we can build our own art market separate from the billionaires.
Instead of decorating your room with posters of art
that sold for millions,
buy original art from artists you like,
but may not be well-known.
There's so much greatness in the world that goes unnoticed or unappreciated.
Make it a point to recognize it when you see it.
Educate yourself on art history,
and build a foundation for deeper art appreciation.
That's the mission of this channel.
That's the message of hope.
Art is not dead.
It lives on in that friend who's passionate about painting,
but can't manage to turn it into a career.
It lives in that art teacher,
or art history professor,
who passionately teaches you the foundations.
And I hope it lives on this channel as well.
Do not go gentle into that good night.
Rage.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
Rage against the dying loop of life.
