Video games have come a long way. From once being seen as a temporary fad, to
just toys for children, or immoral corruptors of the youth, today the gaming
industry easily surpasses the film and music industries combined and it's
still growing. Still, as tempting as it might be to draw comparisons to more
established industries, the reality is that video games have proved to be
something unique. No other industry has been so closely tied to technological
progress. No industry has ever grown so far so fast and no other industry has
experienced so much change in such a short time. With multi-billion dollar
companies rising and falling in the space for a few years and the entire gaming
landscape being radically changed more than once by a couple guys working out
of a garage. And all this in something that's only been around about 50 years.
Video games have come a long way and their evolution has been remarkable. Today
though, more and more people seem to be viewing the industry with pessimism and
despite continued growth, its future doesn't look quite as bright as it once
did, with companies and consumers alike increasingly seeming to be looking to the
past. So, let's talk about the past. All of it, from the very first game right up
to where we are today and every major event in between. This is the entire
history of video games and it begins with something that would end up as a bit of a
staple for the industry. War.
World War II was kind of a big deal. In addition to deciding the fate of a
global population and shaping the modern world as we know it, it also saw
rapid technological advancement that would pave the way for something equally
important. Video games. After building the first ever digital computers for the
purpose of numerical processing and code-breaking as part of the war effort,
this technology was subsequently commercialized and found its way to
several universities. And where computers go, video games soon follow. Of course,
they weren't exactly designed as video games so much as demonstrations to show
what computers could do or just experiments to further the field of
computer science. The first to be shown to the public was Bertie the Brain in
1950, who played Tic Tac Toe. Poor Bertie was apparently quite good, although
every photo seems to show him losing and he was dismantled two weeks after the
exhibition, as tended to be the case with these early computers. The first game to
be created as entertainment was 1958's Tennis for Two, a side-on simulation of
a game of tennis that ran on an analog computer and was created by William
Higginbotham, a man perhaps better known for his role in the creation of the
atomic bomb. Meanwhile in 1962, Space War, a two player 1v1 space battle
simulation created at MIT, became the first game to see wider distribution as
its source code was shared between students and institutions. As the 60s
continued, more games were created for the mainframe and mini computers of the
era, but their popularity was quite limited by the fact that the computers
needed to run these games cost thousands and thousands of dollars, something
affordable for a university but less so for the average family. Things would
change in the 1970s however as video games started to appear alongside
Pimble Machines and other mechanical games in arcades. The first arcade video
game was Computer Space in 1971 which took heavy inspiration from the earlier
Space War and was designed by Nolan Bushnell and Ted Damby. Computer Space
saw limited success but its creators still believed in the potential of the
medium so they founded their own company, Atari. At the same time as this, new
breakthroughs were happening elsewhere as in 1972 the first ever home console was
released by electronics company Magnavox. It was called the Odyssey and its
development started six years earlier with the version finally released being
the seventh successive prototype. The main challenge for team faced was
affordability. The technology for a home console existed, it was just a question
of how to keep the price low enough that anyone would be willing to manufacture
or buy it. But eventually the team led by Ralph Bear found a way and so video
games at long last came to the American family home. This was an important
milestone although the Odyssey didn't exactly see the runaway success of later
consoles. Still its simple two-player table tennis game did provide the
inspiration for Atari's first game, a remarkably similar looking future
phenomenon Pong. Released in arcades in late 1972 Pong was a game that changed
gaming proving immensely popular in arcades and at 25 cent a game also
immensely profitable. By the end of 72 we did three and a half million dollars and
then we did 19 million then we did 35 million hockey stick. In fact Pong was
so popular that the first machine installed quickly stopped working. Atari
were called out to get it going again and found the problem was that the
cash box had overflowed from the vast amount of quarters leading the machine
to become jammed. And so arcades exploded in popularity as Pong proved gaming's
potential. Video games had arrived and at the birth of this exciting new medium
where the possibilities are endless how did everyone react you might wonder.
Well obviously they copied the one thing everyone knew already worked. Atari
made sequels and successors as well as their own dedicated home Pong console
and other companies made their own versions alongside their own sequels
and successors and dedicated home systems. Pong was everywhere as profit led
to proliferation and before long video games were in decline. By the mid 1970s
arcade growth slowed and then shrunk as the market became saturated with Pong
clones and brand new companies that had once rushed to cash in on this big new
thing started going under. Atari themselves fared better although they
had their own troubles by way of a lawsuit that came from Magna Box over
the striking similarities between Pong and their table tennis game. Atari
settled but they weren't the only ones being sued and Magna Box's winnings
ended up totaling over 100 million dollars. And so arcades were struggling
but thanks to technological advancements over the 70s a new prize was up for
grabs and the competition would be intense.
Arcades might have been where video games got their start but home consoles
offered an even greater opportunity and people were quick to realize it. In 1975
the year Atari's home Pong released there were seven other companies
releasing home video game consoles of their own. By 1977 there were at least
82 other companies with 160 different models being released in that year alone.
The consoles from this era were dedicated systems meaning they could only play
one or more built-in games that came included. A lot of these were simply
Pong clones with Atari even taking measures to make the cloning process
more difficult to hinder their rivals. We actually became quite diabolical about
seeing ways that we could just mess them up. We put a chip in and we purposefully
mismarked it so that when somebody copied us they put the wrong chip in. This
didn't stop the market from becoming saturated however but this time a
solution would come through innovation and once more it would be Atari who led
the way.
The Atari video computer system is 20 cartridges with 1300 game variations you
play on your own TV set.
The Atari video computer system later called the Atari 2600 released in 1977.
One year after the Fairchild Channel F became the first ever console to feature
interchangeable cartridges. Bushnell saw the advantages cartridges provided and
rushed to reduce a cartridge based system of his own but earlier problems with
lawsuits, increasing competition and decline in arcade sales meant Atari's
funds were getting low and so they made a deal with Warner Communications to sell
Atari for $28 million. The consequences of this deal would be seen most clearly
in the following years but for now it meant Atari had the money to finish
their new console to beat out their main rival Magnavox who had released their
own cartridge based system the Odyssey 2 in 1978. The Atari 2600 would be huge
with lifetime sales of over 30 million units a number that dwarfs any other
console of the era. Still this success came slowly and in late 1977 the entire
gaming industry experienced its first but by no means last crash. The combination
of a saturated market full of dedicated systems alongside new cartridge based
systems that proved far more desirable meant heaps of dedicated systems
suddenly stopped selling leaving retailers with a surplus of stock they
couldn't shift and causing game developers to cancel most dedicated
systems that were currently in development. The resulting downturn hit the
gaming industry hard leading economists and media figures to speculate whether
the entire gaming industry had simply been a short-lived craze that was now
coming to the end of its life cycle. Amidst this pessimism the Atari 2600
with its relatively high price point of $200 which is almost 1000 after
adjusting for inflation was seen as a tough sell and retailers and consumers
alike were hesitant to embrace it meaning Atari was only able to sell a
fraction of the systems they manufactured in its first few years. Further
competition would also come from other cartridge based systems including the
Intellivision from Mattel and the ColecoVision from Coleco but Atari would
soon find the killer app they needed that would not only get themselves back
in business but would also get the entire gaming industry back on track.
Space Invaders was created by Japanese developer Tomohiro Nishikado at Taito
in 1978 and it is easily one of the most important and influential games ever made.
Before Space Invaders different regions like America, Europe and Japan had
little crossover between them but Space Invaders quickly moved beyond regional
borders to become the first truly global gaming mega hit and that was by no
means its only achievement. Its gameplay may look relatively simple today but
in the 70s it was anything but. As a fixed shooter where the player takes on
rows of gradually descending aliens while hiding behind fully destructible
bunkers it was the first game to have enemies that shoot back at the player.
It helped pioneer the move away from timers over to lives-based systems. It
was the first game to feature a high score system giving it potentially
infinite replayability and it was the first game to feature continuous
background music. The background track itself was dynamic and increased in
tempo in time with the enemies increased movement speed as rounds progressed
giving the action a real sense of tension as the difficulty ramped up. This
iconic part of the game wasn't actually intentional. During its development
Nishikado found that the arcade processor struggled to handle so many
enemies on screen at once and yet as the player took out more and more of them
the render speed increased causing the aliens to move faster and faster. This
created a difficulty curve where the challenge rose and fell within each level
to create moments of higher and lower intensity a principle still seen in
game design to this day. Space Invaders also featured some semblance of a story.
Aliens were invading from space and you had to stop them. Okay it's not much but
compared to the more abstract Pong or Breakout it made the action feel much
more contextually meaningful and marked the beginning of arcade games paying
more attention to these kinds of aspects. And if all that wasn't enough there
was also the game's sales. By 1982 Space Invaders had grossed 3.8 billion
dollars which is over 13 billion after inflation meaning it was the then best
selling video game and highest grossing entertainment product of all time. For
the industry this meant video games were back and soon it wasn't just Space
Invaders. 1978 marked the beginning of what has since been named the golden age
of the arcade. 1979 saw the release of Asteroids from Atari which continued the
space battle theme this time in an asteroid field with more complex physics
based movement while also using cutting-edge vector graphics that utilized
lines instead of pixels to provide a crisp display unlike anything that could
be produced on a home TV screen. The trend of popular arcade games where you
shoot things continued in 1980 with Atari's 3D first-person tank sim
battle zone as well as their trackball controlled missile command which took
inspiration from the still ongoing Cold War to task players with defending
cities from intercontinental ballistic missiles. 1981 gave the world defender
from Williams Electronics which pioneered the side-scrolling shoot-em-up
genre and Gallagher from Namco a fixed shooter which featured complex enemy
patterns and power-ups both features that would define the genre moving forward.
Shooters weren't the only thing coming out of arcades though. In 1980 Namco's
Pac-Man gave the world its first gaming mascot Pac-Man well establishing the
maze chased genre and being the first game to feature power-ups. As iconic as
he would go on to become however Pac-Man's path to success wasn't a
simple one. The game initially struggled to beat Namco's 1979 space shooter
Galaxian in Japan while in America publisher Midway was hesitant to
manufacture many units as they were unsure how it would perform. The reason for
this was that it didn't involve any shooting and so executives feared it
would be less popular with arcades mostly male player base. This was something
developer Toru Iwatani had also considered as he deliberately tried to
create a game that would appeal to women as well as men and offer something
different to war or sports hence the colorful design cute characters and
emphasis on eating rather than killing. Iwatani figured that girls like eating
things more than killing them and it seems he was on to something because in
the end players couldn't get enough of Pac-Man's addictive pellet eating action.
Within a year it had become the best-selling arcade game in both Japan
and America outgrossing even the 1977 film Star Wars in revenue. Pac-Man was
one of the first but by no means last times a video game found record
success through broader appeal and targeting new audiences. Its use of
vibrant color and its focus on a central titular character would also go on to
become video game staples and would soon be seen in other popular arcade
titles like Konami's 1981 Road and River Crossing hit Frogger. By 1982 color and
3D technology were being combined in even more impressive ways like in Namco's
visually striking racing simulator Pole Position and the arcade Golden Age was
in full swing with profits from games reaching new heights and Taito, Atari
and Namco establishing themselves as the three biggest developers around. Arcades
were more than just a place to play games however. Through features like high
scores, multiplayer and the ability to watch and compete in front of other
people arcades provided a social aspect to gaming that went beyond just playing.
Much like how Twitch allows people to watch, discuss and compete in various
games today arcades were the live streaming and esports of the 20th
century and they offered better gaming experiences than you could get in your
home with higher quality graphics, better sound and unique immersive elements
like wheels and pedals in racing game cabinets. Arcades would also have a
significant impact on future game design. Their quarter hungry monetization
method has sometimes led to criticism over their high difficulty with older
console games also sometimes coming under fire for inheriting that high
difficulty but popular arcade titles knew that if difficulty was the only
thing they had to offer players wouldn't have any reason to keep coming back
and so they learned how to make skill-based challenges fun and make
players want to improve and keep playing. Still as important as arcades were
Space Invaders legacy goes beyond just kicking off the Golden Age of arcades
and breaking sales records because it also turned things around for the home
video game market and Atari. In 1980 Space Invaders came to the 2600 allowing
people to play the arcade classic from the comfort of their home. This was the
first arcade to home console port and it wouldn't be the last.
Space Invaders for the 2600 became the first ever killer app or system
seller in video game history and it certainly sold systems with Atari's
consumer sales almost doubling to $200 million in the year it released before
skyrocketing to over 800 million in 1981 with Atari taking 65% of the global
market share and so the great console battle royale that had defined so much
of the 70s was over and Atari was the runaway winner. A victory that proved to
be surprisingly short-lived.
In 1982 Atari was the fastest growing company in American history yet by the
end of 1983 they were one of the fastest falling with yearly losses of over
$500 million amidst the slide in parent company Warner's stock of almost 70%.
In 1984 Atari was sold with Warner receiving no cash for the sale and
never again would Atari be a leader in the video game industry. So what happened?
Well there is an obvious answer but that only tells part of the story. To really
understand we need to rewind a bit and look at where Atari came from. When Nolan
Bushnell and Ted Danby decided to start a video game company together they both
pitched in $250 of their own money to get the company off the ground. By 1982
Atari had 10,000 employees and were bringing in $1.7 billion in operating
profit and this all happened in the space of around 10 years. Atari had a
colorful history and some important people once worked there including Steve
Jobs and Steve Wozniak who left after a few years to start their own company by
the name of Apple as well as a young programmer by the name of Bill Gates who
was fired for not doing enough work. Atari also had a bit of a reputation for
their relaxed office culture. You know flexible hours, informal dress code, the
usual sort of thing. As we had a lot of young people we would constantly offer to
throw a party if they hit quota and it turns out when you've got 18, 19, 20
year olds they're much more interested in the party than an extra you know 50
cents an hour. So we got known as a party company. There's a story that if you
walked by the Borega Street building and you breathed deeply by the air vents
you'd get stoned because the pot smoking inside of it was so heavy. This made
them a popular place to work but it didn't last. The gaming industry was at
the cutting edge of technology which meant to compete and to win funding was
necessary. Hence the move to become a subsidiary of Warner in 1976 which
brought in a 120 million dollar cash injection and made the 2600's 1977
release possible. Warner communications were a big business however meaning
they took a keen interest in how their new subsidiary was being run. To this end
Warner brought in an experienced business exec Ray Kassar in 1978 to help
with marketing and commercialization but as the influence of Warner grew so too
did conflict with then CEO Nolan Bushnell particularly over Bushnell's
desire to continue to invest in research and development for new
technologically superior consoles. This ultimately led to Bushnell's departure
in late 1978. He would go on to found American restaurant chain Chuck E Cheese
and Atari went on to soaring new heights now with a more professional work
culture under the oversight of Kassar. Conflict wouldn't end here however.
Atari was succeeding but they were also changing and not everyone was happy with
their new direction. In 1979 four experienced Atari programmers David
Crane, Larry Kaplan, Alan Miller and Bob Whitehead resigned over Atari's policy
to not credit or provide royalties to the actual game developers. These
engineers would create a software program that would result in twenty thirty
million dollars in sales and they were making this a little paltry salary and
they figured gee I'd like to get a penny or two or three per each cartridge. So we
go to the president of Atari and point that out and he said to us and I'll
quote he said you are no more important to that game than the person on the
assembly line who puts it together. So they figured if they weren't going to
get credit for their work why do that work for someone else which led them to
form their own company. Activision the first ever third-party developer who
made sure to emphasize the role of game creators on their products. Atari
responded like the true corporate powerhouse they were at this time and
sued Activision but they weren't successful at preventing them from
producing games for Atari consoles and instead a deal was agreed where the
third-party company would pay a portion of their sales as a license fee to the
console owner a system that's existed ever since. Activision were only the
start of Atari's problems though. Other senior developers would also jump ship
but it was in early 1982 that marked the beginning of the end when Atari
tried to repeat the earlier magic of their space invaders and asteroids arcade
ports with Pac-Man for the 2600. The problem was Pac-Man was no space
invaders or asteroids. Released originally in 1980 it ran on 1980s arcade
technology with vibrant color smooth animations and high quality sound. All
things for now dated 2600 struggled with. The result is a port that will forever
live in infamy as one of the worst of all time a Pac-Man in name and not much
else. Still Atari's disappointments that year were only just getting started.
November saw the release of the 5200 Atari's next generation home system
which kicked off the 16-bit era. Unfortunately despite being early to the
market there wasn't much else the 5200 had going for it. Its initial price
point of $270 was high, it didn't originally come with backwards
compatibility, there were few new titles released for it and the controller was
widely criticized and while its graphics and hardware were a step up from the
2600 and other 8-bit systems the upgrade they provided was small and poorly
shown by the few titles the 5200 had available which tended to just be
ports of 2600 games. Nolan Bushnell is reported to have left Atari over
disagreements with the direction of future console technology and the
commercial failure of the Atari 5200 seemed to vindicate his stance. Finally
to top Atari's year off there was E.T. which released just in time for the holiday season.
E.T. has regularly been called the worst video game of all time. This may be
rather harsh but history is rarely known for its kindness. Still worst of all time
or not E.T. is certainly symbolic and it's a perfect example of a hubris that
brought Atari's downfall. Atari had acquired a license at high cost for an
E.T. game following the success of the movie but they wanted the game released
in time for Christmas to take advantage of increased holiday sales. This meant a
development time of only a few months and so they brought in experienced
developer Howard Scott Warshaw who had just completed the ambitious and
critically acclaimed Yars Revenge. Warshaw embraced a short development time as a unique
challenge and tried to do the miraculous. He failed and the result is a confusing
adventure game that had little connection to the original movie beyond its
strangely shaped protagonist. This didn't faze Atari however who skipped
audience testing to save time and produced an optimistic five million copies
for retailers only a fraction of which ended up selling. E.T. was a bad game but in this way it
wasn't unique. In fact after the success of Activision more and more developers
entered the third party space. This was before game developers needed a license
to publish games on consoles which created a free-for-all where quality was a
much smaller concern than profit and where accusations of industrial
espionage and reverse engineering became rampant due to third party developers lack
of familiarity with the hardware of the system they were designing games for. By
the start of 1983 at least 100 different companies were developing games for the
2600 in a rush to cash in on the now booming video game craze. In the process
quality control was often ignored and in this period consumers had few ways to
differentiate between good and bad games before it was already too late. As the
market continued to become increasingly saturated with low quality games
retailers were forced to discount stock to try to get rid of these games
encouraging consumers to continue purchasing the now discounted bad games
leading to a loss of consumer confidence which even video game Titan Atari
wasn't exempt from. In fact Atari likely deserved more of the blame than anyone.
Pac-Man for the 2600 was a bad game but it was also the best selling video game
of all time and even then Atari still produced far more copies than they
ultimately sold. And so with a saturated market little quality control rapidly
depleting consumer confidence and even more emergent competition from the
home computer market the gaming industry did the inevitable and sunk
spectacularly in the great gaming crash of 1983.
Video game sales have gone tilt the boom simply isn't booming anymore.
If Pac-Man, ET and Raiders of the Lost Ark aren't selling what will.
To understand the scale of this disaster it helps to look at the numbers. In 1983
home video game revenues peaked at 3.2 billion dollars. By 1985 this number
had fallen to 100 million a decrease of almost 97%. Once quarterly earnings
started to reveal the degree to which games had stopped selling investors
started panicking cashing out their gaming stock and effectively ending the
supply of new money that had previously supported the once growing market. As a
result many newer gaming companies went bankrupt. Mattel, Coleco and Magnavox
all discontinued their gaming lines entirely and Atari was sold for almost
nothing with hundreds of thousands of on-soul games being famously dumped
and buried in a landfill in New Mexico. Arcades still saw some popularity but
they once more entered into a period of decline with the golden age having now
come to an abrupt end. And so video games were officially over being once more
seen as nothing but a short-lived fad not so different from other popular
toy lines that burn bright and then burn out once consumers get bored of them.
And this is how they would continue to be seen in America for the next two years
until a new name entered the scene. While the American gaming industry crashed
and burned in 1983 across the Pacific in gaming's second largest market the year
would be remembered for a different reason. The release of the Nintendo
family computer also known as the Famicom. It wasn't until 1985 that
Nintendo would bring their new console across the Pacific and rescue the
American gaming industry but for Nintendo the story starts much earlier.
Founded in 1889 Nintendo began life as a playing card manufacturer before
diversifying into tabletop games and eventually electronic toys. Their first
foray into video games came from making light gun accessories but in 1977 they
went a step further with the release of the Color TV game a Japanese only
dedicated home console inspired by the success of Magnavox and Atari which
contained Pong in six different variants. In Nintendo's defense at least they paid
Magnavox for a license unlike most. The Color TV game sold well thanks in part to
its modest price and Nintendo went on to reduce several more variants all for
their home market of Japan. They also entered the arcade space with a game
based on the board game of Fellow. It was during this period but a fresh faced
25 year old by the name of Shigeru Miyamoto joined the company but Miyamoto
would not be Nintendo's first gaming superstar. That honor belongs to one
Gunpei Yokoi head of Nintendo's research and development one division and
creator of the iconic handheld game and watch. Apparently inspired by Yokoi
watching a bored businessman playing with an LCD calculator on a train the
game and watch was an early dedicated handheld with an LCD display and fixed
animations. It also pioneered the D-pad. In expensive and long running the game
and watch's sales blew most early handheld competition out of the water
selling more units than even Atari's 2600 over the course of its lifetime but
Nintendo was only just getting started. After several less successful arcade
attempts the company's next big break came with 1981's Donkey Kong designed by
Miyamoto with the oversight of Yokoi it was originally developed as a way to
reuse old cabinets of Miyamoto's previous and rather less successful
radar scope. Donkey Kong took inspiration from Popeye and featured the titular
ape as the game's barrel-throwing antagonist alongside the player controlled
jump man who would go on to become one of the most recognizable characters in
the world after he was renamed to Mario. Donkey Kong was one of the earliest
platformers and the first game to feature jumping. It also broke new ground
in narrative design featuring a complete storyline told entirely on screen
with Donkey Kong kidnapping Mario's girlfriend who the player then works to
rescue before finally watching the two be reunited. It was also a massive hit
establishing Nintendo's name internationally and creating a bid and war
between console rivals Atari and Coleco over the rights to publish it. Nintendo
would follow Donkey Kong with multiple sequels but it was their return to home
consoles that would change the gaming industry forever. At first glance the
Famicom didn't look that remarkable. It was an 8-bit system in a time when Atari
had already given the world 16 bits of power and home computers were quickly
becoming more powerful still. Yet the Famicom did have a dedicated picture
processing unit in addition to its CPU as well as a reasonable launch price of
just under 15,000 yen. Its greatest asset would eventually be its game
selection but an impressive library took time and the Famicom's first year on
the Japanese market saw it get off to a slow start. It would pick up momentum
eventually however and the great gaming crash of 1983 didn't have nearly as
large an impact on Japan as it did America meaning by the end of 1984
Nintendo's family computer had become the best-selling console in Japan and
was well on its way to becoming Nintendo's greatest success yet. This still
left Nintendo's toughest challenge though America which in 1985 was still
reeling from the earlier crash with confidence in video games at an all-time
low. To get retailers to even stock their console Nintendo had to make buyback
deals in case of poor sales but that still left the even bigger problem of
selling the console in the first place. I mean how do you sell a gaming console to
a country that doesn't want anything to do with video games? Well Nintendo's
answer was to pretend that it was something different.
The extraordinary video robot he follows the commands you put on screen to help
you tackle even the toughest challenge. Will you be the first to raise the
incredibly accurate zapper and play games like Duck Hunt and Hogan's Alley. The
first to build a library of game packs like Kung Fu and Golf. Even games like
Excitebite that you program yourself. Will you be the first to get all this in
one package? The Nintendo Entertainment System where video technology is more
than a game. Enter the Nintendo Entertainment System not just a
video game console but something brand new and it wasn't just about the name.
The NES was designed to look like a video cassette recorder rather than a
console. Its cartridges were rebranded as game packs and it shipped with several
accessories like the robotic operating buddy Rob and the iconic light gun which
marketing made sure to emphasize as much as possible. Nintendo's work didn't
stop here though as they had an entire gaming market to rebuild and so the
number one priority became restoring consumer trust in video games. To do
this they strictly controlled third-party development putting limitations on
companies to avoid the oversaturation that have plagued Atari. In Japan this
led to a growing bootleg market so with the NES Nintendo added a special
lockout chip to combat this while creating an official Nintendo seal of
approval to allow buyers to identify Nintendo licensed products. And as for
those products Nintendo also paved the way for their console launch with arcade
releases of the same games through the Nintendo versus system in 1984 which was
built on similar hardware to the Famicom. This not only helped spread Nintendo's
name before the release of the NES but also established a trend of console
titles matching the quality of their arcade counterparts to try to repair the
damage of games like Pac-Man for the 2600. Nintendo even shifted to using in-game
like box art in place of the detailed yet dissimilar artwork of so many earlier
games. All this had an impact but Nintendo had one final ace up their sleeve
which came once more from the mind of Shigeru Miyamoto and would mark the
arrival of gaming's next killer app. Released in the same year as the NES
Super Mario Bros set a new standard. For years players had grown accustomed to
games taking place on a single screen and then in came Mario with side-scrolling
platforming action across multiple screens, multiple levels, multiple
environments and all with different power-ups, boss fights and jaw-dropping
hidden secrets. To top it all off Super Mario featured precise controls that took
full advantage of Nintendo's new D-pad controllers alongside detailed vibrant
visuals and one of the most iconic soundtracks in video game history from
composer Koji Kondo. Mario even had a strong sense of identity. By this point
in time a lot of games had featured space combat, sport simulations and fighting
but Mario offered something genuinely unique. You played as a shape-changing
mushroom-eating turtle-stomping Italian plumber who warped between worlds while
searching for a princess and somehow the concept worked with a childlike charm
that appealed to all ages. And so Super Mario Bros was a landmark title that
kicked off the greatest selling video game franchise of all time but it's not
like the NES only had Mario. In fact only a year and a half later the Nintendo
entertainment system would see the arrival of another gaming legend once
more from the mind of Miyamoto. The legend of Zelda did to action adventure games
what Super Mario Bros did to platformers. With a massive fantasy world fully
open to players and packed with secrets Zelda offered a sense of adventure and
freedom to explore never before seen in a console game. It was also the first
console game to feature a save system thanks to battery-powered memory built
into the game's cartridge which helped support its more ambitious design. And
once more the legend of Zelda was a huge critical and commercial success. As time
went on the NES's impressive library grew and grew launching many of gaming's
most loved series and establishing many of the rules of game design that would
continue to be seen for years to come. Castlevania brought action-packed Gothic
horror, Metroid brought atmospheric sci-fi, Mega Man offered alternative high
quality platforming action, Metal Gear helped popularize the stealth genre and
Dragon Quest and for later Final Fantasy established the Japanese console
role-playing genre. The NES was also well supported by high quality arcade
ports like Ghosts and Goblins, Contra and Double Dragon as well as a range of
Nintendo original sports games providing even more diversity. Basically the NES
had everything and it conquered the American and later European console
markets getting the gaming industry back in business in the process. This didn't
happen overnight and the damage done to the American market really was
significant but by 1989 the console market had finally bounced back close to
earlier levels with consumer confidence largely restored. Over its lifetime the
NES and Famicom sold around 62 million units which was more than double the
Atari 2600 making the NES the best-selling console of the time and
still one of the best-selling to this day. And with Nintendo's console
supremacy and so many American companies having exited the market
following the earlier crash, Japan was able to take center stage of the gaming
industry with Nintendo's name becoming synonymous with video games. Still even if
Nintendo had taken a sizable lead they wouldn't remain unchallenged for long
as another Japanese company was about to make their attempt at beating Nintendo
at their own game.
Sega was a big name in arcades. They entered the Japanese home console market
at the same time as Nintendo when the arcade Golden Age was starting to wind
down. Their first console the SG-1000 released in 1983 on the very same day
as Nintendo's Famicom but it would struggle to compete with Nintendo's
superior system likely as a result of Sega's inexperience with console
development. In 1985 it was redesigned as the Sega Mark 3 which released in
North America in 1986 as the Sega Master System.
The Master System went head-to-head with the NES while copying much of its
marketing strategy. In terms of hardware it had a clear advantage with a wider
color palette and a small edge in raw power but this wouldn't be enough to
make up for its biggest weakness its lack of third-party support. To publish games
on the NES licensees had to agree to a strict two-year non-compete clause that
didn't allow them to bring their titles to Nintendo's competition. This left the
Master System with a much smaller library and while Sega were able to bring
their own first-party arcade titles including the fast-paced rail shooter
Space Harrier and iconic racing game Outrun two of the best arcade titles of
the mid-80s this ultimately didn't prove to be enough and even these games
were still inferior on console than as arcade originals. This ensured that
Sega failed to come close to matching Nintendo in Japan or North America
although they did do enough to overtake a flagging Atari who under new
management had released their own third-generation console the 7800 a system
notable for its innovative backwards compatibility and little else. Still by
this point gaming was global and so Sega turned their attention to other markets.
In Europe the NES had failed to achieve the same level of success as in America
with Nintendo taking a more hands-off approach and leaving the distribution to
other companies. It also arrived notably late with most countries not seeing the
NES until 1987. This was the same year Sega brought over the Master System and
with no more head start and Sega's strong reputation as an arcade developer
Sega started to beat Nintendo for the very first time. By 1990 the Master
System was Europe's best-selling console and Sega didn't stop at Europe. In fact
a deal with toy and electronics company Tectoy saw Brazil become the Master
System's single best-selling country after its release in 1989. By contrast the
NES didn't come to Brazil until 1993 giving Sega a unique chance to capture a
by no means insignificant market. Sega wouldn't be the only new challenger
amidst the now once more growing gaming industry however.
Hudson Soft and NEC's Turbografics 16 released in 1987 in Japan under the name
PC Engine and in 1989 in America and Europe. The console was so eager to let
consumers know that it was a 16-bit rather than 8-bit system that it
included it in the name kicking off what is sometimes referred to as the Bit Wars
as well as the fourth generation of home consoles. As the first truly next-gen
system the Turbografics did boast some impressive hardware with a higher
resolution and expanded color palette to go alongside its 16-bit GPU. This was
matched with some impressive sales in its home region of Japan with the system
getting off to a flying start and beating out the NES in its year of
release. Unfortunately this strong performance wasn't replicated in other
regions with poor marketing and a delayed release leading to commercial
failure in North America and cancelled plans in Europe. Still for Sega this new
competition represented a clear threat and so in response they immediately began
working on their own 16-bit system. It was finished one year later long before
Nintendo would have a 16-bit system themselves and it turned out to be
Sega's best console yet.
The Sega Genesis otherwise known as the Mega Drive outside America released in
1988 in Japan, 1989 in America and 1990 in other regions and with it Sega now had
a system powerful enough to do justice to their expansive arcade library as well
as a clear technological lead on their main rival Nintendo. They even had a new
marketing slogan.
And so heading into the next decade the console war was finally heating up with
one of gaming's greatest rivalries about one-fold. The only thing Sega still
needed was a killer app of their own that could finally go head-to-head with
Nintendo's popular mascot Mario. But for Nintendo there was no reason to panic
just yet as the end of the 80s saw them release a new system of their own one
that would go on to outsell all of their previous systems combined.
Nintendo's Game & Watch was a success but its LCD technology limited it to one
game per system. For Gunpei Yokoi's next console he wanted to create a handheld
device with interchangeable games that offered an NES-like experience on the
go. This was the result.
The Game Boy released in 1989 and was around in various iterations for the
next 20 years during which Nintendo dominated the handheld market the
entire time. It did require four AA batteries but this was a price players
were more than happy to pay. It also lacked a backlight which was more of an
issue. A contrast dial was included but this still meant the system was
unplayable without a light source and even in a well-lit environment the gray
and green color scheme didn't provide the best clarity or general aesthetic. To
make matters worse the Game Boy released against heavy competition with three
other handhelds also vying for dominance at the same time. Atari's Lynx,
Sega's Game Gear and NEC's Turbo Express. All three of these rivals blew the
Game Boy away in technical capabilities featuring not only a backlit screen but
also full-color and far more impressive graphics. By comparison the drab
grays and greens of the Game Boy must have seemed rather pathetic. A sentiment
held by many even at Nintendo during its development where the Game Boy had earned
the nickname DUMMER GAME a pun which basically translates to BAD GAME. In the
end though the Game Boy wound up punching far above its weight and easily
surpassed all competition proving that in the constantly advancing battleground
of cutting-edge technology that is the gaming industry sometimes having the
best specs isn't what matters the most. You see in return for a less
technologically advanced product Nintendo offered something at a more
affordable price with a much longer battery life and a durable more
child-proof design. If success was down to critics the Game Boy would have come
last. In reality however success is decided by the consumer which in this
case often meant parents and it turned out that in this example practicality
and affordability beat superior technology and it wasn't even close. For
Gunpei Yokoi this must have been the ultimate vindication of his design
philosophy which has been translated as lateral thinking with
withered technology i.e achieving success through finding new and
innovative ways to use cheap or mature technology. In an industry obsessed with
the cutting-edge this has been successfully employed by Nintendo
time and time again and despite Yokoi's unfortunate death in 1997
his philosophy can still be seen within the company to this day.
Of course this is only part of the Game Boy's success story
because it also had another advantage over the competition.
Designed inside the Soviet Union by Alexey Pachinov in 1984
Tetris began life as more of a benchmark than an actual video game.
In a time long before anyone could ask can it play crisis
computer engineer Pachinov had to settle for developing his own games
as a way to test the capabilities of the latest hardware.
The idea for Tetris came from trying to recreate the puzzle game
Pentominos when Pachinov had the idea to make the pieces descend vertically.
The lack of a graphical interface on the Electronica 60 Pachinov was working on
did pose a slight problem but it wasn't enough to stop Tetris's core idea from
being enjoyable and soon Pachinov was sharing his
creation with his friends and eventually making an IBM PC version
with the help of a talented 16 year old school student.
From here Tetris spread like a contagious virus
first infecting Pachinov's office then the whole Academy of Science
before moving across Moscow and then beyond
doing what few Soviet citizens of the time could do
and crossing the Iron Curtain. This kicked off a race from multiple eager
parties to acquire the rights of the game for broader distribution in the west.
The only problem with the situation was that the Soviet Union
didn't really believe in copyright law
outside of everything should be controlled by the state
leading to confusion over who owned the rights of the game
and a complicated battle between different competing parties
with plenty of buying and selling of rights that sellers
didn't actually own. The ultimate winner was game designer Henk Rogers
who acquired the rights for Nintendo. The original plan for the Game Boy was to
sell it alongside the new Mario title Super Mario Land
but Nintendo was so impressed by Tetris after Rogers showed it to them
that they followed his advice to use it instead
in the hopes that its simple addictive nature
could transcend experience age and gender barriers
to be a game that everyone could enjoy and it was.
At first glance Tetris might seem similar to popular arcade games of 10
years earlier but with no concerns about maximizing quarters
Tetris considerably lowered the initial difficulty
and this did result in a game that anyone could play
as it eased people into the experience while naturally building tension and
excitement as the game progressed. Tetris required
fast moment-to-moment reactions as well as broader
more strategic planning and when players made a mistake
it was obvious where they went wrong and what they could do better next time.
For the pick up and play Game Boy it was a perfect match
and it went on to sell tens of millions of copies
on Nintendo's new system alone as well as many millions more
across PC NES and later mobile versions
making it potentially the best selling game ever made
even to this day. This helped the Game Boy get off to a strong start right from its
launch which meant as the 80s grew to a close
Nintendo retained their dominant position as leaders of the gaming industry
having far surpassed Atari and held off the new challenge presented by Sega.
All this time however as console and arcade giants froze and fell
another section of the industry experienced its own story
one with a different starting place, different games
and a very different impact on the future.
World War II was kind of a big deal. In addition to deciding the fate of a
global population and shaping the modern world as we know it
it also saw rapid technological advancement that would pave the way for
something equally important, the home computer.
Originally computer game development was limited to only the most enthusiastic
hobbyists. This started in the early 70s with one
of the first and most well-known examples being 1971's Star Trek a
text-based strategy game where players took control of the USS
enterprise to hunt down Klingon warships.
Other early examples include Oregon Trail a text-based strategy game best known
via its later incarnations 1976's Colossal Cave Adventure
a text-based adventure game inspired by real-life caving
and Dungeons and Dragons 1977's Empire a turn-based war game
inspired by the board game Risk Zork also in 1977 and also a text-based
adventure game inspired by Colossal Cave Adventure
and Mud or Multi-User Dungeon a text-based
real-time multiplayer role-playing game that helped pioneer the MMO genre in 1978.
Of these six examples all except Colossal Cave Adventure
were created by students. In fact Star Trek was created by a high school
student who had started hanging around the University of California Irving's
computer lab in his free time. So for computer games it was teenagers who
led the way maybe due to the younger generation's
inherent creativity but also because computers were so expensive
that university students were some of the only people who had reliable access
to them. This started to change in 1977
with the arrival of not one but three more affordable home computers
the Commodore PET, the TRS-80 and the Apple II.
If you want to know what affordable means
in numerical form well the most successful of these
the Apple II cost $1,298 at release which is over $6,400 after inflation.
So maybe not affordable for most but it was a start.
These early computers tended to ship with some games included
but they also came with something else. Basic, a general purpose programming
language that gave computer owners not just the ability to play games
but also to make them themselves and they did.
The best known example of this is Sierra Online
founded by husband and wife duo Ken and Roberta Williams
after playing Colossal Cave Adventure and deciding to make their own
similar game on a family member's borrowed Apple II.
The result was the first ever graphical adventure game
Mystery House, a murder mystery focused game
inspired by Agatha Christie novels and one of the earliest examples of both
graphics in a PC game and horror in any video game.
Sierra Online went on to have numerous hits including
King's Quest, Leisure Suit Larry and Quest for Glory.
Another example is a Calabeth, the first ever computer role-playing game
made by a teenage Richard Garriott in 1979
originally on his school's mainframe pc and finished on an Apple II
bought by his father. Garriott sold the game at his local
computer store in a ziplock bag with a cover sheet drawn by his mom
until a copy of the game made it to California Pacific Computer Company
who signed the deal with Garriott to take over publication
and sold 30,000 copies. The founders of Codemasters, the Darling Brothers, have a
similar story where they became wealthy and established game
developers by the ripe old age of 16 and 17 selling
games by mail order from their bedroom. Arcade and console gaming became
corporate almost as soon as it came into existence
but by contrast the computer gaming industry was heavily grass roots
with hobbyists, bedroom coders and literal children
often leading the way laying the foundations for the entire industry
and proving just what these new home computers were capable of.
This did mean the PC scene was much slower to monetize their efforts
with piracy known at the time as sharing
being such common practice that many people weren't even aware it could be
considered wrong and what started as sharing between
friends quickly evolved into selling bootleg copies for a fraction of the
original price. The differences between computer
and console gaming doesn't stop here though
from the higher age of the average player to the higher price of the systems
to the vastly different control schemes to regional differences
with PC gaming particularly flourishing in Europe the same region where
consoles caught on the slowest. PC gaming basically grew up independently
to the rest of the gaming industry and nowhere is this more evident
than in actual game design. Arcade games started off simple.
They were highly replayable and fiendishly challenging
in large part due to their monetization and they tended to focus
on skill-based gameplay experiences that came alongside arcade specific features
like high scores and lives. Console games then grew out of this foundation
with Atari and Sega owing much of their console success to their arcade ports
and the NES's library being packed with games which
emulated many aspects of popular arcade titles of the era.
PC games however were quick to embrace complexity.
Text adventures like Zork gave players a staggering amount of freedom in their
text inputs while mods did similar while adding in
other human players as well. 1980s genre pioneer Rogue
offered a huge randomly generated world for players to progress through.
Groundbreaking RPGs like 1981's Wizardry or
Ultima provided deep dungeon-crawling overworld
spanning adventures with plenty of statistics, classes and items.
In many of these titles gameplay seemed to take a backseat
to trying to simulate a rich virtual world for players to become immersed in.
Many of these games were still highly challenging
but less emphasis was placed on constant fail states
and replayability with difficulty instead often coming from
depth and low fidelity visuals be they text,
ASCII or spreadsheet were often embraced as a way to provide greater freedom
and maybe as a way for programmers to avoid learning to draw
or hiring artists. In time many of these differentiators would become less clear
as the borders between PC and console would gradually erode
with Japanese role-playing games being an obvious example of
cross-pollination but this process occurred slowly
and many of these same differences between computer games
and their console cousins are still evident today.
Still as the 80s evolved so too did the home computer
with systems becoming more affordable amidst rising competition.
It seems everybody is interested now in home computers
well so far home computers are just a fraction
a small fraction of those being sold in the United States
but because our technology is growing by leaps and bounds
computers can help us with a lot of household items
for grown-ups as well as for the kids. The next generation of computers would
include the ZX series from Sinclair, NEC's PC series,
the Atari 8-bit family, the BBC Micro and the Amstrad CPC.
The best selling of these was the Commodore 64
which released just under $600 and holds the world record as the highest
selling single computer model of all time.
At the same time as this computing heavyweight IBM
launched their now iconic personal computer series
popularizing the term PC. These came with Microsoft's DOS operating
system and supported open software development for the first time.
Before this all home computers were incompatible systems
meaning all programs had to be ported to specific systems
to meet the individual hardware requirements of each one.
The IBM PC and its many subsequent clones
instead allowed software to be ported much more easily
which ultimately greatly benefited game development.
Hardware wasn't the only thing improving in this period though.
By the mid-80s PC games were also making impressive strides.
1984's King Quest from Sierra showed the evolution of the graphic adventure
genre with an animated protagonist and interactive world.
Space Sim Elite broke new ground by adding advanced 3D graphics
and action gameplay into an incredibly deep and open space sandbox.
Ultima 4 in 1985 set a new standard for role-playing games
by moving them beyond their established dungeon crawler formula
with a more expansive world, a richer more nuanced story
and a new moral choice-driven approach to game design.
1987's Dungeon Master on the other hand evolved the dungeon crawler
into the realm of 3D with added real-time combat elements.
The 80s also saw the merging of entertainment and education
in several fondly remembered edutainment games.
The 1985 version of the Oregon Trail taught children history
as well as the dangers of dysentery, typhoid and rivers.
While the also released in 1985 where in the world is Carmen San Diego
taught geography and the dangers of art theft.
Of course the Oregon Trail was also an enjoyable strategy game
with genuine emergent storytelling and rogue-like random generation
years before rogue even existed and where in the world is Carmen San Diego
was a very well made adventure game with strong replayability.
In some ways the educational elements of such games were light
but that didn't stop them showing up in thousands of schools
tricking children into learning or tricking teachers
into letting children play games during school depending on your perspective.
Ultimately edutainment computer games were a trend which
didn't really catch on but they still serve as a valuable reminder
of a time when gaming was in its infancy and developers were exploring
novel applications of this new exciting medium.
By the end of the 80s the era of bedroom coders
was coming to a close with husband and wife duos and pioneering teenagers
soon being replaced or going on to found legitimate development teams
with professional work environments. One such company, Electronic Arts, would
see a major breakthrough within 1988 John Madden Football
a game which would not only kick off one of the industry's largest sports
series but also showed the more mainstream direction
PC games were now heading in. 1988 also saw the release of
Pool of Radiance the first in a long line of Gold Box Dungeons and Dragons
RPGs where after years of video games taking
inspiration from D&D they were now finally starting to make that
relationship official. With home computers continuing to
become more affordable PC gaming ended the decade in a promising
place. Its early years should perhaps best be
remembered as a time of innovation and enthusiasm.
The computer gaming market started small. Popularity was created through word of
mouth and sharing between friends. Creators enjoyed unprecedented levels
of creative freedom and monetization was often a distant
afterthought. Yet many of the games produced from this
era were just as impressive as their console and arcade rivals
albeit often in very different ways. Regardless the impact of these games on
the industry was considerable and gaming wasn't the only thing
they impacted. In a time where the personal computer
was a brand new invention computer games also played a significant role
in showcasing just what this new piece of technology could do
and in popularizing the idea that a computer could be more than just a
machine for work. And so even if the history of computer
games stands somewhat separate to the rest of the industry
it still played a vital role and its importance would only grow
as the years went by.
Gaming's early years were tumultuous with lawsuits bankruptcy and corporate
takeovers coming alongside innovations and breakthroughs
all while technology progressed at breakneck speeds
leaving both software and hardware behind
after only a few years. Within this chaos the video game industry
rose fell rose fell and then finally rose again
and each time there was a connection to the quality of the games.
First with the novelty of Pong before the industry got smothered in an
abundance of Pong clones then with the golden age of the arcade
and Atari's move to bring that golden age to consoles
before a massive low quality cheaply produced games once more sunk Atari
and much of the industry with them and then finally with Nintendo
bringing new life to the industry with their higher standard of quality
and groundbreaking flagship series. The evolution of the gaming industry
wasn't exactly smooth but by the end of the 80s
video games had come a long way. In 1972 there was Pong. In 1989
Prince of Persia on the Apple II used rotoscoping technology to reduce
smooth true-to-life animations. Shadow of the Beast on the Amiga combined
detailed sprite work with parallax scrolling
to create stunning backgrounds. Final fight on arcades
up the level of detail and the amount of things on screen at once
to seriously impressive levels and even on consoles
the new generation of 16-bit systems was starting to really show what those 16
bits could do with games like Golden Axe providing much
better visuals than was seen in the last generation
and it wasn't just graphics. On the NES developers experience with
designing games and their familiarity with the system
was also showing dividends. Take the opening of the famously difficult
action platformer Ninja Gaiden.
Sound, visuals and cinematic style are all combined masterfully here to create
some really compelling storytelling that draws players in and contextualizes
what you actually do in game and it does all this in less than a minute.
Meanwhile on PC games like the City Builder
SimCity or God Game Populous for once more treading new ground and creating
new genres that challenged how people thought about video games.
Still if you really want to see how far games have come
no single title illustrated it better than the latest entry in Nintendo's
most iconic series.
Widely considered one of the greatest games ever made
and as close to perfect as a sequel can be
Super Mario Bros 3 is the pinnacle of the NES library
and it still holds up all these years later.
Where some NES sequels went in bold new directions
not always with the best results the third game in the Super Mario series
instead takes everything which worked about the first title
and does it bigger and better. From the new overworld to multiple new power-ups
new enemies larger levels enhanced visuals an expanded moveset
multiplayer and a much longer runtime it was a game which did quite a bit to
impress but what shined brightest of all was its
creative level design. Every world had its own theme
every stage felt distinct and new things were introduced constantly
with the player never quite sure what to expect next.
Somehow in just three years since the first game
the team behind Super Mario Bros 3 worked out how to make the perfect 2D
Mario game and then they did it. Games had come a long way
but in the grand scheme of things they were just getting started
and the next decade would bring even more progress
more change and more drama.
By the start of the 90s the gaming industry was well and truly established.
With the launch of the Game Boy Nintendo had cemented their status as the
market leader but the aging Nintendo entertainment system
was now facing tough competition from Sega's next generation Genesis
setting the stage for one of gaming's most legendary rivalries.
Meanwhile the increasing affordability of the personal computer
was making PC games a more serious part of the industry
while gaming itself was moving ever towards the mainstream
with bigger budgets bigger names and bigger controversies.
Overall though the 90s was a time of rapid technological progress.
A bit of a decade the 8-bit NES a third generation console
was the best selling on the market yet by the decades close
consoles were entering their sixth generation with 128 bits of computing
power inside much more advanced systems. Graphics
would transition from 2D sprites and pixel based
to the brave new three-dimensional world of polygons.
Cartridges were replaced by the much higher capacity CD-ROM.
Multiple new genres of games emerged including the most popular of all time.
Massive franchises were established including the most successful of all
time and game design experienced its own evolution
as developers raced to keep up with the continually changing times.
Before all this however the decade began with action
and while the fighting between consoles might be what's most remembered
about the 90s arcades also had some important fighting of their own to do
first.
Arcade growth came to a stop following the crash of 1983
but arcades still made up a large part of the market afterwards
and they still continue to offer the definitive video game experience by way
of graphics and immersion for those who had the quarters to play.
By the start of the 16-bit era however their technological edge was narrowing
and even arcade heavyweight sega had started to move away from marketing
itself as the company that brought the arcade experience home
due to the perception of arcades losing relevance within the industry.
Most people probably expected the 90s to be the decade where arcade games
quietly disappeared and maybe that would have happened
if not for the arrival of one game that changed everything.
Street Fighter 2 wasn't technically the first fighting game
but you'd be forgiven for thinking it was. Reaching arcades in 1991 it
represented a massive evolution from Capcom's 1987 predecessor
and brought many of the staples people have come to expect from the genre
including combo mechanics, precise joystick controls
and a focus on face-to-face player versus player action.
Before Street Fighter 2 competitive video games were about
high scores and so the competition was indirect
but Street Fighter 2 allowed players to go head-to-head
making competition more active, exciting and genuine.
This was a major step for gaming and paved the way for the concept of death
matches as well as more serious competitive tournaments
and games as a form of esports. For arcades though fighting games was
simply a match made in heaven and they instantly brought new life to the scene.
The social nature of arcades was a perfect fit for a genre that was about
being the best and winning in style and the popularity of Street Fighter was
explosive causing a significant resurgence in arcades
before soon going on to be one of the highest selling console games of the
next generation and leaving an immediate impact on pop culture.
Street Fighter 2 was soon met with competition itself
first from SNK's Fatal Fury in late 91 then from Midway's
infamously violent Mortal Kombat in 92 before arcades once more cemented
themselves as the leaders of video game technology
with the cutting-edge 3D of Virtua Fighter from Sega in 93
and Namco's Tekken in 94 with a whole host of other smaller names
springing up along the way. For a time fighting games were the hottest
genre in gaming and they made a lot of money in the process
with Electronic Gaming Monthly reporting that in Japan
fighting games accounted for 80% of all gaming sales
in 1996. Other important advancements in arcades
came from the move to 3D technology which preceded the jump to 3D seen in the
next generation of consoles and was in large part the result of a rivalry
between Sega and Namco. This can be seen in Virtua Fighter and Tekken
as well as a number of notable racing and light gun games
including Virtua Racing, Daytona USA, Virtua Cop and House of the Dead from Sega
and Ridge Racer, Point Blank and Time Crisis from Namco.
Konami's highly original rhythm-based Dance Dance Revolution
in 1998 also proved highly influential. Still while arcades might have seen a
renaissance in the early and mid 90s this was ultimately only
enough to delay the inevitable and as the decade grew to a close
amidst a surging console market arcades once more entered into a period of
decline as the era of the arcade gradually came to an end.
Today arcades mostly exist as a nostalgic relic of the past
but their importance on gaming history was enormous.
For years arcades were the largest and most technologically advanced section of
the industry and in addition to producing many of gaming's greatest
titles they also left an enduring impact on gaming culture.
Still while arcades might have kicked off the decade's action
it would be consoles that would take the fighting to a whole other level.
Sega Shot First
In addition to beating Nintendo out the gates in entering the fourth generation
Sega was also responsible for making things personal by deliberately
targeting Nintendo in their marketing.
Conventional wisdom might suggest that naming and by extension giving publicity
to your main competitor in your own marketing
isn't the best strategy yet conventional wisdom
isn't always correct. Genesis does may be the most famous gaming commercial of
all time and it exemplified the spirit of the fourth generation.
Taking shots at Nintendo wasn't the only part of Sega of America's grand
strategy however they also sought to create a
strong library of unique games which would appeal to western audiences
and help make the Genesis stand out. Early examples of this can be seen with
Michael Jackson's Moonwalker and several celebrity-induced sports games
like Joe Montana Football or Pat Riley Basketball.
These still didn't provide Sega with a true system salary needed though
and to make matters worse their head start only lasted so long
as in November of 1990 Nintendo's much anticipated 16-bit system finally
launched in Japan alongside the latest entry of one of gaming's now most
iconic series Super Mario World. In a head-to-head
comparison there wasn't a lot to differentiate the two competing pieces
of hardware. The Genesis did have an advantage in
pure CPU power but the Super Nintendo boasted more RAM,
better sound quality, more on-screen colors and more detailed sprites.
The systems were also similarly priced meaning it was games that would be the
ultimate deciding factor and it was here that Sega was about
to make their most important play yet. Mario had launched Nintendo into the
home console market and was seen as central to Nintendo's success
so Sega decided they needed their own Mario.
Work on the character design started all the way back in 1988
and went through multiple revisions with Sega Japan and Sega America working
together and often disagreeing over the direction.
Central to the design was the decision to emphasize speed
and to appeal to Western audiences with designer Naoto Oshima
even going to New York to ask locals in Central Park their opinion on the design
which ultimately led to a blue hedgehog by the name
of Sonic. The emphasis on speed carried over to game design
with the team wanting Sonic's default speed to be equal to Mario's running
speed and for his running speed to be a great deal
faster. This led to many animation and frame rate
problems but the team stuck with the idea
not wanting to compromise their desire for players to go fast.
Levels were then designed to be large and non-linear to take advantage of the
main character's enhanced movement while also once again being seen as a
straight upgrade to the levels seen in Mario.
Finally vibrant colors and a laid-back soundtrack were used to give the game a
strong sense of identity and in summer 1991
the project was complete with Sonic the Hedgehog
releasing worldwide about two months before the North American release of
the Super Nintendo and so at long last Sega had their killer app.
Gotta go. Hey guy you're the first serious gamer I've seen all morning check
this out brand new 16-bit Super Nintendo in Super Mario World!
Wow! What's this one? Oh this is a Sonic the Hedgehog from Sega Genesis.
Look at these radical colors huh? Wow Sonic's fast too.
Over here! I like Genesis and it costs a lot less.
Look here! I'll take Sonic and Genesis.
Sonic was an immediate success and with it the Genesis outsold the Super
Nintendo 2 to 1 in the 1991 US holiday season
with Sega taking a 65% share of the 16-bit market.
Meanwhile in Europe Sega performed even better as the Super Nintendo
wouldn't see an EU release until mid 1992.
This was one of the major differences between Nintendo and Sega at the time
as while Sega were pioneering the idea of a global release for systems
and software Nintendo were by contrast much slower
at bringing their products to other markets. In the end
this paid off for Sega and allowed them to take a clear lead over their rival
for the very first time and this wasn't the only advantage
Sega now had. Their greatest weakness in the last generation
third-party support would no longer be a problem after Sega
entered the market early and offered publishers much more favorable license
in terms than Nintendo. They also worked hard to stay on top of
hardware developments releasing the Sega CD or Mega CD in 1992
as an add-on for the Genesis. The Sega CD wasn't cheap and its sales
numbers were relatively modest but it did offer a more high-end
product to those who wanted it and the new CD technology provided much
greater storage capacity allowing for more detailed audio
and entirely new types of games like Bose focused on full motion video.
Lastly Sega also didn't slow down with their aggressive marketing.
The Sega Genesis has blast processing. Super Nintendo
doesn't. So what's blast processing do?
And uh what if you don't have blast processing?
It is debatable whether blast processing is even real
but one thing everyone can agree on is that the Super Nintendo
doesn't have it. I mean sure technically the Super Nintendo was the more
advanced system but technically the Genesis did have
faster processing so Sega made sure that's what they focused on
and it worked. Still even if Nintendo didn't have blast
processing there was something they did have
which some might even say is more important. Games. The Legend of Zelda
a link to the past released in America in 1992
and did for Zelda what Super Mario Bros 3 did for Mario.
As a near perfect sequel and one of the best games of the 16-bit era
a link to the past expanded the overworld, expanded links moveset,
expanded the dungeon design and then added an entire
parallel dark world for the player to travel between that was similar and
yet completely different to the world they knew.
The result was a landmark action adventure game that set a standard for
2D Zelda still not surpassed to this day and Nintendo didn't stop there.
Sequels were expected but Nintendo had new ideas too
and they still had one of the best people around for the job.
Shigeru Miyamoto worked on several of the Super Nintendo's early first party
titles including the new futuristic racing game F-Zero
and the technologically groundbreaking rail shooter Star Fox,
the first Nintendo game to feature polygonal graphics
through the use of an additional graphics chip included in the game's cartridge.
Released in early 93 Star Fox went on to become one of the console's best-selling
games although it was still surpassed by another new
Nintendo franchise, 1992's Super Mario Kart which
brought Mario and friends into the world of kart racing
kicking off their own subgenre in the process.
Still Nintendo weren't the only one making good games.
Sega may have courted many third-party publishers but some of the most
important stayed loyal to Nintendo and brought a number of impressive sequels with them.
Square released Final Fantasy 4 known then as 2
outside Japan, Enix released Dragon Quest V which sold millions of copies
even as a Japan-only title, Konami released Super Castlevania 4
allowing players to once more take the fight to Dracula
but most important of all was Capcom who were at the time holding the rights to
the hottest game in the world, Street Fighter 2.
And while this game would eventually find its way to both systems
it still came to the Super NES first giving Nintendo
a head start of more than a year on what would go on to be the best-selling
third-party title of the generation and with Street Fighter
Nintendo had the edge they needed. Holiday season 1992 and this time Nintendo
was selling more systems allowing them to climb back into first
place in 93. Sega weren't done yet though and the
battle was about to get even messier. Wasting no time after the success of
their new best-selling game of all time Sega released the sequel to Sonic in late
92 featuring even faster gameplay alongside
reoccurring series Sidekick Tales but it was their more adult titles that
would truly define the next year. Two major features of this era of console
warfare were the idea that Sega had the more mature system and games
than the family-friendly Nintendo and debates over which version of specific
games were better. These days exclusives are what people
most remember but plenty of titles came to both systems
sometimes with completely different variants kicking off endless arguments
between fans over which system had the superior version
Contra 3 Alien Wars vs Contra Hardcore
Super Castlevania vs Castlevania Bloodlines
Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles Turtles in Time vs Teenage Mutant Ninja Turtles
The Hyperstone Heist and on it went. Sometimes two competing titles would be
pretty much identical but there were other times when there were big
differences and clear winners and losers. For example with Street Fighter 2
the Super Nintendo was king with not only a year head start but also a more
suitable controller that had four face buttons alongside two shoulder buttons
compared to just three face buttons on the original Genesis controller.
Other times though the Genesis reigned supreme like with 1993's Aladdin
where the Genesis version was aided by real Disney animators
and went on to be one of the system's best-selling games.
And then there was Mortal Kombat a game which combined
arguments over Sega's more adult nature and arguments over which system had the
superior version and ended with Sega and Nintendo
sitting in front of a US congressional hearing on the dangers
of violence in video games.
Violence and violent images permeate more and more aspects of our lives
and I think it's time to draw the line. I know that one place
parents want us to draw the line is with violence in video games. The fact is that
a new generation of video games crosses that line containing the most
horrible depictions of graphic violence and sex
including particularly violence against women.
You see much like Street Fighter before it Mortal Kombat was a big success
but its graphic depictions of violence and brutal post-victory fatalities
attracted more attention than from just players kicking off a media frenzy
and national conversation on the role of violence in video games.
When Mortal Kombat made its way from arcades to consoles
Nintendo opted to tone down the violence by removing the blood effects
but Sega instead left them in as an unlockable option
making the Genesis version the most desirable.
Knowing that controversy might be on its way
Sega created their own internal rating system ahead of Mortal Kombat's console
release but this didn't prove to be enough
and by the end of 1993 the national conversation on video game violence
had reached US Congress with both Sega and Nintendo
being called up to answer some difficult questions.
A number of advocacy groups and senators spoke on the issue
presenting a united front while focusing heavily on Mortal Kombat
and the strange Sega CD-FMB game Night Trap
and claiming that there had been a systemic failure of the gaming industry
to police itself. When it came to those speaking in favor of the gaming industry
however those present were anything but united
with Nintendo getting the chance to speak first
and wasting no time in putting the blame squarely on Sega's lack of internal policy.
In the past years some very violent and offensive games have reached the market
and of course I'm speaking about Mortal Kombat and Night Trap
and let me say that for the record I want to state that Night Trap will never
appear on a Nintendo system. Obviously it would not pass our guidelines.
This game which as you've indicated promotes violence against women
simply has no place in our society. Meanwhile Sega began by defending
itself in the way that Sega fans at the time defended their favorite gaming
system on school playgrounds i.e. by reminding those in attendance
that the Genesis unlike its competition wasn't made for kids.
In recent days the glare of the media spotlight on this issue
has resulted in the circulation of a number of distorted and inaccurate claims.
The most damaging of these distortions in my view
is the notion that Sega are only in the business of selling games to children.
This is not the case. Sega also highlighted their new rating system
but this received a lot of pushback including from Nintendo's representative
who seemed much more interested in attacking Sega
than defending the gaming industry. Let me make it just a couple of other
points. I can't sit here and allow you to be told
that somehow the video game business has been transformed today
from children to adults. It hasn't been and Mr. White who is a former Nintendo
employee knows the demographics as well as I do.
Furthermore I can't let you sit here and by this nonsense that this
Sega Night Trap game was somehow only meant for adults. The fact of the
matter is this is a copy of the packaging.
There was no rating on this game at all when the game was introduced.
Small children bought this at Toys R Us and he knows that as well as I do.
Ultimately the senators seemed unimpressed by gaming's great console war
and decided to treat Sega and Nintendo in much the same way that a teacher
might treat two squabbling children. By giving them both a slap on the wrist
and telling them they better start working together to make things right.
So gaming's fiercest rivals came together with other representatives from
the industry to create the Interactive Digital
Software Association which soon led to the creation of the
Entertainment Software Rating Board or ESRB who would produce a unified set of
age ratings for all commercial video games that retailers would then opt into
enforcing. Something that has since become common
practice across many different regions.
In the congressional hearing Sega came under the heaviest attack
and following public outcry many retailers pulled the controversial
night trap from their shelves. However when it came to actual video game
players this didn't seem to damage Sega's reputation at all
and instead helped cement their status as the cooler more mature gaming company
ultimately leading to sales going up. Holiday season 1993 and Sega came out
on top retaking the overall lead in 94 with 55 percent of the market.
By 1994 Sega and Nintendo weren't the only ones dealing with controversy
though as in the world of the personal computer
another violent video game was exploding in popularity
and leaving its own mark on gaming history.
In the early 90s consoles might have received the most attention
and made the most money but PC was still the place to be
the innovation and it saw a number of big releases of its own.
LucasArts 1990 pirate themed The Secret of Monkey Island
set a new standard for the graphical adventure genre with its user-friendly
interface sharp comedic writing and a more open game design but removed any
sort of fail state and ensured players could never be locked out of puzzles or
the means to progress the game. In 1991 Sidmir's
civilization popularized the 4x genre of strategy games
where you explored expanded exploited and exterminated your opposition
while guiding a human civilization over the course of several millennia
a concept that proved as expansive and original
as it was addictive. Delphine software's strikingly cinematic
action adventure game Another World also released that year
leaving a lasting impression on many who played it.
Featuring a scientist fighting for survival on an alien planet
it placed a heavy emphasis on presentation and told its story
entirely without dialogue creating a game that felt years ahead of its time
and would influence a number of important future titles including
Ico, Metal Gear Solid and Silent Hill. In 1992 Westwood Studios created the
first real-time strategy game with Dune 2 combining resource gathering
base building and small-scale warfare into an addictive new formula.
Dune 2 would be followed by Blizzard Entertainment's Warcraft Orcs and
Humans in 1994 and Westwood's Alternative History
Command and Conquer in 1995 which together established the RTS as an
important genre within gaming. 92 also saw the birth of the survival
horror genre with infograms alone in the dark.
A game that went beyond embracing horror as an aesthetic
by deliberately disempowering the player to heighten the tension
and create a sense of dread. Its haunted mansion setting and cinematic
camera would also greatly influence future titles of the genre.
Meanwhile in the world of role-playing games the Ultima series continued strongly
with its highly acclaimed seventh entry The Black Gate
but it was a spin-off from the main series that proved to be the most
innovative RPG that year. Looking Glass Studios Ultima Underworld
was the first role-playing game to feature first-person action in a 3D
environment. Described as a dungeon simulation by its
creators, Ultima Underworld combined the dungeon
crawling of genre grandfathers like Wizardry with cutting-edge action
gameplay and environmental design to create a brand new type of action
RPG that would pave the way for the immersive sim genre and many future
titles. 1993 also saw the release of the visually
stunning graphic adventure game Mist from Cyan Inc.
which took full advantage of the vastly expanded storage capacity
of Benoo CD-ROM to create its iconic picturesque 3D island while helping to
popularize the adoption of CD drivers in the process.
Mist's puzzle-solving gameplay was quite slow but its graphics were far beyond
anything else at the time leading it to become one of the best-selling PC
games of all time. Finally in 1994, Mythos Games sci-fi
strategy game XCOM UFO Defense combined turn-based tactical
battles with real-time management to create a surprisingly deep
earth defense simulation unlike any other game before it.
While Origin System's ambitious latest entry into the Space Combat
Wing Commander series included extensive live action FMV cutscenes
that featured big Hollywood names like Mark Hamill and Malcolm McDowell
represent in a major step of PC gaming towards the mainstream.
Still as important as each of these games were none of them are what the early
90s are best remembered for. For that we need to go back to the start
of the decade where a small group of 20-something year old
developers were working for software company Softisk in an office
in Shreveport, Louisiana. It was here that 20-year-old
university dropout John Carmack was thinking about a well-known problem
in PC game development. How to achieve side-scrolling graphics
on a computer. You see while computers were powerful
in certain ways they weren't designed specifically for gaming
meaning there were some things consoles were just better at
like allowing for faster refresh rates. This meant PC struggled to redraw an
entire screen at the same speed as a console making the iconic side-scrolling
seen in so many of the most popular video games
impossible until Carmack had an idea why redraw everything on screen
when you could instead only redraw the parts that actually change.
This became known as adaptive tile refresh and with it
Carmack was about to change the world of PC gaming.
First Carmack and friends recreated Super Mario Bros 3
step by step something people thought couldn't be done
on PC. They then sent the end result to Nintendo
who were admittedly impressed but told them they didn't want Nintendo games
on anything except Nintendo hardware meaning all their hard work
had been for nothing. So next they decided to make their own
game instead. With no corporate backing or funding
they decided to team up with shareware distributor Apogee Software
to create the side-scrolling platformer Commander Keen.
It was completed in just a few months and saw great success through the shareware
model. Then once the first royalty check arrived
John Carmack, John Romero, Adrian Carmack and Tom Hall
decided to quit their jobs at Softisk to found their own company
id Software. Carmack soon turned his attention to
gaming's new frontier 3D and once more encountered a similar
problem to before which was that computers of the time
were just too slow to allow for fast action in 3D environments.
id Software continued to create more shareware distributor games
while experimenting with 3D which allowed Carmack to iterate on his new 3D
engine by restricting the viewpoint to increase speed
using sprites and texture mapping to save space and so on.
The end result was Wolfenstein 3D which released in summer 1992 and allowed
players to mow down hordes of Nazis from a first person
perspective in 3D environments. Wolfenstein was the first true first
person shooter and its fast pace and smooth action
made it hugely successful but it would soon be overshadowed
by an even more impressive game.
Released in late 1993 Doom was a game which changed gaming.
Bigger, faster and more violent than Wolfenstein with visuals that looked years
ahead of its predecessor Doom was an instant classic.
For years there was no FPS genre there were only Doom clones.
It invented the deathmatch while helping to pioneer the concept of networked
multiplayer. It spawned one of the most active mod
scenes of all time while greatly popularizing the concept of modding
and it was estimated that by late 1995 it was installed on more computers
worldwide than Microsoft's latest Windows operating system.
Doom was a gaming phenomenon and it only achieved that level of success
because underneath its demon-infested exterior and innovative technology
was a really well made game that used fast action
varied enemy encounters and complex level design full of secrets
to create a formula that still holds up all these years later.
Doom also served as a perfect representation of what made PC gaming
so different to consoles in the early 90s. While Sega was desperately trying to
market itself as the mature alternative to Nintendo
games like Doom were providing a genuine mature alternative
without even really meaning to and while consoles were embroiled in a clash
of corporate giants and spending tens of millions on marketing every year
Doom was self-published, distributed through shareware
and made by initially just five guys with two more coming on to help near the
end. And despite this humble background
it was still the most impressive 3d game the industry had ever seen
and it helped to create the most successful genre in gaming.
There have been independent games that have been phenomenally successful since
Doom but it is truly rare for an independent game
to be so successful while also being technologically
years ahead of its competition. The shareware distribution model can
also be seen as a forerunner to digital distribution.
It worked by offering part of the game as a free trial that anyone could download
and play and then asking players to pay to purchase the rest.
With no retailer or possibly publisher it meant games sold this way had much more
limited reach but the lack of any middlemen also
meant lower prices for consumers and a larger cut of revenue for the developer.
And so it should come as no surprise then but Doom's success
quickly turned its creators into multi-millionaires.
Six months after Doom's release John Carmack owned two
Ferraris. He was 23 years old at the time.
Its software would follow Doom with a sequel in 1994
before creating an even more powerful engine to reduce their fully 3d Doom
successor Quake in 1996 which took multiplayer to
soaring new heights with far more modes and built in 16 player
online capability. Quake was another big hit and with it
the era of online first-person shooter domination had arrived.
But for consoles the mid 90s would also bring the next generation of systems
and it didn't exactly play out as most people expected.
1994 was a big year for the gaming industry but its start was still dominated
by the rivalry between Sega and Nintendo and the fallout from the
violent video game debate. Sega had now edged back into the lead
and this period would see several of the Genesis best exclusive titles
such as the beat em up classic Streets of Rage 2,
the side-scrolling platformer Rocket Knight Adventure
and the action-packed running and gunning Gunstar Heroes.
1994 would also see the release of not one but two new entries into Sega's
hottest series after Sonic 3 became so large during development
that it could no longer fit into a single cartridge causing it to be split
into Sonic 3 and the separate Sonic and Knuckles.
Nintendo had plenty of games of their own however. 1993's Super Mario All-Stars
remade the first three entries into the Super Mario Bros series with Super Nintendo level graphics
and is noticeable as not only one of the system's best-selling titles
but also one of the first examples of a massively successful video game remake.
In 1994 Nintendo would raise one of the Super Nintendo's most highly acclaimed titles with
Super Metroid which upgraded the formula of the original game
while retaining its rich sci-fi atmosphere and focus on exploration.
Still, Nintendo's biggest game that year came at the hands of another developer.
Due to concerns about falling behind Sega, Nintendo began looking for other studios
to bring on board, leading them to approach the UK-based Studio Rare
who had impressed them with their latest 3D model rendering technology.
Nintendo suggested they use these pre-rendered graphics to make a platformer
and gave them permission to use one of their oldest IPs to do it.
Even before Donkey Kong Country released in late 1994,
its unique visual style brought it a lot of attention
and convinced Nintendo to heavily back it with a generous marketing campaign.
Even so, the game still exceeded expectations, setting the record for the fastest-selling game
of all time and going on to become the third best-selling game on the system.
It also wowed critics, impressing with its creative level design and timeless soundtrack
in addition to the striking visuals.
Donkey Kong Country was the edge Nintendo needed to pull back into the lead
following a strong holiday season in 1994, but while high-quality new titles
ensured the Super Nintendo was still going strong,
by this point Sega was starting to turn their attention to future systems.
The fifth console generation started early and saw heavy competition.
The 3DO released in America in late 1993 and boasted some seriously impressive technical
specifications, becoming the first system to fully take advantage of new CD-ROM technology.
It also launched with a retail price of $700, which is $1,400 after inflation and struggled
to build a library of solid exclusives, meaning it ultimately struggled to compete with later,
better-known systems despite its strong launch.
And as for those later systems, two would go head-to-head in Japan in late 1994,
but this time, Nintendo wouldn't be one of them.
Sega began work on the next system early after realizing the importance of CD-ROMs
and having had promising results with 3D technology in arcades.
At the same time as this, they tried to maintain support for the Genesis by creating a second add-on
in addition to the Sega CD called the 32X that would bridge the gap between the two generations
and offer a cheaper entry into the 32-bit era.
Unfortunately, Sega struggled to produce enough games for either the Sega CD or the 32X to
really justify their high costs, meaning both pieces of hardware ended up as commercial failures
and might have damaged Sega's reputation with fans who did buy these add-ons due to their
perceived lack of support. Still, it was the next generation where the battle would truly be decided
and so Sega went all out on developing a new system that could meet their lofty expectations.
While Sega was working on a 32-bit system of their own, however, a new entrant into the
video game scene was doing the same and getting ready to change the console landscape forever more.
Sony was an electronics company founded after World War II and best known for their music
products like the Sony Walkman. Their first foray into gaming hadn't turned out very well.
A joint venture with Nintendo led to them producing the sound chip used in the Super Nintendo,
but they also worked with Nintendo on a CD-ROM add-on for the system. Before it could be completed,
however, Nintendo got cold feet over how much control the terms of the deal gave Sony and instead
went to negotiate a more favorable deal with Sony's main rival, Philips. Not knowing this,
Sony went on to announce their Super Nintendo add-on at the Consumer Electronics Show in 1991.
It was called the PlayStation, and the very next day, Nintendo got up on stage themselves
and announced their new partnership with Philips, declaring the PlayStation dead in the process.
For Sony, this was a serious blow and an even more serious betrayal,
something not taken lightly in Japan's honor-based business culture.
They responded by severing all ties with Nintendo, with many executives at Sony wanting
to end all activity connected to the gaming industry, which they had come to view as too
close to the toy industry to fit with Sony's established brand, in addition to being apparently
highly unreliable. Ken Kutaragi, the man in charge of the PlayStation's development,
wanted the opposite, however. Kutaragi was confident in his technology and proposed Sony
go it alone and create a standalone console, while using the company's poor treatment from
Nintendo to support his argument for why they shouldn't give up on the idea.
In the end, Kutaragi got his way, but he still had a problem. Not only was developing their own
system considerably risky, but Sony also had no actual experience in game development.
In the past, consoles had lived and died on the strength of their first party support,
which for Sony didn't even exist. So, not knowing anything about game development,
the team decided to stick with what they did know, hardware and business.
To this end, they designed the system from the ground up with a focus on 3D polygon graphics
and also set out to secure their desperately needed third party support.
To do this, they formed partnerships with established Japanese developers like Namco and
Konami, while purchasing the UK-based Cygnosis, who were best known for their widely popular puzzle
game Lemmings. This gave Sony their first in-house team, and it was through this that they would
stumble into their big break. Developers at Cygnosis found the current workstation-based
development kits to be overly expensive and impractical, and so they persuaded Sony to
instead use a PC-based development system, thus marking a major turning point for the
console industry, which had largely ignored PCs until then.
PC-based development was not only cheaper and more efficient, it also streamlined the process
for third parties, while making porting games between PC and Sony's new system much easier
than before, something which proved crucial in allowing Sony to compete with their more established
rivals. As the console neared completion, Sony decided to break from the tradition of using
the company's name in the title of the system due to upper management's fear that failure could
damage the company's brand, and so the console would keep its original name. And in December 1994,
the PlayStation launched in Japan, just one week after release of another new console,
the Sega Saturn.
The two systems were similarly priced,
and offered similar performance, but it was Sega who proved to be the early favorite,
thanks in large part to the hugely popular Virtua Fighter, which sold at a near one-to-one
ratio with the Saturn at release. For the PlayStation, it was Sega's big arcade rival Namco
that would be the console's most important developer in its first year, with Ridge Racer
proving the most successful launch title and Tekken soon following to give the PlayStation
a 3D fighting game of its own. Still, exclusives wouldn't be the most important factor in the
new system's first years. As both systems prepared for their global release, both companies came up
with a plan to give them the edge over the other, which they would reveal at the first-ever Electronic
Entertainment Expo in 1995, where 40,000 eager attendees packed the Los Angeles Convention Center
to get a glimpse of the next generation of gaming. Sega went first and took to the stage
to announce that, due to high consumer demand, the Saturn would release immediately, that very day,
at select retailers. This was four months before the expected September release date,
and Sega hoped this headstart would give them the advantage. Unfortunately for them, however,
other retailers responded to this surprise announcement very negatively, with KB toys
even dropping Sega from its lineup, and the early release also left the Saturn's launch lineup
rather light on games. Things quickly went from bad to worse, though, because Sony followed with
a surprise announcement of their own, which came when SCE President of America, Steve Race, took
to the stage to give one of gaming's all-time greatest speeches.
$299 was $100 less than the Saturn, meaning the systems were no longer similarly priced,
and it turned out that while Sega's gamble backfired, Sony's instead paid off.
The PlayStation released on the 9th of September 1995. Two days later, it had sold more units than
the Saturn had in the last four months. The PlayStation's launch was huge, and what's more,
their easier-to-develop for system was about to start proving its worth, as a number of former
PC developers soon started releasing games for Sony's new console. Notable examples include
Platformer Rayman from Ubisoft in 95, Naughty Dog's soon-to-be-iconic Crash Bandicoot in 96,
which gave the PlayStation its first real mascot, and Tomb Raider from Core Design,
a graphically impressive action-adventure game featuring one of gaming's most recognisable
female leads. 96 also saw the release of another landmark PlayStation title from Capcom with
Resident Evil, which may be the single most influential survival horror game of all time.
All of these titles were big commercial hits, with Resident Evil, Crash Bandicoot,
and Tomb Raider each going on to sell over 5 million copies.
The Saturn did have games of its own, with several high-quality arcade ports, alongside some strong
new first-party titles like Night's Into Dreams and Panzer Jagoons. Sony, however, increasingly
seemed to have the rest of the gaming industry on their side, and in time, Sony's initial victory
would turn into a slaughter. For years, Sega tried to set themselves apart from Nintendo
by appealing to an older demographic and marketing their system as the more mature option,
but now Sony was doing the same, and beating Sega at their own game.
In 96, Sega responded to the growing pressure with the release of the Saturn Model 2,
which aimed to lower the retail price and cost of manufacturing. Sony, however,
replied by cutting the price of the PlayStation to $199, ensuring their lead just kept growing.
For Sega, the situation was starting to look desperate, and the competition would only increase
as an old friend of theirs would soon release a console of their own.
While the fifth console generation was getting off to an explosive start, Nintendo were quietly
enjoying the Super Nintendo's finest years. After a drawn-out and tightly fought competition
with the Genesis, where Sega had often come out on top, in its later years, the supply of
new Genesis games slowed up, allowing Nintendo to finally pull comfortably ahead in a 16-bit market
that was still going surprisingly strong. This may have been partly because 1995-96
saw some of the Super Nintendo's best games. Super Mario World 2, Yoshi's Island, saw Mario
return with a stunning new art style and fresh Yoshi-focused gameplay. Rare followed up the
monstrously successful Donkey Kong Country with not one, but two more sequels that almost matched
the first in sales. And RPG fans were spoiled for choice, with the cult classic Earthbound's
idiosyncratic take on modern America offering a setting unlike anything players had seen before,
Square and Nintendo's collaborative Super Mario RPG offering a Mario game unlike anything
players had seen before, and Final Fantasy's latest entry, 6 or 3 depending on region,
providing the series' highest rated and best-selling title to date.
Lastly, there was also Chrono Trigger, which was developed by a dream team that included
the creator of the Final Fantasy series, the creator of the Dragon Quest series, and the creator of
the Dragon Ball Manga. Chrono Trigger featured a time-travelling adventure with multiple endings,
lots of reactivity, and some of the best visuals and music of a 16-bit era, and it's often considered
to be one of the best JRPGs of all time. Still, as strong as the Super Nintendo's last years were,
nothing can last forever, at least not in the always-evolving gaming industry,
and development of Nintendo's next console started as far back as early 1993.
After their development of a CD-based system failed to work out with either Sony or Philips,
Nintendo formed a new partnership with Silicon Graphics to bring their powerful
supercomputer technology to the world of consoles. The final product released in 1996,
with the name Nintendo 64 to emphasize its 64 bits of computing. But as powerful as Nintendo's
new system might have been, it was about to face heavy competition, and its main rival had a head
start alongside one other key advantage. Nintendo arrived late, but the N64 did have some things
in its favor. Nintendo's continued focus on affordability meant the system was able to match
for new prices of Saturn and PlayStation, while offering much more powerful hardware.
We've doubled the PlayStation's RAM at three times faster CPU, and a much higher polygon count
that 3D graphics of the N64 were simply a step above any of their competitors.
Nintendo also innovated with their controller by adding a thumb-controlled analog stick,
reminiscent of the joysticks of older gaming systems. The overall design might seem clunky by
today's standards, but it was an important step for the time, and analog controls greatly
complemented the move to 3D. The N64 also came with four controller ports, which was two more
than its rivals, and made it a great system for multiplayer games. Nintendo's launch lineup
initially looked less promising, with only two games available for the North American release.
This lack of games was what delayed the release to 1996, and for most consoles, two titles would
never be enough. Luckily for Nintendo, however, one of those games was capable of doing some rather
heavy lifting.
Super Mario 64 didn't just bring Nintendo's popular mascot into the realm of 3D, it also
shattered expectations for what a 3D platformer could be. Before it, games of the genre had
used fixed cameras, or just suffered from loose, imprecise controls. But using the new analog stick,
Mario was given full 360-degree movement with a detached adjustable camera and a rich array of
movement options. Levels were big and inviting, begging players to explore and experiment,
and the cartoony visual style was a great fit for showcasing the N64's high polygon count.
Basically, it was as strong a launch title as Nintendo could have asked for, but it still
wouldn't be enough. Because as impressive as the N64 and Mario were, there was one thing the
PlayStation did, which Nintendo didn't. And that was used CDs. Nintendo's console was more
powerful. It did have a higher polygon count and shorter load times, but CDs had higher capacity,
and for many developers, this was the most important factor. The best known example of this
was RPG Veteran Square, who had been a loyal ally to Nintendo and had originally begun work on
their next Final Fantasy game on the Super Nintendo. As development progressed, Square soon
realised they wanted to use pre-rendered video and backgrounds, something that would only be
possible with the larger capacity of the CD, meaning creating the game for Nintendo's new
console was no longer possible. As development continued, Square invested more and more resources
into the project, resulting in an estimated development budget of more than $14 million,
making it the most expensive game ever made at the time, and it turned out, Square's investment
paid off.
Final Fantasy VII released in 1997, and was unbelievably successful. Its use of full-motion
video and pre-rendered CG gave it a cinematic style which wowed audiences and critics alike.
Its setting and characters felt fresh and exciting in an era years before anime had found
mainstream popularity, and when most Japanese RPGs still didn't even get released outside Japan,
and its story and sense of adventure resonated with players at the time
in a way that few other games ever had. Final Fantasy VII sold over 10 million copies,
eventually going on to become the PlayStation's joint best-selling game of all time.
For Sony, it was the PlayStation's killer app, and they didn't even need to do anything to get it.
The higher capacity of CDs allowed for the use of FMV, as well as higher quality sound,
and even more realistic and detailed textures. And so, the N64 was the more powerful system,
in all ways except for the one which mattered the most. Nintendo weren't out of the competition
yet though, because there was something they could do which Sony couldn't. Make their own games.
The N64 couldn't match the PlayStation's early sales, but it still got off to a solid start,
thanks in large part to Nintendo's strong pre-established reputation, and more games
were soon on the way. At the end of 1996, Mario 64 was joined by Mario Kart 64, bringing kart racing
to the third dimension, and giving the system its second best-selling game. In 97, Nintendo continued
venue naming convention with the well-received Star Fox 64, and gave Mario Sidekick Yoshi
his own standalone title with Yoshi's Story. They also received invaluable support from the then
second-party developer Rare, who were about to give the console one of the era's most iconic games.
Goldeneye 007 single-handedly proved that first-person shooters could work on consoles,
and they could work well. Taking inspiration from Doom, but opting for a more realistic approach,
Goldeneye featured a memorable single-player campaign that did an admirable job of providing a
James Bond-like experience, complete with a rich story, varied levels and stealth elements,
but it was multiplayer that the game is best remembered for. By bringing the fun of the
deathmatch to consoles, Goldeneye proved to be a massive success, and went on to sell over 8
million copies, putting it only behind Mario 64 and Mario Kart as the system's best-selling game.
And the hits from Rare didn't stop at Goldeneye. They also gave the system a second popular
kart racer with Diddy Kong Racing, before kicking off a new critically-acclaimed platforming series
with Banjo-Kazooie, before following this with Donkey Kong's successful 3D debut in Donkey Kong 64,
and finally by providing worthy successors to both Goldeneye and Banjo-Kazooie in 2000
with Perfect Dark and Banjo 2e. Nintendo also had more important games of their own,
with two in particular going on to help define the fifth console generation.
The first would see the return of Nintendo's other flagship series and produced what may be
the most critically-acclaimed game of all time. The Legend of Zelda Ocarina of Time
released in late 1998 and made the transition to 3D while retaining the series' focus on exploration
and adventure. With intuitive combat, intricate dungeon design and a huge world full of secrets,
Ocarina of Time was a staggeringly well-made game, but what truly elevated it to one of
gaming's all-time greats was its sense of atmosphere and weight. At times, dark, somber,
and even surreal, Link's quest to the feet Ganondorf felt as epic as it was enchanting,
in a way rarely matched in the medium before or since. Nintendo also gave the world a new take
on the fighting genre in 1999 with Super Smash Bros. Featuring an all-star cast of classic Nintendo
characters, Smash moved the focus away from character-specific combos to create a more
approachable but no less enjoyable fighting game that was unlike anything else on the market.
Still, as impressive as Nintendo's first and second-party titles were in this period,
they still weren't enough to match the PlayStation's ever-growing lineup.
With so many developers favouring Sony's system because of its ease of development
and the advantages of CDs, Nintendo was left with little third-party support,
and the more the PlayStation user base grew, the more developers wanted their games to be on it.
Sony finished the decades strongly. They took inspiration from Nintendo to produce
their own dual analog controller in 1997. They transitioned their marketing from targeting
Sega towards directly targeting Nintendo after Nintendo became the main competition,
and with each new year they saw multiple major titles but ensured the PlayStation's dominant
position grew and grew. 1997 brought well-received sequels to Tomb Raider and Crash Bandicoot,
alongside the only other game that could match Final Fantasy and Sales numbers, Gran Turismo.
Produced by Polyphony Digital, a new Japanese-based first-party studio within Sony,
Gran Turismo received universal acclaim and set a new bar for graphics and realism in a driving
game, surpassing even arcade competition in a somewhat symbolic step for the industry.
In 1998, Sony's lineup was arguably even stronger, with widely successful sequels to Resident Evil,
Tekken, Crash Bandicoot and Tomb Raider that would be joined by high-selling new series,
like Insomniac's Spiroba Dragon. Perhaps the year's biggest surprise came from
another ex-Nintendo ally when Konami released their latest entry into the Metal Gear series.
Much like Final Fantasy VII before it, Metal Gear Solid wowed players with its cinematic focus,
this time produced through in-engine cutscenes, alongside full voice acting and an unusually
mature and complicated storyline. The result was one of the most story-focused and cinematic
experiences ever seen in a game, and it too would receive universal acclaim alongside 7 million copies
sold. 1999 was once more a packed year with even more sequels, this time to Final Fantasy,
Resident Evil, Spiro, Tomb Raider and Gran Turismo, alongside a new survival horror game from Konami
in Silent Hill and a kart racer to compete with Nintendo in the form of Crash Team Racing.
As the console generation progressed, the reality of the situation became clear. Sony's lineup of
games was simply too strong, and it allowed the PlayStation to maintain the dominant lead on
its competition from its release all the way to its discontinuation 12 years later. In the process,
the PlayStation became the first console in history to surpass 100 million units sold,
which was more than twice that of the previous generation's leader, the Super Nintendo,
and almost 70 million more than Sony's closest competition, the N64. By contrast, the Saturn
sold only 9.2 million, leaving Sega a distant third place and in serious trouble. During this
period, disagreements over the company's future between the Japanese and American divisions were
reported to be frequent. Ultimately, the rapidly declining profits led the company to discontinue
the Saturn in 1998 in favour of focusing on the next generation, where they hoped to get a head
start on the competition. Throughout the development of their next console, Sega tried to learn from
their mistakes with the Saturn by paying close attention to production costs and trying to select
hardware components similar to personal computers to assist software development. The system also
used a custom version of Windows operating system to further help with porting games between PC
and was the first console to include a built-in modular modem to enable internet access and
online play. In the end, the console was completed while the fifth generation was still going strong,
and in November 1998, it released in Japan, with a global release coming one year later.
The Dreamcast got off to a slow but steady start. Pre-orders in Japan were high,
but hardware shortages meant Sega couldn't keep up with demand, meaning they failed to meet their
initial sales goals. The American launch went smoother, however, and the first year sales seemed
promising. The launch lineup included a number of first-party titles, but its two big early stars
would be Sonic Adventures and Soul Calibur. The first represented Sonic's first true 3D debut
and quickly became the system's best-selling game, while Namco's Soul Calibur was one of the
most highly acclaimed fighting games of all time and is notable as being graphically superior to
its arcade counterpart and showcasing just how much next-gen systems could do. Still,
early sales were one thing, but the true test for Sega would be when their competition joined the
sixth generation, and for that, they wouldn't need to wait long. And so, the decade came to a
close where after years of intense neck-and-neck battle between Sega and Nintendo, it was Sony
who ultimately came out as the winner, and they won by some way. For Nintendo, the end of the 90s
weren't all bad, however, because there was one area where they remained firmly on top.
The Game Boy released in 1989 and quickly surpassed its technologically superior competition.
Nintendo supported their new handheld system with a number of first-party continuations of
classic Nintendo series. This meant more Mario, with Super Mario Land 2 before new series antagonist
Wario got his first game in Wario Land Super Mario Land 3. The Game Boy also got a sequel to Metroid,
with Metroid 2 Return of Samus, as well as a new 2D Zelda with Link's Awakening.
Other notable early Game Boy games include Puzzle Game Dr. Mario, Kirby's First Ever Outing in
Kirby's Dreamland, and a continuation of the original Donkey Kong series, as well as a portable
title from Rare called Donkey Kong Land. These games were all well received and helped the Game Boy
to continue strong, but it would be a new series which came to define handheld gaming in the 90s.
Before that, Nintendo would release the highly experimental and rather disastrous
Virtual Boy in 1995, a 32-bit technically portable headset and controller.
The Virtual Boy was the first console capable of displaying stereoscopic 3D,
although it was only in red and black, and there were concerns about long-term use,
causing permanent eye damage. It was also pushed to market before it was truly ready
and received negative reviews for its high price, uncomfortable design, and weak selection of games
that struggled to use its novel 3D effect in interesting ways. Ultimately, the Virtual Boy
ended as a clear failure, and was discontinued less than a year after its launch before even
receiving a European release, but it was at least one of gaming's more innovative and unique failures.
For Nintendo, this appointment wouldn't last long, however, because they were about to stumble
onto a game that would single-handedly conquer the world.
Pokemon released in 1996 in Japan, 1998 in America, and 1999 in Europe. It was inspired by creator
Satoshi Tajiri's childhood hobby of collecting insects, but upon hearing the idea for the game,
Nintendo were initially skeptical. In the end, it was support from Shigeru Miyamoto
that helped get the game off the ground, with the Game Boy's link cable enabled multiplayer
acting as a major influence in creating a game focused on collecting and trading,
rather than being a more traditional RPG. The idea to have different versions of the same
game with exclusive Pokemon came from Miyamoto, who thought it would encourage the game's social
aspects. And in the end, Miyamoto and Tajiri would be proving right, but success didn't happen overnight.
After a long and problematic development, Pocket Monsters Red and Green released in
Japan to decent but not remarkable sales. By the end of its first year, the game sold over
1 million copies in Japan alone, but then, instead of slowing down like most releases,
Pocket Monsters did the opposite. With a blue and yellow version released later to renew interest
and strong word of mouth as a result of the game's social aspects, sales just continued to grow,
with 3.65 million copies sold in Japan in 1997. To put this in perspective, the total lifetime
sales for the Game Boy in the region at this time was only 7 million, but then Game Boy sales
started to shoot up as well. By the end of a slow localization process, Nintendo and Game Freak
had finally started to realize the potential value of what they had their hands on, and so they decided
to increase the game's marketing, tying the game's promotion to the upcoming anime and the series
mascot, Pikachu. Across America and Europe, Pokemon Red and Blue broke sales record after sales
record, with 31 million copies sold worldwide, or 46 million including all versions. It was later
described as the most successful video game of all time and received the world record for best
selling video game excluding bundle sales. In short, Pokemon was a phenomenon unlike anything
seen before in the history of gaming, and it was a phenomenon that didn't stop at the games.
An anime, a card game, merchandise, accessories, movies, spinoffs, sequels and more, all in mere
months as the franchise grew and grew, with children all around the world doing whatever
they could to get their hands on anything and everything Pokemon. For a short period of time,
the world seemed to stand still, gripped in the midst of a genuine Pokemonia.
It was possibly the biggest cultural phenomenon the modern world has seen, and it's hard to
think of any one thing that has matched it since. To this day, Pokemon is the highest grossing media
franchise in the world, surpassing Mickey Mouse, Star Wars, Harry Potter and Marvel, and it doesn't
look like anything will be catching up with it anytime soon. If there were any doubts still
about the gaming industry's mainstream potential by the late 90s, they didn't survive the arrival
of Pokemon, and all this, every bit of it, was kicked off on the back of one simple game.
When people talk about the greatest games of all time, there are a lot of obvious choices,
but Pokemon Red and Blue might be one of the most overlooked.
Aimed primarily at children, with a legacy that has far outgrown the original titles,
it's easy to forget how fresh and addictively enjoyable Pokemon's concept of combining role
playing mechanics with monster collection truly was to players at the time. It provided a perfect
introduction to the RPG genre, but it also added excitement and personality to the experience,
with players feeling a strong sense of attachment to their pocket companions,
and always wanting to see what new creatures awaited them in the next location,
or which Pokemon might evolve next, or what secrets that might be out there in the world
waiting to be uncovered. The multiplayer aspects and growth of the franchise beyond gaming then
helped turn Pokemon into the unprecedented craze that it became, but that wouldn't have been
possible if not for the strength of the original games, which makes them seem worthy of a special
place in gaming's history. And as for the Game Boy, it soon received an updated model with the
Game Boy Color, which released globally in late 1998. Its best-selling game was, unsurprisingly,
the next entry into the Pokemon series, but it included full backwards compatibility with the
Game Boy's existing library, allowing Game Boy Color owners to not only play their old games,
but also play them in color. Amidst surging Pokemonia, the new Game Boy sold well,
with combined sales with the original reaching over 118 million units, making it the fourth
best-selling system of all time. It was also surprisingly long-lasting, with the Game Boy's
lifespan starting in 1989 and lasting until 2003, which wasn't bad for a system that released
already far behind its competition in terms of technological power. And as for that competition,
by the mid-90s it barely existed, although the Japanese-only Wonderswan from Bandai did mean
there was at least one other system out there at the end of the decade. Regardless, when it came
to handhelds, the 90s was a period of absolute Nintendo domination, to a degree rarely seen
in the industry before or since. Still, the Game Boy wasn't the only system that ended the decade well.
On computers, the second half of the 90s are best remembered for the growing presence of online
gaming and for the large number of critically acclaimed genre-defining titles. PC gaming experienced
slower growth than consoles during this period, but the PlayStation itself marked a move towards
more PC-friendly development and many of the console's best-selling games like Tomb Raider,
Final Fantasy and Resident Evil were also released on Windows. The PC still had plenty
of exclusives of its own though, and it still led the way in a number of key genres.
1997 kicked off with Blizzard's Action RPG Diablo, which took the role-playing genre in a new
direction and reached new levels of commercial success as a result. Before Diablo, computer RPGs
were known for their complexity and were often seen as rather niche, but Diablo's isometric
action stripped away some of the depth to instead place a heavier focus on atmosphere, combat and
item progression, going on to sell over 2 million copies as a result. If action didn't appeal to
you, 1997 also saw the release of a major step for more traditional RPGs with Interplay's Fallout,
which featured a bleak post-apocalyptic setting and a morally ambiguous choice-driven storyline
to provide a fresh take on the role-playing genre. 1997 also saw a landmark real-time strategy game
with Ensemble Studios Age of Empires, which proved to be a popular historical take on the
genre and featured impressive online and network play integration. Its sequel in 1999 was even
more successful and has retained an active multiplayer community to this day. Growing
access to online connectivity also paved the way for one of the year's most important releases
in Origin System's Ultima Online, which became the first game to create a multiplayer online
RPG on a genuinely massive scale. Building on what was started with mods many years earlier,
Ultima Online offered an open-ended player-driven experience with up to 2,500 simultaneous players
in a single virtual world, which far surpassed any other game of the time and popularized the
idea of the MMO. 1998 saw the focus on online gaming continue with the arrival of Blizzard's
next major series. StarCraft featured a well-made campaign and a rich sci-fi setting, but what truly
set it apart was the popularity of its multiplayer. Using Blizzard's integrated Battle.net service,
StarCraft offered fast and efficient matchmaking and its highly distinctive yet well-balanced factions
were a perfect fit for competitive multiplayer. This led to it becoming the best-selling RTS game
of all time, with 11 million copies sold by 2009. It also did much to establish the modern
esports scene as we know it today, particularly with its popularity in South Korea, where televised
commentated tournaments began as early as December 1999. Other important games of 1998 include Grim
Fandango, a highly original point-and-click adventure game from genre veteran's LucasArts,
Thief the Dark Project, a first-person stealth game from Looking Glass Studios known for its
immersive design and vast player freedom, and BioWare's Baldur's Gate, a fancy RPG that set a
new standard for Dungeons & Dragons based video games and marked the start of a new era for the
genre. 1998 would also see Valve make their gaming debut with their genre defining Half-Life.
With its immersive, seamless story, regular integration of puzzles,
and humble, scientist protagonist, Half-Life was almost the polar opposite of Doom,
and it showcased the genre's potential for storytelling while proving that first-person
shooters could be much more than just Doom clones. In 1999, Ultimate Online was joined by another
massive MMO by way of EverQuest from Sony Online Entertainment. EverQuest soon surpassed
Ultimate Online's player count and established the formula of leveling, partying, dungeon running,
and gearing that would come to define so much of the genre and would be copied by so many future
games. 1999 also saw the release of Heroes of Might and Magic 3, which gave turn-based strategy
fans a cult classic title but is still one of the best examples of its genre to this day.
System Shock 2, which combined role-playing with first-person shooting and survival horror elements
to create a sci-fi cyberpunk classic, and Planescape Torment, which gave the decade one of its most
memorable RPGs while winning much praise for its mature story, intelligent writing, and thematic
depth. The 90s would close out in fitting fashion, with two multiplayer-focused FPS games going head
to head for the title of best online shooter. The first was Quake 3 Arena, the latest game from
id Software, and the other was Unreal Tournament from Epic Games. Both games were multiplayer-only
arena shooters, and both games offered impressive 3D graphics and lightning-fast action. Unreal
stood out for its greater variety of guns and gamemodes, while Quake was often considered the
game of choice for traditionalists, but regardless of individual allegiance, collectively the two
games represented the pinnacle of arena shooters at a time when arena shooters were the undisputed
kings of the FPS genre. Amongst the already mentioned games were a number of other successful
series and sequels, including a number of popular simulation and strategy games. Together, these
gave the PC a rather diverse lineup of games, and this was a time when PC gaming was still largely
distinct from that seen on consoles. In the end, though, the 90s were the decade where PC gaming
moved towards the mainstream while still managing to maintain much of what originally made it unique.
From talented young developers making industry-changing breakthroughs
to the long-running focus on depth and complexity in game design,
or the general tendency of catering to more mature audiences.
The 90s was also the decade that online gaming made its big breakthrough, which can be seen in
the popularity of new genres like MMOs, real-time strategy games, and first-person shooters.
With time, online gaming played a greater and greater role in the industry,
but it was PC that led the charge while providing a glimpse at gaming's future in the process.
The 90s was the decade where gaming grew up. It began with all our war between Sega and Nintendo,
but in the end, it was Sony who emerged victorious, and for once, it wasn't because of game design.
This marked a changing point for the industry. Atari succeeded because they were the ones who
first brought high-quality arcade games to consoles. Nintendo brought console gaming back
from the brink with being Nintendo's seal of approval and a focus on high-quality first-party
titles. Sega finally managed to match Nintendo only after their own Landmark series arrived by
way of Sonic, and the Game Boy flourished thanks in large part to Tetris and later Pokmon.
Sony, however, achieved victory through business and hardware, leaving most of the game design to
those who already knew how and instead placing their focus on effective marketing and designing
a system that appealed to developers through ease of development. This showed the growing
importance of third parties, who had come a long way since Activision first broke away from Atari
to get the recognition they felt they deserved. Now, third parties were no longer just an annoyance
and they were no longer optional. Nintendo filled in a great lineup of first-party titles in the
fifth generation, with several being remembered as some of the greatest games of all time,
but the Nintendo 64 had a total of 388 licensed games released in its lifespan
compared to over 3,000 for the PlayStation. The 90s also saw rapid evolution of technology
and might be the single most transformative decade in gaming. The move to 3D was a major
part of this, with arcades leading the way in the early 90s alongside certain pioneering PC
and console releases. By the end of the 90s, however, the entire industry had embraced 3D
technology and the advancements being made within just a few years were staggering.
Alongside 3D, the 90s was also the decade of the CD, which paved the way for full-motion video,
realistic audio and more detailed textures, and the decade where online gaming and competitive
multiplayer found their footing, with several new genres being established which would only
grow in importance in the years to come. Finally, for game design, the 90s was the decade where
games started to go big and to shed their arcade origins. If someone were to try to pinpoint the
start of AAA gaming, it might have to be Final Fantasy VII. With a huge budget, a massive marketing
campaign and a development staff of over 100 people, it was simply a different kind of game
to what was being produced at the start of the decade. For comparison, many of Nintendo's most
iconic 16-bit games had development teams of around 10 to 20, but with new technology came
higher demands on game developers and by the end of the 90s, games in general were becoming bigger
and more expensive to create. The 90s also saw a substantial move towards the cinematic
and the idea of games as a unique medium to tell stories rather than just as a set of challenges
for players to overcome. This can be seen in titles like Metal Gear Solid and Half-Life
and their popularity clearly showed that this approach resonated with players.
While at the same time as this, traditional arcade features like high scores and lives
were starting to disappear amongst gaming's most popular titles.
Overall though, the 90s was an exciting time for gaming, with fierce rivalries, impressive
technological progress and many new emerging genres. But as a new millennium beckoned,
the industry was getting ready to experience rapid change all over again.
The 2000s were a massive decade for video games.
Technological innovations of the 90s matured with rapid advances in 3D and online. The console
wars continued with the arrival of the next and final major player, followed by a seventh generation
that no one could have predicted. And game development moved further towards the AAA,
at the same time that new areas of the industry started to arrive, changing gaming forever more.
Still, at the dawn of the new millennium, the gaming industry was defined by uncertainty.
After months of panic about a Y2K computing apocalypse that in the end didn't happen,
the industry then ran headfirst into a much realer crisis when the dot-com bubble burst,
leading to a stock market crash that hit the tech industry particularly hard,
all of while gamers around the world held their breath in anticipation of the next generation
of consoles. Many questions were on people's minds. How would Sony follow up the most successful
console of all time? How would Nintendo respond to losing the top spot in the previous generation?
Would Sega be able to do enough to survive? And what would be the impact of the computing
giant Microsoft throwing their hat into the increasingly crowded arena?
Before the next wave of systems could really get going, however, the previous generation
enjoyed one of its finest years, as developers pushed fifth-gen consoles to their limits,
and PC saw the arrival of its best-selling game yet. Highlights on the Nintendo 64
include the surreal sequel to Ocarina of Time, a legend of Zelda Majora's Mask,
which featured a time loop mechanic alongside a surprisingly dark tone to create an experience
just as memorable as its predecessor and almost as universally acclaimed. Perfect Dark from N64
Heavyweight Rare, which was a spiritual successor to GoldenEye that built upon the landmark Shooters
gameplay while adding a multitude more options to create the fifth generation's definitive
first-person shooter, and Paper Mario, which continued the Mario RPG tradition established
on the Super Nintendo with a new take on the concept and a new two-dimensional art style.
On the PlayStation, Final Fantasy continued its strong critical and commercial run with Final
Fantasy 9, which featured a return to the more traditional fancy settings of older games alongside
some of the most spectacular pre-rendered graphics on the system. 2000 was also a year that Final
Fantasy was joined by the 32-bit debut of its great rival in Dragon Quest 7, which quickly
went on to become the best-selling PlayStation game of all time in Japan despite its late release.
And finally, Tony Hawk's Pro Skater 2 refined the formula of its 1999 predecessor to become one
of the most critically acclaimed games ever made. It might be tempting to see Tony Hawk's as just
a series of well-made skating games, but to do so would be a great injustice, as they were clear
examples of games so good they transcended their genre with simple yet addictively enjoyable
gameplay that helped them secure an immortal place within early 2000s gaming culture.
The PC also saw its share of big releases, with RPG fans in particular being spoilt for choice.
Bioware's follow-up to Baldur's Gate provided an expansive and deep sequel that still remains
as one of the best examples of its genre to this day. Ion Storm's cyberpunk conspiracy
thriller Deus Ex impressed with its open-ended mission design and high level of player choice,
and Blizzard's loop-filled action RPG series Diablo returned in its second entry with improvements
to gameplay and a story that made it even more popular than its predecessor. 2000s would also
see the release of another important FPS that offered something markedly different from the
popular arena shooters of the time. Originally a mod for Half-Life, Counter-Strike placed a
greater focus on realism and the tactical side of the genre and quickly received plenty of attention
online including from Half-Life creators Valve who offered to buy the intellectual property
and hire the mods creator before releasing the game officially. Counter-Strike helped create
an enduring esports scene as well as a number of hugely successful sequels and showed the
innovative nature and potential benefits of a game supporting modding, something that has
become increasingly rare in games as times went on. Of course none of the games mentioned so far
come close to matching the impact of the year's biggest release. From Maxis and SimCity creator
Will Wright, The Sims was like nothing else before it. As a social simulation with impressive
building tools, Sims turned life itself into a video game and wowed players with the amount of
freedom it gave them and the level of detail it managed to include. From carefully guiding your
Sims up the corporate ladder and finally purchasing the local mega mansion to turning their life into
an inescapable never-ending hell, The Sims was a massive hit with players and received 7 expansions
which was a huge amount for the time. It also sold over 11 million copies making it the best
selling PC game of all time until it was overtaken several years later by its sequel.
Much like Pac-Man or Tetris before it, The Sims was a game which found unprecedented levels of
success by appealing to people who may not have typically played video games. By 2000 personal
computers were starting to become a common household item and The Sims universally understandable
concept and general accessibility made it the perfect gateway to the medium for those who may
not have been swayed by the fast paced deathmatches of Quake or the advanced Dungeons and Dragons
of computer RPGs. Accessibility and broadened appeal would be a major part of the decade but
not before the next generation of console wars got underway in fittingly dramatic fashion.
The Dreamcast got off to a solid start and its launch lineup was followed by a number of memorable
titles. The most important was Shenmue which Sega hoped to be the system's killer app.
Featuring advanced 3D graphics and FMV cutscenes alongside a detailed open world complete with
NPC schedules, variable weather effects and a day-night cycle Shenmue was a major step forward
for open world game design. Ambitious, innovative and technologically impressive it received much
critical praise and sold well although unfortunately not well enough. With development costs of around
50 million dollars Shenmue was one of the most expensive games ever made and its sales of 1.2
million weren't enough to recoup such a high investment. It also didn't become the major
system seller Sega hoped it would be meaning for the Dreamcast there was still more work that needed
to be done. Other strong early performers on the system included Crazy Taxi, an arcade infused
action packed racing game, Jet Set Radio a skating action hybrid that embodied counterculture and was
one of the first games to feature the use of cell shading and Fantasy Star Online a continuation of
Sega's popular fantasy star series and the first ever online RPG to appear on consoles. Fantasy Star
Online showcased the Dreamcast's impressive online capabilities and was particularly successful
with Japanese audiences where online PC gaming still hadn't really caught on. In the end though
the Dreamcast's fate would be decided more by its competition than its games and 2000
was the year that Sony's next gen successor was ready to make its debut.
Following the tremendous success of the PlayStation many were left wondering how Sony would top the
best selling games console of all time. Sony's answer was to leave people wondering meaning
information about the PlayStation 2's development was kept as secret as possible with Sony refusing
to even confirm that they were working on a new system. Secrecy wouldn't last forever though and
at the Tokyo Game Show in September of 1999 the PlayStation 2 was revealed with demos for Gran Turismo
and Tekken to show off its next gen graphical capability. It wasn't the games or graphics
that impressed the audience the most though but rather two specific design features.
The first was full backwards compatibility that covered the entire PlayStation 1 library
as well as some of its accessories like its controllers. At the time backwards compatibility
was an often requested feature yet the only other console to provide it without additional add-ons
had been the otherwise disappointing Atari 7800. And if backwards compatibility alone wasn't enough
the PlayStation 2 also included a built-in DVD player. This was when DVD players were still
relatively new and standalone units could often cost more than the PS2's 299 launch price which
made it seem like great value for money and helped its reputation as being more than just a games console.
When this was combined with the strong momentum behind Sony's brand after the success of their
last system it was enough to ensure the PlayStation 2's launch was a big success with the new console
selling out in Japan and later America as Sony struggled to meet the high demand. The launch
lineup was also noticeably weak with few heavy hitters outside of perhaps Tekken tag tournament
from Namco and low first party titles from Sony but in the end this didn't matter too much as in
October 2000 the PlayStation 2 finally arrived in America and quickly became the public's most
wanted games console.
For Sega the impact was immediate and amidst now rapidly declining Dreamcast sales
and yearly losses of over 400 million dollars the discontinuation of a Dreamcast was announced
on the 31st of January 2001. This would be the end of the line for Sega's hardware aspirations
but they would live on as a third party developer and publisher and in March 2003 the company finally
had a profitable year again after five years of consecutive losses. As for Sony having collected
one scalp already they turned their attention to those who remained and prepared themselves
for what would go on to be one of the biggest years in video game history.
Microsoft unveiled their debut gaming system at the consumer electronic show in January 2001
and right from the start Microsoft wanted the world to know how seriously they were taking
the industry with major marketing campaigns being launched alongside offers to acquire
several big players including Nintendo, Square and EA. The decision to enter the console space came
after seeing the PlayStation success in the last generation with then-CEO Bill Gates worried that
an unopposed Sony could become so dominant that they might threaten Microsoft's line of Windows
PCs. Microsoft had also seen the way the PlayStation's PC focus development kits had won them third
party support which led to the idea of just creating a console using PC hardware and DirectX
programming interfaces with the use of DirectX being what led to the console being named Xbox.
The result was a powerful system with technical specifications notably beyond any of its competitors.
The console included a built-in DVD player just like the PS2 as well as a hard drive and impressive
online support but Microsoft was called MicroSoft for a reason i.e. they were a software company
meaning that at the time they had no actual experience in manufacturing hardware.
This led to expensive development and manufacturing costs with Microsoft ultimately making a loss
on each unit sold. Still luckily for them if there was one thing Microsoft did have available
it was money and in November 2001 the Xbox released in America three days before the
arrival of the sixth gen's final contender. Nintendo might have been down after their last
gen defeat in the PlayStation but unlike Sega they were far from out with dominance still in the
handheld market and a strong selection of established first party series. For their next system
Nintendo's priority was to avoid the mistakes which cost them with their last console. This
meant no more cartridges although they didn't opt for a DVD based system either and instead used the
more data limited mini-disc. They also tried to ensure the system was easier to develop for
and that it didn't release significantly later than the rest of the competition.
Nintendo did try out several more experimental features including stereoscopic 3D, motion controls,
portability and microphone support but for now these ideas played little role in the final console.
And so Nintendo's GameCube was a fairly traditional system that was less powerful than
Microsoft's Xbox but with a slight technological edge over Sony's PS2 in CPU and graphics card.
The marketing focused on Nintendo's reputation and first party success
making use of the catchphrase the Nintendo difference but one thing which did remain the same
was a lack of effort on Nintendo's part to entice third party exclusives.
Nintendo also weren't able to meet their initial target of the holiday season in the year 2000
which would have seen their new console launch alongside Sony's but at least this time they
wouldn't be quite so far behind and at E3 2001 the system was fully unveiled with Shigeru Miyamoto
himself taking to the stage to announce the release date and launch lineup with a later
price reveal putting the GameCube at $199, 100 less than its two rivals.
Unlike every Nintendo console before it however something or someone was noticeably absent
as for the first time Nintendo would be launching their system without a Mario game to support it.
In Mario's place was his brother in Luigi's Mansion which went on to receive positive reviews
but was a far cry from the generational defining Mario titles of earlier consoles.
Luckily for Nintendo though even if Luigi wasn't able to develop to his big brother's big reputation
Nintendo did have another title mere months away which could.
Super Smash Bros. Melee tipped the formula of its predecessor and ran with it featuring more characters,
more stages, more gameplay modes, more music and updated multiplayer but ensured it would
be a hit with fans and critics alike even decades later. Melee went on to be the GameCube's best
selling title and acted as a fantastic showcase of what Nintendo were bringing to the sixth generation.
Microsoft however had a killer app of their own to mark their entry into the console space.
Most of Microsoft's early efforts to buy third party developers weren't successful
but one company they did acquire was a relatively unknown yet still successful
Macintosh developer by the name of Bungie. The studio's sci-fi FPS series Marathon was exactly
the type of game that might appeal to western audiences but its Mac only status had previously
limited its reach. In the late 90s Bungie had begun work on a follow-up to Marathon and after
it was unveiled at 1999's Mac World Expo by none other than Apple CEO Steve Jobs, Microsoft decided
to swoop in and make their move, impressing the team at Bungie with their commitment to the gaming
industry and securing the studio and their new title exclusively for Xbox in the process.
With this Microsoft had now found their tempo title to centre the Xbox's launch around but for
Bungie things would be far from simple. The switch from computer to console brought a number of
development challenges. The team's deadline was incredibly tight and the weight of an entire new
console was being placed quite squarely on their game's shoulders. In the end though Halo proved
up to the task launching alongside the Xbox and becoming an instant critical and commercial success.
Halo was a very ambitious game. The biggest surprise then might be that in the end all its
ambitions seemed to pay off. Featuring vehicle combat alongside massive open world like environments
with impressive enemy variety, AI behaviour and encounter design Halo was a fantastic game but
even more impressive was how well it played on console. Bungie added subtle auto-aim to
accommodate for the use of a gamepad over a mouse and used a system of input buffering to make
movements feel smoother and more precise. The result was a huge step forward for the console
FPS genre and the creation of Xbox's first true blockbuster title. But while Nintendo had Melee
and Microsoft had Halo, Sony on the other hand had what might be the single greatest year of
console exclusives in all of video game history. 2001 was massive for the PlayStation 2. Many of
the PS1's best-selling series would see sequels with Gran Turismo 3, A-Spec, Final Fantasy 10 and
Metal Gear Solid 2 each releasing to universal acclaim and incredible sales. What's more each
of these games showcased outstanding graphics making the difference in the new generation
crystal clear to potential buyers. Alongside these was another important title that would leave a
lasting impact on game design and would kick off the PS2's best-selling series Rockstars
Grand Theft Auto 3. This wasn't the first Grand Theft Auto game but it was the first in 3D and
its fully open world and emphasis on player freedom was unlike anything that came before it.
It remains a landmark open world game and did much to change people's conception of what
video games could achieve and this was still just one of many major titles releasing on the
PlayStation 2 that year. Looking back today the most impressive thing about the PS2's 2001 release
lineup is surely its diversity with different genres and tastes being catered to and innovative
new titles coming alongside the more expected big sequels. Ico gave players something original,
mature and creative. Capcom's Devil May Cry brought arcade inspired action and created its own
new genre in the process. Konami's Silent Hill 2 gave the console one of the greatest horror games
ever made. Naughty Dogs Jack and Daxter brought Sony a major new series and offered something
a little more lighthearted and there are other games that could be mentioned here too. The PlayStation
2's lineup was stacked and this was exactly what Sony needed to keep them on top amidst the launch
of their rivals new consoles. Still even if the PlayStation 2 would end the year ahead,
both the Xbox and Gamecube did see strong initial sales with many retailers selling out of the
systems. Each console also had its own clear advantage with the Gamecube being the cheapest
and the Xbox being the most technologically advanced and so in 2002 Sony set out to take
those advantages away. To do this they cut the price of the PS2 to $199 to bring it in line with
the Gamecube and set about creating a PlayStation Network adapter add on alongside several first
party online focus titles like Socom to compete with Microsoft soon to be launching Xbox Live.
2002 would also bring a number of PS2 exclusives with the three biggest being Square's latest
action RPG Kingdom Hearts which combined Final Fantasy characters with massive Disney franchises,
Insomniac Games Ratchet and Clank, an important action platformer that would get a number of
sequels on the system and Rockstar's Grand 5th Auto Vice City which followed on from GTA 3
by bringing the series to a new city and new decade and found even greater success in the process.
Nintendo and Microsoft had other important titles in the following years as well but each
company would also experience their own third party struggles. Nintendo did finally receive
the Mario game they needed with Super Mario Sunshine which featured a tropical setting
and a new spin on 3D Mario gameplay. Other classic Nintendo series would also get new entries
with Metroid Prime seeing Metroid make its 3D debut in an atmospheric and immersive take on
earlier games that retained much of what made the original special. Zelda returned with Wind Waker
which saw players take to the ocean and explore many islands in a new cell shaded art style
that was a dramatic departure from the previous games. Mario Kart returned with Double Dash
which replaced the sprite to be N64 version with full 3D and allowed two riders per kart
to provide a new take on co-op gameplay. Animal Crossing and Pikmin made their debuts giving
players a relaxed open-ended life sim alongside a highly original real-time strategy puzzle game
and other Nintendo series like Mario Party rounded out what was admittedly a strong first
party lineup. When it came to third party support however Nintendo were once more at a disadvantage
after having done little to secure exclusive third party titles in the lead up to the sixth
generation. What's more rare a developer who had done more to support Nintendo than any other in
the last two generations started to experience financial difficulties and were forced to look
for a buyer. Nintendo already had a significant stake in the company and could have purchased the
rest but they instead declined leaving room for other interested parties like Nintendo's newest
rival Microsoft. While rare did release one Gamecube title before this their acquisition
by Microsoft still left Nintendo's already lacklustre third party support even more lacking.
In a strange twist of fate one of Nintendo's most prominent third party developers in this
period was none other than Sega who brought a number of series to the Gamecube including Sonic
and Fantasy Star. The only other notable third party that provided exclusives was Capcom who
would bring a number of Resident Evil games including timed exclusivity on Resident Evil 4
alongside some new IPs. Still while the Gamecube did have exclusives it also found itself left out
of certain multi-platform releases as the generations stretched on. Some examples include
Burnout 3, Black, Star Wars Battlefront 1 and 2, certain entries into the Pro Evolution
Soccer series, Hitman contracts and Blood Money, Binlight Club 2 and so on.
Individually none of these titles may have been deal breakers but the cumulative effect
meant the Gamecube had the smallest library and came to be seen as the worst system for
multi-platform games. Microsoft would also eventually bring Grand 5th Auto over to Xbox
once more leaving Nintendo out of what was arguably the biggest series in gaming at the time.
To make matters worse Nintendo were also increasingly finding that they were developing
an image problem in Western markets. Amidst the gaming industry that was putting out more and
more mature titles and marketing from Sony and Microsoft aimed at securing older audiences,
Nintendo's Gamecube came to be seen as the console for younger audiences.
This reputation had been developing since their showdown with Sega but now it was starting to do
real damage, particularly with teenagers who might place a lot of value on how a gaming system is
seen by their peers. It may no longer be true today but in the early to mid 2000s Gamecube
just wasn't cool and this had an impact on sales. Meanwhile with the Xbox, Microsoft also faced
problems as they struggled to provide Master Chief with any backup. Attempts were made though,
Project Gotham Racing received strong reviews but failed to come close to matching the sales of
Sony's mega hit Gran Turismo. Blinks the Time Sweeper would see key star from the Sonic series
creating an Xbox exclusive platformer but it too failed to make a major impact
and new acquisition Rare failed to live up to their past heights with games like Grabbed by
the Goolies and Conquer Live and Reloaded. Microsoft's most prominent third party support
came from Japanese publisher Tecmo who made a deal early on with Microsoft and contributed
the popular fighting series Dead or Alive and the 3D action debut of Ninja Gaiden as well as from
several former PC developers who brought a number of RPGs to the console. These included Bethesda's
breakthrough open world RPG The Elder Scrolls 3 Morrowind, Lionhead's ambitious new IP Fable
and BioWare's popular Star Wars Knights of the Old Republic and Jade Empire.
These RPGs would go on to be some of the most highly acclaimed titles on the system and further
cemented Xbox's growing reputation with Western audiences. But compared to the PlayStation 2's
continually expanding library, the Xbox still had a lot less to offer by comparison.
As a result, Microsoft placed great hope on their upcoming online service Xbox Live which
launched one year after the console in November 2002.
Xbox Live was an impressive service for its time, featuring friends lists, voice communication
and fast matchmaking while making use of an ethernet port and the faster broadband connection
over the still popular dial up. Its flagship launch title was Epic's Unreal Championship,
but a disagreement with Electronic Arts over the terms of the new service led to EA
withholding all of their games from Xbox Live for its first few years.
Still, Xbox's online system was a success and launched before Sony's alternative
without the need for any additional hardware. Its impact on the industry hadn't been quite
as dramatic as Microsoft had hoped for though, or at least it wasn't, until the services
killer app arrived in 2004. Halo 2's campaign was a solid follow up from the first game,
but this wasn't the main thing it came to be known for. With Halo 2, Microsoft's best series
was able to take advantage of their console's best feature and it turned out to be a match made
in heaven. Halo 1's multiplayer had already impressed, but for many players this would
be their first experience moving from split screen to online and the improvement was dramatic.
Halo 2 quickly became the console's best selling game and the most popular thing on
Xbox Live, vindicating Microsoft's decision to prioritize online features on their console
while also creating one of the most fondly remembered multiplayer experiences of all time.
But as successful as Halo 2 was, it wasn't the best selling game in 2004. In fact, it wasn't even
close, as just when Xbox fans finally had a real reason to celebrate their console's superiority,
the PlayStation 2 would see the arrival of its own best selling game with Grand Theft Auto San
Andreas, which would go on to reach an unprecedented 17 million copies sold on PlayStation 2 alone.
San Andreas took the open world design of the previous games and drastically increased the
scale, featuring three distinct cities instead of one alongside many new features that improved
immersion and customization. The game did come alongside controversy, particularly after the
modern community were able to uncover a hidden code left in the game's files but enabled a crude
sex minigame which led to outrage and a revision of the game's rating from the ESRB to the very
rarely used adult only rating. Still, this wasn't enough to stop it from becoming one of the most
successful games of all time and Sony's PlayStation 2 flourished alongside it, receiving an updated
slim model the month before its release and promptly selling out again during the holiday season.
The final years of the sixth generation would see Sony continuing to add to their already
strong lineup of games with high selling sequels to Metal Gear Solid, Gran Turismo, Final Fantasy,
Tekken and Kingdom Hearts alongside an impressive new action series in Santa Monica Studios God of War.
Unique titles came alongside the bigger names as well, with games like Team Icos visually
stunning and emotionally evocative Shadow of the Colossus or the weird and wonderful Katamari
Damacy from Namco. Truthfully, neither the Xbox or GameCube had bad lineups of games,
the PlayStation 2 was just on another level and this would ultimately be reflected in its sales.
Over its long, long life, the PlayStation 2 sold over 155 million units worldwide,
making it the best-selling gaming system of all time, a title it still holds to this day.
By contrast, the Xbox and GameCube sold 24 million and 21.7 million units respectively,
making this the most decisive victory of any console generation since the Nintendo Entertainment
System brought the home video game market back from the dead. Sony benefited from strong third
party support, the built-in DVD player, backwards compatibility, a highly competitive price and
a growing reputation of excellence in the console market. For both Microsoft and Nintendo,
there would be silver linings however. The Xbox successfully forged itself a place within the
console market, took second place in a highly competitive generation and found great success
with Halo and Xbox Live, two things which showed much promise for the future as online gaming and
home broadband both continued to become more and more widely adopted. Meanwhile for Nintendo,
they continued to build on their established first-party series while cementing their reputation
for making quality games. The GameCube may have suffered due to its perception as being for
younger audiences, but Nintendo may not have. Younger gamers will one day grow up and by staying
true to their vision and creating great games for all ages, Nintendo continued to create franchises
with strong nostalgic appeal and sometimes nostalgia can have great dividends in the future.
In the end, it seems fitting that the GameCube's best-selling game would be the crossover title
Super Smash Bros. Melee as no other game better represented the system's appeal or Nintendo's
strengths. Nintendo's different approach also allowed them to set themselves apart from the
competition and while that isn't always the best strategy to win, it can sometimes help you survive.
And ultimately, survive they did, as did Microsoft and while Sony's lead may have looked insurmountable,
gaming has always been an industry where things can change quickly.
Before a new wave of consoles could go head-to-head however, the handheld market would finally get
to experience a console war of its own. Nintendo had dominated the handheld market since as far
back as the original Game and Watch in 1980 and after the Game Boy beat out a number of rivals in
the early 90s, Nintendo spent years being virtually unopposed. Their reign continued in the early 2000s
with long-awaited Game Boy Advance, which released worldwide in 2001. The system still lacked a
backlit screen, a feature other handhelds had included as early as the Atari Lynx in 1989,
but otherwise it launched at an affordable $99 and compared to the now seriously dated Game Boy,
it provided a decent step up. The original Game Boy was technically inferior to the 8-bit NES,
whereas outside of the smaller screen resolution, the Game Boy Advance was technically superior
to the 16-bit Super Nintendo. This had clear benefits for games so long as you could see them
on the poorly illuminated screen that once more got to haunt a new generation of children.
Nintendo would follow the Game Boy Advance with the Advance SP two years later, which updated the
model and finally included a light source. And now that Game Boy owners could at last see what games
they were actually playing, they were in for a treat because the Game Boy Advance had an extensive
library on top of backwards compatibility with the original Game Boy's cartridges. The system's
best-selling game was Pokemon Ruby and Sapphire, its second best-selling game was Pokemon Fire Red
and Leaf Green, and its third best-selling game was Pokemon Emerald. But it had successful games
outside of Pokemon as well as all the Nintendo series you'd expect, with plenty of ports of
Super Nintendo classics. One thing it didn't have was an original Mario title of its own,
but without any competition that hardly mattered, and the Game Boy Advance and Advance SP were
highly successful, with sales of over 81 million units. Still, Nintendo's era of free reign wouldn't
last forever, and at E3 2003 it was reeled that they would face new competition from the same
company who had just beaten them twice in the home console market. PlayStation Portable will allow
consumers to enjoy 3D gaming similar to the experience delivered on PlayStation 2. It also
has the ability to deliver high-quality movies, music, and video as well as other forms of digital
entertainment content through one central device. And all of this is made possible through cutting
edge technologies aimed at helping us explore the future in new ways. Sony had dabbled in the handheld
space already with the Pocket Station, a portable add-on for the PlayStation 1 that released in
1999 exclusively in Japan. Their next attempt would be rather more ambitious, and the announcement
showed off some impressively powerful technical specifications alongside a heavy focus on multimedia
support, with movies, music, and online web browsing. Sony's plan was simple, do for handhelds
what they did for consoles through following the same approach, i.e. good hardware, disk-based
operating, functionality outside of games, and strong third-party support. And, as for that hardware,
Sony were keen to highlight just how similar it was to the still mid-cycle PlayStation 2,
at a time when Nintendo's current handheld was only on the level of a two-generations-old
Super Nintendo, and their next handheld was being developed in line with the last gen N64.
Basically, Sony was planning to skip ahead and deliver a product a whole generation more advanced
than their rival. For Nintendo, however, power wasn't the main priority. The idea for their next
system came from Hiroshi Yamauchi, a man who served as Nintendo president for an incredible 53 years.
The dual screens were similar to certain models of the game and watch, and Nintendo wanted to use
their new system as a chance to innovate and move away from the conservative image that they were
worried they'd started to develop. Nintendo were still taking the handheld market seriously, though.
In fact, after the mediocre sales of the GameCube, the next generation of handhelds came to be seen
as more important than ever, with President Yamauchi famously saying that if the new system
succeeds, we will rise to heaven, but if it fails, we will sink to hell.
And so, Sony's PlayStation Portable and Nintendo's DS went head-to-head.
Both systems launched at a similar time in Japan in 2004,
although the DS had a four-to-five-month head start in other regions. The DS also had a lower
retail price of $150 to the PSP's $250. Meanwhile, the PSP had a clear advantage in hardware,
with a larger display, higher resolution, and a much more powerful CPU. This translated to far
better graphics, with the PSP succeeding at coming close to PS2 level, minus the smaller
resolution, whereas the DS was still clearly one generation behind. Nintendo's new system
did come with a touchscreen, however, and this was several years before the arrival of smartphones,
meaning few people had seen this technology before. The combination of two screens and
touch-based controls did make the DS stand out, but it wasn't initially clear to prospective buyers
just how big an impact this would have on their gaming experiences.
And so, as both systems launched, the PSP was the one generating the most hype,
with reviewers impressed by the system's power and with Sony riding high off the momentum
of two record-breaking home consoles. In Japan, both systems got off to strong starts,
with the PSP selling out faster, but the DS selling more units due to greater supply.
In America, the PSP released later and performed below Sony's expectations,
while the DS surpassed Nintendo's. Europe saw more or less the opposite though,
as while the PSP again arrived late, this time it sold out at record speeds,
quickly surpassing the earlier numbers of the DS. And so, in their first year,
the two systems seemed to be neck and neck, and attention then turned to the games.
In the console market, Sony had always excelled at attracting third parties,
but when it came to handhelds, they were still a newcomer, whereas Nintendo had been working
with third parties on handheld games for many years. As a result, both systems received plenty
of third-party support, but Sony no longer had the clear advantage. The PSP looked to continue
the success of its less portable cousins through continuations of many of Sony's best-selling
series. Its biggest success would be Grand 5th Auto Liberty City Stories, and this would be followed
by a spin-off to Jack and Daxter, a new Tekken title with Dark Resurrection, a second Grand 5th
Auto with Vice City Stories, multiple Metal Gear Solid titles with tactical card game Metal Gear
Acid, and the more traditional Metal Gear Solid Portable Ops, and a new Ratchet and Clank game
in Size Matters. Later releases would see new entries into the Final Fantasy series with Crisis
Core and Decidia, a Kingdom Hearts prequel with Birth by Sleep, entries into the Gran Turismo and
God of War series, and several games from Capcom's new Monster Hunter series, which proved hugely
popular in Japan. The PSP was further helped by the addition of a miniature analog stick,
which was a feature the DS didn't have, which helped the PSP's reputation as a more serious
gaming system. Meanwhile, over on the DS, there would also be continuations of popular series,
with the first new 2D Mario since the Super Nintendo in New Super Mario Bros,
as well as Mario Kart DS, a port of Super Mario 64, Animal Crossing Wildwood, Mario Party DS,
and for Legend of Zelda, Phantom Hourglass. However, alongside these more familiar names,
the DS would also find success with several new series that were deliberately designed around
the system's touchscreen. One of the most popular of these was Petsim, Nintendogs,
which released early on and quickly became a big hit. But amongst the DS's best-selling games
were a number of other names that didn't seem to resemble the usual gaming topsellers.
These included Brain Age, Train Your Brain in Minutes a Day, Professor Kakayama's Maths Training,
the 100 Cell Calculation Method, Big Brain Academy, Flash Focus Vision Training in Minutes a Day,
and English Training Have Fun Improving Your Skills. If you want to know just what a big deal
Brain Age Train Your Brain in Minutes a Day was, all you need to know is that it sold more copies
than any Pokemon game released on the DS. The game was inspired by a popular Japanese book,
Train Your Brain 60 Days to a Better Brain, and after a new president of Nintendo, Satoru Iwata,
met with the author, a decision was made to implement the book's thesis in a new game
for Nintendo's upcoming handheld that they hoped might appeal to casual gamers. And it did.
Nintendo released a number of semi-educational puzzle games over the DS's lifespan,
and this became a major contributor to the success of its software sales.
Sony targeted core gamers by doing something similar to its existing consoles and found
success with the teenage and young adult markets, but Nintendo found considerable success with both
younger and older demographics, including people who may not traditionally have had much experience
with gaming. And so, just like with the design of their system, both companies had radically
different approaches with their gaming lineups, and with time, one started to perform better than
the other. The DS saw consistently stronger software sales and was able to maintain its
momentum through a number of redesigns, starting with the DS Lite in 2006, then the DSi in early
2009, and lastly with the DSi XO one year later. These redesigns weren't universally applauded,
with the DSi's removal of backwards compatibility with Game Boy games and its introduction of
digital cameras being seen as questionable, but the DS Lite in particular helped the console
maintain sales. Meanwhile, the PSP also saw hardware updates with the PSP 2000 and 3000
reducing the size and improving the screen, and the later PSP Go, providing a total model redesign
alongside a move to digital only. Still, the Go retained the system's high price,
and over time, interest in the PSP dwindled, while the DS pulled further and further ahead.
This might be because while the PSP came close to matching the PS2's best titles in terms of
graphics, its game still felt consistently inferior to their console inspirations.
Early Metal Gear titles in particular seemed to mark a dropping quality, but even the PSP's
best-selling Grand Theft Auto titles were still widely considered to be worse than the games
which inspired them. Then, as the next generation of consoles arrived with high-definition graphics,
the PSP's visuals were no longer quite so impressive, and with neither graphical prowess
or must-have games to sell the system, and competition from newly arriving smartphones
diminishing the PSP's role as a multimedia device, the system was left struggling.
Meanwhile, the DS was different in both gameplay experiences and audience, and so it was able to
maintain its more unique place within the gaming market over time. In the end, the Nintendo DS
sold over 154 million units, making it the best-selling handheld and second best-selling
system in history, only behind the PlayStation 2. Meanwhile, the PlayStation Portable sold
around 18 million units, making it an impressive debut by Sony even if it still ultimately fell
well behind its competition. For handhelds overall, however, this may have been the greatest
generation in gaming history, with record numbers of titles, genuine innovation from Nintendo,
impressive power from Sony, and overall sales figures far beyond anything which came before
or after. By the end of the decade, smartphones were well on their way, bringing the new frontier
of mobile gaming with them and creating fresh competition for dedicated handheld systems.
Still, for a while, the Nintendo DS and PlayStation Portable put handhelds on top of the gaming world,
and with two very different systems to choose from, consumers were arguably the biggest winners
of gaming's miniature console war. Nothing lasts forever though, and the arrival of mobile gaming
would come to mark the beginning of the end for handhelds, and this wasn't the only part of the
industry where things were changing. For many years, PC gaming had been a place of new innovations
and independent development, but by the start of the 21st century, the divide between PC gaming
and consoles wasn't quite so clear anymore. The PlayStation 1's use of PC-based development kits
made porting between computers and consoles easier than ever, and as a result, many PC developers
started to bring their games to consoles as well. This trend continued into the next generation,
as all major console players now took the importance of porting and cross-platform games
into consideration. At the same time, the console market had seen rapid growth since the launch
of the PlayStation 1, making it a more lucrative market than ever, and then Microsoft entered
the console space as well, making PC gaming and consoles even more closely connected.
The result of all this was that PC gaming wasn't really as important in the 2000s as it was in
the previous decades, and several notable PC developers started to design their games with
consoles in mind, and maybe even as a priority. One of the best examples of this is Bioware,
whose Baldur's Gate series had helped define the computer role-playing genre in the late 90s.
Then, after another PC-focused RPG in Neverwinter Night since 2002, they made Star Wars Knights of
the Old Republic for PC and Xbox, a game with a more console-focused design than earlier titles,
and then their next two games, Jade Empire and Mass Effect, continued the console-focused design
and released exclusively on Xbox and Xbox 360, while only later coming to PC.
And so, while PC games did continue to release in this period, for developers, this was a time
when consoles were often more important. The 2000s would also see certain classic PC gaming
genres start to fall out of fashion, either because of changing consumer interests,
or changing trends in game design, or just the impact of console growth over PC.
Examples include point-and-click adventure games, dungeon crawlers, turn-based RPGs,
arena shooters, certain simulation games, and even real-time strategy games.
Some series that did see substantial PC success this decade include the already mentioned Sims,
which received sequels in 2004 and 2009, the Total War series, which started with Shogun Total War
in 2000 and received four more sequels over the next ten years, and the Civilization series,
which saw its third entry in 2001 with further sequels in 2005 and 2010.
Perhaps the PC's most standout release in this period was Valve's Half-Life 2 in 2004.
Built on the studio's brand new source engine, its graphics alone were a whole generation ahead
of anything on console at the time, and when combined with the engine's advanced new physics
simulation, the game offered one of the most realistic and immersive experiences anyone had
ever seen. Still, Half-Life 2 was more than just the graphical showcase. It used its new
higher level of detail to craft effective environmental storytelling. Its physics were
incorporated into puzzle design and allowed for the addition of a new gravity gun,
and it combined varied gameplay, evocative worldbuilding, and an immersive, seamless story
to create one of the most enduring single-player FPS experiences of all time.
Half-Life 2 is one of the most highly acclaimed games of the 21st century,
and it sold over 12 million copies. At a time when big PC exclusives seemed to be dying out,
Half-Life 2 was a game which came to symbolize the system and its player base,
even if it did still release on consoles a few years later.
Still, even if the PC might have been past its golden age, there was one area where it continued
to innovate, and it was an area which was only growing in importance.
Online Online gaming may have started in the 90s,
but the 2000s was when it exploded. The biggest contributor to this was the adoption of Broadband.
In 2000, only 3% of American homes had Broadband, but by 2010, that number had increased to 66%,
and Broadband meant convenient, high-speed internet access, which was perfect for playing online games.
In 2001, Dynamix's Tribes 2 upped the scale of online shooters to a staggering 128 players
in fast-paced jetpack-fuelled action. In 2002, EA's Battlefield 1942 offered a rather different
kind of large-scale multiplayer warfare with up to 64 players in an impressive simulation
of a realistic battle. Alongside EA's Medal of Honor and Activision's Call of Duty in 2003,
these three series established the modern military shooter, something that would play a
massive part in the gaming industry for years to come. In 2004, Valve released Counter-Strike
Source, ensuring the popular round-based shooter continued to stay relevant, and in 2007,
Valve released Team Fortress 2, a class and objective-based FPS that has continued to
remain active and popular to this day. Online shooters were making their way to consoles
as early as Unreal Championship in 2002, but for many people, PC was still the best place to
experience them, with custom matchmaking, dedicated servers, and loyal communities all shaping an
experience unlike the one on the more tightly controlled consoles. But online gaming wasn't
just about shooting other people. One of the biggest trends of the decade was the growth of
massively multiplayer online RPGs, with games like Dark Age of Camelot, RuneScape, Ragnarok Online,
Final Fantasy XI, and Star Wars Galaxies all following on from what Ultima Online and EverQuest
started in the late 90s. Still, when it came to MMOs, there was one game which reigned supreme
over all others. Released in late 2004, World of Warcraft took Blizzard's popular fantasy series
online in a massive way. With a staggeringly large open world, distinct factions, classes,
and races, and more attention than previous MMOs to accessibility and leveling, World of Warcraft
quickly became hugely popular. By 2010, it was well into its second expansion and had over 12
million concurrent subscribers, all paying monthly fees. In a time before microtransactions,
loot boxes, or DLC, this represented a serious amount of continuous income on a scale which
the gaming industry had never really seen before. 12 million players also meant a serious amount of
time was being invested into Warcraft's virtual world. As more and more players followed, the
reputation of a genre as something life-consuming, addictive, and dangerous grew as those outside
the gaming community tried to make sense of this new, growing phenomenon. In reality, some of the
panic this led to was overblown, but there was an element of truth to it as well. For some people,
MMOs really were addictive. The escapist promised of another world to lose yourself in, the competitive
nature of player-vs-player combat and end-game raiding, and the social bonds that come from
spending so much time with other players in a shared world all contributed to an experience
still new to many people that could provide hours of fun, but could also be hard to turn away from.
World of Warcraft would be followed by many other MMOs, most of which took heavy inspiration from its
success, but in the end, the genre's growth didn't last, and rather than going on to conquer the
entire gaming world, the genre instead seemed to peak at the decade's end as more and more online
games started to emerge. For a time, however, World of Warcraft really did stand at the top of the
gaming world, and it became an important part of 2000's gaming culture in the process. Still,
while World of Warcraft might have been the biggest online game of the 2000s, it certainly wasn't the
only one that left a lasting mark on the industry, and in fact, it wasn't even the only one to come
from the Warcraft series. Warcraft 3 released in 2002, and was an important online game in its
own right, with an active modding and competitive scene that were aided by the game's inclusion
of a world editor. This allowed players to create custom scenarios or maps for the game,
and many of these found popularity online, but one map in particular would go a whole lot further.
Defense of the Ancients took inspiration from an earlier custom map in Starcraft,
and shifted Warcraft's more traditional RTS focus towards hero vs hero action.
Dota proved to be a big hit, and would continue to get updated over the course of the decade,
with a dedicated community being built around its competitive play, which soon started appearing
at esport events. By the end of the decade, Dota was starting to attract serious commercial
attention, and in 2009, one of its original developers, alongside the recently formed Riot Games,
would launch their own take on a standalone Dota-like experience called League of Legends.
In time, the genre's name would change from Dota-like to MOBA, or Multiplayer Online Battle
Arena, and in a little more time, this would become one of the most popular genres in the world.
And it all started with a single custom map for Warcraft 3. Counter-Strike and Team Fortress
were also games which started life as player-created mods, and between them, they proved that the
innovative and independent side of PC gaming, where developers could change the entire industry with
a few lines of code written in their bedroom, was still alive, even in the console-dominated 2000s.
And speaking of console domination, the mid-2000s also brought the arrival of a new generation
alongside the greatest fall from grace since the collapse of Atari.
With the PlayStation 2, Sony achieved the unthinkable, and they were set to enter the
7th generation of consoles with a huge lead in market share and a near flawless reputation
with the public. One year after the release of their next system, however, they would find
themselves firmly in last place in sales while making a significant loss on each unit sold,
with onlookers questioning if they were witnessing the beginning of the end
of the once-immortal PlayStation. For 10 years, Sony dominated the console market
without any competitor coming close. For 10 years, they looked unbeatable.
Until, suddenly, things changed.
The story of how this happened began at E3 2005. For years, gamers the world over had been
eagerly awaiting the next generation of gaming, and it was here that they were finally going to
get to see it, with Microsoft, Sony, and Nintendo showing off their new consoles officially for the
very first time. For Nintendo, the reveal was still rather secretive. The console was named
The Revolution, due to Nintendo's belief that it would revolutionize the industry,
but the reason for that revolution wasn't yet made clear, and other than a look at the prototype
model, some technical details, and a brief showing of some next-generation Metroid,
the audience was ultimately left with more questions than answers.
For Microsoft, the event meant details. The already-announced Xbox 360 was set to launch
later that year ahead of its competition, and Microsoft showed off upcoming games,
provided technical specifications, and emphasized the new online interconnectivity,
with in-game messaging, downloadable games, and further online support being planned.
Sony, however, wasn't as close to their console's release date, and so the event came to be about
the future. Sony's main announcement was the Cell multi-core microprocessor that would be powering
their new upcoming system. This was being built in collaboration with IBM and Toshiba, and used
genuine supercomputer technology, making it a promising piece of hardware that could put Sony's
system a clear step above its competition in terms of pure power. Sony spent far longer showcasing
the Cell processor than any company would normally spend on such a subject, with both tech demos
and games designed to show off its capabilities. Some of what was shown was genuinely mind-blowing.
It can be hard to tell on lower-resolution video footage after years of further technological
advances, but for the time, the quality of certain games was far beyond anything people had seen
before, beyond Microsoft's recent 360 showcase, and beyond what many people thought was even possible.
For example, Killzone featured animations, physics, and lighting effects that are still
difficult to achieve today, 18 years later, including explosions casting shadows in real time.
For people who knew a little about gaming hardware, this could only mean one of two
possibilities, and arguments were quick to break out online about which one was true.
Either Sony was about to obliterate the competition and dominate a third console
generation in a row with their far superior system, or the games shown were fake,
i.e pre-rendered videos that were only posing as games, or at best actual games that were
instead running on top-of-the-line PC hardware. In the end, time would tell, but not before the
Xbox 360 launched. The 360 released in November 2005 at $299 or $399, depending on model,
and it received a positive critical reception. Sales started strong, but manufacturing problems
limited supply, leading to the system selling out in all regions except Japan, while not
selling as many units as was originally hoped. The launch lineup was nothing remarkable,
with Call of Duty 2 and Perfect Dark Zero being the best selling titles, yet Niber represented
a true system seller. And so, with one console released, the field was wide open, with everything
still to play for. 2006 saw the PlayStation 3 being delayed from its earlier release date of spring
to later in the year, while the 360 continued strong, adding more exclusive games to its library,
including the Elder Scrolls 4 Oblivion, Dead Rising, and Saints Row. Meanwhile,
E3 that year brought Nintendo's big reveal, and reactions were mixed. The new name, The We,
was widely mocked, and the showcasing of the new motion controls left audiences uncertain.
For Nintendo and the gaming industry, this was a bold new direction, and no one seemed quite
sure yet what the impact of this would be. One thing it did make clear, however, was that Nintendo
wouldn't be in the competition for the most powerful next-gen system anymore, and would
instead be finding success or failure through forging their own path. And so, attention returned to
Sony, who were about to have a conference that would live in infamy ever since.
Our development teams all around the world, in all of our studios,
have been hard at work converting that technology and vision into magic.
Whoops. Another exciting aspect is the ability for consumers to make microtransactions, 599 US
dollars, and we've been digging deeper and discovering what kind of muscle this machine really has.
And you can see from all of the games that we have up and running on PlayStation 3 that we're
really starting to push what this machine is capable of. Real-time weapon change, it's exhilarating.
What they're creating for the PlayStation 3 is inspiring.
So, that sums up our playable section. When E3 began in the 90s, it was something
aimed primarily at investors and industry professionals, and it came alongside boring
PowerPoint presentations full of sales figures and bar charts. As time went by, E3 became more and
more about media coverage and consumer outreach, with it becoming the number one place to make
gaming announcements, while also drawing heavy consumer scrutiny. By 2006, E3 was starting to
attract more consumer attention, and Sony's presentation wasn't exactly convincing.
Making fun of E3 conferences has gone on to become a recurring part of online gaming culture,
but this was where that tradition started.
And we're certainly not interested in gimmicks.
So, you can position this next to your TV screen and see for yourself what is coming up behind you.
And we're certainly not interested in conventional thinking.
Genji 2 is an ashen game, which is based on Japanese history. The stages of the game will
also be based on famous battles which actually took place in ancient Japan.
So, here's this giant enemy crab.
It's Ridge Racer. Ridge Racer. It requires huge financial investment, 599 US dollars,
but we must take risks to reap the rewards.
Still, as the dust settled, on-stage awkwardness and giant enemy crabs were the least of Sony's
worries. A retail price of 599 dollars, or 499 for a model with a smaller hard drive
and several missing features, was a staggering amount of money, well beyond the competition,
or what anyone expected.
The system would include a Blu-ray player, which helped Sony promote the Blu-ray format,
but unlike the DVD player of the PS2, for most consumers, this did little to make up for the
system's high price, as the Blu-ray format was still rarely being used at the time.
Sony, however, justified the high price on the basis that the power of their system
made it worth it. They were Sony, they made the best consoles, and the higher price was
reflective of their far more powerful hardware. Sony didn't see the problem with this logic,
but other people did.
Alongside the price, release date, and lessons on Japanese history, Sony also showcased several
upcoming games, yet most of them didn't look as impressive as what Sony had shown the year
before. What's more, they also didn't look especially different to the already released
games on the Xbox 360. Sony did have a more powerful system, but it seemed they didn't
have much to show for it. Of course, some people disagreed with arguments ranging online about
the console's graphics, and people possibly seeing whatever they wanted to see.
In the end, time would once more tell the true story, and in November 2006, the PlayStation 3
released in America and Japan, with a last-minute delay leading to the European release being
pushed to early 2007. Regardless of the price, the system did still sell, with stock shortages
and online scalpers causing controversy. The PS3 launch lineup also didn't have too much to offer,
and featured fewer games than the 360 had at release, with the best-selling game being
Resistance Full of Man. Still, by this point, the Xbox 360 had been out for a year already,
and in that time, its library had grown considerably, with the month of the PS3's launch
just happening to coincide with Microsoft's latest big exclusive, Gears of War, a third-person
shooter from Epic Games. Gears was a major critical and commercial hit. Its heavy focus on
cover-based combat was seen as a fresh take on the shooter genre, and it was the perfect game to
fill a space left open by the 360's absence of a new halo. What's more, its Unreal Engine-powered
graphics wowed critics and showcased what the 360 was capable of, and it seemed that what the 360
was capable of was keeping up with the supposedly more powerful PlayStation 3.
Of course, arguments about graphics still raged online, but by this point, for most people,
it was clear that if the PS3 did have an advantage, it wasn't a big enough one to win
them the console generation outright. At this point, you may be wondering what the hell was
going on inside the PlayStation 3, and whether the system even was more powerful to begin with,
and this was a question many people asked throughout the seventh generation.
The simple answer is that the cell processor famously used by the PS3 was more powerful,
but it was also more complicated, which made it harder for developers to actually utilize its power.
Meanwhile, the 360 had a solid CPU itself, while also having a small edge when it came to GPU power
and a more convenient shared memory system. In the end, though, any difference in power
didn't really matter. The key decider was third parties.
Sony hoped that they'd continue to lead the industry, and that developers would prioritize
developing for their more powerful system as a result. In reality, however, the Xbox 360 quickly
gained a sizable share of the market, and so developers' priority became making sure their
games were available on both systems, with some developers even going as far as to publicly
criticize Sony's more difficult to develop for hardware. But as the 360 was easier to develop
for, most multi-platform games were developed primarily for the Xbox 360 and then ported to the
PS3, meaning not only did the PlayStation 3 lack a graphical advantage, but in many multi-platform
games the PlayStation version either looked or ran worse. The PS3 did produce some great looking
exclusives, particularly later in its life once developers had more time to get used to the system's
architecture. But its reputation for having inferior versions of multi-platform games,
at a time when multi-platform games were becoming more important,
did damage the system's sales, with Microsoft often seeing much better software sales for
multi-platform titles. It also damaged Sony's brand, and without a graphical edge or many
exclusive games early in its life, the PlayStation 3 fell behind the 360, while the Xbox's library
continued to grow. 2007 brought more exclusives to Microsoft's system, including Crackdown,
Forza Motorsports 2, BioShock, and Mass Effect. The biggest of these, though, was the much
anticipated Halo 3, which promised players the chance to finish the fight in what was to be
Master Chief's final game. Halo was huge. It went on to sell over 14 million copies
in what many considered to be the best game of the 7th generation up until that point.
Sony would have some exclusives of their own that year, but the likes of a new Ratchet & Clank,
Uncharted Drake's Fortune, and Gran Turismo 5 Prologue weren't enough to match the 360's
superior offerings. What's more, many of the series that once made the PlayStation,
the console king, were going, or had already went, multi-platform. From Grand Theft Auto to Devil
May Cry, Tomb Raider, or Tekken, Sony's list of exclusives seemed to be getting smaller and smaller,
and at E3 2008, it was announced that even Final Fantasy, a series more important to Sony's early
success than any other, would be coming to both systems. Microsoft did face some of their own
problems, the most expensive being high rates of hardware failure, and the infamous Red Ring of
Death. Reports of technical problems appeared early in the 360's life, but the true extent of the
issue wasn't made apparent until a year or two after its launch, as more and more systems continued
to fail. In the end, Microsoft was forced to make an official response to the situation, alongside
offering all Xbox owners a full three-year warranty covering repairs and shipping. This was estimated
to cost over $1 billion, and slowed the Xbox's momentum at a time when Microsoft would have
loved to instead have been pulling further ahead. As the decade grew to a close, the PlayStation
3's outlook was finally starting to look more positive. Consecutive $100 price cuts in 2007,
2008, and 2009 finally brought the system to an affordable price. Several early 360 exclusives,
like the Elder Scrolls 4 Oblivion and Bioshock, turned out to only have timed exclusivity and
made their way to Sony's system as well. And as the generation continued, the PlayStation 3 was
able to add more and more exclusives of its own, including LittleBigPlanet, Metal Gear Solid 4,
Killzone 2, Infamous, God of War 3, and Gran Turismo 5. Meanwhile, the exclusives on the 360
started to come slower, with highlights including Fable 2, Left 4 Dead, and sequels to Halo and
Gears of War. The decade would end with Microsoft still in the lead, but with Sony working hard to
make amends for their mistakes by taking heavy losses on systems sold after price cuts as they
tried to foster an image of appealing to core gamers and creating strong first-party titles.
Still, for Microsoft, the seventh generation can only be interpreted as victory, whereas for Sony,
they went from being untouchable to having to fight for their life. When Sony launched the
PlayStation 1, they found record success through the system's affordable price, its ease to develop
for, and its great third-party support that led to many exclusive titles. Ten years later,
they seem to have ignored all of these factors and were instead relying on name recognition to
sell their system no matter the price, and to bring developers to their side no matter the
challenge of development. Yet, while it might seem like Sony's downfall was brought about by
arrogance, it might be fairer to say that they were simply over-ambitious. The man responsible
for many of the decisions involving the PlayStation 3 was then Sony Interactive Entertainment CEO
Ken Kutaragi, who is sometimes described as the father of PlayStation. For Kutaragi,
this was to be his last direct involvement with Sony's gaming division, which was something he
had once done so much to help create, and he truly believed in the power of the cell processor and
had hopes its technology could be used in other Sony products. In the end, this wasn't to be,
but Kutaragi had taken gambles with the PlayStation 1 and 2 as well, and in the past,
this was a big part of what helped turn Sony into the leader of the industry.
This time, however, he simply got it wrong. Still, Sony weren't the only ones who took
a gamble in the 7th generation, and while the PS3 and 360 were in fierce competition for the
core gaming market, Nintendo were finding success elsewhere.
The Wii wasn't like its peers.
Where Sony and Microsoft moved to high definition, Nintendo's system remained at the 480p of the
previous generation, breaking the long-running convention of new consoles being more powerful
than their predecessors. Instead, Nintendo opted to avoid direct competition and to target a broader
demographic in what has sometimes been called the Blue Ocean business strategy, which asserts
finding value in less contested market spaces. To this end, Nintendo set out with the goal to
innovate, taking inspiration from the success of the Nintendo DS, as well as the popular arcade
rhythm game, Dance Dance Revolution, and new advancements in motion sensing technology.
The end result released in November 2006, mere days after the PlayStation 3.
Unlike the PS3, however, the Wii cost the mere $250, and it quickly sold out, beating the combined
sales of the Xbox 360 and PlayStation 3 in most regions during its launch.
The Wii offered something genuinely new, and people seemed eager to try it out for themselves.
By September 2007, the Wii had overtaken the 360, despite releasing a year later,
and it continued to sell well in 2010 when it started to experience a rapid decline
amidst increased competition. For many people though, the Wii was the perfect family console.
Its advertising targeted a wide audience, including mothers and grandmothers,
and its wealth of party games and simple pickup and playability led to many people who may not
have usually played video games being willing to give it a go. Its best-selling titles reflect
this broader appeal, with the bundled Wii Sports selling and impressive 82.9 million copies.
Wii Sports didn't receive the strongest critical reception, mostly due to the gameplay's lack of
depth, but its simplicity worked well as an introduction to motion control and as a way to
attract those new to gaming. Other new first-party motion control games like Wii Play, Wii Fit,
Wii Party, and Wii Sports Resort also sold impressive numbers, with Nintendo managing
to showcase various creative ways to use their new technology, particularly through the combination
of exercise and gaming in Wii Fit. Alongside these were many of the classic series people
have come to expect from Nintendo, with Mario Kart Wii and new Super Mario Bros Wii being the
best-selling titles, and Super Mario Galaxy, Super Mario Galaxy 2, Super Smash Bros Brawl,
and for Legends of Zelda Twilight Princess being its most highly acclaimed.
Mario Galaxy 1 and 2 stood out in particular for once more offering a fresh take on the 3D
Mario formula, this time with a space theme and lots of creative level design focused on
different uses of gravity. Much of the Wii's library focused on its motion controls however,
and on this aspect opinions varied, with some seeing it as a bold new step for gaming and
others seeing it as more of an imprecise gimmick. The legacy of the Wii is also hard to judge.
It was the best-selling system of its generation, and yet in its later years its sales fell
consistently behind both its rivals in hardware and software, and this severe loss of momentum
may have went on to hurt Nintendo's next console. For a time it looked like the system
would live up to its early codename, but in the end the motion control revolution didn't really
amount to much, suggesting that the success of the system might have been more down to novelty
than the inherent value that motion control provided. There were also problems beyond the
system's less impressive graphics, with poor online support, poor audio, and a plethora of
lower quality titles that seemed designed to purely cash in on the latest craze with little
regard to quality. This came alongside a lack of long-term third-party support from more established
video game developers, who often stated they found motion controls difficult to implement and develop
for. The Wii would also miss out on many multi-platform games due to the difficulty of porting to a
system with lower technical specifications. Yet at the same time, the Nintendo Wii was one of the
most unique and daring consoles the gaming industry has ever seen, and it remains an iconic part of
gaming in the 2000s. And while motion controls may not have been the future for mainstream gaming,
appealing to wider demographics may well have been. The 2000s would see another trend come and go
in the form of accessory-based rhythm games. Across different systems and different titles,
the Guitar Hero and Rock Band series saw hugely impressive sales, and while this sub-genre soon
fell away, this was around the same time but smartphones and mobile gaming were starting
to explode and conquer the casual market as well as a big chunk of the entire industry in the process.
In this sense, the Wii may have been ahead of its time in making inroads
into new, more casual audiences. But it would soon find itself outgunned in the great casual war
by the rapidly growing mobile market. Mobile gaming wasn't the only thing on the rise at
the end of the decade, however, as while console gaming was increasingly going big,
some developers started to take a rather different approach.
The 2000s can be seen as the decade where AAA gaming came to dominate, with bigger budgets,
better graphics and longer development cycles at the same time that certain styles or genres of
games were increasingly being pushed out of the limelight. But in the shadow of this increased
focus on blockbuster titles at the expense of all else, something else started to appear in the
decade's second half. Independent game development had long played a vital role in PC gaming,
from pioneering students in the 70s to bedroom coders in the 80s to shareware
successes in the 90s and even modding innovations at the turn of the decade,
independent development was around since the industry's beginning, and it never stopped
being important. Still, throughout the 90s and 2000s, the technological gap between what small
independent teams and big commercial studios could do grew and grew, moving the industry
further and further away from independent development. In the early 2000s, however,
several factors would align that helped give rise to a new form of indie game development.
The first was the internet, which paved the way for more effective online distribution
without the need for retailers or publishers. The internet also saw the start of browser-based
gaming, which was made possible through programs like Java and Adobe Flash. This would give rise
to a wealth of user-generated content, with hosting sites like Newgrounds seeing massive
amounts of traffic over the decades, proving the popularity of even much more limited games,
with some browser-based games quickly becoming successful enough to get full PC retail releases,
like with PopCap's 2001 match 3 game Bejewelled. At the same time as this, new dedicated software
like Game Maker Studio and new unified game engines like Unity and Unreal Engine were starting to lower
the programming barrier to entry in game development. Finally, in 2004 Half-Life 2 released,
and indie gaming would never be the same. Because despite being very far from an indie game itself,
Half-Life 2 was the first game to be offered on and required the installation of Steam.
The Half-Life community wasn't exactly happy about this, but the Half-Life community didn't
have a choice, and Half-Life 2 was a difficult game to resist. In 2005, Steam would release its first
third-party games on the platform, including independent titles like Ragdoll Kong Fu and
Darwinia. And as Steam's digital distribution model cut out retailers and manufacturing costs,
it gave developers a higher profit margin, meaning that once Valve proved the model could work,
they were able to start attracting bigger names, including id Software, Idos and Capcom,
leading to further growth for the platform. This came alongside the rise of the term
indie game. Once upon a time, there were no distinctions between games on the basis of developer
status or budget, but as the industry grew, people eventually started to differentiate between
small, cheaper, independent titles and the more traditional full-priced commercial releases.
One of the first games to help create this distinction was Cave Story, which was developed
by one man, Daisuke Amaya, over a five-year period starting when he was in college. Amaya was inspired
by the games he played growing up, like Metroid, and so he made a 2D platforming adventure game
with a retro visual style. Cave Story was finished in late 2004, with Amaya making it available
online for free. The reason he didn't charge anything was because he thought the shareware
model would be too much hassle to implement, and he just wanted more people to play his game
after working on it for so long. And people did play his game, with several western media outlets
reporting on and praising it soon after its release, and showing amazement that such a game
could come from just one single developer. But as Cave Story released for free in a time before
most people had ever heard the term indie game, it didn't find mainstream success, and Amaya
simply continued working his full-time job at a printing company until six years later when
Cave Story released on Nintendo's WiiWare service and finally became a commercial success.
Cave Story has been described as the quintessential indie game and it would inspire others to follow
in its wake, while digital distribution and new development tools made doing so more and more
achievable. The next major step for indie games would once again come from Valve and a non-indie
game however. Portal, released in 2007 and its creative puzzle design and memorable story made
it one of the year's most critically acclaimed games. Portal was only about three hours long however,
which seemed far too short for a normal full-priced commercial release. As a result,
Valve got around this by selling it alongside Half-Life 2 and Team Fortress 2 in a retail
compilation called The Orange Box. Still, Portal's high quality and widespread popularity clearly
highlighted the potential of smaller, more focused games. At the same time as this,
Microsoft were looking to promote their own Xbox-focused digital distribution store,
Xbox Live Arcade, which was a perfect place for indie games due to their smaller download sizes.
And so, Microsoft began the Xbox Live Arcade Wednesdays program, which promised a new arcade
game to be released each week over summer, as well as the Xbox Live Arcade unplugged compilation
discs to promote Xbox Live Arcade games to normal retail consumers. This was followed by the Xbox
Live Summer of Arcade, which began in 2008 and saw Microsoft heavily promote a series of newly
releasing indie games each summer. The first year's lineup included Castle Crashers,
Bionic Commando Rearmed, Gallagher Legions, Geometry Wars 2, and Braid. And this proved
to be a big success, which helped establish the concept of indie games with general audiences.
By 2009, promising indie titles were starting to become a common occurrence even outside of
Xbox's Summer of Arcade and Steam. Spelunky, from Derrick U, combined platforming gameplay with
the procedural generation of roguelikes to create a new type of non-traditional roguelike design
that many future games would emulate. Flower, from Back Game Company, released on PSN and took
players on a calm and emotional journey that contrasted sharply from the violence of most
mainstream games. And World of Goo, from 2D Boy, released on PC and Wii and impressed with its
simple yet challenging puzzle design and memorable presentation. And so, by 2010, indie games in the
form that we think of them today had arrived and they were just starting to become an important
force within an industry that was otherwise moving in the opposite direction. At the start of the
decade, Sony were at the top of the industry and were preparing for the release of a console that
would soon be even more successful. By the end of the decade, they were in last place and trying
desperately to rebuild their damage reputation. At the start of the decade, Microsoft was still
yet to formally enter the gaming space, yet by the decade's end, they were in the strongest
position they would ever find themselves in, with the Xbox looking increasingly like the
core gaming console of choice. At the start of the decade, Nintendo were THE company for classic
console gaming, yet by its end, they were finding new levels of success by appealing to new audiences
with new types of technology. Things change fast in the gaming industry, and in just a few more
years, everything just mentioned would end up changing again. But it wasn't just the fates
of the major players that were in flux in the 2000s. Game design itself would see major evolution
as mainstream gaming moved further and further towards a triple-A approach.
The jump from the 6th to 7th console generation would be the last time that new consoles would
bring a really noticeable upgrade in graphics, as games went from 480 to 720 resolution,
but even this came at a cost, as the average frame rate of console games dropped as a result
from 60 FPS down to 30. For years, gaming graphics had steadily increased,
but now, the industry was starting to see diminishing returns, with sacrifices having to
be made to performance to make continued advancement possible. And yet, the best-selling
and most critically acclaimed games were, without doubt, the ones that looked the best.
In 2009, Call of Duty Modern Warfare 2 broke records for sales, and Uncharted 2 broke records
for Game of the Year awards, with both games putting a huge focus on linear cinematic set pieces
and the highest levels of presentation that technology would allow.
And yet, while mainstream gaming was getting noticeably more expensive and less diverse,
it was other areas of gaming that would see the largest growth. At the end of 2009,
rovio entertainment's Angry Birds and Pop Caps, Plants vs Zombies had just released,
as smartphone-fuelled mobile gaming was becoming a larger and larger section of the industry.
Sony and Microsoft were both preparing for the release of their own motion-controlled devices
to try to replicate Nintendo's success with casual audiences, and a little indie game by
the name of Minecraft was starting to make waves online after its first release to the public,
while a little multiplayer game called League of Legends was just coming to the end of its beta.
Gaming was changing, just like it always does, and the changes of the next decade
would see some of the industry's toughest challenges yet, alongside some of its best and worst moments.
The console wars would continue in the 2010s, but the first battle was fought over motion controls.
Nintendo had responded to criticism of the original Wii Remote's poor precision
with the Wii Motion Plus in 2009. This new add-on upped the accuracy, but only in games developed
with it in mind, and it would be required for certain later titles like Wii Sports Resort
and The Legend of Zelda Skyward Sword. Still, both Sony and Microsoft focused their marketing
on why their new devices were better than the Wii.
Sony boasted about their accuracy, pointing to the little glowing plastic ball on the end of
the PlayStation Move Remote as proof that the device is special, and making liberal use of
terms like accelerometer, inertial sensors, synergistic processing units, and internal
magnetometers. And no, I did not make any of both terms up just now.
Microsoft, on the other hand, decided the best marketing strategy was to freak everyone out
with their surreal virtual child simulator, Project Milo, in 2009.
Unfortunately, while it may have apparently worked that day, one year later, when Microsoft
returned to showcase the Kinect again, it was rather less impressive, being something more
in line with the earlier PlayStation Eye toy. Meanwhile, the child Milo was never seen again.
For gaming fans that were happy using normal controllers, this was a strange time to be alive.
Both E3 and gaming media were dominated by the new upcoming battle for motion control supremacy.
For a time, the question of who would win between Kinect, the Move, and the Wii was treated with
the utmost importance, as if we were only now about to see the real battle that would determine
gaming's future. In the end, though, it turned out gaming's future had other plans.
The PlayStation Move, released in September 2010, received positive reviews for accuracy
and responsiveness, particularly when compared to the Wii, and then produced disappointing sales,
as the more serious gaming audience Sony were targeting at the time showed little interest.
A disappointing selection of games to support it certainly didn't help either,
and in three years' time, it was all but forgotten.
Microsoft's Kinect, on the other hand, released in November 2010 for a higher price and received
worse reviews, and then it broke the world records for the fastest-selling consumer
electronic device, while easily surpassing the Move in the process, probably because it was
marketed heavily towards a more casual audience and the controller-free experience it offered
was something different to the already widespread Wii. Reviewers criticised input lag and the lack
of depth in games on offer, but did praise the Kinect's innovativeness. Three years later,
and the Kinect was far from forgotten, but we'll get to that later. Around this time,
the Wii would also see its sales slow, as the motion control craze seemed to be coming to
its natural conclusion after the novelty started to wear off. Still, while motion control might
have dominated the news at that time, something else was dominating sales.
In 2009, Call of Duty Modern Warfare 2 broke sales records for biggest entertainment launch
in history, across all media. In 2010, Call of Duty Black Ops broke the same records,
surpassing Modern Warfare 2. In 2011, Call of Duty Modern Warfare 3 broke records again,
surpassing Black Ops, and in 2012, Call of Duty Black Ops 2 broke records again,
surpassing Modern Warfare 3. Call of Duty's reign of terror would not last forever,
but at the start of the 2010s, it certainly seemed like it might. Put simply, Call of Duty was the
biggest thing in gaming at the time, with release after release, easily managing to sell over 20
million copies, and there was a new release every single year. The multiplayer formula established
by Call of Duty 4 Modern Warfare proved incredibly popular with players, and Activision was happy
to do everything they could to cash in on this. And so, in a time when there was less online
shooter competition, Call of Duty became the undisputed king. Amidst the soaring popularity of
mobile games, the yearly domination of Call of Duty, and the newly arriving motion control devices,
there was a sense at this time that older, or core gaming audiences, might be being left behind
in an industry that didn't seem to need them anymore. This would play a major role in the
next console generation, but there were still well-received games being released in this period,
and amongst them, a new trend was on the rise. The Open World
After the record success of Grand Theft Auto on the PlayStation 2, it's no surprise that more
games would try to copy its approach to Open World design, but while the 2000s would see a large
number of Grand Theft Auto clones, few of them ended up leaving a lasting impact. Things would
change at the start of the next decade, however, as developers started to look beyond Grand Theft
Auto for Open World inspiration. Games like Fallout 3 in 2008, Assassin's Creed II in 2009, Red Dead
Redemption and Fallout New Vegas in 2010, Batman, Arkham City and the Elder Scrolls V Skyrim in 2011,
and Far Cry 3 in 2012 all achieved critical and commercial success to help popularise the
Open World as a concept that would soon come to be used more broadly in mainstream game design.
And as the decade continued, more and more games made the transition to Open World,
including most of the biggest series in gaming, like Metal Gear Solid, The Witcher, Dragon Age,
Final Fantasy, Mass Effect, Forza, The Legend of Zelda, Halo and Pokemon, alongside many of the
decade's biggest new IPs. This fit the established gaming industry trends of trying to make bigger
and better games to continually one up what came before, where Open World seemed to represent
the next step in this while also providing an opportunity to breathe new life into established
franchises. The move towards Open World brought benefits like increased immersion and player
freedom, but it would also lead to criticism about repetition and game experiences being drawn out
or padded, with the term Open World Fatigue sometimes being used as the decade continued.
Still, at the start of the decade, Open Worlds were relatively fresh, and early examples like
Red Dead Redemption and Skyrim were some of the most highly praised and best-selling games
of their respective years. Still, while much of gaming at this time was moving in certain
recognizable directions, there were two games which stood out for doing something different.
The first was Dark Souls, which released in 2011 on consoles and 2012 on PC.
From Software had already impressed players with Demon's Souls in 2009, but Dark Souls was where
they would reach a much wider audience, and the game quickly developed a reputation for its high
difficulty and unforgiving design. What really made Dark Souls stand out however was how different
it felt from so many other games of its era. Since the days of arcades, video games had been
becoming easier and more accessible year after year, to the point where increasing accessibility
was seen as a fundamental part of good game design. The general consensus was that older
games were often far too punishing, so developers added things like regenerating health and regular
checkpoints. Or that old games were too vague and confusing, so developers added more tutorials,
guidance, and features like mini-maps. Or that old games were too simple and video-gamey,
so developers focused more on the cinematic side with action set pieces and cutscenes.
And then, Dark Souls came along and ignored all of this. It punished players for mistakes,
even taking away their valuable experience points. It gave players minimal direction and made a world
where it was easy to get lost, and it told its story almost entirely indirectly, leaving 99%
of the experience as pure gameplay. Dark Souls broke all the rules about how a modern game
should be designed, and in doing so, it created something unique which many players fell in love
with. With time, Dark Souls developed one of the most enduring legacies of any game from the
modern era, although its reception at release was more modest. It was only the 32nd highest
reviewed game from 2011, and it was widely ignored by Game of the Year awards. Yet, it was also a
game which people kept playing and talking about, and soon its influence was hard to deny. Every
difficult game would come to be compared to it. Countless indie games would directly copy it,
and even mainstream games would start to indirectly copy it, all while its reputation kept growing.
In short, from combat design, to the lack of handholding, to the use of difficulty, or its
approach to storytelling, Dark Souls was a title which made the industry re-evaluate what good
game design truly meant, and yet, it arguably wasn't even the most important game released that year.
If Dark Souls challenged how people fought about game design,
Minecraft challenged how people fought about video games. Beginning at the hands of a single
developer, Marcus Notch Pearson, Minecraft would go on to become the best-selling game of all time,
with a staggering 238 million copies sold, a number which is still rising.
Notch took inspiration from the ambitious ColonySim, Dwarf Fortress, and the block-based mining game
Infiniminer to create a procedurally generated block-building sandbox that was made available
to the public online in 2009, and received regular updates over the next two years.
In 2011, it received its official release, and in 2014, Minecraft was bought by Microsoft for
$2.5 billion, with the game still receiving regular updates to this day. Beyond simply being one of
the most played games ever made, Minecraft popularized the concept of early access, where players
paid to access a game that's still in development, and continuous development, where a game is
continually expanded over time with no specific planned ending. It also challenged the perceived
importance of graphics in gaming. For years, graphics had been getting better and better,
and becoming a larger and larger priority, even as this caused development time and costs to
continually increase. Then, Minecraft came along with pixelated blocky visuals that looked
several generations old, and became the most successful game in history.
In doing so, Minecraft proved that not only are high quality graphics not needed for a game to be
successful, but also that graphics might sometimes be holding gaming back. Minecraft's popularity
was a result of the freedom it provided players to create and explore and do more than most other
games allowed, and this level of freedom was only made possible by the simpler visual style,
where not every asset needed thousands and thousands of polygons or multiple dedicated artists.
At a time when the gaming industry was fully embracing AAA design and indie games were still
finding their footing, Minecraft was a monumental statement about what video games could and maybe
should be. And between Minecraft, Dark Souls, the open world trend, yearly call of duties,
and unwanted motion controls, you have a great representation of what the next decade in gaming
would be all about. Video games were changing just like they always were, but now conflicts and
divisions were starting to be more obvious as the industry continued to grow and expand.
Within this, multiple distinct battles can be identified, like mainstream versus indie,
conventional game design versus counterculture, core gaming versus casual, maximizing monetization
versus preserving a franchise, and so on. And it was these divisions that would truly define
the next decade, including the next generation of console warfare.
In the 7th generation, Sony shocked the world by losing.
After years of PlayStation domination, Sony looked unstoppable, but a high price,
complicated system architecture, and the loss of key exclusives allowed Microsoft to close the
gap with core gamers while Nintendo thrived for appealing to new and more casual audiences.
The fate of all three of these companies would soon change though,
and this started before the next generation even arrived.
After years of leading the pack, the Wii sales fell behind both the 360 and PS3 at the same time
that new motion control competition arrived and consumer interest seemed to wane.
Microsoft saw its lead over Sony dwindle and eventually disappear as the 360 lost momentum
amidst few new exclusives, and Sony's system saw its finest years after price cuts and model
revisions turned around sales. Sony's strong end to the generation would be complete with the release
of The Last of Us in summer 2013, which was heralded as one of the finest games of the generation,
at the same time that the PS3 finally managed to overtake the 360's total lifetime sales.
Focus then turned to the next generation, which had officially begun in 2012.
This was the world first reveal of Nintendo's new console as shown at E3 2011.
You may notice a heavy emphasis on the word controller.
This trailer is 3 minutes long and that word shows up on screen 12 different times.
The word console isn't used once and the Wii U console isn't even shown.
The Wii U was one of Nintendo's greatest failures and much of that failure is often said to be down
to consumers failing to understand what the system even was. Looking at the reveal trailer shows how
this might have happened and even among gaming media this caused some confusion. Amongst general
consumers who may not follow gaming news closely, i.e. much of the Wii's new player base, it would
have been easy to mistake this device as just an expensive add-on or a new Nintendo themed tablet
and this poor marketing decision surely hurt the system's sales. This isn't the whole story however
and even during its development the Wii U experienced a bit of an identity crisis that went on to
follow it for the rest of its life. The Wii exceeded Nintendo's expectations and excelled with casual
gamers but Nintendo started to worry that if they appealed too much to casual audiences it might hurt
their reputation with more core audiences. As a result, Nintendo made bridging the gap between
the two groups a priority for their next system and so they decided on HD graphics as this was
expected from core audiences and that it should also include a new innovative feature that could
appeal to families and Wii fans hence the tablet like controller. This controller wasn't as
revolutionary as the Wii's motion controller bin though as tablet computers were already gaining
popularity at this time. The controller was also heavy and bulky in design, had a short battery life
and needed to be in range of the Wii U console to be used making it more limited than an actual tablet.
Nintendo also struggled to show off the advantages this hybrid approach brought to
game design whereas the Wii's motion control was simple to understand and easily demonstrated.
Still, in November 2012 the Wii U launched to the public for $299 or $349. The critical
reception was mostly positive with praise given to its backwards compatibility with Wii games and
peripherals as well as the potential of its unique controller. Initial sales were lower than Nintendo
expected though and the launch lineup had few must-play titles with the best sellers being a new
new Super Mario Bros and the party game Nintendo Land. As time went on Nintendo would release more
games on the system including new entries into most of the series people expected like Mario Kart
and Smash Bros although the importance of these games may have been diminished by the fact that
many also released on Nintendo's latest handheld the 3DS. The Wii U's biggest problem however would
once again be third party support. At the start of the Wii U's life it was on par with the still
current PS3 and Xbox 360 meaning titles could be ported between these systems and these ports made
up a big part of the Wii U's early lineup. These games rarely made interesting use of the Wii U's
unique controller and sometimes ran worse than the older generation versions due to differences
with the system's hardware but this was still a lot better than what was to follow.
Once the next generation of consoles arrived the Wii U once again became technically inferior
to its rivals causing great difficulty for third parties when porting multi-platform games to the
system and as the Wii U got off to a slow start which led to a small user base third parties
then had even less incentive to bring their games to the system at all. Less than one year after its
release EA and Bethesda both publicly stated that they had little plans for future Wii U games and
this problem only grew over time. By the end of the Wii U's life the only game amongst its best
selling titles that didn't come directly from Nintendo was Minecraft and so for the fourth
generation in a row Nintendo's console was the worst place to be for third party games and this
time the problem was bigger than ever. Nintendo designed the Wii U as a system that would appeal
to both casual and core audiences but with little third party support and few games which made
interesting use of the controller the Wii U failed to pull in many core gamers and with confusing
marketing a high price and the lack of a strong new gimmick it failed to replicate the Wii success
with casual gamers and so the Wii U was a complete failure and dumped Nintendo firmly into last place
as soon as its competitors arrived. But as disappointing for Nintendo as this must have been
at least they could soon console themselves but they weren't the only one who dropped the ball
in the eighth generation. Introducing Xbox One.
To understand how the eighth generation was won you have to keep in mind what had been happening
leading up to it. The biggest trends over the last five or six years had been the success of
the Wii and motion control, the huge growth in the mobile market and call of duty continuing
to break every sales record under the sun. People may not have admitted it but the truth was core
gamers were starting to feel like they were being forgotten. The industry was growing but it was
growing away from what made many people like games in the first place and the only thing big
company seemed to care about now was finding new ways to reach the more lucrative casual market.
And so as the next generation was about to be revealed there was never a more important moment
to put the focus squarely back on high quality games. Then came the official Xbox One reveal show
which was the first look at Microsoft's new system and a moment Xbox fans had been waiting for
for years and the only thing being mentioned was TV. It took 33 minutes almost all of which was
focused on TV before a single video game was shown and when it was it was just a highlight reel for
the next yearly installment of multi-platform EA sports titles. This was followed by the more
promising Forza 5 then a newly announced confusing game TV show hybrid called Quantum Break and then
it was back to actual TV coverage. Halo made an appearance as a newly announced TV show,
Steven Spielberg made an appearance to talk about TV, American football made an appearance as something
you can apparently watch on TV and then the show finished with Microsoft's biggest reveal.
Call of Duty will appear on Xbox later that year just as it had for the last six years because
it was a multi-platform yearly series and then the show was over. This was how Microsoft threw away
all the goodwill they had slowly built with core audiences over the last 10 years. At a time when
gamers were worried about how the industry was changing Microsoft used the one moment where
everyone was watching them to prove that all of people's fears were true. The reception to this
reveal was universally negative but things would soon get a whole lot worse. Three weeks later at
E3 2013 Microsoft had one last chance to make a big impression before their system's release
and the show ended up dominated by news that the Xbox One would be an always online system
that owners couldn't play games on it without an internet connection but people could no longer
sell or share used games due to new DRM measures and that the built-in Kinect would be always on,
watching you, recording your daily activities for storage in Microsoft database in case of any
future bad behaviour. That last part may have been added more by the public than Microsoft
themselves and Microsoft were a little unfortunate to be holding their press conference one week
after Edward Snowden leaked documents revealing unlawful surveillance by global security agencies.
Still for the most part Microsoft did it to themselves.
At this point victory was being handed to Sony on a silver platter
and all they had to do was mention video games a few times
and remind people that at least they're not Microsoft.
In addition to creating an amazing library of new titles on PlayStation 4 were equally focused on
delivering what gamers want most without imposing restrictions or devaluing their PS4 purchases.
For instance PlayStation 4 won't impose any new restrictions on the use of PS4 gamers.
Guess that's a good thing.
We believe in the model that people embrace today with PlayStation 3 and continue to demand.
Just heard you there. When a gamer buys a PS4 disc they have the rights to use that copy of the game.
They can trade in the game at retail sell it to another person lend it to a friend or keep it forever.
In addition PlayStation 4 disc based games don't need to be connected online to play.
And it won't stop working if you haven't authenticated within 24 hours.
Sony's best announcement was still to come however.
I'm very proud to announce that PlayStation 4 will be available at $399.
This meant the PlayStation 4 would be $100 cheaper than the Xbox One and it wasn't
because of less powerful hardware. In fact if anything the PlayStation 4 seemed to be the most
powerful system. The reason for the Xbox's higher price was the built-in connect device
a feature but offered several benefits yet was highly disliked by many in gaming communities.
For Microsoft the reveal and its follow-up were a disaster.
One week after E3 they announced that the new DRM policy would be scrapped,
that the system would no longer require an internet connection and that owners would even be allowed
to unplug the connect and still use the console. President of Microsoft's interactive entertainment
business Von Matrick departed shortly after but by this point the damage was already done
and the high price still remained. In November 2013 both consoles released to the public with
the PlayStation 4 quickly selling out. By the end of the year it had sold 1.2 million more units
than the Xbox One and with time this lead grew until in 2015 Microsoft announced that they would
no longer be publishing sales figures. Microsoft may have hoped that after the release of the
Xbox One their reputation might improve due to the quality of the system but unfortunately for them
this too was not to be because while the two consoles were similar in specs and architecture
it was the PlayStation 4 which seemed to have the edge and was consistently performing better
when it came to multi-platform games. For Microsoft there was little they could do but
dig in repair their damaged reputation and prepare for the future. At E3 2014 they revealed a $399
connect free version of the console to bring the system in line with the PlayStation. The TV focused
Xbox entertainment studios was also closed later that year and focus for the future shifted
more towards video games with Microsoft purchasing several studios including Mojang the creators
of Minecraft which Microsoft continued to allow on Sony systems in what they hoped would be seen
as a pro consumer move. For Sony their lead over both Microsoft and Nintendo never seemed to be
any doubt and while in time Microsoft did succeed at distancing themselves from past controversies
the PlayStation 4 continued to be a well-received and well-liked system that offered a far more
impressive list of exclusive titles. This lineup was admittedly slow to get going but later included
Marvel's Spider-Man, God of War, Uncharted 4, The Last of Us Part 2, Horizon Zero Dawn, Ghosts of
Tsushima, Final Fantasy 7 Remake and Bloodborne. Meanwhile the Xbox One had few highly reviewed
exclusives outside of Halo, Years of War and Forza. Still by this point exclusive titles played a much
smaller role in determining a console's fate than they had in the past with most games being
multi-platform and with console exclusives increasingly being released on PC by all parties
except Nintendo. There can be no mistake however that the PlayStation 4 won the eighth generation.
The most recent sales figures show that Sony's system sold over 117 million units which is more
than twice as many as the Xbox One and vastly more than the 13.5 million of the Wii U. For Nintendo
the battle was lost before it even began. For Microsoft, inferior multi-platform performance,
few exclusives and a higher launch price are what ultimately doomed the Xbox One
although the damage done by the poor handling of the initial reveal and the heavy focus on TV
made sure that the system got off to the worst possible start.
Microsoft had found some success at targeting casual audiences with the release of the Kinect in
2010 and they presumably hoped to continue this by including the Kinect with their new console and
focusing heavily on multimedia. We wanted to bring new audiences into Xbox. People that were outside
of what traditionally was thought of as our core gaming audience that was really the intent at the time.
Within the company there's always a sense of do more and grow but I think Don was looking for like
what's that next big leap after Kinect and I think there was a sense that TV could be that thing.
Like Nintendo finding that the Wii U had to compete with real tablets though,
smart TVs were also readily available by the time the Xbox One launched which made much of the
system's multimedia utility less impressive. Their biggest mistake however was simply failing
to consider their core audience when designing their system and marketing it. If they'd focused on
TV in addition to video games the reaction wouldn't have been so negative but instead
all they had to show alongside their TV related announcements were anti-consumer features like
Always Online and DRM and a high price that was a result of a feature most people didn't even want.
When gamers were worried about being abandoned by the industry Microsoft did exactly that
and it cost them. Still like others before them Microsoft and Nintendo were down but not out
and things do change quickly in gaming as the rest of the industry was making clear.
When the DS and PSP went head to head in the mid-2000s Nintendo was the clear winner but the
PlayStation portable was far from a failure and as the next generation of handhelds was revealed
at the start of the 2010s it looked like history might repeat with both companies sticking to a
similar approach. Sony doubled down on power boasting of near PlayStation 3 level graphics
and Nintendo introduced a new unique feature to complement their dual screen design by way of
stereoscopic 3D. This is something Nintendo had been flirting with for years. First with the Japan
only Famicom 3D system in the 80s then with the universally panned virtual boy in the 90s and even
with an unreleased LCD attachment for the GameCube in the early 2000s. This time however 3D was the
main attraction and with a relatively low cost and no need for additional glasses it was a feature
that got people talking. The Nintendo 3DS released in March 2011 for $250. Reviews were positive
with praise given to the addition of a new circle pad analog controller, backwards compatibility
with DS games and the improved user interface while criticism was directed towards low battery life.
The main talking point though was unsurprisingly the 3D effect with reactions varying widely
and these reactions were more important than usual as the 3D effect didn't pick up on camera making
it hard for Nintendo to show off. Still some people were blown away by the effect, some saw it as
nothing but a gimmick and some complained about it inducing nausea and headaches. It also required
rather precise positioning of the system or the effect with blur which was a little impractical
for a handheld device. The 3D effect did at least make the system stand out to something new but
in the end this didn't translate well to sales with Nintendo struggling to sell many units outside
Japan leading to a surprise price cut of $70 only four months after launch. After this sales increased
but it was a significant sacrifice for Nintendo to make just to get the device off the ground.
The PlayStation Beta on the other hand launched at the end of 2011 in Japan and in February 2012
outside Japan meaning it took almost one year longer to release than its rival. Its price of $250
put it in line with the 3DS's launch price but behind its updated price. Reviews for Sony system
were also positive with the improved performance, impressive display, rear touchpad and second analog
stick all helping to make the system stand out as a significant step up from the original PlayStation
portable. The main criticism was the memory card requirements which created an additional and
necessary further cost that was made worse by the fact that only Sony brand memory cards worked
with the device meaning users had no choice but to buy Sony's expensive cards even if they already
owned other memory cards. Still the Vita did its best to get off to a strong start and boasted a
relatively big launch lineup of 25 titles which was more than most consoles or handhelds in this
era. Those games included Uncharted Golden Abyss, Wipeout 2048, FIFA 12 and Rayman Origins.
The Vita's first year would also see more major releases such as Little Big Planet,
Persona 4 Golden, Assassin's Creed 3 Liberation and Call of Duty Black Ops Declassified as Sony
tried hard to establish the system's reputation with core gamers. At first this looked like it
might work with the Vita seeing promising sales at launch but these numbers soon declined and by
the end of 2012 it had only sold 4 million units well below Sony's expectations and with slow sales
came a loss of interest from many third-party studios causing Sony to abandon their strategy
of trying to sell the system through big releases and instead adopt a more indie-centric approach
where they reached out to mobile and PC developers to try to bring as many promising smaller titles
to the platform as possible. In August 2013 Sony also dropped the price by $50 alongside a reduction
in memory cards and in conjunction with the more successful indie focus and the system's strong
sales in Japan the Vita was able to survive but it never came close to matching its predecessor
or the 3DS. As for Nintendo they would launch an updated 3DS Excel model in summer 2012 followed
by a model without the 3D display named the 2DS one year later followed by a new more powerful
version called the New 3DS in late 2014. Alongside Nintendo's characteristic strong first-party
lineup and decent third-party support from companies like Square Enix, Konami and Capcom
this helped keep sales far beyond the Vita. The 3DS would even see the release of a new
Monster Hunter game from Capcom which had long been one of the PSP's best-selling series.
Still as dominant as the 3DS was over the Vita it still fell far short of the original DS
with less than half of its total lifetime sales. The reality was that both the 3DS and Vita were
solid handheld devices that made significant improvements on their predecessors. The 3DS's
much-tounted 3D struggled to prove its value in the long term with many players simply turning
it off for most games once the novelty wore off and the Vita shot itself in the foot with
how it handled memory cards but in a different era it's easy to imagine both systems finding
strong commercial success. Still in the end it wasn't a different era and in the 2010s the
3DS and Vita combined wouldn't even come close to matching the mobile market.
The harsh reality was that in a world where most people already had smartphones
dedicated handhelds simply seemed to have too much competition and so for Sony and Nintendo
this would be the final handheld generation. Nintendo dominated the handheld market for decades
often with a staggering market share but nothing lasts forever.
As for mobile gaming it revealed an entirely different side of the industry
one with different monetization models, different games and different dominant regions.
For most observers of this the biggest takeaway was the industry's size and growth.
At the start of the 2010s the mobile industry was still well behind consoles or PC but as the
decade continued it soon caught up and by the decade's end it was considerably larger than
all other types of gaming combined. Most mobile games made money through in-app purchases or in-app
advertising rather than the more traditional buy-to-play model and the amount of money individual
games could make was staggering. The game with the highest revenue was Arena of Valor also known as
Honor of Kings in China which is a MOBA made by Chinese gaming giant Tencent that's brought in
over $14.6 billion since its release in 2015. If numbers that large seem a bit abstract to you
I like to use the currency called the Bethesda. Microsoft bought Bethesda and the IPs for $7.5
billion so Arena of Valor's revenue is about 2 Bethesdas. Other high grossing mobile games of
the decade include the RPG physics game hybrid Monster Strike, Supercell's fantasy themed strategy
game Clash of Clans, the Battle Royale focused PUBG Mobile, the match 3 RPG hybrid Puzzle and
Dragons, the more traditional match 3 game Candy Crush Saga and Pokemon Go, an augmented reality
based Pokemon game from Neantic that received a lot of mainstream attention during its release in
2016 for its unparalleled ability at making gamers touch grass. It also caused Nintendo's stock to
increase by 50% in the space of a week. It can be difficult to talk about mobile games without the
conversation eventually leading back to money whether it's the growth of the industry, the revenue
of individual games or the methods of monetization that are commonly used. Still for many people
mobile gaming is about the convenience of games that can be played in short bursts
wherever you happen to be with little barrier of entry. As the industry is growing to be so large
it's developed a lot of choice and diversity and as smartphones have continued to become more
powerful what can be achieved on them has increased at the same time. In the end though
regardless of people's various opinions on mobile gaming it's impossible to deny the industry
significance particularly as the trends seen in the mobile industry would soon make their way into
the gaming mainstream. Online gaming has been steadily growing since the early 90s and the
2010s were no exception. What would change this decade though was the way online games made money.
World of Warcraft was a hugely important game not just because it had 12 million active players
but because those 12 million players were each paying a monthly subscription fee.
Compared to a more traditional one-time purchase monthly fees were massive but when it came to
further monetization this was only the beginning. The one-time purchase business model didn't fit
well with online games that were being continually updated and emphasized long-term engagement and
so change was inevitable. One of the earliest and most significant examples was Team Fortress 2
which maintained a steady active player base after its release in 2007
while receiving regular free updates adding additional content. In 2010 one such update
allowed players to buy and sell in-game items like hats and the game's revenue immediately
quadrupled. In 2011 the game was updated to be completely free to play as revenue from
in-game transactions had come to far exceed those of people purchasing the game and after
Team Fortress 2 went free to play revenue went up again and the industry took notice.
At the same time as this new online games like League of Legends were also starting to draw
in lots of players while making a big profit. League of Legends was also free to play and
made money through cosmetic skins and purchasable champions. Players could acquire these champions
through slowly earning in-game currency as they played but many would choose to purchase them
for real money with more champions and skins being added over time to ensure there was always
something new to buy. At the time this business model was largely praised with the free to play
aspect helping the player base grow and the earnable in-game currency providing an alternative
to needing to spend real money. Of course players did still spend money and as the game's highly
competitive nature ensured strong replayability the player base grew and grew alongside the game's
revenue as League of Legends became one of the most played and most successful games of all time.
Still changing monetization wasn't exclusive to multiplayer games.
Once upon a time arcade games made big money by making gamers pay to play but some games went
even further like Double Dragon 3 which featured an in-game shop where players could purchase a
range of items including new characters weapons and power-ups. This was widely criticized and
arcades eventually lost popularity making the one-time purchase model of non-arcade games even more
standard. Older PC games did often sell physical expansion packs that added additional content
at less than full price and these were generally regarded quite positively as a fair way to expand
existing games. Things advanced with the arrival of Xbox Live where some games started to provide
bonus downloadable content usually for free. The Xbox Live marketplace been evolved with
launch of the 360 and soon featured small pieces of downloadable content at small costs with one
of the most infamous being the two and a half dollar cosmetic horse armor in the Elder Scrolls 4
Oblivion. A similar practice was later adopted by Sony and Nintendo at the same time but music
games like Guitar Hero and Rock Band were gaining popularity while making purchaseable downloadable
songs a core part of their business model and so smaller or micro transactions were introduced
to multi and single player games alike. Electronic Arts also introduced micro transactions via in-game
stores into several existing series like The Sims with its third entry. EA would then add a form
of luck based micro transaction in the 2009 edition of FIFA something that is now commonly referred
to as loot boxes. Loot boxes would go on to be added to many other popular online games including
Counter Strike, Team Fortress 2, Battlefield, Call of Duty, League of Legends and more. In 2011
Rockstar pioneered a new approach by selling content that didn't exist yet in the form of a
Rockstar pass that could be purchased to unlock future content. Other games like Mortal Kombat and
Call of Duty soon adopted this season pass approach as well and in Call of Duty this would split the
player base between those with the season pass maps and those without. In 2012 Capcom's Street Fighter
tech and crossover drew criticism after including future DLC files on the game's physical disc.
While in 2013 Dead Space 3 again from EA became one of the first single player focused games to
offer a purchasable weapon and resource pack to assist players in its campaign. Later games like
Assassin's Creed Origins from Ubisoft and Middle Earth Shadow of War from Warner Bros would take
paid advantages in campaigns significantly further and in time microtransactions, in-game stores,
loot boxes and season passes would all become common practice in many big budget games. Although
often not without criticism from players, the media and even governmental regulators who have
likened loot boxes to gambling and raised concerns over their potential harmful impacts.
Meanwhile gaming companies have often sought to defend these additions by claiming that their
only providing players with more choice and that increases in video game budgets have occurred
over time while game prices have stayed relatively flat, meaning further monetization methods have
become necessary. Still regardless of whether any necessity does truly exist, more monetization
means more money and businesses don't usually turn down a chance for extra profit. As single
player focused games are less monetizable, a trend also began towards games as a service,
or live service games, where AAA games tried to expand into online areas or just placed increased
focus on future content updates to create continuous engagement from players. The king of live service
games is unquestionably Grand Theft Auto V, which continued Rockstar's tradition of high quality
and universally acclaimed open world titles in 2013, but then took things a step further with
Grand Theft Auto Online. GTA Online allows up to 30 players to freely roam GTA V's world
while completing lobby-based missions and earning experience points with a focus on general progression,
and while it did originally have a rocky launch, it soon went on to be hugely successful.
When Grand Theft Auto V released, it easily surpassed Call of Duty's sales records,
selling 11.2 million copies in its first 24 hours. Unlike so many of the best selling games before
it, however, Grand Theft Auto V continued to put out impressive sales figures year after year after
year. This was partly because of future releases on next-gen consoles and PC, but it was also because
of the impact and enduring popularity of Grand Theft Auto Online. And so, the gaming industry
saw how blockbuster single player games could be transformed into blockbuster live service games,
where they could not only continue to sell more copies due to staying relevant for longer,
but could also tap into the unbelievably lucrative territory of multiplayer-fuelled
microtransactions. One year after GTA V, Bungie released their new online-focused first-person
shooter Destiny, which combined elements of the MMO genre with FPS gameplay.
Destiny was also very profitable, with publisher Activision claiming it was the most successful
new gaming franchise launch in history, and between the success of GTA Online and Destiny,
the live service trend was established and proven beyond doubt.
Others would soon follow, including several developers that have previously built reputations
around creating single player games, such as Bioware with Anthem, Bethesda with Fallout 76,
and Crystal Dynamics with Marvel Avengers. Clearly, not every live service game was a success,
but for the biggest publishers in the industry, live service offered the biggest rewards,
and the trend towards live service games is still very much alive today.
Still, online gaming in the 2010s wasn't just defined by changes to monetization.
The decade would also see a number of new genres and new takes on existing genres,
as online gaming expanded upwards and outwards. In 2014, Blizzard's Half Stone achieved major
success for its accessible and polished take on the digital collectible card game genre.
In 2015, Rocket League from Xionics combined cars, rockets, and football to create one of
the decade's freshest sports games. And in 2016, Blizzard's Overwatch received great
critical acclaim for its team and hero-based FPS design that stood out from most other popular
shooters at the time. The decade's most popular new genre would come once more from a mod,
this time from Brendan Green, also known by his online alias, PlayerUnknown,
who created DayZ Battle Royale, which itself was an offshoot of the DayZ mod for Armor 2.
Taking inspiration from the Japanese film of the same name, the mod focused on player-vs-player
combat with a large number of combatants on a big open map. The scale of the map and the
random placement of weapons was intended to introduce an element of unpredictability,
and the battleground was designed to get progressively smaller as the games went on
to ensure regular action. The result turned out to be a hit and would eventually lead to the
creation of the standalone PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds in March 2017 that soon turned Battle
Royale into a worldwide gaming phenomenon. Seeing the success of PlayerUnknown's Battlegrounds,
Epic Games decided to create a Battle Royale mod for their upcoming construction shooter hybrid
Fortnite to create Fortnite Battle Royale in September 2017, and between the two games the
gaming industry was never quite the same again. Fortnite and PUBG offered different takes on
the same idea, with PUBG being more focused and prioritizing realism, and Fortnite standing out
thanks to its building mechanics and more cartoony aesthetic. The games would also fare differently
in different markets, with PUBG being a massive success in Asia and Fortnite finding dominance
over school yards across America and Europe. Still, one thing both games had in common was
being staggeringly successful. PUBG quickly broke the record for most concurrent players on Steam
with over 3.2 million, which was about 2 million more than the next highest game on record, and soon
Fortnite was able to boast even greater numbers. Many other Battle Royale games followed in their
wake, some successful, some not, some higher budget, some low, some shooters, some anything but, and
while most of these would not find long-term popularity, that didn't stop plenty of developers
from trying anyway. The 2010s were also the decade where online gaming spread beyond games.
Gaming tournaments had been around for a long time, and by the 90s some were even quite large,
like the Nintendo World Championships in 1990, or the Evolution Championship Series for fighting
games starting in 1996. In the 2000s, televised coverage started to be more popular, particularly
in South Korea, where StarCraft was well on its way to becoming the new national religion.
In the mid-2000s, esports history was made at EVO 2004, when Daigo Umehara, playing as Ken in
Street Fighter III, performed the Daigo Parry.
The 15-hit consecutive parry, with only one pixel of health remaining, into a comeback victory that
would see Umehara through to the finals, has since been described as the most iconic moment in
competitive gaming history. It was also a perfect showcase for the potential appeal of esports,
and by 2010 that potential was quickly becoming reality. New online streaming services opened
esports to a much wider audience, and with more popularity would come greater prize money and
bigger stages, as StarCraft, Counter-Strike, League of Legends and Dota all helped push esports into
the mainstream. With time, more and more games would follow as the numbers kept rising, and by
2019, Dota 2's The International tournament had a total prize pool of over 34 million dollars,
and League of Legends 2019 World Championships would see a peak of 44 million concurrent viewers.
Over the course of the decade, esports became big business,
but people weren't only watching competitive gaming.
Livestreaming and Let's Plays, made possible by platforms like Twitch and YouTube,
also rose to popularity in the first half of the decade, becoming a major new tool for
video game marketing and drawing great amounts of attention to certain titles.
Horror games like Amnesia the Dark Descent and Five Nights at Freddy's, or the social
deduction game Among Us, stand out as examples of how small games with little marketing can still
have massive impacts through this new online social media-fuelled ecosystem. Social media also
brought a greater focus to various controversies. Video games and controversy have long been
acquainted. For example, Mortal Kombat and Night Trap in 1993, Doom following the Columbine shooting
in 1999, Grand 5th Auto San Andreas following the discovery of the hot coffee mod in 2005,
Panic over the MMO genre following the success of World Warcraft, and Call of Duty Model
Morpher 2's Civilian Killing No Russian Mission in 2009 all provide examples of major gaming
controversies, but all of these past examples had one thing in common, which was that the
controversy was caused by people outside of the gaming industry looking in. In the 2010s however,
controversy started coming from within, while becoming more frequent and more intense.
One of the earliest examples of this was the ending for Mass Effect 3, which fans viewed as
disappointing for the similarity between different endings and for their failure to represent players'
choices over the trilogy. The negative response led to an open letter from Bioware's founder,
charity drives from fans, statements from the Federal Trade Commission and Better Business
Bureau, a revised extended cut DLC, a significant number of cupcakes, and a disparaging parody
from Weird Owl. For a disappointing game, this level of negative attention was unprecedented,
but it turned out this was just a taste of what was to come.
In 2014, gaming media and gaming communities embraced the political culture war with Gamergate,
and both have been vigorously arguing about politics ever since.
But there were also controversies over monetization, like with Middle Earth Shadow of War, Star Wars
Battlefront 2 and Genshin Impact, controversies over the disappointing state games released in,
like with No Man's Sky, Fallout 76 and Cyberpunk 2077, controversies over working conditions and
crunch periods at studios, like with Bioware, Rockstar and Naughty Dog, controversies over sexual
misconduct, like with Riot Games, Ubisoft and Blizzard, controversies over graphical downgrades,
controversies over DRM, controversies over lack of accreditation, controversies over lack of
difficulty options, controversies over games releasing too soon, controversies over games
releasing too late, controversies over story decisions, controversies over censorship,
controversies over translations, controversies over voice acting pay, controversies over cameos,
controversies over original authors, controversies over political representation,
gender representation, sexual representation, racial representation and religious representation,
and controversies over controversy and controversies over a lack of controversy,
and you could probably drag this section out even further if one were so inclined.
It's worth keeping in mind that for media outlets and online content creators,
controversy is one of the best ways to make money, and people are willing to do whatever
they can to encourage it. More surprising though is how much consumers seem to have embraced this
approach and how difficult it's become to avoid this constant focus on controversy
within gaming communities as a result. And so, the 2010s were a decade where the internet changed
many things, and video games were no exception. Still, while not all of these changes were positive,
the internet did allow for one part of the industry to flourish like never before.
After major breakthroughs in the 2000s, independent game development continued to thrive in the 2010s.
This period saw mainstream games growing cost and development time, which often led studios to
taking increasingly conservative approaches by sticking to proven genres and series.
Meanwhile, the smaller budgets of indie games meant they only needed a fraction of the sales
to be profitable, meaning developers could still succeed by appealing to niche audiences
or through taking greater risks. The result was a huge amount of diversity, from genre to art style,
to level of accessibility or more, as indie games brought variety at a time when the industry
needed it the most, which can be shown clearly by looking back through some of the decades most
critically and commercially successful titles. 2010 saw the release of Playdead's darkly atmospheric
experiential puzzle game Limbo, and Team Meat's fast-paced and fiendishly difficult 2D platformer
Super Meat Boy. 2011 would bring a new take on the rogue-like genre with the binding of Isaac,
which added action gameplay and Zelda-inspired procedurally-generated dungeons as players helped
Isaac escape his abusive mother. Relogix Terraria also released that year with the expansive 2D
sandbox game going on to sell 44 million copies, making it one of the best-selling games of all
time. In 2012, Journey from that game company impressed many with its striking use of visuals,
audio and non-verbal storytelling that would help it win several Game of the Year awards,
whereas Deniton Games' top-down shooter Hotline Miami came in hard with a mix of ultraviolence
and surrealism to provide a somewhat contrasting experience. 2013's Paper's Please from Lucas
Pope tested players' morality by putting them in the shoes of an immigration inspector at a border
checkpoint in the glorious dystopia of Aristosca. In 2014, Yacht Club Games 8-bit side-scrolling
platformer Shovel Knight paid homage to the gaming's past while impressing with cutting-edge controls
and level design. 2015's Undertale from Toby Fox provided a clever twist on RPG conventions
and created an enduring fandom alongside one of gaming's greatest soundtracks. In 2016,
video game players that wanted to avoid going outside were positively spoilt for choice.
Concerned Ape's Stardew Valley became a sensation for its open-ended and relaxing take on the farming
sim genre. Plactorio from Woop Software gave players an endlessly deep factory and automation
simulator while establishing its own genre in the process, and Rimworld from Ludeon Studios
combined base-building and emergent storytelling in its addictive and relatively accessible take
on the colony's sim genre. Meanwhile, 2017 seemed determined to test players' skills
with the demanding and impeccably presented Cuphead from Studio MDHR that had players running,
gunning and repeatedly dying to its many creative boss fights, and Hollow Knight from Team Cherry,
an expansive and surprisingly epic Metroidvania that had players take on the role of a nameless
knight as you explore the Fallen Kingdom of Hallownest. In 2018, Subset Games Into the Breach
offered strategy fans something new by stripping away much of a genre to place all the focus on
its rich, tactically engaging turn-based gameplay. 2019 would see the release of Megacrit's much
copied yet never bested road-like deckbuilder Slay the Spire, as well as Mobius Digital's
time-loop adventure game Outer Wilds that gave players complete freedom to explore its miniature
solar system as they unraveled the mysteries of its unforgettable universe. Finally, in 2020,
Supergiant Games wowed the world with the action-roke like Hades, a game with so much content
and such high-quality presentation that it almost seems to have left the indie label behind.
Indie games have come a long way, to the point where the term indie
increasingly tells you very little. Once upon a time, the word seemed to imply certain characteristics,
like games that are short, cheap, retro or artsy. Yet, by the end of the decade,
indie could imply almost anything, with massive companies like Ubisoft, EA and Tencent all creating
games in traditionally indie styles, all while independent developers increasingly create games
with a level of ambition, size or presentation comparable to many big-name studios. It's also
worth noting that there are many other games that could have been mentioned in this section as well,
and it is a testament to the strength of the indie market,
just how spoiled the choice you are when looking for high-quality games to highlight.
Still, the vast number of indie games being developed over the past decade
became a talking point in itself, with many raising concerns that so many indie games
makes it harder and harder for indie developers to get noticed and find success.
As the indie market seemed to be reaching a point of saturation in the later half of the decade,
the term indie-pocalypse started to be used to refer to this situation, and yet while increased
competition may have made success harder, there has been no sign of an indie market collapse,
and good games continue to be released. This continued rise of indie gaming also brought
a number of related trends. Minecraft paved the way for the concept of early access,
where many indie games would release unfinished and receive continuous updates over time.
This helped establish new genres, like survival games, while also aiding developers by assisting
with funding during development and making it easier to incorporate player feedback.
The downside of this system was that it could also lead to anti-consumer practices
of misleading advertising, over-promising, or just abandoning games unfinished after
receiving players' money. Still, for every standout early access disaster, it's easy to find
other standout successes. Alongside early access, the 2010s also saw the rise of crowdfunding in
game development, usually through the platform Kickstarter. This often involved respected
figures within the industry wanting to bring back classic series or genres that publishers deemed
too risky to fund, and crowdfunding games could vary between relatively big games from already
well-established studios to much smaller projects from individual developers.
With time, many crowdfunded games were released, and amongst them were many of the decades most
acclaimed indie games, but there were also plenty of notable failures, from MMOs accused of being
scams to games that critically bombed or just games that never released at all. Through the
combination of crowdfunding and indie growth, the 2010s would see a lot of genre revivals,
particularly from those once popular in the past that don't fit well with modern AAA game design.
These included RTS games, point-and-click adventures, CRPGs, shoot-'em-ups, boomer-shooters,
space sims, classic survival horror, beat-'em-ups, FMV games, and many more.
Retro-inspired games in particular saw a resurgence in the 2010s, possibly because people who once
grew up with older games were now old enough to create games themselves and took inspiration from
their favourite games of the past, but also because the smaller budgets of indie games fit well
with retro-inspired design. And developers weren't the only ones making games this decade.
One of the most played games at the end of the decade, and one of the most confusing for older
generations, was Roblox, a game creation platform that allows users to share their own games inside
its engine. Roblox attained great popularity with younger generations, probably as much
like Minecraft before it, it tapped into players' natural creativity. Finally, the 2010s would also
see game development go global as indie development and digital distribution opened the industry up
to more regions around the world. Still, as the ninth generation of consoles finally approached
in the latter half of the decade, the attention would once more return to Japan.
No company has more experience in the gaming industry than Nintendo. But in 2012,
the gaming veteran experienced something new. As for the first time since entering the industry,
Nintendo would see a financial loss for the year, of $366 million. In 2013,
they would report similar losses, and in 2014, those losses would grow even greater.
The Wii U was a failure, but for the first time, Nintendo was starting to fail as well.
They had never been further behind in the console race. The once reliable handheld market was rapidly
shrinking, and unlike certain other big names, they didn't have additional areas of business
outside of gaming. Video games were basically everything to them. And this is the climate in
which they would create their next and possibly last console. Nintendo's growing desperation
was visible long before their next console would be ready. In 2014, the company headscrafted a new
strategy to turn their finances around. A key part of this was to reverse their earliest stance
on mobile gaming. Originally, Nintendo wanted to preserve the quality of their franchises,
and continue their practice of only allowing Nintendo games on Nintendo hardware. But now,
they were looking to enter the mobile market in an attempt to maximize their intellectual property,
leading to core Nintendo series like Super Mario, Animal Crossing, and Mario Kart,
making their mobile debuts. This was also the time that Nintendo launched Amiibo,
a toys to life figure series that had built-in functionality with certain Nintendo games.
Still, as useful as additional monetization might be, Nintendo still knew the deciding factor would
always be their next console. So, how do you respond to record losses and your greatest ever failure?
Well, Nintendo's answer was to double down and try the same thing again.
And so, once more, Nintendo would avoid competing with their rivals in terms of power. Once more,
they would focus the console around a portable screen, and once more, they would target the same
audience with the same intent to bridge the gap between serious and more casual gamers.
Still, far from creating a Wii U 2, this console would instead learn from the Wii U's mistakes
and address its greatest shortcomings, providing true portability without needing to stay close
to a console, as well as better battery life, a more comfortable and versatile design, and of
course, less confusing marketing. Officially announced in October 2016 after years of fan rumors
and released in March the following year, the Nintendo Switch was a gamble. By this point,
many Nintendo fans were sick of being behind the competition in terms of power,
and were frustrated by Nintendo's continued focus on gimmicks. The Nintendo Switch ignored this.
Similarly, the Nintendo 3DS, while less successful than its predecessor,
was still Nintendo's best-selling system at the time, and by creating a new portable device,
Nintendo were risking competition with their own system, while also combining their two
main existing revenue streams. What's more, after several disappointing years,
Nintendo were fast approaching the point where they simply couldn't afford another
lackluster launch, and following the reveal, plenty of onlookers were expressing doubts.
But in the end, those doubts would not be founded. The Switch launched strong.
By the end of March, it had sold 2.74 million units, exceeding Nintendo's expectations.
Nintendo responded by increasing production capacity. The Switch responded by continuing to sell.
Nintendo upped their forecast for the financial year, aiming for 10 million units sold,
and the Switch then upped its sales again, meeting this target with months to spare.
By the end of its first year, the scale of Nintendo's success was starting to be revealed.
It would take the Switch less than 12 months to overtake for lifetime sales of the Wii U,
and in the process, it became the fastest-selling games console in history.
Things change quickly in the gaming industry, but sometimes they change in your favor.
There is no single reason for the Switch's record-breaking success,
and its reception from reviewers was no more positive than the Wii U before it.
The portability of the system is a clear upgrade from its predecessor, and the Switch may have
benefited more from a lack of handheld competition, as while smartphones were more common than ever,
the Switch offered something much more traditional and substantial than mobile gaming did,
which might have appealed to a different audience.
It may also have benefited from the failure of the Wii U.
Nintendo learned from the earlier system's hardware and marketing to make needed improvements
on their second attempt, and the Wii U's underplayed library also gave Nintendo the
perfect opportunity to port many of its best games over to their newer system to quickly
expand the Switch's lineup and ensure the system got off to a strong start.
And speaking of games, the Switch certainly had its share, including a launch title that
may have been the first true killer app seen in more than a decade.
The legend of Zelda, Breath of the Wild, is one of the most highly acclaimed games in history.
By taking Zelda Open World, it gave new life to the Zelda series and the Open World genre,
with a more hands-off and exploration-driven approach to game design that many felt represented
what had been lacking from many other games of the modern era. Breath of the Wild was a
true system seller, and its sales clearly show this, as it accounted for almost 50% of the
Switch's early software sales, with the game selling nearly one-to-one with the console.
Launching with a mainline Zelda title, let alone one of the best-received Zelda titles in history,
is always a significant advantage for a console, but the Switch's first year included more hits
than just Breath of the Wild. Soon after its release, it would receive its all-time best-selling
game by way of the ever-popular Mario Kart 8, which was an expanded version of the Wii U title,
as well as a well-received sequel to third-person territory control game Splatoon,
and even a new 3D Mario game in Super Mario Odyssey, which gave the Switch
its second critically adored, must-own title. In a time when consoles were increasingly launching
with weaker and weaker line-ups, and had less and less exclusive games, the Switch finished its
first year looking like a true heavyweight, with plenty more still to come. And as the Nintendo
Switch got off to a great start, it pretty much solved Nintendo's long-running third-party
support problem, as many developers no longer wanted to miss out on the Switch's larger user base.
But it wasn't just Nintendo who would have a good year in 2017, and it wasn't just Nintendo
who needed such a year. After the Nintendo Entertainment System launched in 1985, Japan
dominated the gaming industry for over 30 years, but as gaming moved to high definition,
this quickly started to change. More and more of the best-selling and highest-reviewed games
were coming to be from outside Japan, with major Japanese series like Final Fantasy and Gran Turismo
seeming to experience longer, more drawn-out development periods and a decline in critical
and fan reception. In this period, a new trend began of Japanese studios outsourcing established
franchises to Western developers, something that was once almost unheard of. And this wasn't just
small unknown series either, it included some big and beloved names like Resident Evil, Silent Hill,
Devil May Cry, Dead Rising, Castlevania, Contra, and more. The worst part of his trend was that
almost every one of these games was received far more poorly than the older Japanese-developed
games of the same series. Meanwhile, other major Japanese publishers like Square Enix would make
moves to acquire Western-based developers in order to adapt to the changing market demands.
Konami went even further by going on to abandon games altogether in favour of focusing on
gambling and the pachinko market, while industry giant Sony shifted their focus far more heavily
towards Western developers and Western audiences. And this was more than just a change in where
development was taking place. From 2007 to 2012, the Japanese gaming industry shrank for
five years in a row, and the only major Japanese developer doing well in this period was Nintendo,
who were about to release the Wii U. And so, as the Japanese gaming industry stumbled and fell,
a lot of people started to take notice. The views of the general gaming populace were perhaps best
summarised by once-popular indie developer Phil Fish when asked what he thought of recent Japanese games.
As tone-deaf as this might now seem, at the time, Fish really was just saying something many people
were thinking, and it wasn't just Western developers and journalists. Japanese developers
were also highly critical, and it's not an exaggeration to say that the Japanese industry
was experiencing a genuine crisis that was made even more dramatic by how much of a fool from
grace it seemed to represent. But in 2017, this would finally change, as Japan took back its crown.
It began before the year even started. At the very end of 2016, two games famous for being stuck in
development hell finally released. Final Fantasy XV was first shown in 2006. The Last Guardian,
the next game from the team behind Ico and Shadow of Colossus, was first announced in early 2007.
Ten years later, after much anticipation, derision and desperation, these games finally made it to
the public, and both were received positively. But this was only a taste of what was to come.
January 2017, Resident Evil 7 released two critical acclaim after the previous mainline entry was
widely panned, and achieved success by returning the series to its survival horror roots. The very
same day, Yakuza Zero released in the West, becoming the most successful Yakuza game of all time,
and popularizing the series outside Japan. In February, Neo released ending developer Ninja
Theory's long run of poorly received titles, and becoming their most highly acclaimed game
since Ninja Gaiden in 2004. March brought Neo Automata, which released a critical acclaim,
becoming the first game from beloved oddball game director Yoko Taro to reach mainstream audiences.
This was the same month that the Nintendo Switch and Breath of the Wild also made their debut.
April continued with Persona 5, which became the most highly reviewed JRPG since Final Fantasy 9
in 2000, while also making thousands of people online say the words,
I don't usually like JRPGs, but... Something worth keeping in mind here is that
Yakuza Zero, Neo, Neo Automata, and Persona 5 all released as PlayStation exclusives in the first
half of 2017, all received great reviews, and all sold millions of copies. And yet, at E3 2016,
Sony wouldn't promote any of these four games. They ended up as some of the best
PlayStation exclusives in years on a console that was, at the time, light on exclusives,
and yet Sony had refused to show any of them in favor of focusing on multi-platform games like
Call of Duty, Modern Warfare Remastered, and LEGO Star Wars, The Force Awakens. This was probably
because these games simply looked to Japanese, and despite being a Japanese company, Sony seemed
to decide that showing such Japanese looking games could be bad for their brand. This was the
situation Japanese games were in, at least this was the situation in the eyes of the biggest
Japanese games company in the world, until 2017 happened. June brought the triumph in return of
one of gaming's most iconic fighting series, Tekken, after an 8 year absence. July brought
the release of Dragon Quest XI, only in Japan and yet Japan alone was enough to reach 5 million copies
sold. August brought the return of 2D Sonic in Sonic Mania, a game not made by Japanese developers,
but instead by several Sonic fans, and yet it went on to give the iconic Japanese series its best
reviewed game since the Dreamcast. September brought the return of Metroid in Samus Returns,
seven years after the last Metroid game, and 13 years since the last 2D Metroid. October brought
Super Mario Odyssey, and December rounded the year off with Xenoblade Chronicles 2,
the best selling game in the long running Xeno series, and another reason for Switch and
JRPG fans to be happy that year. For video games, some years are better than others,
and 2017 was without doubt one of the best of the modern era. There were good western and indie
games released that year as well, but it was Japanese developers who stole the show, and the idea that
the Japanese games industry was falling behind, or dying, would be permanently dispelled ever since.
Nintendo and the Switch would find further success in the following years, with major titles like
Super Smash Bros Ultimate, Animal Crossing New Horizon, and many many Pokemon games.
Still, as the decade reached its end, attention would return once more to the other two major
giants of gaming as their next generation of consoles were getting ready to finally release.
The most interesting thing about the PlayStation 5 and Xbox Series X is how uninteresting they are.
Once upon a time, different gaming consoles were entirely distinct species,
but look past for deceptively varied exteriors of Sony's and Microsoft's latest efforts,
and you'll find near identical pieces of hardware. AMD 8 core Zen 2 CPUs, AMD Radeon
R DNA GPUs, similar SSD drives, similar promises in resolution and frame rate,
similar backwards compatibility, similar disc and digital only variants,
similar prices, although the digital only Xbox is cheaper and less powerful,
and a similar release date, which basically means, unless you're a tech enthusiast,
a dedicated fanboy or girl, or a paid marketer, there isn't anything important separating the
two machines at a technical level. The real proof of this is in multi-platform performance,
where once the 360 beat the PS3, and then the PS4 beat the Xbox One, now there's no clear difference.
Some games might perform better on one system over the other, but even then the differences
tend to be small and don't always follow any general rule. This doesn't mean the launch of
the two systems was uneventful, but even here, events of note had nothing to do with the systems.
A global pandemic, combined with a global microchip shortage, led to supply issues and stock
shortages for both companies, which then led to heavy scalping. For what it's worth,
the PlayStation 5 got scalped harder and would eventually sell more, with recent
figures putting the PS5 at 30 million units sold to the Xbox's 18.5 million, although even in 2022,
hardware availability was still a limiting factor. Regardless, even if the console war has turned
cold, there have still been major developments that will likely shape the future of gaming in
the years to follow. The first is the emergence of virtual reality headsets, which would see a
major breakthrough when 18 year old Palmer Lucky had the idea to use cheap lenses in place of older
expensive lenses and instead tackle the problem of lens distortion through software,
creating the potential for much lower cost systems. Lucky was joined by John Carmack of Doomfame,
and together they created the company Oculus VR in 2012, which was then purchased by Facebook
two years later. Sony and Valve would also start development of their own headsets,
and in 2016 the Oculus Rift, the Vive from Valve and HTC, and PlayStation VR all launched to the
public and received a mixed reception. Praise was given to the immersiveness and uniqueness of the
experience, while criticism focused on the high prices, high latency, the practicality of space
required, long-term comfort, and the possibility of motion sickness. In time, second generation
headsets arrived that made significant improvements over their predecessors. The Oculus Quest 1 and 2
provided standalone headsets that removed the problem of wires. The Valve Index provided
impressive field of view and resolution while making improvements to comfort, albeit at an
impressively high price, and recently the PlayStation VR 2 provided a high-end headset
with an OLED screen and a strong price-to-performance ratio. Seven years after VR headsets first
arrived, it's become clear that despite their rather lackluster start, VR technology is making
impressive strides and still getting better every year. That said, truly widespread adoption still
hasn't happened yet, and the experience provided by VR headsets has so far seemed to be more of an
adjacent experience to traditional gaming than a replacement. As while VR does allow for completely
new types of experiences, it also has significant disadvantages, like the limitations of controls
or long-term comfort that make it a bad fit for some areas of gaming. Still, when it comes to the
console war, Sony has established themselves as one of the best manufacturers in the VR industry
and are placing more and more focus on VR games, while Nintendo have mostly stayed away
and Microsoft has made some big moves in the past but have distanced themselves more recently,
meaning if VR does become a larger part of the industry, it's Sony who looks like the one who
benefit the most. And if the rate at which VR technology is improving remains steady,
it's easy to imagine the VR industry seeing significant growth over the 2020s, as better tech
leads to more users, which leads to more games, which leads to more users, as the positive feedback
loop kicks in and VR finally becomes a core part of the industry alongside consoles, PC and mobiles.
But while Sony might be winning at VR, Microsoft has seen growth in a different area.
Game streaming has been around since the start of the decade, with companies like OnLive and
Gaikai offering forms of cloud gaming, a service where you play games on a remote server,
which is then streamed directly to a user's device. This removes costly hardware requirements,
but also requires high-speed, low-latency internet connections and substantial data usage.
Neither OnLive nor Gaikai would turn a profit and both would eventually be acquired by Sony,
but in time other cloud-based streaming services would appear to take their place.
Meanwhile, both Sony and Microsoft launched their own game subscription services, PlayStation Now
and Xbox Game Pass, which would incorporate cloud gaming as well as provide access to a range of
games that can be played for no additional cost. Of all subscription and streaming-based services,
Xbox Game Pass has reached the most users, while seeing substantial uptake amongst PC players.
It seems clear that the plan is to create something like a Netflix for video games,
however despite heavy investment from Microsoft, they still haven't been able to reach their
target numbers and are facing a lot of competition from other companies like Amazon and Nvidia.
The full impact of game subscriptions and streaming remains to be seen.
Some worry that widespread use of game subscriptions will move games further towards
additional monetization methods like microtransactions, while widespread use of streaming
could have an even more substantial impact as it threatens the existence of traditional console
and PC gaming entirely, particularly in regions where people may already have less disposable income.
Rumors also currently exist about a cloud gaming handheld device from Sony,
and it seems possible that cloud gaming will come to play a much greater role in the industry
in years to come. Game Pass hasn't been Microsoft's only recent investment, however.
The final trend that seems to be defining the current generation is consolidation.
When Microsoft announced its acquisition of five smaller studios at E3 2018,
few questioned the move. Sony had been winning the exclusive war for years and showed no signs
of stopping, so it made sense that Microsoft would look to acquire talented studios of their own
to create dedicated first-party titles to help them keep up with the competition.
Microsoft's acquisitions didn't end at E3 2018, however. First, there were more smaller
studios announced. Then, there was the more surprising news of a deal to acquire Zenimax in
2020 for $8.1 billion, which included Bethesda and big-name franchises like The Elder Scrolls and
Fallout. Then, other large companies seemed to join in with major purchases, like EA acquiring
Gloomobile for $2.4 billion, Take-Two acquiring Zynga for $12.7 billion, and Sony acquiring Bungie
for $3.7 billion. Still, the biggest buyer would once again be Microsoft, who announced the deal
to acquire Activision Blizzard for $68.7 billion in 2022. Activision Blizzard are the largest
third-party publisher in gaming, and an acquisition of this size is unprecedented. This is different
to buying talented studios, which is something large gaming companies have been doing for years.
Instead, this is basically buying a significant chunk of the industry,
and many, including regulatory bodies and antitrust agencies, have expressed concern
about the potential negative impacts this may have, with the deal still currently facing
significant challenge, particularly from the competition and markets authority in the United
Kingdom. Whether this deal will ultimately go through, though, remains to be seen.
Microsoft has been quietly losing the console war for years, and most believe
competition between major gaming companies can only benefit consumers. Yet, whether these moves
will make the console market more or less competitive is unclear, and this general trend
towards consolidation certainly raises concerns. Still, this is hardly the only thing people have
been critical of in recent years. The Romans had a saying that translates to,
the past is always well remembered, and the Romans weren't alone in this belief.
Sometimes, however, things really do get worse. So, what about video games?
Everywhere you look online, you'll find people telling you about how bad games are now,
and how much better they were in the past, but the internet is also addicted to negativity,
and people are biased. So, what evidence is there for this belief, and what does gaming's 50 year
history actually tell us? Well, for one thing, the future does raise concerns, but a worrying
future isn't anything new. This is an industry of change, and change brings uncertainty.
The gaming industry has crashed more than once. The console market almost died completely. The
biggest gaming company in the world went bankrupt. Many other console manufacturers also exited the
scene. Reliable companies have produced spectacular failures. Established companies have experienced
tragic deaths. Y2K didn't happen, but multiple stock market crashes did. The most successful
console of all time was followed by the company's greatest failure, and soon after this, every other
major player also suffered their greatest failures. Motion controls threatened to take over, PC gaming
threatened to become irrelevant, mobile gaming threatened to take over, indie gaming threatened
to become apocalyptic, online gaming threatened to take over, and now, consolidation, monetization,
and subscription services threaten gaming as we know it. And time will tell how things play out,
but really, future concerns are a part of the gaming industry, and they always have been.
So, what about the present? Well, one of the biggest trends in the last 10 years has been a
growing abundance of remakes, remasters, reboots, and re-releases. On the one hand,
old games don't always remain accessible, and so attempts to bring them to modern audiences
makes sense. And as the passage of time creates more old games, it also makes sense that there
might be more attempts to bring back older classics. This might also be representative
of the changing demographics of gamers, where there's now a large portion of older people
nostalgic for the games from their childhood, or younger gamers unwilling or unable to play older
games who still want a way to feel included. Still, one thing that is hard to justify is the
low quality of some of these newer additions. There are many remasters and remakes that could
be criticized, but perhaps the single one most endemic of a bigger problem is Grand Theft Auto,
The Trilogy, The Definitive Edition, a compilation of three of the best-selling games of the 2000s
that was published by one of the most respected developers in gaming, and yet, the end result
was appalling, being buggy, inauthentic, and an all-round visual downgrade, with missing
animations, sound effects, and textures. The Definitive Edition received one of the lowest
user scores of all time, and stands as a testament to just how bad an improved addition can be,
with Rockstar making matters even worse by also removing the original games from stores at the
same time. So, various re-releases have given companies a lazy and low-cost way to cash in on
past games. Some remakes do receive considerably more effort, but even these display a deep lack
of originality as companies are choosing to finance remakes of still readily accessible
and enjoyable games in place of creating something new, and this practice seems to be becoming more
common. So far in 2023, 90% of the highest-rated games are remasters and remakes. This is rather
pathetic, but the high critical ratings and the fact these games continue to sell is proof that
this is what many people want. One day, attitudes might change, but for now gaming companies just
seem to be giving the people what they ask for, with the quality varying between attempts.
Another trend of modern gaming has been additional monetization methods, such as loot boxes and in-game
cash stores. For the mobile industry and many online games, these have been incredibly effective at
increasing revenue, and this has come to extend to even some more traditional games, although some
attempts have been met with considerable backlash. Still, much like with remasters and remakes,
consumers again have a choice here, both in whether to play these games and whether to spend
money on these services, and again, many people are making the choices that make additional
monetization methods profitable. The gaming industry is a business, and if consumers allow it,
companies will do what makes them the most money. Finally, another obvious trend has been a decline
in the quality of AAA, with games seeming to take longer to release while taking less
risks in their design and being more likely to launch unfinished and buggy.
This is partly because advancements in game technology have slowed over time,
alongside ever rising game development costs, which has meant graphical upgrades have become
less noticeable, and impressing gamers through continually creating more spectacular games
has become harder. As a result, games might be overambitious, or make sacrifices to gameplay
or design, or take longer to release, or make sacrifices to quality in order to meet deadlines.
Claiming that AAA games have got worse in recent years seems pretty reasonable though.
The thing is, many of the highest-rated and best-selling games from recent years
have still been the biggest budget and most visually impressive titles. Critics and consumers
are like, want and reward AAA game design, and amongst these games there will be some that
succeed, and some that fall short. It seems unrealistic to expect every game to meet the
highest standards, or to criticise the industry for caring too much about budgets and presentation,
while people continue to praise those same qualities in other games.
A lot of the problems mentioned here do have some relation to greed, and the gaming industry,
like other industries, can certainly be greedy. This also isn't anything new however.
After the success of Pong, gaming companies made so many Pong clones, the industry collapsed.
After the success of Atari, game developers made so many low-quality third-party games
that the industry collapsed again. Space Invaders led to too many arcade space games,
NES developers made too many action platformers, Doom led to too many Doom clones,
Grand Theft Auto led to too many GTA clones, Guitar Hero led to too many plastic peripherals,
The Wii led to too many motion control devices, and too many low-effort motion control games.
Call of Duty led to too many Call of Duties, Minecraft led to too many Minecraft clones,
Dark Souls led to too many Souls Likes, Skyrim and Far Cry 3 led to too many Open World games,
Daisy led to too many Early Access Survival games, PUBG and Fortnite led to too many Battle
Real games, Indie games led to too many Indie games, Slay the Spire led to too many Rogue-like
deckbuilders and most recently, Vampire Survivors led to too many whatever the hell genre this is.
The point is, success often leads to saturation, and it's been that way since the very start.
And yet, at the same time, the industry has often rewarded those who go against the grain.
Pac-Man, Tetris, Pokemon Red and Blue, Half-Life, The Sims, The DS, The Wii, Minecraft,
Dark Souls, Daisy, Battle Real, Gaming History is littered with games that did something different
and were rewarded for doing so. The point that I think everything comes down to in the end
is choice. People do have a choice in who they support and how they spend their time,
and sometimes the choices of gaming companies or the general public can be frustrating,
but it is their choice to make and they do have their reasons.
And after months of researching, thinking and writing about gaming history, I have come to the
conclusion that nothing defines this present moment in time as much as choice does. It is a
strange thing to try to write the history of the present, because so much of how we understand
the period is shaped by how it looks from the future. That said, I don't think there is a crisis
of modern gaming. I don't think the industry is in decline, and I don't think games are getting
worse. And the reason is because currently, right now, we all have an abundance of choice.
The industry has grown wider and become more accessible, but this is the result of growth,
and traditional gaming hasn't been sacrificed to achieve this.
Instead, within traditional gaming, we've seen a tremendous increase
in the number and types of indie games being made, while through emulation,
re-releases, community efforts, second-hand purchases, and official subscription services,
older games have never been more available, and with the likes of cloud gaming and indie games,
the barrier of entry into gaming has never been so low. The number of games being made
has also increased, and for most people, older games are still out there. Everyone today has
a great amount of choice, and that makes us rather lucky. I hope this abundance of choice
remains in the future. In fact, I hope we get even more choice in the years to come, but this isn't
guaranteed. One day, all old cartridges will stop working, CDs will rot, and old hardware
will fail. One day, computers may struggle to be compatible with older software. One day,
emulation might be shut down or strictly regulated. One day, fees may increase. One day,
competition may disappear. One day, the indie market may collapse. One day, the console market
may collapse. One day, the entire industry may collapse. It certainly has before. The future
holds no guarantees, and this is an industry of change. But right now, things aren't as bad as
many people might think they are. Good games are being made every single year, and goddamn,
is there a lot of good games already out there. Video games have come a long way,
and not every change has been for the better. But never before have people had so much choice.
Use it wisely.
This has been the entire history of video games. Thank you for watching.
I promised myself I'd do a Patreon plug here, so here it is. The video is over. I hope you enjoyed
it. It took a long time to make, but I think it was worth it. I've been making videos for five
years now. In fact, this will probably be up almost exactly on the channel's five-year anniversary.
And I am lucky to be in the position I'm in. But the channel growth has slowed a lot recently,
and I'm feeling under a lot of pressure to try to satisfy the algorithm.
And that's how YouTube goes. But I do feel very limited in what videos I can make.
I'd love to make more time-consuming and unique videos, like deep dives into certain areas of
the gaming industry. But it is a consistent worry for me how such videos will perform,
and whether I can afford to spend hundreds of hours on projects, knowing that a bad
Titan or thumbnail could doom the video for a bad click-through rate and so on.
For this reason, I'm thinking of trying to promote the Patreon more to try to get myself
a little more creative freedom. I've hardly mentioned the Patreon for the past year or so,
but I'm going to start promoting it a bit more often, like at the end of videos,
as I'm doing now. That's what this is. This is promotion. I don't have much to offer for
patrons, but I've revamped the tiers a bit. For $6 you get your name in the credits for videos,
but you can give less for that as well, and all patrons get all other benefits,
which include detailed monthly updates, the occasional Patreon poll, and access to some
unlisted videos which includes a few uncensored videos, a few older videos not on the channel
anymore, and a few unique reviews. Other than that, all I can say is I work many hours on these videos,
I work long hours, I rarely take breaks, I try my best to maintain a high level of quality,
and I do everything on my own. And you don't need to give anything, but it would mean a lot to me
if you did. Anyway, thank you for watching regardless, and I'll see you in the next video.
