Hello, I'm Gary Burke, a co-chair for this summit 2023 ontology summit, and it's March 8th, 2023.
And we are going to be doing our second phase of our ontology summit, moving into things like ontology design patterns,
wiki data, and things of that nature. First, I should say that the schedule speaker was called
away on a project that he had to attend that has made a video recording. And so we were going to be
playing a 35 minute or so video recording later in the session. But first, I'm going to do a few
introductory slides, overviewing this part of this summit. So with that, let me turn to slide
share here, screen share, and show you my first slide. So this has a working schedule for the second
part of the summit, starting with modules and patterns with Kogen Shimizu from Wright State.
He'll introduce himself in detail. And it shows that some of the other sessions that we have,
basically things are nailed down now. So next week, we will have a design pad in discussion.
So to follow up to this session, we'd call Hammer, who's now at Google, had been at IBM.
We have invited some of the original people, such as Valentina Pursutit, to present, but we never
heard back from her. So we had call stepping up to do that. Following that, we're going to have
a session on Wikidata. I'll have a little bit more to say about that probably next week.
And you can see the remaining schedule here leading up to a panel, which we still are filling in,
but Pascal Hitzler will be one of the main speakers on that. So with that, let me turn to
today's session. And I thought I would introduce a little bit of the topic on ontology design patterns
and modular ontologies before we go to the video. So this is an example of a widely used pattern,
actually that I was a bit involved with, which is called semantic trajectory, which you see on the
left. And you can get an idea about what ontology design patterns are. So we have a range of concepts
here. What is a semantic trajectory? How do you define it? Well, first we define it in terms of
having segments that go from and to places where we do a fix, that is, we take a sensory measure.
And this segment is traversed by some type of conceptually moving object. Most of the time we're
thinking of a real physical object, but it may be a conceptual object. So it may be something like
a disease that is essentially having a course of action over time. And we're taking measurements
under disease over time. And we have a source for the, and a sensor type and a location for the fix.
You'll notice that most of the boxes have a solid line. Gary. Yes, Gary. Can you go into
presentation mode? Let's see if I can do that. Do you want me to go into slide mode here?
Yeah, make it easier to read.
How does that help a little bit? Thank you. No, not so far.
All right. I'm going to go on here. My next slide tries to illustrate the range of things you might
see in ODPs, ontology design patterns. On the left, you see a rather complex pattern. Actually,
this is an early version dealing with sensors, the sensing things, sensing features of interest.
There's actually several patterns probably composed in this, and this particular pattern,
the semantic sensor network pattern, for example, has evolved over time and improved on. Slides are
changing, Gary. Your slides are not changing. You don't see two ODP examples on the screen?
No. You are on the first slide.
Okay. I'm talking about the second slide. No, we don't see. Oh, second slide. Yeah.
You do see it? Yes. Okay. But it would help if you would. Did you still see the second slide with
two ODPs? There's one diagram. Okay. Well, there's two things on it. On the left side is a complex
one. On the right side is a very simple pattern for transitions. We don't see that. You don't see
that. Gary, I think you are sharing the original window of the thing and not what you are seeing.
You want to share your screen, not an individual application?
There we go. There you go. Yes. Okay.
I was asked to change your mode. Do you see the two patterns now? Yes.
So, again, to complete this is the complex one on the left, which is dealing with sensors
information and the very simple idea of what is a transition and transition of an event has a
starting time. It's a setting for a thing and it has a final state. So, transitions from a start
to an end. Very, very simple design. Okay. Can you see a new slide now? Why ODPs?
Yes. Okay. Fine. Okay. So, I wanted to provide a little rationale for some of the things that go
into using ODPs. The original idea was that it was difficult to understand and get an overview of
very large ontologies as they were growing. It was also difficult to see the effects of a change or
an extension in some concepts. So, what impact it would have? And also, another thing that was said
is that it's often very hard to get full agreement on all the commitments on a large ontology. And
for these reasons and other reasons such as interoperability problems and alignment problems,
understandability problems, people decided to look at these trade-offs and maybe it would be
better to start with something smaller like some of the patterns that I showed you before.
Here's a little bit more on some of this reasoning about what ontology patterns might be like.
They reflect, of course, the need to capture the reality that is in data, common to patterns.
Often, the patterns in data are hard to find, but if we can spend some time looking at that,
we can sort of abstract some of those patterns from the data itself as opposed to a pre-developed
top-level ontology. I have a quote here, roughly a quote here from Verna Kuhn early on in the era
when patterns were starting to be used. For solving semantic problems, it may be more productive to
agree on minimal requirements imposed on small notions like a pattern notion. So, the idea was
to use small and well-engineered, coherent, minimally constrained schemas as a start for ontology
that later could be combined, as I showed you with the semantic sensor net, where you might
can be combining several different patterns. You can use very good documentation and design
rationalities and best engineering practice for reuse over time, so you can prove things
like the semantic sensor network over time. So, for all these reasons, people did try out going to
modular patterns. And as they did, and roughly about 12 years ago or so,
Gangamy and Presuti, who I invited to a session but haven't heard back,
wrote some documentation on modular operations and just talked about five basic types of
operations when reusing them and building them. So, the first is, of course, importing them,
and you can use import functionality to do that into whatever you're trying to do.
You can also specialize, two types of specialization. You can take an existing idea and
specialize it conceptually and then go from there. Or you can have a specialization done
by creating subclasses and subproperties on existing ODP classes and properties.
You can also generalize an ODP in the concepts in them. And one of the most complex things,
and you saw a little bit of this in the semantic sensor net, the early version, is composition,
where you use multiple ODPs, small pieces, and try to compose them in a meaningful way,
fitting them together. And the last one, of course, here is the idea of, well, you may not find
an idea in a particular pattern that you want to use, and you might have to develop new patterns
for that. And here is an example of just such a thing of an expansion. I showed you that
semantic trajectory before. Here we have a portion of that trajectory on the right,
but you're sort of extending it and combining it with other things, so that a particular project
that NSF funded called the Geolink Projects used the trajectory for scientific expeditions.
And so they had to, they specialized the idea of what is traversing the segment to a vessel that
might be going on a cruise. And they also added other ideas on that, such as the data was gathered
and put it into a repository, things of that nature. So this is just a small example of how
patterns get built and get reused. And we'll hear more about that from Kogan and also next week
from Kahl. My last slide is just a few sources on that. This is the reference to that semantic
trajectory, for example. This is a tutorial sort of on how you combine patterns, make good patterns.
This is something on how you document patterns and so forth. So with that, let me stop the share
and let me turn the session back over to Ken, who will hopefully start the Kogan's video,
which runs about 34 minutes or so, which will leave us with a little bit of time for Q&A,
although he's not here this time. He promised to come back next time when call presents,
he'll be available questions and answers. So if we have an important ones, we have an address here,
you may be able to do it then. So this is the recording.
Hopefully you'll be able to hear the sound, but it's quite redundant. You'll notice that
the transcript is on the right. And you'll also see the transcript on the screen as he's speaking.
Hello, everyone. Welcome to my talk. Today, I'm going to be providing a
introduction to patterns and modules. And by this, I really mean patterns and modules as they
exist outside of the traditional sort of formal ontology perspective. So I'm not looking at the
modules and the patterns as they exist inside of say, for example, Dolce or BFO or any of the other
upper fundamental foundational reference ontologies, but instead coming at this from more of the
empirical data-driven side of things. We'll go over briefly the methodology and some of the resources.
So very briefly, my name's Kogan Shimizu. I'm an assistant professor over at Wright State University
in Dayton, Ohio. Some of you have already spoken with me at previous talks and some of you have
just known me for years already. But regardless, I'm happy to be here and talk a little bit about
what I'm interested in, and then also the point of the talk. So a little bit more about me is that
I'm broadly interested in knowledge engineering. And I mean this from the full perspective or the full
spectrum from just basic knowledge representation from any, from low expressivities of taxonomies,
controlled vocabularies all way to full-blown owl ontologies. But this also encompasses some of the
deployment aspects and how our knowledge graphs and these knowledge bases use. And that's a lot of
where this pattern-based methodology comes from is it's not just about patterns and the knowledge,
but also patterns of usage and how you can really simplify how knowledge graphs and the constituent
knowledge is really utilized. And then of course the the next two things are just kind of employing
knowledge engineering to do more effective open science and more effective teaching of this
material. So kind of looking at knowledge engineering from the perspective of knowledge
engineering in order to be a more effective teacher. But I digress by now. So without further ado,
let's take a look at the rest of our talk today. There are four main pieces that we're going to
dig into and I'll give briefly an motivation and then we'll again briefly kind of go over the
modular ontology modeling methodology or MOMO. And then I have a few examples of what patterns
look like and kind of some connections to some previous pattern work that we've seen in previous
talks here. And then we'll close with some tools and resources. So the first example that I have is
called the nowhere graph. The nowhere graph is a NSF-funded consortium. And I don't mean that in
a more formal sense. There is no NSF consortium in this case. By this I just mean that there's a
pretty huge team. I think it's over 50 collaborators at this point and that spans from all of the
student researchers to the investigators, the collaborators from NGOs and private industry
and government agencies. It's pretty quite expansive and with high coverage. We have a whole bunch of
different data sets that come from that are contributed by the different collaborators or
we're pulling them from publicly available websites and we're integrating them all and trying to
provide a geospatial backbone so that way the representation of spatial integration is pre-done.
We're front-loading the cost of doing the spatial integration and this came with some pretty tricky
and interesting problems with how to adequately express these spatial relations and also ensure
that we have provenance from all of the different data sets and all of the different features and
do the semantic harmonization. And it turns out that we did wind up using a modular knowledge
graph in order to do this. So this is what the schema looked like back in July of 2021
and into 2022 I believe. And each one of these little tiny boxes that you can see here are a
module. We have an expertise module, we have a hazard module, we have different modules for the
different data sets so climate division, soil types, storm observations, smoke plumes, things that
impact the world around us by some physical phenomena and is also of interest enough that the
government at a state or federal level is tracking them and providing data sets about them.
And so what we did is we identified a kind of pattern that exists in this observations and it's
drawn from the SOSA SSN, the sensors observations sampling actuators ontology from the semantic
sensor network and kind of extracting a core piece of that and using that as a sort of template
to mint new patterns which kind of turn into these modules and so on. And this strategy I think as
both Nick and Chris have said in previous talks is really effective for rapidly expanding
additional coverage for a domain without really having to know the ontology in and out.
There's some clear connection points to these strategies. And so what this results in is as
of November of 2022 is this much larger schema and I don't think this is everything either.
And it's also hardly readable because it doesn't fit on the screen. It's kind of an interesting
sort of catch 22. It's cool that we've been able to integrate all of these different data sets but
now it doesn't fit on the slide so we can't really show it off. But anyway the evolution and
maintenance of the graph comes from these patterns and these modules and being able to rapidly
replace a module or add in a new module based on an older module or the same pattern
is really instrumental. And we'll kind of go into this in a few slides.
Another example that we have is the enslaved hub ontology. So the enslaved hub is a smaller
but no less important knowledge graph. It's really about identifying, integrating and really
making visible the stories of the peoples of the historical slave trade. So trying to find
how a particular person might have traveled from place to place largely against their will and
with different names and different personal relationships and trying to identify what
actually is the ground truth because that's one of the hard things here is that integrating
all of these little tiny data sets from historians across the nation and around the world even
you have different interpretations of the events that occur or different interpretations of the
first source, the first hand sources. And this resulted also in a modular knowledge graph.
Otherwise we wouldn't be presenting it in this particular presentation. But the point is that
having a way of modeling the different types of characteristics of the peoples of the historical
slave trade as well as this sort of integration of the data sets is really valuable and really
makes it easy to apply a pattern based method towards it. This I will not get into so much
with the rest of the presentation, but if you have any questions or you want to see the schema
you can go to enslave.org or if you have any questions my email is at the end of the
presentation and you can go ahead and pass on questions and I'll either answer them or send
them on to the team. So anyway let's go ahead and dig a little bit more into modular ontology
modeling. So one of the things that I didn't really talk about is what is the difference between
a knowledge graph and an ontology. And in this case we don't really mean them to be too differently
except for in this case an ontology is really just the T-box of the ontology. And then we
consider the knowledge graph to be the A-box coupled with the ontology which acts as a schema
for the knowledge graph. Really it's just changing the different buzzwords around
in order to make sure that the work is fundable sometimes or a little bit more relatable to
to a broader audience. And in this case what we mean with pattern mediated methods for knowledge
engineering and including these patterns is really including and using patterns as a first order
or first class citizen within the modeling paradigm. So making sure that the modular ontology
is directly represented using annotations and this is what really drives the ability to expand
the the ontology or the knowledge graph schema based on the existing patterns within the ontology
or to yank out and say we'll we don't want this one anymore let's go ahead and replace it with this
new one and then finding all of the pertinent axioms and underlying instances for those for those
classes is quite valuable. And so what we have here on this slide is what we call the modularity
which is the patterns made out of sorry the schemas made out of patterns and then on the right
hand side we have the metadata scaffolding and so this is really the the the catchy way of saying
well we're just going to annotate the schema with additional information that indicates what
pattern or module particular classes within the ontology belong to. So with this in mind the
metadata scaffolding can really be thought of as the sort of ladder right you have a conceptual
component which is an extremely human centric term which might be implemented in a number of
different ways. For example space and time are great examples of this because there's
so many different ways of modeling space right that we can each say that each ways of those
modeling spaces is is kind of pattern is kind of like a pattern and so a spatial extent would be
the conceptual component it would be represented by some set of patterns and then you choose a
pattern and you turn it into something that's more apt for your use case and we call that a module.
And then you have the instances of the modules which are really just the shapes of the data
the actual triples or the materializations of the the data that the model module models.
We use a a language called opala or opal which is the better way of of kind of turning the
the acronym into into a human word which is just the ODP representation language. So OP
and then A from pattern and then L. What I have here on the right is an in-progress draft of the
version two of opal and what we are trying to do here is to include even more information about
what is actually going on inside of the pattern. Axioms tend to follow patterns especially within
the MOMO methodology but there's also different ways of thinking about patterns in terms of the
representation so you can have a perspective which is really just an extremely simplified
view of maybe a more expressive version of a pattern. You have documentation that's associated
with it so the the pattern will have a schema diagram and all of the different ways that you
want to represent a pattern we're trying to codify into the into this model. There is an
additional there's a base opala or opal which was published in 2016 from a number of people
from the the community and we are kind of generating a new specification currently.
So modular ontology modeling now let's take a look at the actual methodology it's it's nine steps.
We want to focus as I said largely on the empirical data-driven reality which means
that we're not necessarily always concerned with the philosophical ramifications as we are with
what can we model and what data is readily available or important to the use case at hand. So
you start with designing the use case with however whichever methodology that you want with use case
generation and this can you can draw from any number of knowledge elicitation frameworks.
What we find to be particularly important and we call out here is the use of competency questions.
I don't think this is particularly new to the ontology modeling community
but it really helps you identify what the key notions are but also the interactions with the
data and this is really where the the empirical or data-driven reality aspect comes in because if
you can't really in natural language ask a question about it then what to what extent is it useful to
model beyond that. There's probably some fighting words in that statement but at this top level
sort of of this address here we can sort of gloss over that for now. The the the interesting parts
now are in steps four five and six which are really kind of what differentiate MOMO from other
methodologies and that's really once you have the key notions for your use case which are extracted
from your data, your competency questions, your domain experts, what have you. You want to match
those the conceptual components that patterns model. We have resources that I'll display later on in
the presentation about sorry about of all of the different patterns that we have and can be used
to sort of plug and play a schema together. The instantiation of the patterns is comes what
comes next and that's really replacing the terms and properties of a pattern wholesale kind of like
a template starting with maybe like madlib style. You're not subclassing a pattern you're just
using the structure of the pattern over and over again. In step six we have the systematic
axiomatization which is once you have your patterns and you look at the schema diagram
for your different modules and your different patterns is you go edge by edge within your
schema diagram and you assign the ontological meaning of what that top level intuitive conceptual
relationship is. I won't get into that so much within this talk but what we have here is the
modular ontology modeling published in the semantic web journal and you should be able to
kind of get a lot more information on the exact processes within this methodology from there.
After that you plug all of the modules together with quite literally like puzzle pieces you review
the final product add any more axioms that you think are useful across the entire assembled
schema and then you produce your owl artifact.
So that was really Momo in a nutshell. So what I have here are a few examples three actually I
think and then a brief discussion on the template based instantiation that we utilize for Momo and
how it kind of connects or is quite obviously parallel to the sort of DOSP strategy employed
within the oboe community. So this first pattern that we have here is a pattern for depicting
causal relationships between events this is something that came out of the nowhere graph
project actually the next two patterns are as well but I kind of want to show you here how you
have a pattern and then you also have a module within the pattern right this abstract event
compared to this events this concrete notion of event event for those of you who are familiar with
the upper ontology sphere this would probably be easily modeled as
your sort of perjure and endurance thing because you have a description in a situation you have
this thing that exists in time and thing that exists out of time but from a pattern perspective
the exact implementation of this doesn't matter and that's kind of the point you can implement
this pattern using an upper ontology or you could call it whatever you want like event concrete
which is maybe not a great name but kind of gets the point across. These blue boxes with the dashed
lines are what we call the interfaces I said earlier conceptual components but you can kind
of think of them as interfaces from software engineering because they are an implementation
they are a hook within this pattern that says right here belongs anything that is a model of
what an observation is or anything here can be fulfilled by something that sort of adheres to
the contract of what a spatiotemporal extent is and we just note that with with the blue box
and so you can replace that blue box with an entire new pattern or you can kind of just
drop it away and have it something very simplistic like a stub and so on and so this
is how we do that and this is also what allows it to kind of for people to kind of conceptualize
these as puzzle pieces because you take your spatiotemporal extent pattern you plug it in
quite literally like a puzzle piece into the spatiotemporal interface within the schema diagram
and then you just build out your patterns and you modify them to your use case and then you're
done right that's kind of the strength of what we're trying to do here is by leveraging these
patterns and the fact that all of the ontological analysis has already been done it's really just
the assembly and configuration for your use case that drives the the usefulness of this
okay I accidentally reordered these sorry for flipping through a few slides there
this is another example here of of a pattern we have two interfaces this time but now actually
what we have here is this purple box which is really just a controlled vocabulary it's this
it's it's just another sort of um technicolor idiosyncrasy for our um presentation or our schema
diagram presentation and it's really just saying that the the class of organization scheme consists
of strictly a set number of individuals not particularly exciting but it's something that
we can model and is sometimes extremely convenient to to model even at the pattern level and then
doing it explicitly like this instead of having a subsumption hierarchy somewhere in the background
it means that there's really no change to the ontology when you add in a new instance for
example here of the organization scheme in this case you would replace custom with whatever you want
because custom kind of doesn't belong in the in the in the pattern here um
keep moving on uh so this final pattern example that we have here this is a pattern for depicting
features of s2 cells or any cell in a hierarchical grid so let me back up there a little bit what we
have are these cells um and the cell is really just a geometry a tessellated geometry across the
surface of the earth or any body really but in this case let's let's just stick with the earth
and then what you have is these cells are hierarchical so four cells make up the next
tessellated geometry and it just up and up and up and so s2 um is one particular
version of this and that's employed by google and it's really just um four cells make up the next
larger cell and then four of those make up there and um there's also a way to do this using hexagons
that's called h3 using it out of uber but really what um what's interesting about this
are these red arrows i mentioned earlier that sometimes it's useful to have these
shortcuts within a pattern a simplified view right so when you have a cell and you want to
represent it uh using geosparcle or um using some sort of uh geo informational science standard
way you disconnect the cell as a concept from its geometry uh which is the literal that describes
the sort of boundary points of the cell and then the spatial relations actually occur between the
geometries not technically between the cells however when you're querying generally you want to
know how the things are spatially related at a human level and not just these arbitrary
geometries that exist um under the hood and so having a way to specifically represent these
within the schema diagram useful but also logically under the hood um as a sort of
roll chain is also is also useful uh and we use the opal annotations for the different um
excuse me for the different shortcuts to say well this is this one's optional you
don't have to actually materialize this because it's it's part of the pattern but only in so far
that you may want to simplify this for for other other people um so for example going from cells
the attribute of the particular feature that simplifies three hops with an inverse in there
into one simple thing uh but you lose a lot of the expressiveness um and uh the ontological
pitchness there so there's there are some tradeoffs uh finally um as one of our examples
this here on the left is the kwg core ontology um and the sosa ssn kernel that we use uh the core
is really just the four main concepts that we have and some very basic relationships it's
obviously much more built out within the ontology uh itself but from a schema diagrammatic um and
also from this nice compact view it's useful to only include a couple of these pieces um
but it connects into this kernel and then this kernel um the sosa ssn kernel this pattern that
we've extracted essentially from that ontology we just essentially mint um or not mint we stamp
over and over again one per data set uh how this connects right so the feature of interest remains
the same uh because it's the superclass but this observation that we have here within the kernel
um i actually done to lead you the arrow to the wrong thing it should be to the climate observation
and the observation and then you have the climate observable property and the observable property
right this is not a particularly exciting implement or instantiation of the sosa ssn
kernel template but you can see how um after you've kind of changed the names to be um more
tailored to your particular sub use case right represent a us climate division and its climate
observations um there's all of this additional stuff that's now hung off of it right we use has
simple result instead of has result the observation has a phenomenon time and then we go out and we
say okay at least with this particular diagram we say that there's hidden or additional complexity
um which would be implemented by another pattern or another module elsewhere for spatial object or
temporal entity all right so we're going to go ahead and start wrapping up i have a few things
for the tools and resources and then we'll uh we'll end with um my slide for passing on any
questions to me so the the the cool the the cool one and this is really a self insert here uh is
called model uh the modular ontology design library which is a collection of curated patterns uh so on
the next slide we have the ontology design patterns portal uh this is a huge collection of
patterns of varying quality because it contains uh submissions of patterns which were peer reviewed
but were rejected but never removed from the portal or they have wildly different sorts of uh
constraints on them ontological commitments that make them very tailored to a specific
use case and you would wonder whether or not they can really be called a pattern right so what we did
is we took out the patterns that we thought were maximally useful um and uh polished them up new
schema diagrams made sure that the axioms were consistent gave in some examples uh and and kind
of organized them by category and then we described all of them using opal right so model is actually
an annotation ontology of all of the different uh patterns um this what here on the right is
13 patterns in version one uh i am working on a second version which contains 32 some of them
are redundant in so far that they are alternative patterns for the same conceptual component or
the same interface right a couple of different spatial extent patterns a couple of different
event patterns um a couple of different role patterns and and so on um and then uh model is
not just an artifact it is meant to be a template model is a type of ontological collection which
is a collection of patterns um i call mine model because i suppose that's my prerogative but it
could be any um anybody could make a model uh finally i think i already said this is that the
model encodes many inter pattern relationships so it has uh what interfaces it provides and then
conversely what interface it implements what conceptual component in implements what are
the different specializations and generalizations between the uh patterns and what category do
they belong to uh we already talked about the portal so i'll move on what i have here is called
commodity uh the comprehensive modular ontology integrated development environment quite a mouthful
commodity is a plugin for protochet um i wrote this as part of my phd dissertation so it functions
but it is not like production quality you know it it's something to use and um to uh leverage but
you might run into a bug here there if you do uh let me know and i'll try my best to address it or
help out but essentially what this does is it provides a graphical canvas uh to do modeling
with all of the power of our and the coup de grace so to speak would be the
uh pattern library which is the number two you can actually drag and drop all of the patterns from
model directly onto the graphical canvas and it will connect them based on those uh interface
points that we talked about uh and then you can also uh customize the sort of semantics that the
edge um edges will generate uh what do i have here so here's a a quick example of what this looks
like um oh that was wrong let me try that again uh so what you can see here is the the dragging
and the dropping directly onto the thing uh it will draw the module around it um when you
draw drag sorry drag the next one over it'll connect it on the obvious touch points um
and then you can rename stuff and drag and drop and add your own classes and so on i'm not going
to go back because this seems to be fighting me on this so thank you very much for attending this
talk i'm so sorry that i couldn't be there today uh please forward any questions to me um at my
email uh or go ahead and pass them on to gary and he could do this i will also be here next week um
right after carl's talk uh which will have a lot of overlap with the sort of design process
and we can talk there um or i can answer any questions that you might have again thank you
so much and have a great day
i guess i'll verbally thank kogan for this and we'll see him next week
we now have about 12 to 15 minutes for discussion including questions and answers of course
kogan not being here there may be limitations on what we're able to
say but uh maybe we can have some discussion among ourselves here
so with that i'm looking for hands raised here and uh i know there was a small amount of chat in our
other uh online chat yes james you're commuted but here we go uh thanks gary and i appreciate
that kogan was able to present even though he wasn't able to present so much appreciated uh it
did have a bit of a hard time connecting this step up to what i do day to day when i do things that i
call design patterns or usually focused on templates and csv files or tsv files that get expanded into
some set of al-axioms that define a class uh but i guess my question was
so i am aware that there's this larger literature about ontology design patterns
that i'm not super familiar with uh i guess my my general question is how well this talk
lines up with kind of the larger literature on these things uh i don't know maybe that's a question
for gary but other people could uh could chime in is there like a single notion of ontology design
pattern and kogan was expressing it or is it a more diverse kind of field topic keyword
well it's an interesting question i'm not sure i can be definitive i have opinions of course
and i am not necessarily as up to date on all the literature uh if there's somebody out here
attending who who feels they are they can certainly speak up kogan mentioned setting up sort of a new
a new repository uh for curated design patterns and this reflects the fact that that people have
been building design patterns and posting them and uh the idea is for them to have
good documentation to reuse practice to make connections to other uh design patterns and
maybe upper levels and a lot of that is that is missing you know when we we talk about fairness
for ontology we sometimes find that they lack some of the ingredients of fairness and so
that is has been true for odps uh over time but like the the the foundry uh there's a sub community
here of people like like uh pascal and kogan and uh the people involved with the nowhere
where graph we're trying to pull some of this together and and provide more of a community
where there are higher standards existing practices so i'd say again that maybe it isn't
it isn't as large a community and maybe hasn't been uh as well funded uh as things in the biomedical
field but this is an attempt to sort of do something of that level quality and i myself
am very much interested in how these two communities can sort of share and cooperate
i mentioned the semantic trajectory as being able to be applied to a course of disease
but i'm not sure anybody has done that i'm not sure that anybody has looked at
what's common about these patterns and how to how to take uh a a dead simple pattern from oboe
and sort of put it in uh and compose with it along with uh odps from the other communities
that would be an interesting thing to look at it and might be an interesting research article
for us to consider so hopefully i've given people enough time to know maybe more about this and have
things to say i just wanted to laugh at your bit about being well funded because we don't think of
ourselves as well funded and being on the side of tooling side of things but we think of ourselves as
stealing uh time and money to build these tools but maybe you're right a lot could be said about
that it's a relative question of course and the continuity is such is very important where
things get started in the question so the geolink pattern that i sort of identified came out of or
built on a semantic trajectory but they didn't necessarily continue to fund more of that for
other types of expeditions and things like that so some of the concepts can be reused but necessarily
the projects have a you know a three year five year type of extent and and one's uncertain about the
other side that's true we often have longer time frames than that you know oboe but not always thanks
okay
um i see something in chat so i'll just read that in addition to what james asked what ontology
projects do you know and hopefully it's the community rather than just me uh use ontology design
pads for practical practically during during development um again that that's a much better
question to ask of both kogan and uh call uh so let's keep that question i do know that there
have been studies which looked at the relative of quality of ontologies built by reusing patterns or
not and unfortunately at the time of the publication i know of it wasn't great it wasn't uh a big help
at that time but again things have moved along since some of those earlier studies
ashaya you have your hand up yeah so maybe i just ask a clarification questions
in his talk does he mean that uh the design pattern we can use no matter what top ontology
that we are using and another one is so the my understanding is that the design pattern
if as logo so they are not necessarily map kind of have the same using same block
like but they can still connect to each other is that correct understanding
yeah i can i can maybe address part of that which is the interoperability question with
upper level ontologies so you notice that some of them had these stubs with the dotted lines
and has he's he said i i don't remember his exact words the idea is you can plug in different
things at this particular point some of them may be entire patterns some of them may be a
very simple concept and so forth so the idea is that the the core of the pattern below the dotted
line is gets reused and it's in common so that you can you can ask some questions across it
because there's a common element a little bit like what cob is doing right cob is providing
that core that other people can tap into but yes there will be variations depending on whether
you tap into dulce at the top or you tap into oboe so or bfo i should say so it allows sort of
some commonality and some flexibility it's a compromise there maybe somebody else has
some other wisdom to add to that or or real wisdom to add to that
well it design pattern each design pattern will have certain requirements for it to be applicable
and that could make it impossible to use in certain with certain upper ontologies
so it's
but i to what extent do these design patterns have those requirements explicitly stated
so this is very much a bottom up effort at times coming from what the data is saying to reflect the
reality of the data as opposed to a more abstract concept above and so as long as you have common
questions that can answer with the data can answer real things of interest to a domain
that they feel that's that's viable now there could be of course these different philosophical
distinctions at the top level the question is whether you have common questions that sort of tap
into that at all
they may it may not for practical purposes
yeah again this is a question this is a deeper question that people who are like kogan and
caulk and probably provide a better follow-up
there is a there's a workshop on ontology design and patterns
it's WOP
it's WOP
regularly WOP is an annual event
and you can see that some of the people in there online the past ones are online and
you can look at the at the press the papers i often do
i was part of the review panel here who are active in that community
who might have some comments
yes we have a few minutes left so let's hear from people with different experiences on this
or different ideas on this
you don't have to be shy because you've heard me talk about it yeah obviously people will know
more than that yeah so hello i'm chris hello chris so i was one of the co-organizers of the
last rendition of the workshop on ontology design patterns so if there's anything in
particular you would like me to comment on now i'm unhappy too
so we may have questions what were some of the patterns about from the last or the issues
at that i didn't attend
right so there there were patterns from different domains one of which was particularly interesting
to me which was about the design of scientific taxonomies now i don't know the
details anymore because i haven't reviewed the actual pattern but each year there are a number
of patterns that get published and one interesting point to notice here is that the patterns that
get published are not always following the same structure so there are different ideas
of what what a design pattern should consist of and also how a design pattern is supposed to be
reused and this is also one of the key notions in which i personally think that the notion of
the software design patterns differs from the notion of a ontology design pattern so when we
talk about a software design pattern these patterns are often thought as language agnostic so they
provide us with a solution that could be adopted in different languages whereas these ontology
design patterns they are often tailored to a specific knowledge representation language so
that it can be reused in that particular formula and that is one of the key differences that often
get confused between these two different notions thank you that's a good although i do know in
in his what 10 points that the less that is to produce the owl artifacts so up until then there's
some degree of conceptualization more abstraction right right so um there have been different
proposals for how a design pattern is supposed to be reported and one of these proposals includes
this 10-step or 12-step process where you have to um list all the requirements for a particular use
case and all the ways in which a pattern can be reused but that is not standardized in any way
so there are different proposals of how this could be achieved and this is just one of them so
again i have tried to actually empirically look at how patterns are reused and so far
it doesn't seem to be the case that there are there's a standard notion of either the reuse of
design pattern or standard design patterns that were used consistently throughout ontology so this
is still a open question that that's a challenging observation that we want to sort of repeat next
week so i hope you'll be back for that and ask again because i i agree that you know this is an
we're empiricists here so we want to know what really works where things are and so forth and
what can be re really reused so we we have looked at modl model they're they're curated the repository
for ontologies for odp's anybody else looked at that
oh right here the importance of building up a library we've got a hand raised
oh okay i missed it maybe it's on the other screen
oh unfortunately disappeared they have to go
so hopefully they we can continue this next week yeah
yes indeed and so call hammer who's now at google has been very involved in these things
continually and has done a lot of practical development with them and can speak to that
and can speak to methods used and since he's went from ibm to google there's probably something
he's able has been able to do he may be able to speak at a different degree of abstraction but
he has practical experience um so with that i think we can adjourn for today and um and hopefully
see you all again next week and tell your friends i hope frisk can make it okay i'm glad to be there
thanks everybody i don't know
