Greetings, it is election day Eve, and I'm wearing camouflage, not because of the election,
because this coat is the best windbreaker, it is 63 degrees here in northern Wisconsin in the
middle of November, so I went for a bike ride, and I had these reflections, which will be this
week's, frankly, I would like to talk about the COP 27 in Egypt, which I expect will fail, like the
26 convenings of parties, at least insofar as reducing emissions and mitigating the default
climate trajectory, and I'll explain why in a moment. Last month I did a, frankly, on the seven
stages of climate awareness, which basically was stage one, there is an environment, stage two,
climate as part of the environment, stage three, the climate changes, and that's due to CO2, stage
four is that fossil fuels are the biggest driver of climate, stage five is that energy is vital to
human civilization, stage six is that we're part of a system, economy, growth, debt, climate,
all that fits together, and stage seven is that we're not going to be able to
directly solve for climate, climate is a symptom of a much larger problem, and therefore we have
to look two or three steps ahead. In thinking about that, I realized there are other categories
with which we view the issue of climate from different perspectives. One of them, which I'm
going to talk about today, is what we care about, and then in the not too distant future,
I will also talk about various climate scenarios and also various interventions as individuals
or as society, but first of all, what's going on in COP 27 in Egypt, the reason that it's failing
is because we're trying to optimize three things, we're trying to optimize climate change and
emissions, we're trying to optimize economic growth and the market system, and we're trying to
optimize equity or inequality both within countries and between countries. So if we're ever going to
solve any of these things, we have to understand how it is that humans care about climate change,
so here is again from my perspective, this is no academic empirical study, but there are seven
stages of what we care about. Number one, obviously as we care about ourselves, I went on a bike ride
today at 63 degrees in November. How is climate going to affect me in North Central Wisconsin?
Is it going to cause me to have heat problems or wet bulb issues? Well, I mean, I have air
conditioning and for me personally in my vocation, I'm probably more likely to be killed by speaking
about climate than I am about actual climate change, but as biological organisms, we first care
about ourselves. The second stage is our future self, and our future self is really almost an
illusion emotionally. We can envision in 20 years when I'm in my mid-70s what it might be like,
but emotionally I don't really think about that. I think about the things in the near term
this weekend or next month, and frankly when I'm in my mid-70s, I'm going to worry about my lower
back and my arthritis and my knee and being able to afford other things. I'm personally not really
thinking about mid-2040s what the climate's going to be like, though I probably should. I'm cognitively
imagining it, but I'm emotionally not. The third stage beyond self and future self is our friends
and family, and I don't have any children. I have cultural children, the 270 students that were my
former students. I have a lot of young people in my extended cousins, etc., and so that's the next
stage of what humans care about. For biological reasons, we care about our kin. The fourth level
is the region where I live, and the people in my region, Minnesota and Wisconsin,
actually don't look so bad in the intermediate term climate models in the middle of the distribution.
So I think about what will this place look like. I've gotten to know the ecology, the ecosystems,
the animals, the rivers, the back forests and stuff where I live, and I do think about what will be
the climate impacts of that. So those are the kind of four stages that are common, but outside of that,
which are things that we don't often emotionally think about as stage five, which is other people
in other areas of the world. I did a beautiful podcast a few weeks ago with Ayan Mahmood from
Uganda, and she's talking about already the challenges that people are facing with higher
wet bulb temperatures and lack of air conditioning, and my friends at TMP, Mission Climate, Frank,
get down now, have created a graph showing that even in the coming decade, those areas in the world
that we're going to have to go in a decarbonization pathway, we're going to have to
rematerialize, and those minerals and materials are going to come from countries that are going to
have a combination of higher wet bulb temperatures, more civic strife, and higher climate impacts.
So these are things that we don't really think about, plus many of these countries aren't going
to be able to afford air conditioning. And a wet bulb temperature is there's a dry temperature,
and then if you combine the humidity and both temperature and humidity are expected to increase
in the various climate scenarios, it used to be above 35 degrees Celsius was fatal for humans,
because our sweat would not be able to evaporate. They've now shown that that 35 degrees is actually
lower, it's 31.5 degrees is the correct number. So in the not too distant future, hundreds of
millions of people will live in regions where higher temperatures and humidity will be fatal,
unless they have air conditioning, and or shade or other things. So the fifth stage is caring about
people outside of our immediate biologically related, culturally, geographically related sphere,
and this may be the first time in human history that there is a risk that we can think about that
goes and extends way beyond our tribe. The sixth stage you can guess where I'm going with this
is other species. And what is the wet bulb equivalent for dolphins and elephants and apes and lions
and deer and exotic animals and insects and birds? And how will they move or adapt? Daniel
Pauly and I did a podcast already Ocean Fish are moving northward because they're not getting the
same amount of oxygen they were because the waters are warming. Very few people when they think about
oh climate change is going to be this, think about other species.
And the seventh stage of what we care about is of course other generations of humans,
of global ecosystems, of other species. The climate models that are shown in the news
all end in the year 2100. We have equilibrium climate sensitivity, but there's an earth system
climate sensitivity, which is after all the feedbacks have run their course. What is the
ultimate resting point of temperature? And that's well, well beyond the year 2100.
And emotionally things more than 10 years away have effectively a zero value in our minds,
so it's very difficult for us to think about or care about the deep future.
So climate equity is one of the things that's being discussed in Egypt, is reparations and making
people a hole for the damages that 90% of the emissions in the world are from the top 10% of
wealthy countries. And I think there's a certain logic to this that these other countries are not,
have not contributed to the problem, yet they're bearing the brunt of it. And I think this is
all viewed from an economic standpoint right now, but if you consider our place in the carbon pulse,
we're somewhere between the two stars on the graph. And on the upslope we can talk about
equality as giving others part of the wealth because they haven't grown as much. But I fear on
the downside of the carbon pulse that the equity and the sharing is going to be life or death.
It's not going to be an economic argument because on the downslope of the carbon pulse,
not only do we have 40 or 50 years of increasing temperatures ahead of us,
even if we were to stop all fossil carbon burning today, but we're going to have less
energy and more expensive energy with which to respond to the crisis, especially air conditioning.
So it really makes me wonder if climate change is the first issue in human history,
where the equality issue becomes one of an existential issue. And what will be the impacts
down the road in Africa, in South America, in poorer countries that have high heat and high
humidity? And I don't think we have any plan for this. President Biden four days ago said,
no more drilling. Yet two months ago, he's proud to show that we are drilling in response to
higher oil prices. I can imagine these high level political officials going to a meeting on climate
change and they hear how urgent and dire it is and they nod their heads and then they go to
another meeting about the economy and how we need lower oil prices. And they nod their heads and say,
we're going to do this. And then they go to another meeting and say, we need to have more
equality, the wealth and income equality in our country, in our world is extreme. And this isn't
fair and they nod their heads. There is no plan on how to solve all these things together. So
those of you that have followed my work know that our human system has a metabolism and this
metabolism is stronger than our politicians and our billionaires and our philanthropists.
And we're going to eventually run out of enough low cost hydrocarbons to continue growth.
And then everything changes. In order to really change that, yes, we have to understand how the
climate system interacts with human systems. We are also going to have to change what we care about.
We're going to have to extend the boundaries of our empathy and concern
beyond myself and my future self and even my genetic kin. I don't know how this is going to
happen. I think about it all the time. And so this is not a prescription or an answer. I just
wanted to reflect that we care about different things and that is a piece of the puzzle.
Thank you. I will talk to you next week.
