People always ask me, how do you get so connected to nature?
Why do you care about this?
My answer is always that potential is exactly the same in you
than it is in me.
I just have been fortunate enough and deliberate enough
to cultivate it.
So I think it's innate in every single human, which
is why, despite all of the things
that we're seeing around us today,
I have great excitement about the future and our ability
to restore and reconnect.
I'd like to welcome my friend and colleague, Alexa Fermanish,
to the program.
Alexa is an investor, a consultant, facilitator,
and activist on the environmental crises,
basically an all-in strategy on developing programs
and interventions that repair our planet's ecologies.
She is currently the co-director of SEED Biocomplexity,
a new initiative with the aims of creating
the world's most comprehensive assessment of biodiversity
for any location on the planet.
She also co-founded the animist investment studio
called Ground Effect to direct capital
on behalf of other species and shift worldviews
towards one of interbeing with all life.
It's no surprise, longtime followers of this podcast
know that my value system and ethics and what I care about
that Alexa and I found each other
during the virtual connection of people working
on behalf of nature.
This was, at times, a personal conversation.
Alexa is a friend, and she is a champion for Earth's future.
And I hope you enjoy this conversation.
And please welcome Alexa Fermanish.
Alexa, great to see you.
Hi, Nate. How's it going?
I'm good.
Winter started here.
And I can't bike as much as I do in the summer,
but I'm trying to snowshoe and do other things.
Boy, I've talked to you so much on our little WhatsApp channels.
And when I met you in Europe, there's just so much to talk about.
How can we get started?
You have a long list of things that you're passionate about,
you're interested in.
Maybe just start by giving a little bit of your background
and what you're working on most recently.
And I have lots of questions.
Wonderful. And, Nate, it was such a pleasure
to be with you in the mountains some weeks ago,
months ago now, I guess, in my home country.
And I loved our long walks and philosophical musings.
Let me start with what I'm doing now,
and then I can give it a little bit of background.
I'm currently managing two slash three main projects.
The first one is I'm the co-director of an initiative
at the Crowther Lab, which is a very interdisciplinary
ecology lab at ETH University in Zurich.
And the initiative that I'm co-directing,
we're building the world's most comprehensive measure
of biodiversity for any location on the planet.
So it's a super exciting project,
and I can talk more about that if you'd like.
About five years ago, I launched my own investment vehicle,
investing on behalf of nature.
It's called Ground Effect,
and it's an animus investment vehicle,
which I can also get into.
And we have about 20 plus current investments
across grants and for-profit,
all trying to support nature,
and obviously the communities who live close to the land
to thrive and regenerate and do what they do best.
And then lastly, I'm a little bit like you,
in that I do everything I can to speak, share, create,
as much as it is to keep myself sane.
I don't know if you have the same experience,
but I have a podcast called Life Worlds,
and I do a lot of writing and photography,
and I'm a wilderness guide.
I bring people out into the land.
And so all of that kind of exercises my more holistic,
creative, wanting to connect part of my being.
I'm sure it's the same for you with your podcast.
It is the same.
And so just, yeah, I guess how I got here,
back to your question.
I was thinking about this the other day.
It's like, if I were to teleport you back,
like 30 years ago, maybe 25 years ago,
you'd find a very geeky,
very kind of awkward and lonesome Swiss girl
in the middle of the forest in Switzerland.
We live outside of the city,
surrounded by tons of books.
Like I love science fiction.
I love these like long epic novels
that talk about like multi-generational timeframes.
A lot of them were animals though,
the Red War series, if anyone knows those, video games.
I loved so many different types of video games
and adventure games.
So I was very immersed in that,
but it was always with this relationship to nature
when I look back towards it.
And then I studied political science
because I was deeply curious about
the relationship between human and natural systems
and how human systems perpetuate themselves.
I think you've been one of the leading voices
in helping me to make sense of all of that.
I worked in journalism for a while
and then I moved to Mexico for most of my 20s.
And to summarize of a long arc,
I think it might be encouraging
for some of your listeners to know,
especially the younger ones,
that I followed a very non-linear career path.
And a lot of people around me,
the word judgment might be a bit strong,
but there was definitely curiosity
around the different trails I took and paths,
but they were always centered around wanting to understand
the living world much more deeply
and human psychology fundamentally.
And that obviously leaks into what we do
with human systems.
So I worked with many NGOs doing
land-based regeneration projects,
working with local communities,
biocultural restoration.
I launched a company myself that was guiding
learning journeys for investors,
CEOs, executives into the land,
looking at regenerative economics and business principles.
And that was because when you're working
with an environmental nonprofit, for example,
you often see that a lot of the damage
is happening upstream in the economics
and the mindset of extraction consumption, et cetera.
So it was a very powerful tool.
We ran that for about two years,
brought about 120 people through the process,
and I continue to be a facilitator
and deeply committed to guiding
those deep ecology experiences for people.
And yeah, long story short,
four or five years ago started the investments
and joined the lab about a year and a half ago.
So biodiversity, nature, human,
society and economics has been my big focus.
So why are you focused on biodiversity
and why does this specific ecological issue
call to you rather than something more stream
than just climate change writ large?
I love this question, Nate,
because I feel like this question
is the basis of our friendship.
Fundamentally, your love for all beings and for life
is, I think, the glue that connected us
from our very first conversations through to now.
And so it's a question I would wanna ask you as well.
There's a series of emotional reasons
and very practical ones.
Which ones would you want me to start with?
Whatever you are called to.
Of the emotional ones.
The emotional ones.
It's always interesting which ones you lead with first.
For me, it's quite simple.
I think that emotionally, it's easy to fall in love
with a furry-haired lemur or a Chinook salmon
or a particular tree friend
or tree that you have close to your home.
Biodiversity is what we're in love with, right?
Whereas in a way, carbon and climate
has become almost like a deadening conversation
around a very abstract concept, a single molecule.
Now, if you're a perfect animist,
you can absolutely fall in love
with a molecule of carbon.
I would, great merit to that.
But in a way, they contain very different ways
of relating to things.
Like 80% of people have nature as their screensaver.
You work throughout the year.
You save up, you save up to spend two weeks into,
spend two weeks going into the land.
Like nature is, I think, fundamentally,
we are all biophilic.
You want me to pause?
Wait a minute.
80% of people have something on nature
as their screensaver?
Yes.
What does that, just that one sentence
relative to the rest of the things in our economy,
what does that say about our economic system
and about us, really?
It says a lot about what we value
and what we find beautiful
and probably the dissonance when you look up
from that screensaver to the other windows
and the other things you're doing
and maybe you're cubicle.
But it's a message about what we value.
And so fundamentally, obviously, carbon and climate,
they are one and the same with biodiversity
and most things that we've referred to as carbon
are living beings.
They are part of the natural world.
But for me, poetry is what gives us art and dance
and music and culture and myth.
And it's this rich, rich tapestry out of which
human civilization and culture emerges from.
And just try this thought experiment for a second.
Imagine a planet that had no more elephants.
We just, the last elephant was gone.
Or a planet that had no more tigers
or no more, place your favorite creature
in the middle of the circle.
Even if you had never met any of those creatures
in your life, come across them,
wouldn't that somehow inside of you
create a fundamentally different feeling
of the earth and what it is to be alive?
Like we exist because all of these other beings exist
because these ecosystems exist.
I can see it in your face.
So for me, these are the emotional reasons,
like why biodiversity?
Whereas if I was to tell you, 33 tons of carbon
is the sequestration potential of a whale, 33 tons.
It's a different physiological response.
So I don't know if you wanna comment on that
before I get into the practical reasons,
but for me, that's why, again, biodiversity
is what we're for, is what we're in love with.
It's why we want to create these changes.
It's why we'll consume less.
It's why we'll make the efforts to change our lifestyles.
Whereas climate, unfortunately,
has become what we need to abstain from,
what we're doing wrong, et cetera, et cetera, et cetera.
And it's a big tech focus.
Like it's an engineering problem
as opposed to a value's deep humanity
tethered to nature problem.
Yes, absolutely.
So do you think that those emotions that people feel
in the fact that 80% of our screen savers
are something nature-related,
is that related to people's experiences with nature
as they grew up, or do you think it's something innate
in who we are as evolved beings on this planet?
Like you and I, you said that you grew up
as a nerdy girl in the forests of Switzerland.
I was a nerdy boy in the forests of Southern Oregon,
and that imprinted nature on us.
But is that just waiting to be a seed germinating
in all of us?
And it's just been kind of squelched by our economic system?
Or what are your thoughts on that?
100%.
I think, first of all,
early childhood exposure is key
because those neuronal connections that get made
in early childhood with the living world,
I had John Young, who's an amazing nature mentor,
come on my podcast, and he's done a lot of work
with the eight shields method around nature connection
and mentorship.
He trained with the Sand Bush men,
and with a host of other elders,
and he says, you know, there's primary connections
that get made with the living world in early childhood
that is very hard to replicate,
and you can't skip that step.
And so part of the work that is upon us today
is to recreate some of those experiences for adults
because it can happen, it can happen.
And that kind of leads me to the second part
of your question, which is, you know,
E.O. Wilson, amazing biologist, ecologist, philosopher,
speaks to a thing called biophilia,
which is also part of our core sort of investment thesis
if you will, ground effect.
And you're checking if it's on your bookshelf.
It's here somewhere close.
You'd better have some, E.O. Wilson.
Oh, I have all of his books,
but I actually have biophilia and it's close by,
but not on this shelf.
So there's the answer to your question.
The innate love of life or of nature,
or you know, put in your ecological word
that human beings have,
we are physiologically hardwired to connect the living world
because first of all, for thousands of years
and going back through, you know, genetic history
until when we were, you know, emerging from the ocean,
our bodies are hardwired to sense the land,
read the land, connect, listen and feel.
And when we do that, our bodies and souls drink from that.
And so for me, it's, you know, people always ask me,
well, how do you get so connected to nature?
Why do you care about this?
My answer is always that potential
is exactly the same in you than it is in me.
I just have been fortunate enough
and deliberate enough to cultivate it.
So I think it's innate in every single human,
which is why despite all of the things
that we're seeing around us today,
I have great excitement about the future
and our ability to restore and reconnect.
But maybe we can get to that after.
I do want to get to the practical part
of the biodiversity question
because I think for rationally oriented listeners,
it's also, there are some important myths,
I think, that are to be dispelled
about the differences between biodiversity and climate.
And so now we're moving out of the terrain
of sort of psychology and soul and care
and all these things and into some of the practicalities.
Can I ask one more question about the psychology and the care?
Many questions.
Because if I don't, I'll forget it later.
Many, many, many.
The statistics for biodiversity as you and I
are acutely aware have been quite disheartening
for a long time and accelerating.
And I used to be obsessed with shows
like Planet Earth and the BBC and nature documentaries.
And I can't watch them anymore.
Even as beautiful as they are,
it's a little painful for me.
So my question for you is,
yes, we are all have the potential to care
and love nature the way you said.
And I think that is a huge opportunity
for a cultural awakening.
But those of us in the scout team
that have the empathy and the love
and the diligence, as you said earlier,
it can become too painful at times.
How do you manage that dichotomy?
And do you think it's true that those who are most empathic
and feel what's happening to nature are doing great work,
but they have the risk of being overwhelmed
and saddened and burned out?
There's many ways to approach that answer.
Yes, and not just those who work in nature,
but those who work in all of the meta-poly crisis space.
There's incredible burnout.
And I think one of the most important initiatives
or series of initiatives that I'm seeing
are how those who are on the front lines of this movement
or the back lines doing the brunt work of, you know,
the brackets in COP or whatever it may be.
I'm referring to the brackets
when you're trying to fill out those, you know,
those documents in the main halls.
The ability to know how to self-care and regenerate
and sort of internal renewal in order to go out
and do this work is key.
And so we can speak about this later,
but one of the areas that we're looking into,
into supporting financially is all around
climate grief, anxiety and care.
And I did a podcast episode with Britt Ray on this as well.
But personally, Rebecca Solnit wrote
this amazing little book called Hope in the Dark.
And in that, her definition of hope is the closest,
the word hope always kind of sat strangely with me.
Her definition of hope is the closest
that I've gotten to understanding the way that I relate
and I'm able to sort of greet the world with, you know,
beauty and expectation of something better.
Hope is expectation of a different outcome
without specifying what it needs to be.
And it's hope in the unknown and all the possibilities
in quote unquote, the emergence.
Like she writes in the book, you know,
inside of the word emergency is the word emergence.
And so it's this notion that, I mean, like Nate,
how many times have you picked up a pamphlet or a book
or some shred of information sort of fluttering across time
that landed on your lap or you saw it on a billboard
and I don't know, Kansas or something.
And something that someone wrote or did or spoke or sang
at some point in time moved you,
possibly hundreds of years later.
And so in a way, I mean, she has this amazing quote.
I pulled out some of my quotes for this podcast
because I love, love quotes,
but she has this amazing phrase, right?
Where she says, like, change can come upon us
like drops of soft water that wear away stone
or an earthquake breaking centuries of tension, right?
And so in a way, change can happen slowly or suddenly
or unpredictably.
And when you look at all of the changes
that have happened in our lifetimes
in the last hundred years, incredible things.
So first of all, to all those who are despairing,
I'd say, yes, but we have no clue what's coming.
We have no clue what these thousand points of light will bring.
And there are thousands, millions of points of light.
And quickly, the second thing I would say is
the grief, the fear, the pain, the anger,
it's so normal and also we have to feel it.
Because if we numb that,
if we can't watch the planet Earth episode anymore
because it hurts us,
then we're going to numb our capacity
to rile up all the positive emotions,
all the fiery emotions that have us actually,
you know, do whatever ours is to do, right?
Whether that's activism or journalism
or reforming the financial system.
So the depth of our pain and the depth of our grief
out of that arises a broken heart that will heal
and help to like do whatever it can in the world.
And so actually psychic numbing and dissonance and denial
and all of this, all of these sort of counterintuitive
psychological processes keep us further away
from the actions that the world needs.
Which gets us back to the need for healing
and being kind to yourself and marathon, not a sprint
and some of the other things that you're involved in.
Yeah, while you were speaking and using Rebecca's quotes,
it reminded me that word combinations some other,
from some other human you will never meet.
Yes.
And visual combinations have the ability to create magic,
which is something that's unexpected.
You can just with combining certain words, influence
and other person's mood and their actions.
It's quite something.
It's one of our superpowers as a species.
Yeah, absolutely.
I mean, another one of my great mentors,
I've never met her, but has been Joanna Macy.
And so I would encourage anyone, you know,
badass, elder, Buddhist monk, activist.
She created a whole work of body of work
that's called the work that reconnects
and it's about facilitated group processes
directly pertaining to your question
on what do we do in order to feel it all
in order to be able to act.
And I think that the one thing that is so insidious
and perverse about our current society
is individuality in a way and isolation.
So if you're alone watching Planet Earth and weeping,
yeah, that's kind of hard
and maybe you have the psychological tools for that.
But if you host a screening with 10 of your best friends
and you know you're all a bit sensitive
and you feel safe to weep together,
like collective in the collective is when healing happens.
Individually it happens as well, but it's much harder.
And so I think that what I would love to see
and what probably will happen as this crisis deepens
and also expands in ways we can't predict positively
will be collective places of grief and ritual and mourning,
which is a form of activism, which is a form of hope.
But so I would encourage people, you know,
there's tons of resources out there
and I've got a bunch on my, you know,
on different websites and so do you.
Like Traynup and Khalid Gibran, an amazing mystic,
wrote, the deeper that sorrow carves into your cup,
the more you can fill it with joy.
So that has been my experience.
Like I'm super gooey and so I will like break down
and cry and feel it, but the next minute I wake up
and I look outside and there's a blade of grass
and I'm like, holy, like we live in a world
where a blade of grass exists.
Like how spectacular is that?
Yeah, I hear you.
And sometimes I think that energy surplus
and the trajectory that we've followed,
that material wealth has acted like an accordion
to move us towards an individual experience of the world
as opposed to a collective one.
And I do long for a return.
Just the question is, what are the externalities
of that return gonna be?
But beautifully said, please continue where I interrupted you
on the practical aspects of biodiversity.
Yeah, no, no, I think it was a very important sort of,
it's not even a tangent.
Yeah, Nate, it's about the development elasticity,
I think for that pain and how we bounce back
and feel and bounce and feel.
Practically, and I see this a lot
because of my work with the lab.
And you read this phrase,
which is kind of even incorrectly written,
which is corporations, governments
are just wrapping their head around climate
and now they have to do biodiversity, how do we do this?
And so there's been this massive ontological,
physiological error in the middle of the climate
or carbon movement, if you will,
that has negated the role of biodiversity
and nature at large, let's say.
They are one and the same.
So first of all, our economy is 100% dependent on nature,
not 17, not 60, not, there's nothing,
nothing that enables you and I to be here right now
if it weren't for nature.
Food, water, clothes, air, like you name it.
So 100% of the economy is dependent on nature
and yet they've been approached as siloed problems, right?
And maybe I can give like two, three examples
of the ways that biological and life processes
create the climate and how these feedback loops happen.
First of all, maybe some of your listeners know this,
but one out of every two breaths that we take
comes from the ocean, right?
It comes from plankton, phytoplankton specifically.
So every second breath is created by these organisms
that are, by the way, dying out
because we're packaging them up for omega-3s
and it's crazy, but they also seed cloud formation.
So about 60% of the clouds above
in the southern oceans around the Antarctic
are seeded by plankton because when they breathe,
they create little molecules as molecules go up into the air
and they seed clouds.
So very practically, these plankton are seeding the clouds
and seeding the climate.
Another example is the concept of keystone species,
which I know that you know,
but these are essentially key creatures
inside of ecosystems that activate a whole series
of other ecological processes.
So when you think of all of the animals
that move and migrate through the earth,
you have the wildebeest across the Serengeti, right?
And they're churning up soils and spreading seeds
and making niches for other animals to live
and by pooping they're bringing carbon back down
to the soils, but they're moving across the land
in these like massive vein-like corridors
called wildlife corridors.
And you must see them as if they were cells
inside of your body moving through veins.
It's the same with the salmon, right?
The salmon that take their annual migrations
and looking out the window like from deep out in the ocean,
they collect all of the nutrients
and they come back up, nitrogen phosphates
and they come back up and they swim up river
and they die hundreds of miles from the deep ocean
where they initially spawned.
But those massive migrations,
like movements of all these fish
are literally feeding the forest.
So as all these creatures move,
they're feeding the trees, they're feeding the carbon,
they're cycling these ecological processes
and they are part and parcel of the carbon cycle.
And so a paper came out a few months ago
that maybe you can link in your show notes
that show that the reintroduction
of a lot of these keystone species
like the muscox and the bison, the wolf, certain fish
can detonate huge cascades of carbon
capturing inside of ecosystems.
So salmon and wildebeest are keystone species.
So not only is biodiversity important in its own right
as a separate issue than climate change,
but biodiversity is part and parcel of climate change
because of the sequestration and the ecosystem services.
What happens if we start to lose
a lot of keystone species?
I think the easiest way of bringing this home
is that the earth is like your body.
Well, the earth really is your body,
but and if you look at all of the continents, like organs,
the creatures are the connectivity between them,
the all of the kind of connectivity, right?
The amino acids, the blood cells or whatever you name it.
And so these creatures are keeping your stability
in check through feedback loops.
So if these species disappear,
it would be as if you're cutting off vital connectivity
between your different parts of your body.
So therefore your body goes out of whack.
So you may get invasive species coming in,
you get disturbances, right?
Ecological disturbances for, yeah.
Keeping with your analogy of the earth as a body,
what are the, dare I ask what the implications are
that we've lost 70% of the populations
of animals, birds, fish, reptiles and insects
since I've been on the planet?
The way that this functionality gets lost is very quiet
until it's very hard for ecosystems to recover.
So in climate science,
there's a concept of tipping points, right?
These are states in which the,
an ecosystem or region will just enter into a new state
if enough changes happen to it.
So you think of the melting of the ice sheets
or the Amazon becoming a dry land savanna.
The absence of these key cyclers of life,
let alone for all of their other values
that I spoke about earlier,
means that nature's, yeah, hanging by a thread.
However, rewilding is a movement that I am a part of
and have supported and it is astounding
how quickly life bounces back.
I mean, you bring back beavers to an ecosystem
and within a few months, right?
The pools are back.
I have Derek Gao came on my podcast,
he's an amazing kind of renegade rewilder from the UK
and he speaks about the lights come back on
and everything that can sliver, fly or swim
just comes back to those little ponds.
And I think that we have friends who are reintroducing
beavers and rivers sort of slightly illicitly
because they were just like, we just need to get
the beavers back.
The reintroduction, especially of these keystone species,
and another paper came out last year, this year, well, 2023,
showing that there are way more keystone species
than we even knew, right?
And so the reintroduction of them,
it is astounding how quickly nature bounces back.
So yes, we have lost a lot and we need to get life
through this bottleneck right now,
which is why we need to conserve and protect
many of these last wild places
and create the connectivity between them
by allowing creatures the space to move.
How successful or growing or is there a lot of momentum
behind the rewilding movement?
Can you give some other examples other than the beavers?
I know that E.L. Wilson championed the idea of half-earth,
where humans live on half and wild creatures
are undisturbed on the other half.
And it's kind of a good overton window
to get us going in that direction.
And there's 30 by 30 initiatives and stuff.
But can you unpack rewilding as a cultural theme
a little bit more?
If the word culture was important there,
it can be a culturally contested word as well.
In the UK, for example,
there's a lot of tension around the word rewilding.
A slightly perverse phenomenon has begun happening
where rich landowners purchase large tracts of land
to rewild them.
But it's not a sort of comments-based,
democratically land redistribution kind of thing.
So I think like with carbon markets
or even biodiversity markets that are coming,
and we can talk about that.
We need to be very careful.
But there's a few groups that do this amazingly.
So I'd encourage anyone to check out the world
of rewilding Europe, the work of rewilding Europe.
It can be everything from restoring crayfish
to the apennines in the Italian Alps
so that all of those streams and rivers
get back their functionality to bison.
So bison are being reintroduced.
I was visiting some rewilding projects in Romania.
And the bison, it's like the wildebeest,
they turn up the soils, they capture the carbon,
they clear out the undergrowth, more trees can come in.
And actually, in the US where you're based,
the wildebeest and the First Nations
had this very symbiotic relationship
where they would migrate with the wildebeest.
And the wildebeest would clear the land
and they would, you know, plan in their ways.
I think.
Sorry, buffalo bison, exactly, thank you.
Wolves, you've got the famous example, obviously,
of the reintroduction of wolves in Yellowstone.
So these are all sort of examples of rewilding.
The separate, I think that rewilding in today's world
has to come with a relationship
to human biocultural economy.
I think some of the misinterpretations
of the half earth could be conservation, you know, 1.0,
which was fortress conservation,
which was kicking native people off their land
to create these enclaves where only nature thrives.
It would be ideal if we could understand
how to create these corridors.
And there's lots of tools for coexistence
between humans and the reintroduction
of some of these creatures
because they don't kill a lot of livestock,
but it takes, you know, one sheep being killed
for fairly enough for farmers to be completely against.
In Switzerland, we're about to cull
quite a big portion of our wolf population,
which is heartbreaking because of attacks on farm animals.
But the attacks aren't so marked.
But the question is not how do we sequester half the earth
for wild creatures when we take the other half ourselves?
It's how do we learn to coexist and share our land
with those who came before and are our kin
and our ancestors?
And obviously a lot of native communities
or IPLCs have that knowledge.
But it's about learning to coexist
with more of that wild in our doorstep.
I have a couple of follow-ups to that.
One is a story that recently happened to me.
Like you, I love megafauna
and all the different 6,000 mammals species on the planet,
particularly African megafauna like lions
and leopards and elephants.
And you read stories where messiah warriors
have to kill a lion for some ritual
or they're protecting their village.
And so they have to kill one of these beautiful animals.
And you get really upset about that.
Like why would they do that?
And yet a few months ago,
a raccoon came in my barn and killed three of my chickens.
And I was like, oh, dang it, I can't have that happen.
Now I didn't kill it.
I captured it and drove it like seven miles away
and let it go in some forest.
But what is the difference between me and this raccoon
and that raccoons are abundant here
versus someone in another part of the world
that has animals that we might deem
as really important keystone species for our planet?
You know, it's this coexistence
and the boundaries of your moral compass
and your daily life, you know?
Do you have any thoughts on that?
Totally.
There's a lot of kind of interesting initiatives emerging
in terms of how we can use technology
or different tools to make those boundaries
more productive, let's say.
So for example, if you're thinking of Africa,
which is why I thought of it,
African elephants can often charge into towns, villages
or you know, farmer's plots.
And it's really an issue.
Africans hate bees, the elephants,
African elephants hate bees, right?
And so initially some of the communities
would put beehives surrounding the fields
so the elephants would just stay away.
But it's been shown that even just the sounds of the bees
drive away the elephants.
So now there's a sort of bioacoustic approach
where people are placing the sounds of bees
to keep the elephants away.
You can tag the creatures and have, you know,
alarm signals for when they're coming in
or you know, warning signals.
So I think that there's ways that we can be intelligent
about that coexistence.
On a psychological level,
I think the separation that keeps us from,
I think it's perfectly sane that you get angry
when that raccoon kills all of your chickens, right?
Like, and I don't know what ancestors would have done
in some idealized 2000 year history.
Like maybe it would have been exactly the same thing.
But there's something about coexistence here
which strikes me as well when it comes to
how many humans will be migrating
and how we are going to have to let in
our, you know, our human kin
that may appear so fundamentally different to us
but who essentially also need home and place to live in.
So it's a deeper question on how we begin to work
on human beings' internal relationships
to duality or otherness.
And I would believe that the same skills we cultivate
on a human level may transpire
into how it relates to other creatures
if we're deliberate enough about it.
So on the emergence and hope rabbit hole,
if it were possible to tap into the love for nature
that you think resides in all or most humans,
we still are in an economic system
that's based on profits, tether to energy,
tether to extraction.
And so that's the cultural goal.
But I'm just wondering if there could be,
you can pay 5% of your taxes in this currency or in this thing.
And that thing you only get by doing rewilding
or regenerative activities in the area where you live.
Could something like that happen from the ground up
if there is the political change of consciousness
in lots of people?
Do you think is the question the feasibility
of putting in a tax like that
or that some kind of tax like that
would change people's minds?
Well, I guess I'm looking for a way
to link the love for nature
and the powerlessness we feel in our current economic system
to exhibit our love for nature.
And this way is linking the incentives
with the behavior a little bit.
Michael Sandel, a Harvard professor wrote this book,
The Moral Limits to Markets.
And you're not, I may have you've read it and...
Heard of it, not read it.
It's good read, I recommend it.
He speaks about some of the dangers
of replacing intrinsic values with extrinsic motives.
So specifically, I've been swimming in this
because I've been concerned about the monetization of nature
or which is happening anyway,
but how do we design that more intelligently?
Time and time again, it's been shown
that if you replace a civic desire to do something,
if you replace a civic desire to do something
that's coming out of collective restraint
or some sense of duty to the common good
with an extrinsic motive, namely money,
the initial intrinsic or moral reasons
for doing that erode.
So for example, a town in Switzerland
was asked if they would accept to be a nuclear,
I won't call it waste site,
but if they could bury nuclear waste in it.
And initially something like 60% of the town said,
yes, okay, we'll do it.
And then the government said,
well, let's try and get that a little bit higher
as a percentage.
And so we'll offer you also a financial reward
on top of that.
And it's astounding the amount of people who consented
actually dropped half because you replace
the intrinsic good civil care with this sort of carrot,
if you will.
So that's a microcosm of our global situation in ways,
yes?
Well, I think relating it to,
if you heal nature and here's some money needs to happen,
this is the dilemma we're in.
Like we have a very, very narrow window
to get life through this bottleneck.
And if we don't create financial mechanisms right now
to protect and restore nature inside of this car
and economy, then we'll be losing a lot
of our life support system, right?
And all of the other things I stated earlier.
But if we only do that,
and if we don't think about the more fundamental
psychological relationships we have to nature
and also healing that divide,
I'd be very concerned about the deeper human,
humanness, if you will.
So I think that putting in a tax like the one you described,
people may accept it or they may resent it
because it wasn't chosen by them.
And it's not arising out of some deeper
intrinsic incentive.
Well, it wouldn't be taxing people.
It would be relieving tax
if you did these pro-regenerative, pro-rewilding things.
So it would almost be like a subsidy.
I think we should do an experiment on it.
There's also experiments being done
on universal conservation income.
So what happens when you give communities just UCI
to look after ecosystems?
And what does that do to values?
I think mapping the values inside of pilot schemes like that
would be very meaningful work for someone to try and do.
Okay, so someone listening, start that up, keep me posted.
But yeah, this gets at one of the core arguments
within the field of ecological economics.
There's a lot of people within that field
that want to put prices on ecosystem services
and include those in the market.
And others are like, those things are priceless.
And once you monetize them and put a dollar marker on them,
it changes their value to us as human beings
and they become part of the economic extractive system
granted with probably more accurate prices,
but their prices nonetheless.
So is this kind of what you're getting at?
Being the natural world and the financial world,
are they compatible at all?
I think the question is less, are they compatible?
Because with billions of humans on the planet,
we need some kind of system of value in exchange,
but it's under what conditions
or what changes to the financial system,
do they become compatible?
Like what are some of the tennis that need to be upheld?
And I was curious about a few weeks ago
that I didn't know the etymology of finance.
Have you looked that up recently?
The root of the word finance.
No, the root of the word, I don't know.
Yeah, right, it's interesting.
It's the repayment of a debt, if you will.
It's having an obligation to something or a restitution.
Isn't that so interesting?
And so, yeah.
Well, so the relationship of humans
to the entire natural world of planet Earth
is finance in a way,
because we have an enormous debt to nature.
Exactly.
And so for me, yeah.
We're using debt to extract more
and accelerate the destruction of nature.
So the question is,
I think the Capital Institute
wrote this paper, Regenerative Finance,
but it's more, how do we design finance
to pay that debt back more intelligently?
And I think that we must think
in terms of time horizons here.
So in the short term,
there are very meaningful schemes
that we can develop and design
that I think are important for ecological
and social regeneration.
And it's more about how those things are structured.
So for example, what do we do about the commons, right?
Like finance has to answer the question
of these ungoverned vast expanses of landscapes
and how we incentivize their protection
considering that all harm can be externalized into them.
That must be answered.
We must answer what we can do
about land privatization and ownership,
because if ecological economics or let's say,
I don't know, impact investment goes in
and you can start spending a lot of money
off doing things with land, with biodiversity and otherwise,
how do we make sure that we naturalize
in a way those gains is the way that I think about it,
which is it's not just those landowners,
those real estate funds or real asset funds benefiting
from the income from that carbon or biodiversity,
but it's cycled back into nature and communities
in the same way that nature would have it.
So I think these are all sort of design constraints
that have to do with land tenure or land ownership.
Biodiversity credits is a huge conversation
that we're in the middle of
because we're creating this measurement layer
for biodiversity.
And in terms of biocredits, the question there is,
should we enable offsets at all?
Well, offsets have existed for 20, 30 years.
What would a biodiversity credit offset?
Well, what physically would that be?
Can you give an example?
Yeah, for sure.
I mean, there's a whole taxonomy of them.
So there's about six different categories
that a group that we work with Nature Finance has outlined.
I can send you that paper later.
An offset can be everything from,
most offsets are hyper localized.
So you're a developer, you need to raise down a forest
or you want to raise down a forest
to build a shopping mall or an apartment building.
Some ecological value will be lost there.
And so you must recreate that ecosystem elsewhere,
replant trees somewhere else.
That's a biodiversity offset.
Or then you have biodiversity certificates,
which are essentially,
I'm Nestlé and upstream in my value chain.
I've replanted some trees
or done some watershed restoration.
And there's different ways now via MRV,
which is monitoring reporting verification.
So it's a combination of ground truth,
sort of sampling and satellites, remote sensing.
You can show that you've committed some good deed
in restoring that ecosystem.
And you can essentially have a biodiversity credit, right?
Showing, I have done a good deed.
Now that can just remain there.
It's omitted, but it's never sold or traded.
And in a way, it's a way of showing your investors
or stakeholders, we're assuring ourselves
and we're assuring the long-term viability of this business.
It's not just a do good action, that's the point.
It's like protecting nature
means you're ensuring the viability of your business
in the longterm because you're supporting
the very fundamental assets
that your entire business depends upon.
A big question right now is whether biodiversity credits
should be allowed to be traded,
whether you should have secondary markets or derivatives
and all of these financial tools on top of that.
The argument for that says that for markets
to generate enough money, they need to be liquid, right?
And so the tradability, let's say we plant 100 trees
in the Amazon and that generates, I don't know,
100 bio credits.
And let's say you have a profit share, revenue share
with that local community, whereby they get 80%
of any future sales of a credit,
which doesn't happen right now in some of the carbon markets.
So it's sort of benefit sharing, if you will.
If you can trade that once,
that community gets 80% of the value once, right?
And then the developers get the other 10 or 20%,
let's say for the work that they did
in developing and monitoring and reporting.
If that credit can be traded 10 times,
they'd get 10x money back.
And so you can see why it's appealing.
Which they would then go spend at Home Depot
and Walmart and other places on things
requiring carbon and extraction.
It's a good question, but you saw the results coming back
from that UBI experiment, right?
That the world's largest UBI experiment
where actually people don't always spend
on consumption necessarily,
but more money doesn't always mean better for the planet.
Granted.
So that's kind of the question of bio-credits.
I have an article that you could link to,
which is called selling nature in order to save it.
And in that, I outline a lot of super interesting arguments
for and against this financialization of nature and...
I have a couple of questions.
First of all, I'm not a fan of the carbon trading schemes
because I think they're mostly schemes,
but at least carbon is kind of standard.
But I would think biodiversity
would have a biodiversity quality asterisk
on just about everything.
Because if you're gonna develop a shopping center
in Ecuador by the Galapagos,
and then buy some credits to buy some farmland in Kansas
and put some trees there,
that's a little bit different of a biodiversity quality, yes?
Absolutely.
And so in the conversation of offsets,
there's a few working groups right now
on this biocredit conversation
that are sincerely trying to learn from the mistakes
we've done in carbon markets,
and saying that biodiversity can't be fungible
in that way in an offset market
across vastly different eco-regions.
But there are other dangers.
There are four main dangers,
and we can quickly, quickly speak about them.
But one is ecological.
When you create these ecosystem service markets,
the way that they're structured
often incentivize the reproduction
of very strange and artificial ecosystems
that nature wouldn't have.
So if you look at stream mitigation banking,
which the US did,
which is the oldest ecosystem service markets,
they prioritized rivers that didn't stray,
that didn't erode.
And the sort of, you know,
the proof of a good river restoration project
was that it didn't erode,
which is ridiculous because rivers move.
So the carbon tunnel vision
or the optimization of any one ecological variable,
for example, number of species
or proximity to a protected area,
means that you will begin to incentivize
the overproduction of that one thing.
So we could get monocultures
of specific types of biodiversity,
which is happening now,
which is why the tool that we're building
at the Crowther Lab is attempting,
and really will be the world's most holistic
measure of biodiversity,
because we're taking in all the possible variables
across genetic species and ecosystem level diversity
to try and negate as much as we can
that over-optimization for one variable
of what we call nature.
So those are the ecological risks of these markets.
One thing that keeps popping up in my mind is
a lot of this is happening fast
and people are becoming aware
and working on these projects on rewilding
and regenerative agriculture and bio-credits, et cetera,
except it's just at the margin of this juggernaut
of the Star Trek Borg of an economic system
that is still optimizing extraction and profits
and all that, the super organism.
And if those could be linked somehow,
like in New York State,
they're outlawing propane stoves
because propane comes from fossil fuels
and it's bad for climate.
The COP 28, they're trying to phase out fossil fuels
without the rest of the world agreeing that that's necessary.
It's like a conversation within its own little tribe
and echo chamber,
and yet the value system of 80% of humans
having screensavers of nature,
if there is a way to link those
so that it's a much more agreed upon thing,
which is why I think your work is so essential on this stuff,
which is unpacking humans' connection to nature
as a value system,
the consciousness of what you care about in your life.
Somehow that needs to be integrated with our incentives
and I don't know how to do it,
but I think it would be much more scalable
if people like you
and working on these efforts for biodiversity
if that was acknowledged as one of our cultural goals.
I'd say that it's less fringe and mainstream
than what it might appear.
For example, this year we saw the launch of the TNFD,
the Task Force for Nature-Related Financial Disclosures.
This was huge.
It followed the TCFD,
a very valiant effort of hundreds of people
trying to calculate in impacts, risks, and dependencies
of value chains on nature, so corporations.
It's very likely that most global companies
will have to disclose their impacts and risks
and dependencies on nature in the coming years.
So these are huge shifts within the financial industry,
which is why this was the cop
with the most amount of financiers, right?
And the biodiversity cop that was in Montreal last year,
the same.
There's a lot of initiatives underway right now
to reprice sovereign debt, for example,
linked to nature, KPIs, key performance indicators.
Central banks.
There's a whole greening the financial system movement
where central banks are looking at,
okay, how do we calculate the true cost?
And regenerative agriculture was niche maybe a few years ago,
but I'd say now where we saw what was happening
in this latest cop, which was the first cop
where food was really hugely present.
When the hundred and X, what was it?
60 countries signing up to globally reform the food system.
So I'd say that things like rewilding
are still a bit niche, but fundamentally,
calculating in the costs and the impacts
of this massive debt that we've incurred
on the natural world and understanding that
if we don't do that,
the whole house of cars comes tumbling down.
That is exponentially coming into awareness.
And I think that all of the natural disasters we're seeing
and people forcibly having to leave their homes,
it's having us wake up.
So luckily it's not niche
and I'm surrounded by so many initiatives
that I can't even count them.
That's good to hear.
So you also are an ESG investor
or in that sphere of environment sustainability governance.
Can you unpack a little bit about your work in that field?
Sure, yeah.
I think ESG is sort of a,
it can be a box-ticking exercise I think we've seen.
What we do with ground effects
is that we invest with a worldview and a philosophy,
which is this indivisibility that we have with nature.
It's fundamentally saying if I was this ecosystem
or this species, what do I value?
What does nature value?
What are all of the voices that we're not bringing
to the table from the other kingdoms,
let's say, of life?
And so we're an animist investment vehicle
and for those who haven't come across the term animism,
if you think of an ecology as like a web of relationships,
animism is the felt sense of those relationships.
It's the sense that the world is alive
that we're embedded in this web of relationality
and that there are many other beings out there
who are their own persons
and only some of them are human.
And they are a genetic kin, they are our relatives
and they have just as much right to be here as we do.
So a lot of ESG or even impact investing,
I see a sort of what can nature do for us
and for the human economy and how can we keep thriving?
And that's just not how I feel the world.
The way I feel the world is how can I support the thriving
and the regeneration of these other beings?
And sometimes they value things
that I don't necessarily value
or that the economy doesn't value
but that are fundamental to the underpinnings of life, right?
Maybe a little net, a little tiny fly
is serving a critical purpose
that I can't quantify or understand
but just because it doesn't make it into my calculation
doesn't mean it's meaningful.
And so very practically,
we're using financial capital, money,
to try and turn it into something that nature values.
And we do that in a few different categories.
So we fund earth's living processes.
So agriculture, food, soils,
rewilding, biodiversity initiatives,
large landscape restoration, preservation,
core scientific research
that really illuminates the awe and the wonder
and this kind of ecological backbone of all life.
So we've given some funding, for example, to the fungi,
the mushrooms and mycelium
that support everything we see above ground.
We support kind of guy and voices, if you will,
of those who speak on behalf of nature.
So advocacy and journalism, activists,
we've supported the rights of nature
which is giving other entities in the living world
legal personhood inside of the human system.
It's incomplete because who are we to grant them
our personhood in our legal system
but it's still a bit of a hack.
It's like ecocide, it's like let's use
the current legal tools that we've got
in order to encourage more of this life to thrive.
And one of the latest categories
that we're looking into for this next year
is the development of human inner consciousness or wisdom.
So the inner growth of human beings
and how do we embed a much more wise operating system
inside of our human systems?
It's so impressive.
I am such a fan of your ethos and your work
and I'm realizing that we have not even got
to half of the topics I wanted to cover
and we're an hour in.
So we might come back to the philanthropy and ESG investing
but I wanna talk about you have a podcast.
It's called Life Worlds, which you started
and from the main page of your website,
the podcast series that explores
how to orient your life around nature.
We discover the mindset, skills and actions
that are required to partner wisely with other forms of life
and engage in acts of brilliant restoration.
What inspired you to do this
and can you talk about your experience?
It's always funny to hear something
you've written read out to you.
I guess, two main reasons.
The first is through this work,
I was meeting such amazing characters,
probably a little bit like you.
And it was like, I need more people to know about their work
and have their voices and their initiatives
and what they're doing in the world, right?
And so initially, the podcast was I wanted to give a platform
to all of these incredible actors
that are really, really pioneering different approaches
at this moment in time.
But the reason why it shows Life Worlds
and the focus I give to all of the episodes
is that our culture is steeped in duality, right?
In this I, them, me, you know, this othering, if you will.
And as I mentioned earlier,
my frustration with a lot of the climate and nature movement
is it's still for humans, you know,
for human's sake on our terms.
And I believe and it's pretty certain
that the more that we think like ecosystems
and take their interests in mind
when we rewild, restore, do agriculture, do law, do finance,
the more intelligent the intervention is,
but also the more that we transform.
And so at the core of the podcast
is this question on the human separation of nature.
And so with all of my guests,
they're not just exceptionally adept in their fields,
but they are all cultivating a different worldview
and relationship around nature
where there's a different relationality,
the integration of constituencies of different voices.
And in a way, Michael Abelman, who's an amazing farmer
who came on the front of the first episodes,
says, you know, how do we make our way into the slipstream
of the biological activity of all life
and see ourselves as part of that system?
And so what I ask with Life Worlds
is how people cultivate their own internal worldviews
and skills and being able to embody
the perspectives of ecosystems,
both because at least we're more intelligent
in intervention and secondly,
because that's one of the psychological
and spiritual transformations
that's really needed right now.
Do you, in your experience, there's Mother Earth
and we're talking about Gaia and all the other species
and the ecologies, have you found that women
and the feminine side of humanity
is more in touch with that?
Or is it 50-50 or do you notice anything
along those lines?
I think the feminine in each of us
is just waiting to be expressed,
no matter what body or whatever you find yourself in.
There is a feminine principle,
which is more nurturing and life-giving and tender
and in touch naturally.
Feminine leadership is something I exalt
and only want to see more of in the world.
And I would love that all of those
who are more in their masculinity
to also have the permission to be that
in a way it's like indigeneity,
like we are all native to this planet.
And so, yes, more feminine in the world
but more feminine in all of us.
And in terms of the podcast,
the guests are completely split along those lines
because yeah, it's more about cultivating
a deep sensory skill set and acuities and perceptions
than necessarily the bodies that we're in.
So one of the points of your podcast
is it's important to view the world
through a non-human lens.
And you and I, when we observe what's going on in the world
and the ecosystems and the impacts, we do that.
But do you ever actually go so far
as to empathize and imagine some creature in nature
you're looking at and imagine what it must be like
to be a spider or a gopher or a squirrel
or orangutan or a leopard or whatever you're seeing?
Do you go that far and try to imagine
what life would be like living as such a creature?
Come to one of my dance parties.
No.
I think that metamorphosis is a very archetypal
and guttural inclination of human beings.
And so what I mean by that is throughout time
our ancestors developed ways through ritual,
ceremony, dance, song, beat, whatever you name it
to embody the life worlds of other beings.
I think it is fundamentally part of human culture.
I mean, here in Mexico, I was at a,
in this crazy room the other day
with about like 2,000 tribal mass
from across the country, dancing masks.
And some were human, some were non-human,
some you couldn't figure out what they were.
But our ability to shape shift
and take the form of other beings,
I think has been culturally present
in most continents of the world.
So do I personally do it?
There are nature reconnection exercises
that can train you in physically embodying
the different acuities of another being.
And it's quite interesting when you playfully
give yourself over to that process and you don't,
you're not gonna do it very seriously sitting there.
I'm going to become a wolf.
But like, what would it be?
And it's a fascinating process.
And we've done it with people you wouldn't expect, right?
Like very A type, C suite executives,
but everyone has their own space.
And we can tap into something very deep
and very ancient if we do this.
In terms of an investment thesis quickly,
because it's part of some part of ground effect.
It's like a permaculturist,
where they say, you know,
spend 12 months observing the land
before we make an intervention.
I think that if you're trying to restore an ecosystem
or create an intervention in any kind of nature-based context,
imagining what it's like for that ecosystem to be
in the same way that if you're trying to design
an intervention for a human system, right?
Whether it's, you know, shopkeepers or farmers,
what is their life like?
Doesn't mean you have to like,
wear their clothes and become them,
but a sincere curiosity is critical, I think, in this work.
I agree with that.
So do you think before organized religions
way back in the day, we were all animists?
That that was just kind of the way things were?
Many people, a lot smarter than me on this topic,
have said yes.
Animists just being, you know,
we understood that there were energies and rivers and rocks
and we existed within these cycles and life processes
that also transcended our own planet, right?
But these cosmological cycles of time,
we've really lost that cyclicality.
And for me, animus is also systems thinking.
It's like, things lead to other things,
they're entangled, there's emergence, there's chaos,
you know, it's all of the kind of systems one-on-one.
And because we were so activated-
So animus would be the world philosophy
most linked to systems ecology?
Oof, I would have to think about that one.
It's a big statement.
Okay, keep going, sorry you're interrupting.
No, I think it's a good question.
Let's entertain that for a sec.
It's tricky, I think because animism permeates
a lot of world philosophies,
like I've practiced Buddhism for quite a few years
and in a way animism is almost like a practice.
It's a worldview of understanding that the world is alive,
as I said earlier, and that things are entangled
and that we can have relationships with them, you know?
You, I know from our conversations,
have relationships with your animals, right?
That may seem silly, but it's true.
They're my family.
They're your family.
Only about half of my best friends are humans.
Exactly, I love that line.
And so is that animist or is that Buddhist
or is that humaning or is that being an earthling?
You know, the boundaries aren't so clear,
but being in our bodies and having sensory acuity
is to sense and feel the world
is a fundamental part of systems thinking, right?
Because you have to adapt.
You have to watch how things move.
And if we're cut off from that,
from all of that sensory intelligence,
we don't have access to a deeper form of knowledge.
So that's the way I would answer the question.
So here's a bit of an aside,
but given the limits to growth and the peak oil
and the four horsemen and the other things
that I talk about, I think we're approaching
a cultural transition, both in our economies
and in our relationships, everything,
the great simplification.
I predict that as things get more chaotic
and uncomfortable relative to the past,
that humans penchant for religiosity
and for group cohesion around a purpose and a story
that's larger than ourselves will become widespread.
And I think there will be a lot of new religions
that pop up from some charismatic person with a story.
Many of them will be untethered from reality.
I think the animus story of we are on this spaceship earth
hurtling through a lonely, dark, lifeless universe,
this blue-green planet is special.
And the species that we share it with are precious.
And this is what I ascribe my meaning to and my purpose.
I think that will be one of the religions
of coming decades.
The question is, will it be just a tiny thing
on the far fringe or will it be serious and meaningful
and maybe shifts our entire culture?
I don't know.
Any thoughts on that?
Yeah, it's a very good question or thought.
I think the answer to it will be in relationship
to how we're able to work on some of the things
you spoke about earlier in the podcast
relating to grief and despair and tribalism.
As the crisis upon us will lead to massive displacement
and the breakdown of fundamental ecological systems
food, et cetera, we could tip the other way
and become deeply tribal and sectarian.
That is a very possible outcome,
which is why I think that supporting and working
on the cultivation of much better human psychological tools
and human wisdom and all of this inner work
that some people think is woo, but no, it's just leadership.
It's like we need people to be wise leaders in this time
if we're able to, in a way, you know,
E.L. Wilson, again, like paleolithic instincts,
medieval institutions, god-like technology,
if we're able to take those paleolithic instincts
and make them a bit more sophisticated
and that can constrain or bound our behavior
and relationship to that technology
and reform those institutions.
I think we stand a very interesting chance.
Something I have seen, and this came up a lot in my podcast,
is that when we heal the earth, we heal ourselves
and we don't wait around to be a fully, you know,
like woke enlightened human being
to start doing all the good stuff.
It's like sinking your hands into soil, right?
Like people who work in inner city farms
who have had a history of drug abuse, you know,
or substance abuse.
Just sinking their hands into soil is so deeply healing
or the Chicago Green Corpse, right?
Like going in and, you know,
under financially privileged communities
who start to restore their parks,
who never had a relationship with nature,
suddenly become much more deeply connected.
So I think that that feedback loop between human and land
will happen because we have so much to restore and protect
and the incentives around it are emerging
and the initiatives are emerging and there is a movement.
So we will see this earth religion happening.
Now, something that I want to posit to your listeners
is any system of faith needs places of worship.
And I would love to imagine different urban centers
who have like nature temples or it sounds kind of cheesy,
but like, where are places that we can go
which aren't linked to a current world religion
where we can sit amongst others or do things amongst others
who care for the earth and when you're a Hindu or a Buddhist
or a Christian, it doesn't matter,
but we're here for our relationship to the wider whole.
That I think is a very interesting artistic intervention,
for example.
So do you think it's important to be able to attach oneself
to some piece of land somewhere one might call home
and considering and thinking about that place as sacred
or even an extension of oneself?
I mean, I've lived where I have for the last 17 years
and I'm used to it.
And sometimes it seems almost mundane
because I know the trails and the trees and the animals
because I have my wildlife card out.
But I also become very deeply connected
and I know when something's different.
And when I travel and I come back here,
I can't wait to go on those trails again
because I feel I don't own it.
It's not that.
It's that this is my place where I'm tethered.
What do you think about all that and the importance
of connecting to land?
Well, first of all, I think that whether you feel connected to it
or feel that it's sacred, it is, first of all.
So it is all sacred and you are all connected to it,
whether you're awake to that or not, you know.
The importance, Simone Weil has this great phrase.
She says, you know, rootedness in place
is one of the most important needs of the human soul.
And so fundamentally, the answer is yes.
Now there is a certain colonialist way of doing it
which is I arrived to this land and you're mine.
But there is this longing in my own heart
and it's to be claimed by a place, right?
Instead of me claiming something,
it's, wow, can some place in the world call out for me
and have me come and tend to it and steward it and look after it?
And again, as I said before, like we are whole
by the nature that we make whole.
And so the more that people can tend to a patch,
it doesn't have to be like a glorious, you know, mountain range.
I mean, who has a mountain range anyway,
but it can be an un-glorified, very un-sexy kind of local place
that you tend to, but it's a relationality between you
and the world and a place you get to know.
You get to know its seasons, how it expresses in different moments.
John Young, who I referenced earlier in terms of nature mentorship,
he speaks of this concept called sit spots,
which maybe you've come across.
It's a very common educational tool for kids and for adults, really.
And it's you find a place within 15 minutes of your home
where you can sit, it can be a park under a tree,
but you're looking out, you're looking into the natural world
in some way, you're there.
And you go there if you can every day, 10 minutes, 5 minutes,
you sit 15 minutes and you sit in that place since your sit spot.
And I can't tell you Nate, the amount of people I know
who have been given this practice and now do it regularly,
I'm talking like 50, 60 people,
and their relationship to their sit spot transformed their lives.
And as John Young says it, it's like,
initially your relationship is like a string,
it's like a little string to the place.
But over times and over sits, those strings become a rope.
And then that rope binds you to that place.
And then if you're bound to a place,
it's like all of this meta crisis, even the word,
it's like, what the hell is this?
It's like this hyper object I can't grasp.
And so these local connections are doorways into caring.
There are places that open the aperture for us to understand
and relate to and process what's happening in these wider systems.
For viewers of this show that found what you just said
as beautiful as I did,
how would you recommend that someone just get started
to cultivate that relationship where they are,
just find a sit spot within 15 minutes of where they are?
Well, how else do you get started?
So I mean, you obviously have sit spot practices.
There are tons of these practices.
On my podcast, I have a bonus episode called Sensing Place.
And there I share some different practices people can do.
One of the basic things is like learn where you are,
like understand your watershed,
like literally like map out your watershed,
like where does the water come from?
Where does it go when it leaves my tap?
Where are the reservoirs?
Where does my waste go?
Situating yourself in a place
and then looking at it across time as well,
like what did it used to be?
In the Regenesis Institute,
it trained you how to be regenerative practitioner.
It's a great course.
There's a concept called the story of place.
And in the story of place,
you look at geological time processes,
migrational human and animal.
Every single place has this latent identity or potential,
just like every human has their own unique flavor,
like their own little charisma or way of being,
their own color.
And so get to know that part of your place.
You can do a story of place, for example.
And just committing to being there
and, you know, pollinator pathways
and all these things that sound very,
can sound very trite and kind of provocative
are actually, I mean, some of the wisest
and most grounded people I have met,
who I trust the most,
are people who are embedded in their place
through some of these very humble daily acts.
And is this available to everyone
or is this a little bit of a privileged elite western society
where those have access to wealth,
have access to parks and such,
or can anyone in the world start this in their local place?
It is a privilege to have access to green spaces.
I think, for example,
I was reading a statistic about the UK recently
and it's abominable,
like inner city, underprivileged communities
don't have access to a green space.
And ironically, the most privileged people
are the ones who spend less time in place
and who move around from place to place
and are the least-binded.
And so it's interesting
because it's like a function of privilege,
but it also correlates negatively sometimes.
But to answer that,
I don't know if during COVID,
you saw this phenomenon of weed watching.
It became viral.
People became obsessed with the weeds
that grew under their house.
You know, people...
No, I didn't see that.
Yeah, there's a whole...
I did a whole episode on urban ecologies
and it's like there are ways, even in the city,
to create those threads and those ropes
and those cords that I described earlier.
And in that episode,
in one of those episodes,
I speak about the Chicago Green Corps.
And I think that if we can support
neighborhood revitalization programs
or inner-city developments
for some of those communities
to just begin to participate in, you know, creating parks,
which, by the way, we will need
because of climate mitigation adaptation.
Like, we will need more nature in cities
because otherwise they become, you know,
these heat domes.
And so even a few trees really shifts the temperature
in a microclimate in a city.
So it's incredible because both, you know,
psychologically and spiritually, this is important,
but climatically, there are all the right incentives
to do this and water catchment and, you know, erosion
and flooding and all of these kinds of things.
I'm going to put you on the spot with a hard question.
And this is a question that I might do,
frankly, on later today
because it's just suddenly become a bee in my bonnet.
A bee in your bonnet?
A bee in your bonnet.
I love it.
You and I have spoken on the issue of the superorganism
and malloc and the surplus created from agriculture
and then fossil carbon and then currencies,
world reserve currencies and now AI,
and it's just accelerating this power dynamic
in human systems.
And of course, we need bottom-up value shift
and all the efforts that you're working on
and many other people, those are critical.
But I sometimes wonder if the main thing
to shift this planet away from the
Wiley Coyote cascade moments ahead
is to somehow shift the consciousness
of one to 2,000 elite people in the world
away from consumption, extraction, status, power
into recognizing that, well, first of all,
they're going to lose all that on the default path.
But secondly, that we have arrived
at a species-level conversation.
It's not their fault that we're here,
but it is within their power and their fiduciary,
given where they reside to maybe make big changes.
That's a big question.
Do you have any thoughts on it?
I think if we don't attempt to do that
with the right few thousand people,
the damage that is happening will be greater, right?
So for me, it's not a question of if,
it's a question of how.
It doesn't mean that that consciousness
shouldn't come at the expense of, you know,
just average people and, you know, everyone else.
But I think that people who today
steward disproportionate influence and power
and capital, possibly,
if they can have some deep embodied
and, like, there's no going back kind of notion
of some of the things we've been discussing here,
everything that then bursts forth from that place
will be different.
And you actually take, because it's not self-interested,
it's something deeper.
And we need people who hold that to understand
and redistribute and serve the whole more greatly.
How we do that, I don't think it's through facts.
I think it's through, you know, David White said,
poetry is the thing against which I have no defenses.
Poetry is the thing against which I have no defenses.
It's through something aesthetic and poetic
and poignant and embodied.
And people can experience this in a midlife crisis,
you know, in a way, these are rites of passage.
And, you know, if you were to tell me, like,
one thing that you wish everyone on Earth could do
once in their life,
I would say hopefully when they're younger and they're teens,
but bring everyone through a rite of passage,
like a vision quest in the land,
which is a transformational moment
when you realize that you are embedded in
and depend upon systems much wider than your own self,
your own ego.
So this is how I would begin to go about something like that.
Have you witnessed that with people
that you've brought through your nature expeditions and such?
Yes.
Yes.
Well, maybe you need to have those nature expeditions
for those 1,000 to 2,000 elites.
Sign up, come with Alexa.
I would not call them elites
because that's already stroking the ego.
Yeah, yeah, yeah.
But if we could draw up a list of people
who are willing to take four or five days
to go deeply into the land
and listen to actually
some of their deepest callings of what they are,
I would love to draw up that list with you.
Let's do it.
But these things are happening.
I mean, there are people who are working on this, right?
And so I think it's just about
also skillful action
and how we give those same people the tools
once they reemerge
to sustain that consciousness shift
because I've seen it as equally destabilizing
and some people have it after like plant medicine journeys.
You return to the default world to your job
and you're like, what do I do?
And many times,
your task was stewarding a system of thousands of people.
So you can just overnight say,
I'm going to close down Monsanto
because people are reliant on that.
So for me, it's not just what's the experience,
but what's the follow on
and what's the viable alternative for them to exist within.
So you mentioned the importance of poetry
to which we have no defenses.
And then based on what you just said,
is there a way that we can incorporate science and art together?
What do you think the role of art and creativity
is for the metacrisis space
and specifically biodiversity
and the things you're working on?
I think that science helps us know what we need to know
and I think that art moves us into doing it
or understanding it.
So art...
So they're both necessary?
Absolutely.
Art, I understand, almost is culture, right?
And in a way, our arts have emerged from culture
or co-create culture,
which emerges originally from nature itself.
But culture is the edifices that we build towards, right?
It's the gods that we build edifices for.
And so if the biodiversity nature movement
doesn't become a cultural movement,
an artistic movement, a vocal movement,
think about extinction.
Extinction can be silent
and just devastatingly heartbreaking.
But what about if we had public spaces a morning
or the memorial day to last species, which does exist, right?
It's what are all of these ways of expressing
the things that the science is telling us
in order for it to become visible and undeniable and real?
And you and I were together in this...
What was it called?
Scandinavian Impact Safari that small giants created.
And one of my big takeaways from that safari was,
you know, make it real.
Like, let's make all of the examples
of how we can live differently,
physical and tangible and touchable,
how we live together, how we farm, how we do urbanism,
how we do energy.
And for me, that is art, that is culture.
It is embedding something that is a philosophy
or an idea into something real
and lived for daily people's lives.
Thank you. I happen to agree.
You've listened to some of my podcasts
so you know some of the closing questions
that I may ask you.
I might mix them up a little bit.
I'm just so impressed by the work you're doing,
and I spent enough time with you
that you are such a machine in...
Machine is not the right word,
but you're just so productive and on the ball
and capable.
I just wish there were thousands
or hundreds of thousands of humans like you.
The world would be a much better place.
For people listening that are resonating
with your words and are aware of what we face,
do you have any personal advice on how to be alive
at this time? How to cope?
How to engage with these challenges?
By the way, Nate, right back at you.
Yeah, I think there's three things.
There's kind of my mantra.
One is learn to see beauty.
The other one is join your comrades
and the other join your comrades, your friends.
And the third one is contemplate death.
So very briefly, learn to see beauty.
This world is astounding,
even in the depths of the war
and the crises that we're facing.
The fact that you and I are here alive,
like the amalgamation of different things
that had to come together for this to be,
for friendships to meet in form, for the ocean to be.
So cultivating that beginner's mind
and learning to see the world anew every day
with the eyes of a child or the eyes of an alien,
just like descending upon the earth and saying,
how did this come to be?
Because in a way, that beauty is what sustains us.
And so, Nate, go back and please watch your Planet Earth shows
and cry and see the beauty in them
and don't shy away from that.
The second one, I think, is I join your comrades,
which is there are so many good people
working on brilliant stuff.
Like, if you're ever bored, there's something wrong with you
or maybe you're being deliberately bored,
which is also important, but like,
there is so much that you can do
and so many things that you can join
and you're not alone in doing that.
There are incredible people out there doing this work
and so just go join them.
And the third one is about contemplating death
and this I take from the Buddhist practice
and it's a Plum Village practice,
but it's, you know, a thousand millennial old teaching.
And it's every morning I wake up
and I do my meditation and my little morning things
and I contemplate that I am of the nature to grow old,
I am of the nature to get sick
and I am of the nature to die
and that everyone around me
is of the nature to grow old,
to get sick and to die
and everything that I care for
and everything that I love will one day die.
And you sit there
and there's some guided meditations online
you can find or I can send them to you
and you contemplate profoundly what it is
to slowly, slowly have all those things
vanish and disappear, yourself included.
And if you do that on a daily basis,
the wonder that you have
and the sort of self-arising gratitude
you have from just being here right now,
today in your senses is profound.
Do you do that every day or repeatedly?
Yeah.
Wow.
Wow.
I've done it a couple times and it was profound,
also quite scary,
but I never thought you'd do it every day.
Wow.
Okay.
On that note.
No, no, no.
I'm going to both do that
and I'm going to find a sit spot on the land here later today.
What about young people?
I mean, you work at A.T.H. Zurich.
You're surrounded by a lot of young people.
What advice do you have,
especially for young humans
who are resonating with, deeply,
with what you're saying about the natural world,
but are aware of all these things?
Do you add any others to the beauty and the joy
and the meditating about loss and death?
Yeah.
I can only speak to things that have helped me
because I don't know what it's like to be 18 or 19-year-old today,
but there are youth movements that are growing,
that are wonderful.
If I was in those shoes,
I would join some of these youth movements
and educate myself profoundly
on all the ways that I've been or unlearning, if you will.
I love reading arcs of deep history,
going back thousands of years.
I love reading biographies of people
who have built movements or changed the world.
I think there is so much historical context and precedent
that can get lost in today's runaway world of A.I. and tech
and all the social media.
As much as we can,
situating ourselves in those longer arcs of history
and human evolution, and those who've come before,
I think is probably incredibly important.
Another thing I would say, which I mentioned before,
is don't be scared to feel and find contexts and containers
that will help you through that process
and where you can help others as well.
Do you have any specific one, two, or three book recommendations
on the grand arc that were meaningful, helpful to you?
Yeah, for sure.
I really liked Louis Mumford, Technics and Civilization.
He speaks about the ways that psychology form,
shapes forms and technologies in vice versa.
Very interesting, very interesting.
I really love Jason C. Scott's books,
like Seeing Like Estate or Against the Grain,
that kind of contextualize the great simplification.
Actually, Nate, his books are about simplification, like deeply.
I have Against the Grain.
Seeing Like Estate is almost better.
And then, gosh, I can't even give you a third one,
because there's, I would even say something
even like a Fridge of Capra book,
like something that speaks about systems dynamics
and spirituality in these wider arcs.
In terms of biographies, I'll come back to you
because there's almost too many to name.
You could send Lizzie a list and we'll put them in the show notes.
Fridge of Capra, by the way.
Not personally.
Okay, I'm trying to get them on the show.
I don't know anyone who knows them.
Okay, awesome.
I'm not going to ask you what you care most about in the world,
because I already know, unless you want to add to that.
Yeah, I mean, what I care the most about in the world
is that everyone can wake up and realize their own divine nature.
It sounds super cheesy, but we are all spectacular beings.
And if people could wake up and perceive their non-duality
with each other and with the world, like fundamentally,
and that they are fine how they are,
we don't have to consume, we don't have to strive,
we don't have to postulate,
we don't have to step on other shoulders.
Like this feeling of like you are enoughness and rightness.
If I could just like create a bomb and like place,
like curve that around that globe behind you around the world
and just for everyone to wake up with that feeling,
I'd be deeply curious what would happen.
So you are at a university,
and I think there's 240 million college students,
humans around the earth.
And the university has good programs
and is moving towards environmental and system stuff slowly.
But I think young humans, postdoc sort of people,
have huge potential to weigh in on the research
and the questions where society really needs to address.
Do you have any suggestions there on research questions
or programs or how the academy can be more support
to a living world in the future?
Yeah, so one of the things would be research
on a post 1.5 degree world.
I know it sounds a bit apocalyptic,
and it's not necessarily what you'd expect me to say,
but if we're looking at two plus degrees,
which might be just a reality.
Okay, what makes the most sense to do today?
Because I think that a lot of the global initiatives we're seeing
are not based on that understanding,
and I know that you agree with this, right?
Because so much of your work is around this.
How would we think about food systems differently?
Where would the food growing belts be?
How would we think about, you know,
voluntary migration of people already now?
How would we start designing social systems?
Like, there's a whole lot of planning
that we could be doing that we're not,
because business as usual,
a little bit more green is the name of the game.
It changes everything,
and energy depletion changes everything.
So, within the academy,
we have climate people looking at,
we might be headed for a 1.5 to 2 degree or higher world,
but that doesn't make it into the rest of the academy,
and the law, and the ecology,
and the agriculture, and everything.
That's a great point.
This would be critical research.
Like, I've been looking for a map.
Please tell me if you have it,
if any of your listeners do.
Let's say 2.5 to 3 degrees.
What can grow where food-wise in that?
What are we planting today that doesn't make sense for that?
What should we be planting differently?
Food and forests, obviously.
And the human implications of that are obvious.
I don't have to state them.
So, this gets to the heart of one of the dichotomies in our world,
which is evidence that Dubai, the last couple of weeks,
is for the academy, for a tenured professor
to get resources to fund that
and be an acceptable research project
within his or her university,
there has to be like a phase shift
in the thinking of the higher ups
and where the money comes from and everything.
It's almost, no, we don't want to go down that path.
That path is...
Because if that research is needed,
then it calls into question all this other stuff.
I hope it can happen,
but do you see what I mean?
There's like two conversations going on.
I do.
I would be curious to hear from people
who have wanted to study that agenda if they've struggled.
And I could imagine that there would be academic
or other homes to host that work,
and it could be inside of foundations, for example.
I mean, the role of philanthropy is not to be underestimated.
So, maybe it's not inside of academia,
but it's finding some good researchers to do that.
And very quickly, the second thing I would get people to study
is sort of climate or biodiversity psychology.
And how do we really move people
and how do we create incentive systems
that are differently than what we've been doing before
because things aren't working so well?
How does the communication really work?
And, yeah, a lot around that human collective processing capability.
I think a lot more concrete research on that,
on the psychological component, would be critical.
So, when I asked you what you most cared about,
you kind of used your bomb to change people's recognition
of what they're capable of.
But instead of a bomb, if you had a magic wand,
is there anything you'd like to add to that
to change the default trajectory of humans in our planetary future?
If you could change one thing.
Yeah, I knew this question was going to come
and I really don't have an answer for it.
I hope that in the last hour I've answered it in different ways.
God, because it's like, yes, let's give people vision quests,
but then that seems trite when there's war happening.
So, then it's okay, what do we do about peace and justice?
But that emerges out of a dual mindset.
And so, it's like, okay, well, let's tackle non-duality,
which is at the core of religion.
But then religion can become tribalized.
So, I don't know, you've heard a lot of these answers, Nate,
over the last, you know, I don't know how many episodes of your podcast.
What would you do?
What would be your wand at this point in time?
Well, Kate Rayworth just asked me that on episode 100,
and I said, very similar to you,
that we need a change in consciousness
to focus on the weave versus the me.
And to recognize that we're part of this interconnected natural world
and that life is precious.
And if more people had that deep understanding,
I think there would be ripples throughout the system vertically and horizontally,
and then better decisions, better research, better incentives,
better institutions would emerge.
Of course, there is no such magic wand that would do that.
But we have podcasts, we have videos, we have conferences,
we have education and work like people like yourself.
So, we're doing many magic wands in our efforts.
Can we crowdsource solutions from your listeners?
Can you create like a one-website Google forum?
That's just what is your hack for the consciousness shift
and see what people respond?
There's so many opportunities like that.
I mean, we have three people here on my staff and I need to grow it.
But that's a wonderful idea.
There's also another thing that I'm thinking about
and I don't have the tech expertise to do this,
but I'm sure some people do to do a discord on the great simplification
so that in a city in Switzerland or in Mexico or in Kenya,
those people that are listening to this and engaged with it
can connect with each other and form some local initiatives
because I think you're right.
When we find others who are working on this stuff, it is uplifting.
And it gives a deep sense of meaning and purpose
and it will have impacts on the natural world.
So, yeah, I agree with you.
Yeah, absolutely.
I have so much more I want to talk to you about.
So, you have to promise to come back.
If you did come back, what is, in addition to the topics we discussed today,
is there one topic relevant to our collective futures
that you are passionate about
and would be willing to take a deep dive on?
Thank you for the question.
I'd want to deep dive on some of the solution sets around nature
or let's say approaches versus solutions.
So, nature markets, investments, initiatives,
sense make together, like which ones make sense, which ones don't.
What are some false solutions that seem to, you know,
portray themselves as, you know, salvation and, yeah,
like let's sense make some of the ecological approaches
that are emerging at this moment in time.
Let's do it.
Do you have any closing words for this whirlwind overview
of your work on behalf of the natural world?
Hmm.
I'm very grateful to have had a chance to come on this and speak.
Thank you so much, Nate.
Thank you, Alexa.
Good luck with everything and I'm sure we will be in touch.
Thank you.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform
and visit thegreatsimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
This show is hosted by Nate Hagens,
edited by No Troublemakers Media
and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
