I saw firsthand the proof that well done organic agriculture can be more productive than chemical
agriculture. And I saw this in India because right now the Pani Foundation, who I did a
couple of videos before, they had the water cup founded by Bollywood star Amir Khan, who's like,
you know, he's very, very famous Bollywood star. And the Pani Foundation had a competition where
about 8,000 villages worked on their water problems through watershed restoration. And at
least 1000 of those villages fixed their water problems. Okay, like permanently fixed the hydrology
of their watershed. So now they have abundant water. So then the Pani Foundation, they had the
next iteration of this competition, which is they call it the Farmer's Cup. And the Farmer's Cup,
which I was just there for the last four days of the competition, I visited four villages that
were participating farmers groups in those villages were participating the Farmer's Cup.
And they had the opportunity to talk to over zoom and it happened a lot during the pandemic to
educate themselves and talk directly to some of the top experts from universities,
natural farming experts in or in India and in the world, one on one group to group educating
these villagers. And so many of these groups they had, I don't know how many groups they had
competing, they had, I need to find out many hundreds, maybe thousands of these groups competing.
And they were using the, what we would call best practices of organic agriculture there,
they call them SOPs or standard operating procedures or practices. And so they use these SOPs
to the letter from what these experts in organic agriculture, university people were telling them
and widely these farmer groups, widely across these farmer groups who moved from chemical
agriculture to organic based agriculture, biopesticides, the neem tree, all these different plants
that they have are pesticides, caldung, fertilizer, fertilization, using good soil conservation
practices, cover cropping practices, appropriate irrigation, how much water do you apply? When
do you put on irrigation? When do you do a bug treatment? When do you thin the plants? When do
you thin the fruits? And across the board, they slayed chemical agriculture in their productivity
levels. And I did not expect this subplot of investigating these farmer's groups, the subplot
was like, oh my god, well done organic agriculture beats out chemical agriculture like many fold
in these cases and they don't have chemical residues, they have higher prices for their goods,
the people are healthy, the water is healthier, the soil is healthy, all this stuff.
It was very convincing and I'm going to be sharing that in my video documentation
some of these stories. But a lot more human labor required, like the hours of human labor per
x amount of agriculture would be 2x, 5x, a lot more than we use in the United States, yes?
Yeah, but all of these groups actually ended up having decreased labor costs
because they were extremely efficient, they were heading off problems before they arose,
and they also formed cooperatives between farmers, and that was another one of the purpose. So
every one of them had, well, not just farmers cooperatives, even when I went with the Isha
Foundation, which is Sadguru's foundation, I went all over and looked at their agroforestry
project in the Cauvery River Basin, the Cauvery Calling project, where they've produced 84 million
trees that have been planted in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, the southern Indian states.
And even single farmers there who were using organic methods and interplanting
agroforestry trees saw a reduction in labor when they stopped using chemicals and started
using integrated organic practices. So I actually think that that runs contrary to what we are told.
