I have often said that in a materially constrained future, a great simplification,
we are going to have a simpler society, and with that a return to living in a more integrated
way with the natural flows of the land. With me today is Oregon State Professor Andrew Millison,
who is an expert and an educator in the field of permaculture. Permaculture is a design system
which focuses on doing just that, working with the land instead of against it.
Andrew founded the Permaculture Design Education Program at Oregon State University,
where he is the education director and senior instructor with over 25 years of experience.
Andrew also has a very popular YouTube channel, travels the world documenting
epic permaculture projects in places such as India, Egypt, Mexico, Cuba, and throughout the
United States, which he shares on his YouTube channel. In a world that often feels out of our
control, permaculture design offers a way where we can work with the land and see improvements
right before our eyes in food, water, social capital. This podcast is mostly so far talking
about the constraints that are leading us in the destination of a great simplification,
but increasingly I want to have guests on, like Andrew, to talk about responses,
especially things you can start doing right now in your own community wherever you live.
Please welcome Andrew Millison. This was a great conversation.
Hey, Andrew. Hello, Nate.
Great to see you. Good to see you as well. The last time we spoke a couple of months ago,
you were about to head to another trip to India. How was it?
It was unbelievable, I've got to say. It's hard to give a short synapsis, you know,
a few words without just being like, incredible, mind-blowing, crazy, but it was really,
I'll just say, I felt my brain shift at some point, and I don't know exactly how,
but I felt like things change inside my head, taking in the amount of incredible information
that I was witness to. So I'm really excited to share the trip with everybody. It's going to be
14 episodes. Wow. So I want to get into that a little bit with you. I've never been to India,
but you and I talked about a mutual friend, Vandana Shiva, who is inviting me to go there and make
a movie on yoga of the earth, which is not yoga, the postures, but yoga is in the daily practices
of being in community, working with the soil, regenerating the land, and the holistic
experience. And I've never been to India. It boggles my mind that there's five times the
population in India as the United States, and in many ways, their practices are ahead of where
we are and where we need to be heading in the future. I assume that's why you're going back
there so often. Yeah. I'm going and I'm focusing on these very progressive visionary projects,
and India has problems that are multiplied from what we have as well. So it's a mixed bag,
but it is, I believe, this year becoming the most populous country on the planet.
And so my feeling is there's two things. One thing is, if this revolution, the ecological
watershed revolution is going to happen somewhere, it looks to me like it's going to be India. And
if it doesn't happen in India, then it's going to be great tragedy because of the population,
water, climate pressures that they face there. But I see a lot of tipping points being reached
there that we can speak more about. Yeah. I'm really interested in that. You are the first
guest of Seventy that I've had on the show who's a permaculture expert. So let's just take a real
brief background. Can you briefly describe what is permaculture? How did it come to be
real briefly and how did you get involved in it back in the day?
Yeah. So permaculture is a design system. Many people think permaculture is a gardening technique
or a set of techniques, but it's really not a set of techniques. It's really a way of seeing. It's a
particular lens and it's a particular design protocol. It's a series of steps that you follow
in order to originally design landscapes, properties, watersheds, farms, villages, homes,
suburbs, urban areas. And then as it evolved, it has expanded into social realms.
Some people think that permacultures can be used to design everything. I tend to keep it still as
mostly a land design and stewardship system. And it was developed in the late 70s, early 80s
in Australia by this guy, Bill Mollison, and he was a professor and he did all sorts of things.
He was a trapper and a logger and a jack of all trades. And he had a student, David Holmgren,
and so actually the entire design system, as he explained in his autobiography, it came to him
in a flash. It was like a revelation that he had. Like he saw the whole thing all at once and saw how
he had to spread this system around the world. And so, you know, when we look at traditional
people, we look at people that are living in place without import of resources,
living within their means, and we look at the different patterns and systems that people
have used to support themselves, water, food, energy, medicine, housing, materials, all these
different things. Permaculture is the system in which we would design sustainable human settlements
that take care of all the different needs that people have. And so, at this point,
we're far enough in where it's a very established system. People have been testing and improving
and figuring out this protocol. And it's a pretty advanced design science at this stage in the game.
So, is it designed with a goal of being more sustainable or permanent permaculture?
Why would someone choose that and why was it designed?
Yeah. So, one thing that Mollison recognized was the destructive nature of conventional
agriculture for starters. And the impermanence of conventional agriculture, logging, destruction
of watersheds, destruction of water cycle, erosion of soils, extinction of species, how
human sustenance, our sustenance was on a large scale degrading the landscapes. And he said,
this is very impermanent. We need a system that actually has a permanence to it. We need a system
that supports our needs, that also improves ecosystems, improves water tables, improves
soils, increases biodiversity, increases resources as part of the design of the system.
So, is permaculture synonymous with regenerative agriculture?
Well, not really, because regenerative agriculture is the agriculture aspect. So, permaculture began
as permanent agriculture, but it really evolved into permanent culture. So, regenerative agriculture,
you don't look at the architectural planning of a village, a city, a town. You don't necessarily
look at road orientation, transportation, energy systems. It's really farming where permaculture
is the whole system. And the agriculture portion is just one aspect of it.
So, you have a very popular YouTube channel devoted to permaculture practices, especially water.
Is there a growing subculture in the USA aware of the importance of land and systems and permanent
agriculture and related skills to our future? Or is it still a pretty fringe thing?
It's definitely growing. And if it is still a fringe thing, then I would say that those fringe
people are finding themselves in positions of influence. I mean, partly because I do
have a lot of visibility out there. I mean, I am contacted by different people in different fields
almost daily, whether it's people that are in universities, people that are working for municipal
governments, like venture capitalist billionaires who have some project that they want design help on,
like the span of people who are interested in this, at least from who are contacting me,
is like, it's really broad. And I don't want to confuse my own success with the success of
permaculture. I don't know if it's just that my profile's risen, so people are contacting me or
those people were always around. But at least from where I sit, I am seeing a lot of people,
a great deal of interest, and it's not just the fringe.
The same with my work, Andrew. It seems to me that we're approaching a biophysical
phase shift where the cultural stories are about money and technology and efficiency.
But Ukraine, Russia, last week, the Silicon Valley Bank, these are like warning shots across the
bow that our system is complex and maybe fragile and unsustainable. And I think there is this natural
deep human connection to the land and the biogeochemical or physiological processes of the sun
and the rain and the soil. And it just feels kind of like home to us. What do you think about that?
Absolutely. I mean, there is what I would hope would be the natural evolution of our species
towards a higher thinking organism that actually can live harmoniously with the planet.
I would hope that we're getting there. But there's also just the fact that anybody
can access this information, that they just have to have a thought about it and get on the
internet and start typing out some words and they will be brought down this rabbit hole
that will give them this huge body of information and this whole paradigm, really.
So I think there's a lot of different things going on simultaneously.
Yeah. So your work and others are kind of acting as an overton window to stretch the minds and
skills of the scout team of humans that do want to approach that larger, longer-term human,
sustainable cultural evolution. I think that's awesome. So you're known as a water expert,
but how did you're starting your education in your practice of permaculture? I think I read
that you started in the hot, dry, arid climate of Arizona. How did that affect the way that you
approached and understood permaculture? Yeah. So I studied permaculture when I went to Prescott
College back in the mid-90s. Prescott College at the time was probably the only college or
university in the United States that had a permaculture class. The class was held in Southern
Arizona. I took my permaculture design course in 1996 with Barbara Rose and Brad Lancaster,
and then I took an advanced course with Tim Murphy down in the Chiricawas back in 97.
In an arid climate, when you learn permaculture, it's all about water. I mean, the patterns of
water flow are very, very stark. The landscape is very clear. The atmosphere is clear. You can see
the mountains. You can see the watershed. You can see the patterns. And when you practice water
harvesting and permaculture in a dry climate, the ecosystem, the landscape is so responsive. I mean,
in an arid climate, things are so responsive to just a little bit of extra water. So it's really
easy to see the effects of permaculture in that kind of landscape because it's like the color
green on the color brown. And you can watch the green part grow, basically.
So at various timescales, Liebig's law of the minimum could be finance and trust right now,
and in the next decade could be oil, a cheap oil. But in the next century, where humans live,
it may be water in many places. I mean, water in the long run is way more important than oil, yes?
Yeah. Well, I mean, it depends where you are, for sure. There's a lot of places where we're already
there. I mean, it's interesting when you look at places like, oh, the Gulf states, and you find
out like, oh, wow, there's a whole desalinization grid linking the Gulf states, this water grid
to supply water to places where there just is not that water. And, you know, of course,
the desalinization is very much dependent on fossil fuels. It's high energy intensive. I mean,
you look at places like India, it's like monsoonal rainfall. I mean, the whole civilization there
is dependent on this particular rainfall pattern. And there's lots of places where we can see,
you know, the roots of many conflicts between nations, we can see that they start with water.
So, I mean, I think, like, I don't think it's in the future, I think it's just in the background.
So, with climate, and this is going to be a 75 to 90 minute podcast, it could be five hours,
because I have so many questions for you. But with climate, there's going to be a higher standard
deviation of rainfall. As evidenced by this week, there's huge floods in Monterey, California, etc.
Does permaculture deal with only arid, dry? Like, how do we get more watered? Is it also
deal with too much water issues and how to deal with that? Yeah, I mean, permaculture deals with
the whole range, basically. Permaculture is a design system. It's a lens. It's like a pair
of glasses that you could put on. And you can basically put those glasses on, and you can apply
this permaculture perspective to any situation, any climate zone. And so, like, the permaculture
designer's manual is divided into, there's the arid chapter, the tropics chapter, and the temperate
chapter. I mean, that's kind of a simplification, oversimplification, you might say, of the wide
variety of climate zones in the world. But yeah, but definitely it's not just dry areas.
So, it's a design lens. Is permaculture then a one-size-fits-all concept, or is there something
that needs to be heavily adapted based on the specific land and environment you're working in?
Yeah, I mean, permaculture is a site-specific design system. Meaning that this lens is a way
that you would look, you know, analyze each individual site and come up with a unique design.
So, it's kind of like, it's, there's art. There's artistry to it, right? Where, I mean, Bill
Mollison said, every permaculture is different, you know, and it becomes a unique expression of
the landscape and the collaboration between the people on that landscape and the natural forces.
So, there's like a Bible or a set of design principles globally, but then there's going
to be little specific guidebooks that have to be developed locally based on the conditions of that
watershed or area of the planet, yes? Yeah, there's a lot of, I mean, there's the permaculture
designer's manual and there's a lot of other kind of well-known books, but then there's some really
great, very specific books like the Tropical Permaculture Guide, for instance, that was written
by a guy in one of those islands right by Indonesia. I'm blanking on it. So, you know,
and then there's specific, a lot of people have written, you know, articles and looking at
particular tree varieties in Colorado and, you know, everywhere you go in the world,
you have a different palette of plants, you have a different dynamics, even though you might be in
arid climate, things are tweaked a little bit more, so, you know, differently from each other.
So, you know, when someone basically, when someone goes and creates a permaculture system in a
particular area, then they become the researcher in that area. They're testing out plants, they're
testing out different systems and they're coming up with the pattern language of appropriate systems
for that place. And is there a network that people can learn and share and collaborate
globally or regionally on these individual designers that you just described?
Yeah, I would say that there are just, there are many networks. The permaculture system was set up
not as a top-down organization, but more of a mycelial network. So, there are independent
institutes spread all over the world and those institutes are usually, you know, the place where
both social communication and as well as techniques, skills, workshops, resources
are concentrated. And there are different levels of functionality depending on where you are.
Is that something that could really be improved to help knowledge spread and get this, you know,
one to two orders of magnitude bigger if there were more resources and strategy and how to share
information around the world? Yeah, I mean, there's certainly a lot of people who have focused on that
and there's different, there's like the Permaculture Global, which is a website put together by the
Permaculture Research Institute, you know, and then, I mean, my, I have my own networks of my
alumni and such and, you know, there's various different organizations around the world, but
the point of not having as a top-down organization in its outset, you know, why Bill Molison
basically designed it as a mycelial network, part of that was so it could never get taken down.
It could never be destroyed by one particular hub. So there is no one centralized,
encompassing network by design, because if there was only one centralized, encompassing,
encompassing network, then there, there is one potential point of failure.
Wow. So it's one of the original pillars of decentralization, if you, if you will.
Yeah, it's been decentralized from the very get-go by design.
And some people say it's actually the largest aid and relief organization on the planet. If you
actually took all the decentralized people that are working for disaster relief, refugee relief,
you know, helping people in need around the world, that it would, it would surpass the
surpass the largest any organization that existed out there.
Wow. Yeah.
Wow. So you just got back from India. You said you're making 14 videos for your channel.
Those are videos of, of Indian people working on water and permaculture related issues that
you're going to share with US viewership. Yeah. Well, interestingly, the first series that I did,
India's Water Revolution, which I published in 2020, which is seven episodes,
I thought I was making it for the US population. But once I put it out there,
it actually had as much or more viewership from India itself than from the US. So this time,
I'm not sure that I'm making this for the US population. I'm making it more for the world
population. And the main person that I'm working with doing the editing, I edited the first one
completely myself, but is a guy by the name of Ashok Meena, who is Indian. And he's in Jaipur.
And he was actually filming with me on about half of the trip. So I'm really happy actually that
it's going to be edited in India, because it's going to have a much more cultural sensitivity
and nuanced understanding in the production. So I'm not sure that it's for the Americans,
actually. That's awesome, Andrew. Seriously, I mean, this is a species level moment.
And I think we get so insulated looking at the bizarro situation in the United States on so many
levels. We forget we're only 4.5% of the world population, and there's lots of other countries
that are adapting and responding to world challenges. So good on you for doing the global
story. So some of those videos, could they be applicable to US watersheds, or is the situation
in India really quite different? Well, you know, on a physical level, it's all very applicable.
I mean, the watershed perspective can be applied to anywhere in the world, because it's how the
landscape is divided. And it's the basic management unit with which we need to heal the planet with.
I mean, that's how we restore the water cycle. That's how we restore the forest. That's how we
restore agriculture. Everything is on the watershed level. But it really became clear to me this time
around the advantages that India has and the disadvantages that the United States has in
just very basic, base level legal and infrastructure level structures that it makes it really challenging
to do some of the things here. Could you give an example, like you mentioned legal? What do you mean?
Well, so basically, the average Indian village that I visited, so I'll give you an example.
I went to one of the most wonderful villages I've ever visited in Maharashtra,
a village called Pemgiri. Pemgiri, we were actually, my wife and I were the first foreigners
to ever enter Pemgiri. We were told and they greeted us absolutely splendidly with dancing and
parades and it was a wonderful experience. And in Pemgiri, they have a banyan tree.
It is a huge, huge banyan tree. It covers an acre and a half and they say that they believe
that it is the second largest banyan tree in India. So I'm like, wow, I'm like, how old is this village?
They're like, well, we don't really know how old this village is. The closest thing we could
tell you is that there were texts that 500 years ago mentioned this banyan tree. They're like,
this banyan tree was big enough 500 years ago to be mentioned in some sort of scriptural text.
They're like, beyond that, we have no idea how old this village is. Now, because these villages
are so old, they are working on the old patterns. And the old pattern, which is the pattern that
I am promoting, is that land management is based on the watershed. So these villages, the boundaries
of their villages are the ridges, mountaintops, hills that divide drainage basins, one from the
next. And so when you go and you look at all these villages in, say, rural Maharashtra where I was,
but it's pretty much everywhere that I've gone, their commons, their land units that the community
is deciding what's happening within their area is a watershed. So when the community decides to
fix their watershed, to fix their land, they are fixing their hydrologic unit. And so the results
are complete. In juxtaposition with the United States, where we have an arbitrary grid of property
ownership that's just been superimposed on a non-gridded landscape. So the land management
units are very typically arbitrary compared to water flow. So that's like, when you talk about
legal, that's the legal property boundaries is like a huge advantage that you have when you have
an encompass, when your boundaries encompass a watershed. Yeah. So our cities and villages
and counties, etc., were made for political expediency or other reasons, but you're advocating for
some sort of a watershed democracy or something like that, where from an ecological standpoint,
the most important thing to our forests and our soil and our sustainability is the water.
So we should be making decisions based on the watershed that we reside in, yes?
Absolutely. And I don't know, it sounds like maybe you watched my video called America's Big Mistake.
I didn't watch the video, but you and I have talked about that before. And the former governor of
your state, John Kitzover, is a friend of mine and he's talked about, we need to redistrict our
cities based on watershed. So talk more about that. What is watershed democracy and geomorphology?
Yeah. So I mean, it's not just our cities, it's our cities, our counties and our states. So watershed
democracy was a concept put forth by John Wesley Powell, the early American explorer,
Lake Powell, is named after him. And he actually suggested that we divide up states boundaries
in the air and west based on watershed boundaries, the ridges, the waterways, the hills. So a state
would be a watershed basin. And then the counties within that state would be smaller micro basins.
So your political administration corresponded with drainage basins, with watershed administration.
And so that's, you said, that's basically watershed democracy. And then you asked about
geomorphology. That's my favorite word. I always tell my students this, is geomorphic. I'm like,
if there's just one thing I want you to learn in this class, if you'd like never come back and
you're just here like the first two days of class, geomorphic, conforming to the shape of the land.
This is, in my opinion, the fundamental flaw of our civilization is that our political boundaries
and our land management units, property boundaries, are not conforming to the shape of the land.
Because if we, if they did, then decisions we made would have an integrated holistic
landscape scale impact instead of a fragmented or fractured impact. And that's where when you go
to India and you see actual political boundaries based on water, bet shed boundaries, and then you
see people who have gotten together and fixed their watershed and have very rapid positive
results. It's like, it makes me pine for that system when you actually see it functional. Yeah.
So are the areas in India based on geomorphology and watershed, like the political
boundaries of communities and such? Well, the village boundaries, yes. I mean, for what I see,
and I've seen a lot of them. And this has been this way for a long time, presumably.
Because it is the natural, logical way to divide landscape. This is how humans have
divided landscape for millennia. Was there something like that that existed
in when Native Americans were the only ones on this continent?
I'm sure that that was the case in, you know, I mean, you could look at Native American land
divisions, watershed, language, eco zone, you know, there's a lot of like, there's a lot of
different things that you can look at, you know, one difference in India is that agriculture,
settled agriculture existed for a very long time. And so these village locations, because of the
way the climate is and all that stuff, are not nomadic, right? You had nomadic peoples there,
but these locations I'm talking about are not nomadic. And so it's a little bit different
than prehistoric. I mean, I don't like that word prehistoric, you know, because that's,
it's kind of like assuming that like history started when white people started, you know,
keeping track of it, right? But, you know, on this continent, there are certainly places where
there's long term established villages, you know, I spent a lot of time on like the Hopi,
Hopi land and the Rio Grande River Valley, for instance. But there's also like a lot of nomadic
people moving around. And so it's a little bit different when you're a settled agricultural
society versus nomadic society and the like established, like, like in India, there's been
people on the land doing agriculture for so long that like all the space is filled in,
right? There's not a lot of wild areas at this point. I mean, in the mountains, like really high
up where things are so wet or very steep, but pretty much all of the land that can be settled
has been settled with old established villages for a very, very long time. And so
it was long enough for like the land boundaries and land divisions to become very clear,
you know, for a long time. Yeah. So two questions there. Presumably,
soil health and soil regeneration and along with it, replenishing the water table
are primary objectives there. If everything is full, there's nowhere else to go. So you have
to take care of your place, number one. And number two, when there's a young child growing up in
these places, is it natural generation after generation for that young Indian human to learn
about permaculture and I mean, it may not be called permaculture, but how to take care of the soil
and how to do the right practices to have proper water table management, etc. Whereas a young
American child doesn't learn those things. Yeah. I mean, it's really easy for Indian child to get
the watershed concept because it is their village boundaries. So there's no, there's not a big
leap there. There's not a big learning curve that has to take place, right? And I mean, that's a
that's a real advantage in making the shift, you know, because that already exists. And I want to
say another thing that is a huge advantage there is the continuity of management, the unbroken
continuity. So I told you, these villages, they don't even know how old these villages are. These
villages, thousands of years old, the people that are living in those villages, their ancestors
are the people that have been living there. Like they have no question that that is their place,
that their ancestors have been there for a long, long time, and that their descendants will be there
for a long, long time. There's no question about the continuity of landscape management. So when
they make a change there, it's a permanent change, right? We're here. Well, first off, you know, back
to Native tribes for a minute, like I feel like I didn't give a good answer because I don't totally
know how Native American people had landscape divisions, in part, because there, there was a
great fracturing, you know, like the sacred hoop was broken, right? Many, there was like a genocide,
basically. And right now, the Native tribes that still exist are, you know, they had this
deep disruption in their history not too long ago, right? So that's probably one reason why
I don't know. Yeah, the knowledge might have been lost. I mean, there's, there's lots of places where
the knowledge is still there, you know, and I've been to a lot of those places and talked to a lot
of people. But I'm just saying, in juxtaposition in India, you have these villages. I mean, yes,
there's been wars, there's been conquering, there was the British colonialism, right? But
it wasn't like a continent, continental wide disruption,
genocide, you know, of like everybody there. There's a, there's a real continuity in many areas.
No, when you say many areas, like the majority of the land in India, like over 50% is kind of
managed and looked at this way or pockets. Well, I would say, I would say more than that. I guess
when I'm saying many areas, I'm in my mind, I am separating rural and urban areas. Because the
urban areas have a lot, a lot of people and they've grown very extensively. And in many of the urban
areas, the old systems have been paved over and polluted. And one of the projects I looked at
was actually in Coimbatore. It was a wonderful group that was taking, that was in the city of
Coimbatore. I think Coimbatore is maybe a couple million people. I have to look real quick. It's
not like a mega city. It's a fairly big city compared to America, you know, American cities.
But they were identifying the old water system that was put in 1000 years ago by the Chola Dynasty,
right? So the Chola Dynasty, they created this series of check dams and diversions and lakes
and created a really, really large-scale water management system that only in fairly recent
times went into disrepair, neglect with the industrialization of Coimbatore. So this group
I was with, the KKPA, that I'm going to put a video about that was just absolutely wonderful
group of people, they basically were remapping, re-establishing the old canals, cleaning out
these old lakes. And when I say lakes, I mean, like lakes like 200, 300 acre lakes, right? This
is in Tamil Nadu, South India. So they get a lot of rain when they get rain. And in restoring,
in locating, it's like archaeology figuring out and re-establishing this old system within this
city, they are recharging the water table on a very grand scale and re-establishing water sources
for farmers in the area. So even in the cities, we see this restoration and we see this watershed
scale management that's been taking place. But I would say to answer your question, I would say,
and like, you know, I've traveled, I've spent six months of my life traveling in India. So
I've only been to, you know, it's a huge country. So I've been to a lot of places
and I haven't been to a lot of places at the same time, right? But I would say that when you look
at the rural landscape, which is really the vast footprint of the country, the rural landscape
is segmented by watersheds. So I would say it's pretty like you could say, you know,
I would have to get actual data to give you some sort of percentage. But you know, you could safely
say that like the overwhelming majority of the country is managed by villages at the watershed
scale. Not to give you too much information, but with my right hand, I'm petting my 13-year-old
black lab and every time I stop, because I want to write down a question to ask you,
she like nudges me and I can't reach my pen. So I'm just going to go off
free flow asking you questions because my dog is attacking me. So let me ask you this, Andrew. I
don't know how much you know about my work, but I generally forecast what I refer to as a great
simplification where the energy subsidy that has supported our lifestyles and the financial
claims above it are going to de-complexify just by physics in the coming decade and we're going to
have a more local and regional economy with less energy and throughput. And based on what you're
saying, India relative to the United States is a poor country, material speaking, but they may be
way ahead of us and we can learn way more from their practices than they can learn for us on
what's ahead in coming decades. What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, I would say again,
it's hard to compare because there's so many people there that they actually are
they're people rich. I mean, as far as labor goes, most of these really large-scale
watershed restoration projects and everything I'm looking at are done by hand. I mean, you see
things that are done by hand there that are just not done by hand here and we just, we don't have
the demographics in this population to be able to do what they've done people-wise, you know,
in the kind of low energy system. But the advanced situation there in their capacity for community
effort, their capacity for community-wide cooperation, I mean, I feel like that's the
thing that can really teach the world. Because like you look, you're like, wow, yeah, you had
like 3,000 people show up to dig these structures. Like you have to have a pretty harmonious
social system to be able to pull off some of the kind of things that I'm looking at. So that's
another thing. I guess I get pessimistic about the United States because I come back here and
I'm not saying India is not socially fractured. I mean, there's like, I'm not even going to get into
it. I mean, people, anybody that follows, you know, knows about the deep divides and rifts in Indian
society. But it's not that far back that Mahatma Gandhi was walking the earth and did the salt
march and they had the charka and everybody started spitting their own thread. Like it's not
that far back that they had really massive, massive communal cooperation to put off the
British colonization. So, you know, they're only a couple generations back from like a nationwide,
you know, communal effort. So they have that memory. Yeah. There's a cultural memory of that,
yes? Cultural memory, exactly. Where like, in the US, I mean, you know, we don't have a cultural
memory. We start talking about the civil war. Right now, people are, when you look at the
political discourse, there's a lot of discourse about, you know, like a lot of people are upset
that the civil war, you know, turned out the way it did, right? And so like a lot of the fracturing
in our society, you know, like we have that, that's pretty recent in our cultural memory as well,
that we were actually literally at war with each other. So, yeah, it's tricky.
So, let me ask you a really hard question. Jason Bradford is a mutual friend. He and I teased
around this. Vandana Shiva is a mutual friend. She and I talked about this. My core thesis is that
energy surplus has enabled this moonshot of consumption and population in the world the
last couple hundred years, because there's a 10 to 14 to 1 energy input for the whole
growing and processing and packaging and delivering and storing our food. And it used to be
back in the day, our energy systems were a food, a calorie source and not a sink.
So, as fossil fuels decline, a lot of people think that the natural gas fertilizer and pesticides
and herbicides and the energy for tractors and all that is going to mean less food for the world.
But Jason and Vandana have suggested that, yes, while that may be true, if we substitute human
labor, which you just mentioned, there's a lot of in India, for some of these fossil inputs and we
instead look at resiliency instead of efficiency, and we maximize the nutrition per acre instead of
the dollar profits per acre, that the sustainable human population may be a lot higher than people
think with a big asterisk. Human population doesn't just eat food. We also do other things like watch
TV and fly and whatever. But what are your thoughts on that from a water and soil and permaculture
perspective of substituting fossil mechanized fertilizer agriculture for permaculture practices
with more human labor? What are your thoughts on all that?
Yeah. Well, first off, I'd like to say I don't actually know Vandana. She I've met her a couple
times, but I wouldn't necessarily, she's like a mutual friend. I think if you told me, if you
mentioned my name to her, I don't think she'd know who I was. Okay, fair enough. But I know of
her, I'm actually going to be interviewing her. Great. But that's another story. So maybe she
will become a friend, hopefully. She's a global treasure, I think. Yeah, I have a lot of respect
for her and I've watched a lot of her stuff and heard her speak a couple times. So I saw first
hand the proof that well done organic agriculture can be more productive than chemical agriculture.
And I saw this in India because right now the Pani Foundation, who I did a couple of videos
before they had the water cup founded by Bollywood star Amir Khan, who's like, you know,
he's very, very famous Bollywood star. And the Pani Foundation had a competition where about
8,000 villages worked on their water problems through watershed restoration. And at least
1000 of those villages fixed their water problems. Okay, like permanently fixed the hydrology of
their watershed. So now they have abundant water. So then the Pani Foundation, they had the next
iteration of this competition, which is they call it the Farmer's Cup. And the Farmer's Cup,
which I was just there for the last four days of the competition, I visited four villages that
were participating, farmer's groups in those villages were participating the Farmer's Cup.
And they had the opportunity to talk to over zoom and it happened a lot during the pandemic to
educate themselves and talk directly to some of the top experts from universities,
natural farming experts in India and in the world, one on one group to group educating
these villagers. And so many of these groups they had, I don't know how many groups they had
competing, they had, I need to find out many hundreds, maybe thousands of these groups competing.
And they were using the, what we would call best practices of organic agriculture there,
they call them SOPs or standard operating procedures or practices. And so they use these SOPs
to the letter from what these experts in organic agriculture, university people were telling them
and widely these farmer groups, widely across these farmer groups who moved from chemical
agriculture to organic based agriculture, biopesticides, the neem tree, all these different plants that
they have are pesticides, caldung, fertilizer, fertilization, using good soil conservation
practices, cover cropping practices, appropriate irrigation, how much water do you apply? When
do you put on irrigation? When do you do a bug treatment? When do you thin the plants? When
do you thin the fruits? And across the board, they slayed chemical agriculture in their productivity
levels. And I did not expect this subplot of investigating these farmer's groups, the subplot
was like, oh my god, well done organic agriculture beats out chemical agriculture like many fold
in these cases and they don't have chemical residues, they have higher prices for their goods,
the people are healthy, the water is healthier, the soil is healthy, all this stuff.
So it was very convincing and I'm going to be sharing that in my video documentation,
some of these stories. But a lot more human labor required, like the hours of human labor per
x amount of agriculture would be 2x, 5x, I mean a lot more than we use in the United States, yes?
Yeah, but all of these groups actually ended up having decreased labor costs
because they were extremely efficient, they were heading off problems before they arose,
and they also formed cooperatives between farmers and that was another one of the purpose. So
every one of them had, well, not just farmers cooperatives, even when I went and I, when I
went with the Isha Foundation, which is Sadguru's Foundation, I went all over and looked at their
agroforestry project in the Cauvery River Basin, the Cauvery Calling Project, where they've produced
84 million trees that have been planted in Tamil Nadu and Karnataka, the southern Indian states.
And even single farmers there who were using organic methods and interplanting
agroforestry trees saw a reduction in labor when they stopped using chemicals and started
using integrated organic practices. So I actually think that that runs contrary to what we are told
in western agriculture. For sure. So of the things you learned in India and what you were just
mentioning with this competition, what practices, two-part question, what practices that you
discovered and observed might be transferable right now to places in the United States and what,
in the intermediate term, what sort of things could make our agriculture more sustainable,
more resilient, healthier. And by the way, the thing you didn't mention that was implied is
it probably improved social capital a lot because people are working together and they're talking
to each other and getting their hands in the soil instead of on their iPhones, et cetera.
Yeah, that was huge. And you'll see a lot of that in the videos. The social capital that
has been built is very evident in the celebratory nature of the whole thing.
So one thing that was very ubiquitous, I'm going to tell you like general themes because there's
lots of specifics, but general themes, bio fertilizers from cow dung and cow urine was like
exceptionally potent fertilizer. And this is something where, I mean, we have a big problem
with factory farms polluting, like nitrate pollution from excess cattle manure and feed
lots and all this stuff. We could really be connecting the dots between animal manures
and the need of fertility needs. The answer there would be decentralized cow ownership.
Well, then you wouldn't be shipping stuff everywhere. So partly there is there's cows,
people, there's there's small scale animal husbandry that is mixed in all over the rural
landscape. So nobody is far from a manure source, basically. So that's one advantage there.
What's fed to the animals is probably better for the manure than all those giant factory farms.
Yeah. And people are doing basically they're growing crops. Funny, they grow corn there.
They grow corn for animal feed. You barely see corn like in a dish, you know, kind of thing,
but they're growing animal feed and then they have animals foraging, you know, so they don't like,
like nobody has a weed whacker. Like there's no mowing. There's no weed whacking, right? There's
like the animals are managing the landscape in that sense, you know. The other thing was just
incorporation of trees and perennial plants on property boundaries on margins like his hedgerows,
right? So boundary, boundary plantings of trees and other perennial plants
had a has a great effect on retention of soil moisture from blocking the wind, partial shade,
all the organic matter, material that comes off of a tree incorporates into the soil.
The changes in soil underneath trees for water retention, you know,
then of course, the yields that you get from hedgerow planting. So I mean, I really saw that
just when you have a one dimensional annual agriculture or crop agriculture landscape,
there's so many advantages to adding a three dimensional element to it, tree based agriculture,
at least just on the margins. There's so many residual positive effects that people seem to
have from that. So those are two just like real basic ones that are pretty easy wins.
Here's my view. I think people like you are going to be rock stars, movie stars in the coming
decade because these are the skills, this is the knowledge that our country is going to need.
In your opinion, you're kind of a scout leader, scout team, figuring this stuff out on your own,
you know, this is your passion and this is your vocation and you're a teacher at Oregon State.
What is it going to take for more people in our country, leaders, politicians,
civic engagement to wake up and do some of the things that you've been talking about?
Are we going to have to hit rock bottom and oh my God, there's a crisis or could there be a ground
swell of movement in this direction? What do you think? Well, you know, a wonderful thing is happening.
It's an unavoidable, unescapable thing and it's the passage of time that's seeing the baby boomers
retiring, you know, opening up positions to the upcoming generations. I'm a big follower of like
Peter Zines demographic models. I don't know if you've seen his work. The end of the world is
just the beginning, but you know, he just talks about this demographic shift that's happening
and I'm witnessing this because I love millennials. I love Gen Z people because I'm seeing these young
people coming up and finding themselves into sort of influential positions. This is like
really starting to happen now and they're going, we don't need to do that anymore. Like, okay,
let's take a rethink at this here. I'm very optimistic. I work with young people at the
university, but now that I'm almost 50 years old and like a lot of people that I'm working with
these days are like in their upper 20s, low 30s and they have a different mindset and I'm like
real optimistic that we're going to see that the generational shift that is going on, you know,
that the baby boomer retirement peak began in the year 2022, you know, according to Peter Zine,
right? That when this wave comes that we're going to see like a lot of transformation of
institutions because the old guard is just leaving. I actually agree with that and until
recently I was also a college teacher and what you just said resonates with me, but Oregon State
is kind of a unique agricultural learning hub. If you're a young person and you read the tea
leaves about it, the biophysical phase shift and you want to go to college and learn something that
helps your future, there really aren't a lot of universities that are really diving into the level
of your work. Is it possible that we will have more holistic undergrad or forget what you call it,
17 to 21 year old education of humans for a future that they will face? Is that possible to scale in
universities where universities teach permaculture and have a mandatory six months on the university
farm or something like that? What are your thoughts on that? I mean, that's certainly growing in
different places and like OSU has some cool stuff going on, the organic growers club run by
the sky James Cassidy, really great programs and that kind of thing, but I think that there's a
different trend going on. I call it the university of YouTube and I think that people are out there
this is why I'm putting it out there because people are out there educating themselves
independently. You have millions of views on some of your videos. Yeah, I have like almost 25 million
views on my channel. I mean, some of this stuff has gotten pretty far out there and it comes back
to me in very interesting places and ways that I hear about some of the ripple effects of putting
this information out there. I'm feeling optimistic and that just like feeds me to do more of it
because I'm like this India series and I'm putting together now, I want this to just
rock everything else I've ever done be a whole nother level. Let's keep on taking this to the
next level, but I think that education just like social media and YouTube is like surpassing
mainstream media, surpassing Hollywood figures. I think that the free education that people can
get there is just kind of lapping the pace at which universities move at and so, you know,
universities have to have to catch up in a sense. It's kind of funny actually coming for me because
I do work at a university and I am, you know, also actively working to transform the university
curriculum as well. What do you teach at Oregon State? I teach permaculture. Okay. So I teach in
the horticulture department. I was not hired as a permaculture teacher. I was, I student activism
is what got me into the position that I'm at. So the student said, we want to have a permaculture
class at Oregon State University and one student in particular got signatures and she said, and
this guy right here, Andrew Milsen, he's going to be the teacher. Wow. And I had to make my own way
and support my position by creating a whole online program. So, you know, yeah, go ahead.
You look like you've been doing that. How long have you been doing that? How many years have
you been teaching permaculture at OSU? Since 2009. And do you, so 14 years, do you have
former students that 10 years after they graduated or in touch with you and giving you
feedback or checking in and are they still using the skills that they learned from your class?
Oh yeah, absolutely. I mean, there's a different, there's, there's some people that like went the
permaculture route and they're like, I'm doing permaculture, they're permaculture teachers,
they have landscape companies, you know, a lot of my students end up doing that kind of thing.
But I also have students who are like, oh, hey, yeah, I work for the, the NRCS now.
Oh yeah, I work for the USDA. You know, oh, I just got, actually it wasn't one of my students,
but I just, someone just got in touch with me. Oh, I'm going to do the keynote presentation
at the Washington State Municipal Stormwater Conference, right? So like permaculture people,
oh yeah, permaculture person is, is organizing the Washington State Municipal Stormwater Conference,
you know, so it's like, yeah, it's definitely, they're all over there.
So you, you should, you should feel some pride in that, I think.
I mean, yeah, I have moments where I'm like, feel like really satisfied about what I've done. But
like, for the most part, I'm more driven about what I'm going to do, because like, nothing's really
enough, given the challenges that we face, you know, I feel the same way. What are you going to do,
well, you know, people asked me that recently, I'm actually like, what I'm doing right now
is like what I was going to do, like five years ago. So I think really, like I'm going to keep on,
keep it on at this point. I'm have a lot of plans to go other places in the world, more places in
the world, besides the places I've already gone, document these systems, document people that are
doing, you know, revolutionary, large scale landscape transformation, cultural transformation
that are like healing the planet, basically, going to these places and showing in a, you know, fun
and interesting, but also technical fashion, what they're doing here. So they can be replicated. So
I feel like right now, I'm like a, I'm like a amplifier. Right. So like my job is to just to
identify and amplify the good work that people are doing, and then put it forth in a fashion that it
can be replicated or learned from at least. Yeah. You are a permaculture and water catalyst and
diplomat. Yeah, that's kind of what I'm going for. Yeah. So for people listening to this episode,
who may not have thought about this or know much about permaculture, and they're like,
holy crap, this makes a lot of sense. I actually think this makes sense for my community to get
conversations and maybe a group of people thinking and doing this, learning together,
starting this in their watershed. How would you advise them to get started?
Well, you know, they always say, where do you start doing permaculture? Right outside your
own back door, you know? So I mean, permaculture is a, it's a grassroots activation. So the point is,
it's like nobody, you know, you can start permaculture on your, on your apartment balcony.
You know, you can start growing food. Like you can start recycling your organic food waste under
your sink in a worm bed and creating organic, perfect, beautiful worm castings, organic fertilizer
for your like tomato house plants. I mean, there's no, there's no, there's nothing too small.
So, you know, so people, that's the thing about permaculture is everybody can be activated to
doing it in their own lives and then, you know, reaching out and connecting with other people
that have common interests, creating a study group, watching videos together, going and doing
like a permablits. We're like, okay, we got five people that are interested, let's all go work on
my place and we'll transform this whole side yard, you know, and then we go another, you know, we go
work on your place. It's like, it's really conducive to community building and like,
like it's, it's a ground up, you know, organization, a ground up movement. So there's nobody that like
is, is, is, uh, nobody should be priced out, you know, and, and even if you're like a renter,
I mean, there's so much land available. Like there's so many people out there that would
like someone else to grow a garden on their place. You know, young people, I know, I was just talking
to some young people that came by my house the other day who'd recently moved to town and they
were like talking like, oh, yeah, and we put out a thing on like the next door website about, oh,
we're looking for some people that would like, like us to garden their space. And of course,
this is Corvallis. So it's, you know, kind of garden heaven. But they were like, we were absolutely
overwhelmed with responses. There was so, you know, in the same way that, that things are being
passed from the boomers, you know, down the generational shift, it's like, there's a lot
of people out there that have property that would like someone else to take care of the property.
Wouldn't it be awesome if there was some sort of a networked, crowd sourced campaign where
financially wealthy people in small towns and cities across the United States
could donate some land within the the village or city limits to young people to turn into a
permaculture hub before the city and then the social capital and the food and nutrition and
the skills and everything could just kind of spread out from that is something like that
possible. Is that desirable? I think stuff like that's already happening. You know, I'd have to
kind of like go back in my notes and think of different projects. But I mean, I think stuff
like that is fully already happening. Yeah. Awesome. So I know you are a busy person. If you
don't mind, I'm going to ask you some personal questions near the end. I mean, I'm respectful
of your time. I have so many questions for you. I garden, I grow, actually, I grow too many potatoes.
My girlfriend grows around 2000 bulbs of garlic and we grow hazelnuts. I have 200 hazelnut trees.
To be honest, the podcast and my job are making me less resilient in my gardening.
But for the last 20 years, I've had lots of things that I've planted. And I, for me, it's not
about being sustainable as much as it is being with the land and the soil and it calms me down and
it gets me away from the technology and I'm just under the sun and getting my hands dirty and
getting physical exercise and it makes me healthier to do that. But I'm blessed to have a little bit
of land here that we do that on. So, Andrew, given your lifetime of work on sustainability
related issues and given what you've mentioned as the challenges that we face as a nation,
as a world, do you have any personal advice to the listeners of this program at this time
of global ecological crisis in addition to learning permaculture?
Yeah. Yeah. I mean, I would say, find yourself. Who are you? What is your greatest
potential? What are you going to be? What's going to make you happy and how can you contribute?
And can you simultaneously contribute to the world and fulfill your heart's desire?
I think that's the goal. And for you, Nate, it's like, well, you could be just a farmer
and you'd be very happy there, but then you might not be exercising your full gift to
change the world. But for some people, just making a beautiful farm and feeding their
community, feeding their family, that's kind of their highest potential. Other people,
some people ask me sometimes, they're like, how come you don't have a farm? Shouldn't you have
a farm? If I had a farm, then that's all I would do. But I have other
God's gifts kind of thing. What is your thing? I have certain ideas and visions of things I want
to do and certain skills that can do that. Don't do what you think you should do. Do what's like
really fulfills your heart and uses your abilities. I love that. I tell my students,
the time is now not to minimize your impact, to maximize your impact, which is a very aligned
with what you just said. So do you change that advice that you just said with your students?
I imagine teaching 18, 19, 20 year olds who are aware of climate change and the economic
difficulties, they are probably more anxious today than they were 10 years ago when you started
teaching this. How do you change your advice to your students? And at the end of the semester,
when you're sending them away, what are your parting words to them?
Yeah, well, there's a thing that people keep saying, the jobs that your kids are going to have
don't even exist right now. You can't even imagine. So I'm like, don't get too fixated
on what you're going to do. Fixate on developing yourself, developing your potential, developing
like knowing what's best for you and how you can best contribute and the job stuff will unfold.
That'll come from there, hopefully. And the other thing I say is work backwards from like,
how do you actually want to spend your day? What's your ideal day? And work backwards from
there because some people are like, I want to be a landscape architect and they think of landscapes
and they think of being outside and they think of planting trees and then they're actually sitting
in front of the computer doing AutoCAD. That's kind of happened to me. So really think about
how you want to spend your day. You're like, I want to be outside all the time. Okay,
then don't become an engineer. And you may or may not sacrifice income, whatever, but none of that
matters. I don't want to be too cliche, but it's like, follow your heart. Your heart knows
what you should do. Yeah. What do you care most about in the world, Andrew?
Yeah, I care most about goodness and about amplifying goodness, really. I think that's
what it comes down to. We very well might not fix the world's problems. This could be just an
exercise right now in our own experience that we're having. So I think whenever I
have some sort of decision to make, a lot of times I'll sort of drift off to the moment of my own
death and hopefully I'm lying there and all my family's surrounding and the angels come down
and when you're reflecting on your life, you're looking back. Regardless of what happens with
the planet, it's like when you're reflecting on your own life at the end of your life, when you
have this flash and you see everything that happened before you, everything that happens
since you were a baby, it all flashed. You're like, did you do the best you could? Did you spread
goodness? Were you kind and loving to the people around you? Did you help the earth? Did you help
the species? Were you a beneficial aspect of the world? The answer should be yes.
So work backwards from there and make sure that at the end of your life, when you cannot
look back, make sure that you've got your boxes checked and that you're good with the earth and
with the universe and with your family. That's one of the most beautiful answers I've gotten to that
question. Thank you for that. I also value goodness and I hope that you and your work can pass the
baton of that to lots of young people. In addition to a wand, a baton, if you had a magic wand
and there was no personal recourse to your decision, what is one thing that you would
do to improve human and planetary futures? Yeah, I think that if I could induce one thing,
it would be that every human gets to have some sort of god oneness with the universe experience.
Hopefully at some point in everybody's lives, whether it's caused by the death of a loved one
or the birth of a baby or something, they have some moment where they realize where they shed
their dramas and their worries and they just recognize their connection. They're just part
of this fabric. If I could blink an eye and wave my wand, it would be everybody simultaneously
sheds the illusion, whatever illusions that they're in and just sees their life and themselves
and creation for what it is. So the shift from me to us, me to we. Yeah, and even
not even identifying with their own body, but just having a moment recognizing that we're just
made up of vibrating particles. When you first started that, you paused and you said,
I would wish every human had, and I thought you were going to finish the sentence with
a hectare of land to do permaculture on. I don't know that that's everybody's thing.
I'm less and less judgmental about what someone's truth should be because I've met so many people
doing so many extraordinary things that are so impassioned by what they're doing that I'm like,
oh, should everybody be agricultural? Well, civilization was built on surplus. It's like,
you have some people that are super impassioned about farming, they can grow more food than
they can eat. Then they can eat. So there's a lot of room for people to do many other things.
So I just want people to, I feel like sometimes I have fantasies that somehow when AI or whatever
becomes sentient, it's going to be some sort of evolved entity that we'll see beyond what
we're able to see with our human dramas and everything like that. I'm just like,
fantasizing. I'm like, what can cause the shift in human consciousness? What can
cause the moment that we all see ourselves in the world in a moment of truth and clarity?
Widespread ayahuasca use, maybe hitting rock bottom and having a gut check as a culture.
Maybe YouTube channels like your own where people learn and experience and have awakenings.
I can envision many different possibilities, but I'm with you there.
So this has been a fantastic overview of you and your work and your knowledge.
I've recently concluded my podcast by asking my guests, who are mostly first time guests,
that this was kind of a general overview of permaculture and water and your work in India.
If you were to come back in six months and take a deep dive on one thing, what is most
passionate to you that could just take a deep dive down one particular rabbit hole of a topic
special to you? Do you have any speculation on that? Yeah. Well, I mean, right now being that I
just got back from India two weeks ago, there's just so much that I could say about
the particular things going on there. I spoke very generally, but there's so many stories
that hold all of these deeper lessons in them of what different groups of people are doing
and the level of impact that they're actually seeing and the scale of large scale transformation.
So I guess it would be a little more storytelling and getting a little more specific to open the
window a little further into some of these possibilities that I've witnessed.
You're a great human being and I'd love to have you back and maybe we'll do just that.
When will those videos be out on India and how do people find those videos and your channel?
Yeah. Well, you could certainly watch the first season by going to Andrew Millison, YouTube,
Andrew Millison. You can go to my websites, andrewmillison.com. It's A-N-D-R-E-W-M-I-L-L-I-S-O-N.
And then also, if you just type in Oregon State University Permaculture,
you could certainly get, well, PermacultureDesign.OregonState.edu is how you get to my OSU stuff.
And on my YouTube channel, I have a playlist called India's Water Revolution. So that's the last
season and that would be a good starter just to see what I did three years ago.
This, we're going to put out the trailer. Actually, we're making a little trailer.
We'll probably have the trailer out within probably by the end of the month or thereabouts.
It's right now, it's March 13th. So probably by April 1st or so, we'll have the trailer out.
And then, I don't know, there's a lot of moving parts to really putting these together. A lot of
map animations and graphics and things that are not that easy to come by. So definitely,
over the next six months, you're going to see these episodes sequentially popping up, for sure.
But you could busy yourself in watching my other videos while you're waiting.
Awesome. Thank you so much for your work and foresight and evangelizing the importance of
maybe a different way of doing agriculture in the United States and globally. And
let's stay in touch.
Awesome. It was great talking to you, Nate. I really appreciate you having me on. And I wish
you the best of luck and look forward to talking again soon.
Thanks, Andrew.
