Amigos y amigas, bienvenidos a la great simplification. Today's guest is Antonio Turiel,
who is a physicist at the Institute of Marine Science in Barcelona, Spain, specializing in
remote sensing, turbulent sea surface salinity, water cycle, sea surface temperature, sea surface
currents, and chlorophyll concentration. He is also truly a polymath and a renaissance man.
Most times when you see the word polymath, it's someone self-describing themselves on LinkedIn.
I am describing Antonio Turiel as a polymath. We talk about oceans, how they are important
in regulating Earth's climate, yet they receive very little attention as to what's going on with
the ocean, temperatures, the AMOC, etc. Antonio also runs a popular blog in Europe called The Oil
Crash. He truly is working 60 to 80 hour weeks on the human predicament, very active in Spain
on trying to get Spain to do things more sustainably. This conversation covers a wide spectrum
of content. Antonio and I have known of each other's work for 15 years, but this was the very
time, first time we've ever spoken together. It was a great conversation for those of you who
are listening to this on the podcast apps. I might suggest that you watch this on YouTube,
where there are full captions available, because Antonio, even though it's his third language,
he speaks very, very fast. This was a great episode, and I hope to have Antonio back.
Please welcome Antonio Turiel.
Saludos, amigo. Good morning. Antonio, I have known of your work for a very long time,
and you've probably known of mine, and we are finally having a conversation. Thank you for
taking time out of your busy schedule today. Well, I am very glad to be here with you,
actually. Yes, I have been following with you for very long, like now.
We had to wait until the crisis was upon us to have a conversation, the irony.
You are, among many other things, you're a physicist specializing in remote sensing,
turbulence, sea surface salinity, water cycle, sea surface temperatures, sea surface currents,
chlorophyll concentrations, and other marine ocean issues. You also run a popular blog on
oil, and you're very active in Spanish, in Spain, in the sustainability discussions,
and you have a family and a full-time job. My first question is, how in the heck do you do all this?
Well, you know the secret, the secret is not sleeping. It's quite easy, actually.
For instance, today I have slept just for hours. This is not my usual schedule,
but sometimes it happens. Now, I think it's a question of having a good organization of time,
I guess, but also when you are in a combined set of something, when you think that something
must be done, I think that you find the energy to do it. Yeah, I feel the same way, but I still
need eight or nine hours of sleep, and you and I, on these prep calls with our technology,
you were up at 10, 10.30 p.m. doing these tech checks, so carry on with your important work.
So, I think we could talk for three or 12 hours, but we have a 90-minute hard
stop because of your train. What should we talk about?
I think that we can start talking about the situation with the climate in general,
and in particular ocean climate, which is my specialty, and then we can go ahead discussing
all natural resources and the kind of energy that we have for energy and for economy at the
global scale. I think this will be more or less the things that we could tackle.
Excellent. That was my idea as well. So, I've had a lot of ocean experts on this podcast,
one on peak fish, another on prior mass extinctions with hydrogen sulfide,
and DJ White, who's a cetacean activist, but no guest so far has unpacked specifically
how burning fossil fuels leads to acidifying oceans. Can you, just for starters, in like a
basic primer sort of way, explain the mechanisms and the risks and implications of ocean acidification?
Well, something that happens in the oceans is that the oceans are continually being mixed by the
action of wind because wind generates waves. So, the question at the end is that because of this
mechanism, oceans are continuously capturing a small bubble of air inside it. The question
is that if you are increasing the concentration of CO2, this is contributing to the solution of
this CO2 inside of the ocean. This is what we call inorganic dissolved CO2. There is another
mechanism for the dissolution of CO2 inside water, which is caused by the action of living organisms,
so in particular algae, because when they die, all the carbonates, all the chemical substances,
they have assimilated CO2 from these bubbles I mentioned before. And when they die, they go
to the bottom of the ocean, and then because several mechanisms, the CO2 is also released and
also dissolved, and this contributes to acidification of the ocean in the deeper layers of the ocean.
So, we have a mechanism for the lower layers, and anyway, all of them are contributing to have
more dissolved CO2. The CO2, when it is dissolved on water, because it is carbon oxidized,
it becomes the carbonic acid, and the carbonic acid, as the name implies, it's an acid.
So, this contributes to acidification. Why is acidification important? Because there are a lot
of marine organisms that needs the pH, the concentration of ions, the acidity, the say of the
water to be in a particular specific margin, otherwise they die. This affects fishes and
this affects, for instance, corals, because corals have a problem to integrate carbonate in order to
form the exoskeleton. So, this becomes dissolved, they tend to desegregate and disappear. This affects
also the skeletons of algae. At the end, it's affecting all marine life, because in one way or
the other, they are depending on having an stable, let's say, acidic level in the ocean. So, yes,
this is one of the conundrums that we have, because also we know that from all the emissions,
the man-made emissions of CO2, because of the burning of coastal fuels, we know that you first
of them finish into the ocean. So, this is the reason why the ocean is acidification at this very
rapid rate. Okay, I have multiple follow-up questions to that. Let's start with your last
one. So, most of the heat emissions from fossil fuels have been absorbed by the oceans, right?
Like something like 90 percent? What is that? 80% of the case of the heat, well, the main reason
is because the ocean has more capacity to store heat than air. So, this is what is called the
heat capacity, which is to say the amount of energy, the amount of heat that you need to accumulate in
order to increase the temperature by one degree. And when you compare the heat capacity of the
water against the heat capacity of the air, it's about one million times more in the case of water.
It's much, much, much larger. So, water is the large storage of heat of the earth. So, anytime
that you're putting into contact the warm air with the ocean in continuous basins, the water is
assimilating this heat, it's getting rid of this heat from the air and accumulating into the water
because it has a huge capability to store in it. The probability that it has a huge capability,
but not an infinite capability. So, the problem at the end is we continue to do this. We are going
to alter also, alter actually the structure of the of all the water column. We are affecting the
consistence where the fishes live. We are affecting the many, many things and this is what is happening.
And what is more worrisome even is that all this heat that the ocean is accumulating
could be released suddenly if the given specific, specific physical processes take place. And this
may happen. So, one part, a significant part of this accumulated heat could be suddenly released
causing a massive disruption. How would that happen and has that happened in the past?
It seems that there are several cycles that favor this release of heat from the ocean. It has mainly
to do with the movements, the vertical movements of water in the ocean and also the difference
between their temperature and the water temperature. So, what happens is that as we are accumulating
heat on the oceans, if the warm water finally upwells at a place at which the air is colder than
the water, the water will be transferring heat to the air. And this is the main mechanism of
transfer. And it seems that this happens with more intensity because this happens always, I mean.
But the question at which times this mechanism intensifies, it seems to happens following
several cycles. We don't know all of them. But it seems that we have a 20-year cycle that in fact
we are now going to the back part of the cycle in which the ocean is releasing a significant
amount of heat to the air. And there are other cycles, other periodicities, other times at which
this release is even increased more. But we don't know exactly why this happens with this
periodicity. We don't know the mechanisms. At the end, taking into account, as in any other branch
of science, we know some phenomena, but we don't know all the answers of why these things take
place. At least we know they take place, but we don't know all the mechanisms being involved.
So, it's safe to say that most people don't really think much about the ocean unless you
live on the coast. But the oceans have been acting as a huge buffer for the heat that we've been
emitting over the last 100 years. And we just take it for granted, yes?
Yes. Now, something which is important is when you are running climate simulations with large
computers, it is very clear that what is driving the behavior of the climate on the long run
is the ocean. The ocean is the main driver because it's the main system in terms of accumulating
heat and energy in general. So, the effect of the ocean is felt all over the world. And many
of the important perturbations, for instance, El Nino, which is something that we've been
discussing this year, because this year seems that there's probably to be one El Nino year,
and it is associated to droughts and floods, and it's associated also to heat waves and so on,
depending on the place you're living on. This is mainly, at the start, it's mainly ocean phenomenon.
It starts in the ocean, and it finish on the ocean, actually. So, yes, the dominant part
of all the climate machine is the ocean. So, compared to the rest of earth systems,
is the ocean fast or slow to change? And what if oceanic changes begin to speed up?
The ocean, because of this huge capacity that it has to store warm heat, let's say, and energy,
is the slowest part of the climate system. It's typically, well, not probably the slowest,
because maybe the cryosphere, the ice, is even slower, but the cryosphere has less size and
impact. So, from the most active parts, it's the slowest one with difference. And the fact that
some processes are speeding up, actually, right now in the ocean, is quite worrisome, actually,
because it is indicating that all the processes around what we typically call climate, which is
what is happening on the air, the weather, and so on, probably are going to accelerate as well,
and much more. So, this is the reason why any accelerating in the ocean is very important,
because normally it is slow, it should be slow, and actually it is accelerating.
Okay. So, getting back to your comment on coral, there are some scientific reports that suggest
coral reefs will be 75% gone by 2050 or nearly gone this century. So, this, I think, affects like
25 to 30% of ocean species, because they dependent them for their life cycles. But this is probably
due mostly to sea surface temperatures. Acidification will play a role going forward,
depending on latitude, currents, etc. But what are your thoughts on the implications of a loss of
coral, and what a loss of coral this century, in turn, kick off a collapse of trophic food webs in
the ocean? Well, this is clear because coral offers the habitat for many species of fishes,
in particular. So, the question is that if coral is collapsing, many species and especially species
of fishes are collapsing as well, because they are going to lose the place at which they live.
So, this is implying that all this part of the trophic chain disappears. Something that people
don't think it to account is that when you are considering the living beings on earth and the
different places on earth, they are all connected. This is the cycle of life. So, at the end, you
have, you have, first, you have the algae, which is the same as plants in the ocean. There are
other animals that eat those, those planes animals, those who which eat those other fishes,
other fishes that we do, those and so on, have to arrive to the greatest perpetrators. But at the
end, everything dies. And in dying, all the organic and inorganic matter that you have gets dissolved
and is the basis for the new generation of algae to bloom. So, the problem is that-
And 10 million years from now, it will be oil?
Well, 10 million years, I don't know, but several tens of millions of years? Yes, of course. Once
they accumulate and if the geological conditions are the appropriate ones, for sure this will be
turned into, yeah, of course. But the problem is that we cannot wait, so for so long. But the key
point here is that if you have one part of this trophic chain, you know, this trophic means eating,
so the way in which one eats from the other and the other which one this one and so on and so on,
at the end, everything is reduced, is composed and serves as food for the algae, you know,
everything restarts. The problem with this is that if one part of this chain collapses at the
end, all the chain collapses. And this is something that, for instance, we have observed in several
parts here in the Mediterranean Sea that we have what is called barren seas. So, on the barren
bottoms of the Mediterranean Sea, we have lost the posidonia, which is a kind of grass that
lives there. We have lost also corals. We have lost a lot of things. We have no fishes. So,
the only thing that we have there is orchids, you know, this small animal. And on top of it,
on the surface of water, you have jellyfish. And this is the only thing that you have.
Every other thing has disappeared. Is that just in some areas of the Mediterranean or a lot of areas?
It is happening maybe in some coastal areas, across Spain, across Italy, and across Greece.
So, are you chained to your office doing papers and presentations in science, or have you actually
gone, been able to scuba dive and go in to look at some of these reefs and actually in the ocean?
No, because I probably, you know, I have too many things ready to do that. No, my problem is that
I specialize a lot in remote sensing. And remote sensing, you see the ocean, but for a
distance, you know. And even if I travel a lot, because I'm forced to, because I have a lot of
meetings, for instance, with the European Space Agency for these kind of things,
I am not doing campaigns. I am not performing campaigns myself. My colleagues here are performing.
Sometimes they have invited me. But the problem is that you cannot arrive to everything, because
it's very hard to do everything. Yeah, no, I understand that. So, acidification,
it's going to affect aragonite and calcifying organisms. But it's another hit against coral,
but also, as you say, not only coral, but other calcifying plankton and organisms. So, I assume
that this will, because of the heat and maybe the oxygen, I'm not sure, I assume that this will
initially be in the shallow waters. But how fast will ocean mixing make this a full ocean thing?
This is hard to say, because, you know, we are observing that we have experienced
changes in the way the ocean is mixed. Because something which is quite interesting, actually,
it has to do also with the problem of taking profit of wind energy, is that winds are becoming
more intense in open ocean and less intense on the continents and on coastal areas.
And some places, this change has been traumatic. Why is that?
We are not completely sure. We think that it has to do with the most rapid pace of ocean in order
to absorb and release heat. But anyway, it is something that we are measuring. So, we know for
sure this is happening. And as I said, in some places, this is quite traumatic. So, the question
is that the wind is the main force for mixing. It's not the only one, but it's the main one
for the mixing of waters. So, we are changing the way in which
waters are mixing. But again, this is not homogeneous. There are some places at the ocean
at which the mixing rate is increased and the mixing rates at other places decrease.
So, you are commenting on temperature, water temperature, and this is true that this is
affecting in general all the life because temperature affects in many different ways.
One important way is that as you increase the temperature, you are reducing the solvability
of oxygen. So, it means that the amount of oxygen that is contained inside the water is diminished.
So, for organisms that like having this oxygen to live, for instance, fish, because they are
taking the oxygen from dissolving water, they have less and less added. And even at a point that
combined with the presence of some algae, there are death of the zones in the ocean which there
is no oxygen at all. So, no living species lives there. And this is one of the effects. But for
sure, the increase in temperature also, what is increasing is the solvability of the carbonates
from water. And this is also one of the reasons why the reefs, the coral reefs are suffering,
and other organisms are struggling because the carbonates, the substance at the end,
the carbonate to understand, to be understood is, I mean, it's like the concrete from which
the organisms are done. So, at the end, they are made. So, at the end, if you have not this,
if you get this off in the water, you have a problem because anything is being ruined,
it's been destroyed.
So, last year, I had a podcast with a British Columbia scientist, Daniel Pauley, who's studying
something called the Gil oxygen limit theory that fish are actually moving towards the poles
because they have to get, they can't breathe, they have to go to where the water is cooler and
there's more oxygen. So, fish don't care about the climate debate in the world, they're already
moving towards the poles.
They are moving, actually. And yes, so, I mean, but the question is that at this point,
trying to deny that there is a change on the climate of the earth is completely absurd because
it's something that we can measure from many, many different ways. I will explain to you something
that if you don't know, probably you're going to find amazing, actually. Some years ago, one friend
of mine went to Antarctica and he commented to me that it was absolutely impressed because he has
been a lot of times there, of amount of blue ice bears that he saw. Why blue ice bears are so
special because the ice becomes blue only when it is very, very, very compressed. So, typically,
when you have blue ice, it means that it has been really very deep inside a thick layer of ice,
probably for thousands and thousands and thousands of years. So, these ice bears may
have blue ice that he saw, probably represented the ice that was there since, I don't know, maybe
20,000 years ago, 100,000 years ago, something like that. And now, the problem is that everything
gets, the system likes it there, they are running into the sea. And this is not normal. I mean,
prior to that, I mean, 30 years ago, you almost never saw one of these blue ice ice bears.
But this is one of many, many other evidences of the things that are taking place. And in particular,
regarding fishes, we are measuring this. We are observing that as decades pass, several spaces
are moving, are moving, going away from the equator. So, again, to the north pole, the south pole,
because otherwise they cannot live. There are some spaces that simply cannot resist some
temperatures and also for breathing, they need specific conditions. Not only that, but there
are some specific species of fishes in which the rate of the gender changes depending on
temperature. So, we are observing that because of these changes in temperature, they have, for
instance, an excess of female specimens in front of male specimens. And these, sometimes,
might make cause and problems, okay? So, then, as I say, there are many evidences, and it's not
only on the sea. We are also observing the displacement of some insects. For instance,
the Spain is quite evident right now. We have some species of insects that used to live in
the tropics that are arriving now to Spain, just because the conditions are low in it.
You also have those dedicated plantations that show there are trees in Spain, but they're
basically dead monocultures that don't have a lot of biodiversity and insects and life the way that
they used to do. There's that. So, let me ask you this. I don't know if you know much about this,
but since we're talking about the oceans and wind, there has been news that the AMOC, the Atlantic
Meridional Ocean Current, has slowed something like 15%, which is a massive amount in the last 30
or 40 years. And living in Spain and Northwest Europe, that has implications for future climate
and, in fact, if you look at the climate models worldwide, that area doesn't look to be heating
up that much relative to the rest of the world. Is that because of this AMOC? And what can you
say about your research and what the AMOC is and the implications?
Yes. So, the AMOC is what you call the Gulf Stream. So, it is the, let's say, surface
arm of AMOC. AMOC is a part of the global circulation of water that is essentially transferring heat
and moisture from the equator to the poles. So, there is one of these arms that goes on the surface,
what is called the Gulf Stream. It is running from North Brazil until the Gulf of Mexico,
then turning around Florida Peninsula, and then following all these coasts to the United States,
and then turning more or less a bit below Cape Athera, very close to New York. It is turning
down to East. And this is arriving, it follows more or less a constant latitude. So, it's like,
let's say, a horizontal, a straight line when you're seeing a map. And this is arriving in Europe,
and this is supposed to be one of the main reasons for which the climate in Europe is warmer
and moisture. I mean, we have more humidity thanks to that. And this also helps in order to have
a better harvest here and so on. So, it is very important from the agricultural point of view.
So, what you say is right. One of the implications of this slowing down of AMOC is that the climate
in Europe is going to be, by comparison, not as warm as the rest of the world. I wouldn't say
cooler because it's not cooler because the driver for increase in temperatures is also present in
Europe. But here, the temperature, I mean, Central Europe is different in the case of Spain.
Doesn't increase at the same pace as in the rest of the world because of that, because the lack of
this, but also it becomes drier. And this drying partisan worrisome right now, for instance,
we have a problem, important droughts in Europe that were unseen since five years ago,
five hundred years ago. It may be a coincidence or maybe it's an effect of the cumulative effect
of the climate change for sure. Okay, three more questions on oceans and then we can move on.
Number one, on AMOC, why is it slowing and how much further slowing is already built in because
of the inertia of the climate system? Yes, as I have said, AMOC is part of this
thermohaline circulation. So it is mainly driving by the difference in temperature and
sanity. Precisely the thing I am working around this, because now we are able to measure surface
sanity, we are able to measure surface temperatures from some years ago and also surface currents.
We're combining all together, we can identify at which rate water subsides and downwells at
specific places. So the question with AMOC is that you need to close the loop associated to the
thermohaline current because at the end it must make a circulation. So what is coming on surface,
but at the end it needs to go down in the ocean, running by the bottom of the ocean, then coming
up in Antarctica or in the Pacific Ocean and then coming back from several ways and then
finally arriving again to Gulf of Mexico and then completing the circuit. So the problem
that is probably one of the causes of this slowing down of AMOC is the problem that we are
observing in the south of Greenland, that was one of the specific places at which this current
which subsided was downwelling. Probably it's associated to different things, like a rain for
one thing, also the accumulation of fresh water because of the melting of water from Greenland
and also from continental Canada. This is for instance something that was observed in past
times in the geological history that the fact that you have a great amount of fresh water
fresh water is harder to sink. So the problem at the end is that this water normally what happens
normally south of Greenland is the combination of wind and other factors makes that some salt is
released and this water is getting saltier and colder and then it starts to sink and this is
the way it completes, but now because of the presence of this fresh water in surface, this warming
surface, it tends to be buoyant, this surface is very hard to sink and it's one of the reasons
it is slowing down. We have other two points at which the AMOC goes down which are south of
Iceland and probably there are also some efforts there, maybe not as intense in the case of Greenland.
So this is the reason, the main reason is this one, because the changes associated to the melting
especially coming from Greenland and from Canada. And how much more of that is already built in?
Well you know as this is a very slow current when you make a change on it, it takes a lot of time
to reinitiate it. So for rebooting it, this is very hard. Now the main concern right now is if
this current could be completely stopped because of this or diverted more to the south that it
could also happen. There was a Hollywood movie about that I think it was called the day after
tomorrow. Yeah I know, but it's very exaggerated actually because things are much slower in
reality. Let's say that the things that happen several days there typically will happen in
several thousand years actually. But anyway the question is that it could arrive to a complete
stop. If it stops it means that Europe will become very dry. Actually this is what happens
and probably it would imply that the east coast of the United States will become much hotter and
warmer even at latitudes like New York. Well and among other things it would eventually then lead
to stratified oceans and lots of very bad effects for oceans. And for hurricanes?
Why? For hurricanes because you have a warming gas because you know the main field for hurricanes
is the temperature of sea surface. Yes so as you know that above 28 degrees Celsius of sea
surface temperature you have energy to fuel the hurricane and this will imply that hurricanes
could go farther north with all the implications it has. Okay here's a hard question for you
maybe. Some people especially with what's going on not too many countries too far to the east of you
humans are afraid of that we're headed for a thermonuclear strategic exchange between NATO
and Russia. What would the effect of a multi-year nuclear winter have on the oceans and their
ecosystems? Have you looked into that? And the problem is that if we do this
well apart from the implications the direct implications from radiation and all the
the fallout from the nuclear weapons and so on that is absolutely devastating.
You these taking into account that now the conditions the let's say astrophysical conditions
of the earth astrophysical cycles associated to the slow changes in the nutation and eccentricity
of the orbit of the sun around the earth around the sun. Earth is now in a situation in which
if it was not for climate change it would be favored to go to frozen to become in a glacial
state because normally what has happened the last millions of years with this configuration
of continental masses with this configuration of chemical composition of the atmosphere and so on
we typically have periods of let's say 110,000 years in which the the earth is frozen it's in
glacial state and we have some beta stable states not so longer of interglacial which is temperate
which is another period in which we are right now that typically lasts around 10,000 years.
So the truth is that climate warming and climate change the fact that we have concentrated
CO2 in the atmosphere now it is making it possible that the earth to be frozen okay so this is the
only good effect associated to the release of CO2 the price that we have gone too far away in this
direction but in case if you make a nuclear winter you are forcing the earth from this classical
state because it is what is favored just because the current configuration of the orbit of the
earth so for sure the earth the earth probably won't for sure more probably the earth will enter
in let's say 103,000 years of of glacial state and also the the blocking out of the sun would kill
a lot of the plankton and yeah it will kill everything I mean no no this is clear I mean
you have the you have a let's say amount of aerosols and other particles will be dispersed
in the atmosphere that typically lasts for five years in the case of a total nuclear award I mean
I hope we are not coming to this scenario but in this case yes the time for the all the dust to
really start allowing the having the the rates of light to all the sun to come to the surface
will be last typically five years so in five years almost everything will be lost not everything
but almost everything will be lost so this will be a total it would be the spell a total disaster
for plants and for algae for sure no I mean the mass majority of the life on earth will be exterminated
this is clear and then we'll fall in this time 110,000 years of last election
jellyfish and urchins
yes some crocoches maybe okay so uh segueing into your other specialty and by the way let me pause
here you are truly a polymath I know that because I followed your your writing for a long time and
you have a strong Spanish accent and I just want to call out and and respect you that you are able
to articulate these incredibly complex scientific topics in Spanish obviously but also in English
which is not your language and it's it's just deep gratitude for people like you that are just so
multi-talented and care about these things so mucho gracias thanks a lot also in France if you're
interested so segueing into to energy so so you understand peak oil and other limits to growth
so given that we are now or close to peaking and that oil is the master resource how worried are you
then about the future of life in earth's oceans given that you know the the amount of emissions
are likely to go down in the not too distant future they're not going to go away they're
still going to be a lot but they're not going to be not increasing so that's question part one and
then part two of all the ocean risks given your knowledge about energy the depletion what is the
biggest ocean risk that you're you're worried about well that's you are complicated questions
complicated ones actually so regarding the first one is that you should take into account that even
if we are forced to reduce our oil consumption yes because the production of oil starts decreasing
that is a process that is since it is starting by now the rate of of descent the rate at which
the the production of oil on the case is not fast enough in order to let's say spell out the possibility
of a catastrophic climate change if we wanted to avoid the worst scenarios of climate change
we should be reducing our consumption of fossil fuels in general not only oil but let's say
five eight percent per year excuse me seven eight percent per year and this is not the way at which
the production of oil is going to decay not to not to say for instance coal is not going to fall
so fast the overall decline rate of legacy wells might be seven percent but we're gonna
still drill and that new drilling is gonna offset that yeah exactly the question is if we were
to stop completely oil will be more or less around the rate that we need but we have still
coal and you have a gas so this is not enough so this is and plus plus you can see that if
what happened in germany the last six months that's one of the greenest political environments
in the world and they're rebooting old cold towns because of the russia situation as expected
this is this is the another question so what happens in a situation of energy crisis is that
you make resort to resources that are worse from the point of view of CO2 emissions so even it may
be in terms of energy you are reducing your energy consumption because you are using something which
is worse which is not giving you as much energy as you have before probably in terms of CO2 you
could have an an worsening of the situation so you will have the worst of two worlds so to have
less energy and more CO2 well and I think we're going to do I sadly I agree with you and one part
that that's not talked about by the way there is not a single integrated assessment model in the IPCC
that specifically projects a decline in growth and not only that there's none that do the nuclear
winter scenario in the climate models and there's also none that include a deforestation as a response
to negative economic growth because yeah the burning of the trees wouldn't be as bad as coal maybe
but we are losing the sink what what if we lose half of our forest sink capacity yes at the question
at the end is thinking about that in the forest biomass you have CO2 that has been stored there
with some some changes some renewal but has been stored there typically for for centuries
so at the end you are releasing CO2 because it was accumulated there yeah this is clear I mean but
it's not that only that I mean it's also fracking it's also tar sands this is the kind of resources
that are so bad that they release a lot of CO2 just to obtain a bigger amount of energy so
and the question at the end is that most likely we're going to follow this path and as you have
said this is exactly what Germany has done while the situation has become dire enough
they have started burning more coal something which is quite paradoxical the past summer
is that in the situation in which we have heat waves in Europe in central europe and in germany
france and so on and we have droughts they have problems to carry the coal across the ring river
just because the level was so low that the boat couldn't pass so I just wanted the coal to pass
in order to burn it to aggravate the situation so but unfortunately we are so blinded to the energy
question we are so blinded to the climate question that we are trying to do our best I mean as a
society as a community as whatever civilization in order to to burn more and more this regarding
the effort the long term the long term so regarding this first question my intuition
is that even if CO2 emissions are going probably down in the next years to the case just because
of the inflation is something that we cannot avoid probably the rate of decay is not going to be
enough in order to really avoid a very sharp climate change even a catastrophic climate
this is for one regarding to your second question can you remind me because
second question is you you're an ocean marine expert of all the possible ocean risks given
what you just said about climate what is the the biggest risk that you are worried about in the oceans
in the in the next hundred years well we have the problem for I mean it depends if you are thinking
about marine life or you are thinking about the importance of oceans for humans there are many
things that are very massive risk yeah this is the problem there are very many things that are
massive risk risk for both in both senses so we have the problem with the inflation official
is for sure this is important because by 500 million persons depend on the protein they can
get they can get from fishes and we have a lot of overfills fisheries this is a problem we have
the serious very serious problem with the accumulation of plastics which is entering all
the traffic chains and you know plastic is the main problem that they represent is that when
they arrive to our our figures with our dish is that um they uh they they are what is called endocrine
endocrine disruptors endocrine disruptors so it's altering or your hormonal functions and this
this is not good so there there's two plastic problems right there's the big chunks of plastic
and then there's the minuscule ones we can't see that are in the ocean food chain yeah this is the
product the even some algae are able to assimilate so this assimilated them fishes and it's more and
more assimilated in greater predators and so on so we have the problem with plastics we have
the problem with uh heavy metals which are very intense in some in some oceans and some
for instance in the Mediterranean the presence of heavy metals is quite important we have in
general the releases of the oxines and other chemicals organic chemicals that have a lot of
dangers a lot of dangers for life in general because they are very toxic and we have the
problem of signification one of the problems that we have for instance very close to the coast
all over the all over the the earth but for instance in the Mediterranean is that as we are
dispensing several drops and all the water table is getting down because also we are over exploiting
it and then the the the sea enters from below the ground you don't see it but the sea is entering
and it is signification this this path so it is reading this this water table this is not going
ever going to be able to to be used because of the control of the presence of the water that's
happening in Bangalore there's so many things yeah yes so there are so many many things that
for me would be hard to say which is the greatest risk for me one of the important risks that for
sure the ocean is going to have at least for the following I hope a few years is the the pressure
for exploiting natural resources in the sea in order to compensate for the lack of resources on
earth all on the sea right right you mean the undersea mining of nodules of copper and things
like that yeah yeah okay I knew that this conversation would go six hours so we're
going to keep it to 90 minutes per our agreement so let's switch to energy again hey you you know
a lot about this topic let's just start here can you explain what the second law of thermodynamics
tells us about what types of energy we should be using and what types of tasks and how it relates
to the ability and the desirability of electrification of our economy yeah well it's also a very
complicated question actually well let's just start by the beginning the laws of thermodynamics so
we know everyone knows about the first law of the thermodynamics so the energy is never destroyed
it's only transformed so you are you cannot win energy nor lose energy it's only transformed all
the time alone and this is quite I understand that for many people this is a bit strange
because what you know is that you are putting gas in your in your car and at the end of the day
you have less gas so you need to refill so you are losing energy but the question that this
energy which is concentrated organized energy is getting disordered it's been converting heat
because something that most people that know don't know is that doesn't know excuse me is that heat
is actually the energy the kinetic the kinetic energy associated to the movement of the molecules
of the of the authentic body so what you are doing at the end is you have this orderly movement of
your car that by friction by the fact that it is I mean passing my other surfaces by the air and so
on you are losing you are converting in a disorder movement or that also molecules in a substance
I explain in this because this has a lot of to do with the second principle of thermodynamics
what when you say when they're applying the second principle of thermodynamics says
that when you are doing any transformation regarding energy no matter what you are going to
lose a part of the energy in the transformation because it is going to be converted in this
disorder movement of the things and this is what typically we call entropy so when you are for
instance converting the energy from your gas in the engine in your car even in the process that
is taking place in your engine this process is not hundred percent efficient it couldn't be
and one part of the thing is just being dispersed as heat and you cannot avoid that so the question
is that when you are transforming energy from one type to the other you are going always to
pay a toll an energy toll you are going to lose some part of the energy and the amount of energy
is going the amount of energy you are going to lose is larger as the types of energy the original
type of energy and the final type of energy are more different for instance if you want for instance
to have a water bill and what you want is to convert the mechanical energy of the of the flow
of the river and you want to convert this linear movement in a circular movement of the wheel
so this is mechanical to mechanical this is very efficient and typically you are going to lose
very low amounts of energy because of this so from all the incidents that are coming to the wheel
probably are going to take in profit of 90 percent of even more which is the most inefficient way
the most the kind of transformation for which you pay the largest amount of energy in the
transformation for instance photovoltaics because you are converting uh let's say solar energy
which is the energy of the photons coming from the sun that's a light which is a kind of very
order but also very dispersed energy and because of this specific uh one tune effect on the atoms
you are able to convert these to electricity they are very different don't you very different
types of energy you are taking essentially one of the most disordered types of energy more dispersed
which is light and converting to one of the most order ones which is electricity the efficiency
is typically quite low so for typically pv panels installed today i mean the commercial ones it is
around the efficiency is around 20 21 person on the lab on a specific conditions very well
devices pv panels with very expensive materials as well maybe you can attain 30 40 i think the
largest possible amount theoretically is about 50 c but then under very very very controlled
situations which is not going to happen ever in reality so this question regarding efficiency is
quite important because sometimes when you are making plans for all the transformations of the
different types of energy as we are passing through several steps of transformation every
every step in plus a loss of energy so we are getting energy from the sun which is light
on on electricity on the pv panel so we are losing around let's say 80 person in a commercial
panel then you are taking this electricity and for instance you want to convert this to hydrogen
because hydrogen is more convenient let's say uh uh to be a store to be manipulated
i'm not completely sure because i think it's quite bad actually but anyway so you are going to lose
another 50 person of this 20 person that you have forgotten so you are losing you are going to
to have just 10 remaining and maybe this this hydrogen you want to use in a car or in a truck
and then you need to do all the many processes in between you need to compress the hydrogen you need
to first reduce the temperature because otherwise it is going to be very warm very hot and it could
explode and then you are going to take this advantage of this in a in a fuel cell so you
are going to lose incredible amount of energy because of any one of these transformations so
all the idea regarding regarding the energy transition the way in which we are going to apply
these different steps are relying on the fact that at some time we are going to increase the
efficiencies so that everything is going to run smooth and we are not going to lose
incredibly huge amounts of energy but but if the sun is if the sun is so ubiquitous and huge
and the photons hitting the earth are abundant then who cares if it's only 20 efficient on the
solar panels i mean that's right well this is this is a good point because typically this is
the kind of argument that was used for a long amount of years sometime ago so they say okay the
amount of energy coming every year from the sun equals let's say eight thousand nine thousand
times the amount of energy being consumed here using all the different sources of energy so
it is so large that who cares the problem with this is that first of all well let's recall that it is
this energy arrives dispersed over all the earth's surface which is huge and few quarters of the
of this surface is is erosion it is not easy to gather the energy there other parts are deserts
other parts are mountains i mean it's not that easy to gather it but the question also is that
from time some since some time ago we know that at the end the earth is already using the energy
from the sun for doing things which are important for instance i mean to to create winds rain to
make the the plants grow you know these kind of things that are important at the end for the
functioning the normal functioning of the earth so at this point this this has been analyzed by
at the at the suric technology institute i direct to the conclusion that in the best of the cases
the amount of energy that we can intercept from the sun without altering all the normal
functioning of the earth in a catastrophic way even worse that the climate change will be
to gather around 0 point i don't remember the percentage but it will be a key equivalent
to four times all the energy that we are consuming right now which is a huge amount actually but it
is not eight nine thousand times it's just four times so this first implies that okay it is not
as abundant as many think it is abundant but it is not incredibly not look seriously
abundant it's this is not true and then if it is a large amount but it's not so large
then the way in which you are using it is very important and the efficiency of all the transformations
are crucial if you want to make something which is functional and this is just one
of the many problems that we have with all the systems devoted to gathering the gathering
real energy so if you want i can i mean it's a typical when i'm making my talks i typically
explain why this model of real energy is not necessarily the best one the best fit one and
this is just one of the four main problems that we have with it so the first one is this one
the second one is that it relies on materials that are not so abundant on earth because the
systems for harnessing this energy maybe the kind of energy they are harnessing is renewable
but they are done from renewable materials and the point is that some of these materials are
actually scarce on earth and they have also their own depression curves so you can obtain a given
rate so it's not that easy to make the substitution and even the non-rare ones that if we were to scale
them you know two orders of magnitude like copper will will have their own depletion curves
and it will take more energy to get them yeah exactly well in fact in the case of copper
if you see what is happening in Chile right now it is quite clear that very you are we are arriving
very close to the peak of copper production in principle it was intended to be around
2035 but i think that probably we're going to accelerate it and and then if we do mine all
that additional copper then we have another shortage which is water in Chile because you
need a lot of water to mine the copper okay keep going what are the third and fourth let me let me
say something about this because it is interesting because uh some months ago i was contacted by a
mining industry in Chile because they wanted a system to predict the presence of jellyfishes
because they have also a lot of jellyfishes there coincidentally and the problem that
they need to get in order to operate a desalination plant they need to keep the main
duct taking the the sea water free from jellyfishes because it blocks and every time it blocks it
it makes a breakdown for several million dollars and they wanted to have a system to predict this
so you know everything at the end is is connected in a way
yeah it is i mean the uh uh the late Albert Bartlett said that um the greatest uh inability
of humans was to understand the exponential function i would i would append that by uh the
ability of humans to think in systems to think and then what because we're so reductionist looking
at one thing but now we know the jellyfish impact copper impact solar impact energy okay
what are the third and fourth uh challenges yes so um the third and this one is quite crucial right
now is the so far when you consider all the steps on the life cycle of any renewable
gathering system uh it depends i mean it depends on fossil fuels so for each one of the steps on
the life cycle from destruction of the materials that you need in order to make the the different
pieces the different components of the systems the energy devoted for this making of these components
all the phases of transportation all the phases regarding the deployment installation
and the maintenance of the systems at the end of the commission in if a phoenix because they
are not the commission in all those phases you are using fossil fuels it's very hard to avoid
using fossil fuels at up to date nobody has ever gaffer managed to to be able to do all the steps
on the life cycle of our renewable system uh in which fossil fuels were not uh appearing
so for instance this makes people like gail berber to say that in fact um the new world
systems are fossil fuel standards something that you can you can get around if you have
some fossil fuels by the hands otherwise you cannot because they need fossil fuels to break
and i think this is a quite serious concern right now because something that we are observing
is in the current situation in which for instance we are struggling to keep on the level of diesel
production because diesel is the thing that is decreasing the fastest regarding all the all the
fuels derived from oil we are observing that in general all mining on the earth transportation
on the earth has become much more expensive during the last years and this is affecting for
instance companies that are working manufacturing windmills and manufacturing wind power to be
and systems and so on to the point that they have incredible losses i was getting the information
quite recently from the losses accumulated during the last year just last year and i see that for
instance the three greatest wind manufacturers on earth they have very incredible losses for
instance of festas has losses for one and a half billion dollars past year just 2022 and gamesa
which is now part of semen's it was a former spanish company and is now part of semen's
they have two billion losses past year and um general electric the wind power division they
have uh two two billion losses so it's absolutely amazing yeah i'm much more sanguine about solar
than than wind as as a you know potential resource but but keep going on because i have like
19 more questions for you so what is the number what is and by the way real quickly on this i
totally agree with you that all the renewable advocates in government and and industry kind of
neglect the fact that we that they think that uh we just keep everything the way it is and we build
out all this other stuff without understanding that this huge subsidy of uh fossil helpers
500 billion strong in terms of of human labor equivalent are going to be retiring and declining
and that is what is supporting the build out of of renewables right now but keep going um
antonio what is your fourth my fourth question is savvy that they find also quite interesting
that nobody wants to discuss about this and is the fact that those systems are um by design
design to produce electricity and electricity is something which is cool i think something
is very nice it's a high value kind of energy is a source of energy need to produce consumer energy
but at the end of the day in the context of the world it represents 20 21 percent of all the fine
energy consume of the world and in advanced economies it's it's a bit more but you are
typically moving on the range of 20 something person and the question at the end is you have a 70
something percent of the energy which is not electricity currently and we're assuming that
it's going to be easy to convert this to electricity usage and it is not clear because some of the things
that we know that are hard to be given to go to to become electric and even more important
interesting than that is that when you analyze the consumption curves of electricity for instance
in spain in the european union and in the in the ensemble of all advanced economies we have said
that this stagnation or decrease of the electricity consumption since the year 2008 so we have 15 years
in a row with oscillation i mean it's not that simple decline but you have a clear trend of
decreasing electricity consumption when the previous years will have a very steep increase of electricity
consumption so it seems that it is very hard to increase the amount of electricity that are
consuming this is normal because electricity is not the preferred way to consume energy still
the preferred way to consume energy because of the flexibility the all the possibilities that it gives
is from a fossil derived from from oil this is the main source of final energy in the world
when you say when for instance in the case of spain that now they are pushing very strongly
on ocean europe that we may just make this substitution because it's going to be simple in
some sense and i say okay but at the end the consumption of electricity is being reduced from
15 years so it's not something which is accidental the last year i mean the covid the
pandemic no no no no no it's something that actually is happening for 15 years in a row
so something is happening here of course it has a lot to do with the lack of the the loss of
industries in general the industrial reaction is something that in europe now is getting very intense
because of the situation in europe and it's not easy to say that this is going to change so why
do you want to increase the amount of systems able to produce electricity when you have no
market for it this interesting question
well you and i have never actually spoken about that but your four um your four categories there
are exactly what i say in my presentation so either we're reading each other's work um or
this is a this is a robust finding um so um so you've said before antonio that based on analysis
of various studies that the world would likely be able to sustain around 40 percent of the current
energy that we consume in kind of the intermediate to longish term you've also said that if planned
for and managed well that this doesn't have to result in a drop of standards of living for most
people but rather a change in lifestyle can you unpack what you mean by this and what is the difference
between standard of living and lifestyle in your opinion i think this is quite big
seen quite differently in europe than in united states because here we have not the superman
sprawl and it is easier because we need less um let's say private transportation systems
so for instance in my case i live in uh in a town outside of Barcelona and i commute by
train to my work here in Barcelona and back um well for me this is not quite complicated
not to have a car but for some other states quite complicated so the question for instance the
discussions here is in europe now as you know the european commission has said that in principle
the selling of cars working on on gas or diesel could be forbidding starting in 2035
and this is because they come and they start to realize that it's going to be very hard to
keep all the amount of cars that we have here so how you can manage to make these changes in the
taxi consumption without affecting your life standard so maybe not owning a car but selling
the car with other people that are going the same direction of view probably this is much
easier to be done in places like Spain or in places like europe in general they did in
united states because you you live in a quite different way okay we know also that 30 percent
of all the food produced globally is wasted even without anyone touching it and so the
point we are talking about the problem that we have in the food system that we have a problem
a serious problem in the global food system but this problem is mainly a distribution problem
it's not a production problem i mean we have also production but for sure but the main
contributor a nice distribution problem we have in the huge waste of for instance
clothings there is this i don't know you know that in atacama dessert in in in the sort in
in chile there is a vast extensive terrain at which there are a lot of clothings being dropped
there some some of them are still wrapping the plastic they were producing it so because now
body has other types then just because now are out of fashion and they are not interested in them
but this of course is a very huge waste of energy resources whatever whatever you want
and in in general this methods of car sharing something that for instance in spain it's quite
common that you have a washing machine inside your house this is not typical in united states but
here it's quite common i mean the blocks of apartments people have a washing machine
for its own at each apartment so you can share them for instance this is done a lot of in united
states you can share them you can share other electric appliances i mean at the end it's a
question of reorganizing the way in which things are done and in the case of spain for instance it
will be relatively easy to reduce our energy consumption by two thirds by two thirds yes
relatively easy really yeah but the problem the problem is that this will have a huge
economical impact right and financial on stocks and bonds and things yeah yeah yeah so the question
is i am just discussing here the technical part the problem is that of course the what it implies
in terms of economics and financial is devastating because you are really cutting up cutting off
sharp a lot of uh industrial activities for sure the problem at the end is that maybe probably
this is going to happen anyway also if you want the people to leave they need to have jobs they
need to do something for living for a living so at the end they need to work in something
so it's not that easy as okay we are going to shut up all the factories i mean it's not that this
is us but from the technical point of view what we need to leave is not as much as it puts in
the problem is how we pass from this oversized economic system oversized production systems
to something that can be encompassed with the limits of the planet and this for sure is the
hardest but that is something that i usually insist in my talks that typically the problem
rather than energy is posed as a question which is a technical question and this is a reason why
a physicist like myself is asking well how can we solve this and i did i say i mean from the
technical point of view this is not a real problem the main problem is a society problem
it's a cultural problem we need to change the way in which we consume and we um make relations
is between among each other and with the planet it's a cultural thing maybe it's not really a
technical question but i'm pretty sure making such a huge transformation of the economic system
is not an easy task and i understand that many people go desperate when you see that because
it's okay this is almost it's probably more difficult to do that the transmitter looking
for a magic and that is also incapable of doing everything but but at least we're now talking
about it i think the ukraine situation has at least made the words that you just said
sound somewhat plausible so uh moving on to another topic related to what you just said
that i know you uh have researched and thought about why is the idea of rationing something
that is generally associated with scarcity something that economics and economic theory
which is supposedly the science of scarcity is not good at thinking about or handling and
how have the minimal and temporary rationing systems in europe uh because of the russia
ukraine situation been received so far this isn't the scene also for many avenues actually
so first of all something that should be say about rationing of course rationing implies that
you have not enough resources in order to keep the things the same way you were doing previously
so this meaning that in some sense you have a scarcity but the question is that the economic
theory of course is not um able to cope with rationing by a simple fact is because in a standard
economy theory you have a principle which is going the infinitive sustitutability principle
that says any factor reproduction factor can be substituted by another one the market will be
finding the invisible hand of the market except for energy they get that totally wrong well i think
it's not only that it is not the only case but it is there probably the main case right now so
and in at the end this is just a hypothesis it's not a law of the nature it's something that well
it is hypothesized to be there like that but it's not true this is what's happening it's not true
the idea is that in principle if you put um price tag large enough you are going to the
market is going to find a substitute well at the end it will be okay provided the physical
reality allows it that sometimes is not the case because for instance in the case of energy
you have energy that you have but even in the case of materials it happens that you have not
really appropriate substitutes and if it is something that is essential as energy is then
you have a problem for sure so that this is a reason why a standard economic theory does not
contemplate rationing rationing always is seen as a failure of the market because the market
should be able by definition to provide a substitute so if it is not doing is well because
someone is interfering with the market and creating this situation and this is not truly
meaning this is just because the physical reality with this interface is physics at the end okay so
at the end the question is well how do you deal with rationing ration at the end implies okay you
can you have not enough for what you wear your expectations because at the end is that i mean
you are expecting to spend as much in in all the things you are doing but you have not enough
so you need to decide how do you how do you assign this and you in the case of rationing
you cannot use the typical market laws because what is going to happen is that the one who is
able to pay the most is the one who is going the largest portion but sometimes you have some
essential activities like say for instance agriculture food production food distribution
i mean all the things that are related to water is bringing water to have clean water
drinkable water i mean all these things implies a lot of energy and other things and well in general
they put in all the essential goods to the reach of all the cities so those things also
for sure should have a priority in the use of energy so at the end the question is that when
you are thinking about rationing the way in which you are rationing is a political decision
i'm pretty sure that it is going to be presented as it has happened in the case of europe as a
technical as a technical issue but it is not it is always a political issue because it is the idea
that you have a house or say it should work that makes you to decide okay how am i going to assign
for instance you can say okay we are coming you are giving to everyone uh this uh the proportional
amount of food things so you have let's say 10 percent less so everyone has 10 percent less
okay but this is a way of saying that everything is equally important to you but it is not or you
say okay these activities are more important than others but then the others that are going to be
reduced the most you are taking a decision on that and this has to do with your or our ideas
principles ideology whatever it's a political thing and in the case of europe what has happened
is that um uh of course we we have not enough gas for for all the the things that we wanted to do
so we have passed by several rounds of rationing in europe even maybe well you are probably aware but
it's something that even people in europe has not been aware of this but first we have a
rationing of gas so we were told in the past summer that we should reduce our gas
consumption by 15 percent in the case of spain because it was a different it was just seven
percent but later in september october we were told that we will have to reduce electricity
consumption by 10 percent which is a significant amount and at the end we have been able to cope
with this we have been able i mean we have met the goals the two reasons for which we have met
the goals first in the case um of this particular winter is because the winter in europe this year
has not been really cold it's amazing because for instance in central europe we have observed
temperatures with more 15 Celsius above above the average i mean i don't know how many Fahrenheit
just multiplied by 1.48 but it is really it it is really it is really very warm
so this has favored that the typical needs for energy for heating has been much more reduced
during this year the other thing is that we are experiencing a massive closer of factories
enterprises and industries in europe it at a really massive massive rate so i think that
people don't want to speak out aloud but it is exactly what is happening and for instance germany
is taking is taking a great hit with this so uh altogether has allowed us to significantly reduce
to ration but uh what is interesting is that it has been done almost not taking any specific
measure because the the stated measurements were quite weak quite unconcrete but at the end taking
account what has happened that the winter was milled that the industries are closing so actually
they have not need to to implement anything on place even so even so the european commission
has announced that for the from here to the year 2030 we should reduce our total consumption of
energy another 12 percent or total consumption of energy taking into account that we are starting
from what where we are starting them with this additional natural gas with the reduction of
electricity not only that but for instance in the specific case of france we have we
they they have they have a real very complicated situation uh the what they call it subjected
sovereignty sovereignty plan i mean austerity plan for energy consumption they they say that
they are going to reduce the total energy consumption by 10 percent from now to 2025 so
interviews and they are going to reduce the total energy consumption by 40 percent from now to 2050
which is a huge amount i mean this for sure is going to apply to a huge economic transformation
at the end the problem is how are they going to do it you are following for instance the
situation in france right now it is quite uh heated i mean they have massive strikes i just can't
imagine i mean given your knowledge that the linkage between the energy and gdp if you reduce
your energy by 40 percent your gdp is going to go down which what about all the debt the the
trillions of dollars of debt by the european central bank how is that going to be paid back
that spells the end of the euro and all kinds of other other issues um a comment and a question
first of all that the fact that european governments are actually stating these things
is hard for me to imagine the same statements being made in my country i just cannot imagine
it even though you're at least facing reality well but we have we are facing a different
reality than yours that's true because we still have 80 of our own uh energy yeah yes this is
the key point you have resources we have not yeah this is so do you think do you think uh um in the
near future in the next decade that we europe and the us uh or anywhere globally are are going to
need to um as part of this rationing discussion are we going to nationalize essential industries
such as energy to ensure that everyone who needs access to resources get the gets them is that is
that on the horizon well it's not interference it's already happening in the case of europe
i mean france has nationalized them well they have the apart which was um non-nationalized
which which private of the main electricity utility that they have in the country elitist
in the forms so 16 percent of these was in private hands and they decide to nationalize
by year but at the same time germany uh decide decide to nationalize the three largest um
distributors of natural gas in in germany but at the same time belgium privatize the electricity
utility of brussels and the same time austria privatize the same the main utility on vienna i mean
this is happening all over europe but it is be done in such a i don't know how to qualify this but
let's say silent way that nobody is actually talking about this and for me this is very funny
because um um the european union has specific regulations against that against doing exactly
that but as all the countries are doing nobody's saying anything it is quite funny so it is already
happening but probably this is not enough because the key point for us is that we have not the
resources we have not the resources so we need to get the resources from somewhere in the case of
united states you have the resources you have plenty of resources i mean they are not infinite
you are going to run out of them you are going to um before that you are going to run low on them
in the amount of resources is going to be deployed and this is going to cost problems there but it's
not the same as in europe we have really nothing so i wonder who's going to be better off spain
because we don't have the resources and you're going to be faced with a hardship now and figure
out how to navigate it at a lower throughput or the united states which has another decade or two
of resources and will continue to living in an unsustainable way and not prepare
you know this there is a sentence by john michael grill which is quite good so collapse now and
i'm going to rest yeah i think maybe this is going to be good for us even if it is going to be
harder right now we'll see we'll see yeah so many people uh antonio um moralize capitalism as either
a savior of the world or the root of all our problems what is your stance on this and given
energy depletion that and climate and ocean risk which you are fluent in do you see capitalism
as having a place in future societies well i need that we need to um to go to the next step i mean
capitalism is just one step in the evolution of economical thinking so we have before that we have
what is called i don't know how to say in english or i know the term in spanish but we have a
which is called physiocracy them well another term that i know how to translate so we have
passed it by several different economic systems capitalism as we understand it now uh you typically
when you look for definition for instance at the wikipedia or whatever you say capitalism is a
system which is characterized by private property free market and so on and this is this isn't right
i mean in capitalism you have that but you have also in other systems in previous systems we have
also uh private property and free market this is not what makes the essence of capitalism
we make the essence of capitalism right now i mean at the beginning of 21st century and the
thing that in fact puts everything in compromise is the necessity of growth this is the key point
so the question that the capital um the money uh has right to have an interest rate so this
interest rate is what makes you uh makes the need for this exponential increase on wealth this
exponential increase on production and consumption and everything and for sure this is
completely incompatible with a finite planet this is the critical point at the end so
we need to overcome the limitations of the current system and to go to a different system
which is just another one in a section historical uh succession of systems in which you can have
private property you can have free market but you cannot have infinite growth because of course
if it's not it's impossible in a finite planet this is the key point so some people when i am
discussing this thing some people here in europe you know in europe the political thing is different
in united states but they they like to post themselves as anti-capitalism i i think that this
is uh from my point of view is a wrong a wrong way to to post the thing it's not a question of going
against because capitalism with these lights and shadows is just a promise just a step in the
evolution so the question is not going to be anti-capitalist but be post-capitalism going
to a system that is going to be created after this one and this is something which is natural i mean
all living things as civilizations for instance progress change along the time to adapt to the
situation so we need to adapt to the current situation and this adaptation implies an evolution
in our way in which we relate with each other and also with the planet and something that should
be have been obvious from throughout the case now but now it's impossible to avoid it is that
we cannot grow from everything the planet is and it is so simple statement very very clear
statement all the statement all the parts that we have is from one one hand we have run with the
inputs because we cannot keep the pace the rhythm at which inputs are entering the system we are not
running out we are running short so and you have a problem with the inputs and we have a problem
with the outputs because all the ways we are generating are changing the climate but are
contaminating ourselves i mean they are poisoning ourselves all the end so at the end and all these
things may be because we have we have had intent of growing forever in a free planet and this
fortune cannot work and this fortune should at one point of our should break at some place it is
breaking several places at the same time okay it doesn't matter we have arrived to this point
as i used to say that i am not looking for um how do you say ah sorry i i i i i i i i i i i i
i'm not interested in in in finding the guilty persons i'm interested in finding the solutions
so forget about how we are here it doesn't it doesn't imply for it that for sure people
some people have more responsibility than others but for the time being the chat's
concentrating the solutions which is the thing that we need and as you have said um we are going
to run probably very different pathways for instance in spain in europe in united states in
china in russia the situation is going to be quite different for the different regions and so on
but in the long run we need all of us to become really sustainable in some sense so europe for me
is already in the in the fast track to that and we need to figure out how to do this in this way
and the problem from now is that they are completely blind to the real to the real um death of the
problems that we have yes i see um i want to be respectful of your time i'm not getting to all
the questions i want to ask you so you might have to come back uh in six months or so so uh in six
months we we may live in a totally different world so um antonio society in the planet uh as
you're well aware face many risks and challenges um what are you most worried about now like in the
near term well for sure that risk of nuclear war cannot be ruled out unfortunately i don't for
me this is not the main scenario but unfortunately it's an SNF that cannot be ruled out and this
for sure will be overwhelmingly the the main risk but putting this apart for me the main
problems is that probably we're going to observe a proliferation of wars and revolts on the planet
it is already happening the problem is that this is already happening we have many countries that
are becoming failed states failed states for instance Sri Lanka is only keeping more or less
something to say because india is investing a lot because india is very worried about the
situation of Sri Lanka also because they have this Tamil minority there that can be influenced
with what's happening in Sri Lanka and india is ejecting a lot of resources on Sri Lanka just to
keep the it afloat but Sri Lanka is completely collapsed we have Pakistan which is a country
which is also in a very delicate situation and we are talking about a country having
a 220 million person and atomic bombs so this should be taken and they can't buy natural gas
because europeans are buying it yeah exactly absolutely absolutely correct we have a dire
situation now in south africa which is in principle the richest country in all africa
well this in terms of gdp for sure and they have a very delicate situation right now a lot of
instability and so on but we have many many countries having quite dire situations in africa
latin america i mean asia at this moment at this exact moment so the main risk right now is that
we can observe a real breakdown of a lot of conflicts inside the countries among the different
countries wars and all this kind of stuff we can go to a global this stabilization process and this
in turn could severely affect those united states because united states some of the resources they
are obtaining you're obtaining from other countries and in these countries you get very
destabilized this is going to create problems also for you even if you can run much more
self-sufficient than that for sure for me this is the main risk right now i mean in the social
times because this can be the question for me is that the reason why i think this is the the worst
the risk right now is because probably this is going to claim at all in terms of human
lives which is going to be available so do you have any personal advice to listeners who understand
what you're talking about at this time of global economic crisis kind of the john michael gareer
variations simplify first and beat the rush or what what do you tell people yeah i again
it's different united states and in europe so in europe the people people listen to this podcast in
all countries of the world it's a global audience the problem is that probably the response depends
on the place you are living in for instance if you live in latin america nobody needs to explain
you because probably you are living this sleep maybe a slow motion or not as a slow motion as you
would like so they already know the situation is becoming very very many parts in latin america
in the case of europe i think that's yes so simplifying your lifestyle is something which is
important and also to gain something which is important very important is to gain psychological
resilience because if you have a life expectation they have a you know a lot of expectations on how
the things should go out and now all your worldview is being shattered by the reality this is very
hard this is really very very hard so i think that it's quite important to gain this psychological
resilience to gain this adaptability that here in europe you are not so used as in united states
people tend to have a lifelong work here this is the usual thing so people work in the same
thing for all their lives at the same place everything all the same and probably now the
scene the thing is going to be quite different so we need to adapt and we need to face this with
that repeat dose of optimism understanding that we can improve but we need to put the
means to improve this is completely different from the american mentality i mean it's a different
completely completely different way thinking things and in europe i think these are things
which are important also trying not to get depth because it is going to be very hard
i am very i am very happy because just yesterday i cancelled my my the loan on my house i am very
happy right now and i think that this this other part is important and also trying to work locally
to gain resilience at the community level working community are things that are important so in the
case of these states i think that these prescriptions are useful anyway the problem is that it's not
going to be so evident in probably 10 years during the next 10 years probably you are going to be in
a completely different situation because also you are going to lose our let's say dead weight the
dead weight of europe because europe is going to get in some sense disconnected and this will allow you
without your own means probably to be more or less okay more or less in a world that has
become smaller suddenly for better 10 years more it is going to depend on a lot of factors that
for me it's very hard to to evaluate precisely for instance how the situation with oil production is
going to keep in united states because even if we know that fracking as it is going right now
this decrease of the drill and compete the wells and so on probably is going to to get us a very
drop in the next months but at the end it depends if you restart a new cycle of investment the involvement
of the government because you have the resources at the end so even if they're expensive you can
exploit them so this will imply that maybe you are reducing social welfare in order to
produce this thing okay this is going to be hard to to to be sure how solid it's going to be deployed
in united states but most likely you have for saying something 10 years more to adapt so
a taking drastic measurement right now probably is going to be seen as a weirdness something which
is not fit for normal social standards but something that could be useful for you is to
observe what happens in europe and to try to learn the lessons from what is going to happen to us
would you change your advice on what to do to young humans teenagers or college age students
what what do you tell them about the future antonio well i have my own teenagers at home so
do they understand all this about the energy and climate yes yes yes my daughter usually says
that we have a skewed up this situation she blames us but in fact i need to accept that it is true
actually i mean she's also she's also participating in in the in the in the same part right now i mean
because if you cannot avoid it okay but yeah this is true that we need to do more than on that
my recommendation for people who are the for the youngsters well i think that um even united states
the life they are going to live is very different from the one that their parents have lived and this
is clear they need to understand that getting resilient to be adaptable to not be not be very
dependent on um supply chains that need to arrive to isolated places this this is important we need
to avoid that it is better to love in communities which are more or less self-sufficient that can be
um supplied easily uh this kind of stuff and also regarding the choices for career
for instance if you are going to college or whatever i think that it is better
my i cannot avoid that because i am a physicist myself but i think i think that in general stems
are better choices than others my unfortunately i mean taking into account the the the
the diners of the predicament that we have so if you could go for stems i think it's preferable
sensibly taking into account if you could i mean not not not anyone has the skills or the
natural inclination to this and also other other other skills are useful and for sure
but stems are going to be massively massively needed yeah no i agree with that um what do you
care most about in the world antonio my my kids no doubt no no i mean uh sometimes uh
there are always people that because as i make a lot of inconvenience statements
some people look for some hidden motivation in myself and looking for some i don't know
economic motivation but this is very hard i've been sometimes blamed for working for possibly
industrial industry nuclear uh i don't whatever um and i always give the same answer when i ask
my motivation i have two motivations in my life and well what is 16 years old something that is 12
years old these are my real motivations and this is the reason why i'm doing what they're doing
if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision what is one
thing you would do to improve human and planetary futures and since you are a polymath i will give
you up to three things with the magic wand i actually will just need one okay one because
the problem is as i have said it's a culture we will have we will need uh um how do you say uh
a collective um a collective attack of common sense this is what we need the most we need to have
a lot of common sense that we are actually lacking of it we are putting short term interests
completely skewed views of the world and something that for me is quite annoying actually
is disturbing that many times you observe that people are um are giving up on their personal
responsibility on the public affairs so you need to get involved and this concerns you and you
cannot say the typical saying that is okay well someone is taking care someone is in charge in
charge this is what kids say adults take care of their own business adults know that they
need to take responsibility we cannot act as children we need to act as adults so if we all
act as adults i think it will be enough with education though to understand our biophysical
reality as a as a key component are you active politically in in in spain with sustainability
issues and and getting these ideas scaled so that common sense has a better chance of of manifesting
well you know uh when you say political sometime uh it is important i don't know if the connotation
is the same in in the case of the United States but um it's different to distinguish between
political and partisan so of course everything what i do is political because by definition
of political comes from the word the greek word police within city and it's the things that are
interesting for the citizens of for sure what they are discussing is important for the citizenship
so something for by the way you don't know the word idiot uh was applied in the it's also
greek one and it was applied for the people that were not aware about the the affairs of the city
so the people that really didn't want just the word idiot is coming from that isn't it's a greek
word so it's quite so should we should we title this episode antonio touriel common sense versus
idiots this is exactly this thing so but anyway regarding my engagement with public authorities
administration and so on i am trying to convince them i am talking to them frequently some they
are frequently asking me what's the mean it is very funny because uh they don't really trust
everything what i say by they fear that i am right so and this proposition they keep on coming and
asking me asking me even if they don't like what they say because of course what they are saying
is not totally likelihood yeah excellent so i i want to keep my word to you so you can catch
your train to get back to your children a final question this was an introductory overview of
your expertise your work your worldview on on the climate ocean a little bit on energy if you were
to come back on this podcast six months from now or something what is one question one topic
that you feel passionate about that speaks loudly to you that you would like to take a deep dive and
just speculate the real energy transition that we need to do i mean there are many things that
we need to discuss on on that but something that probably we are going to be in urgent need a massive
need to be discussed in six months from now it's about food because food is going to become a very
big issue globally so probably see we could discuss again in six months from now we're going to talk
about food a lot okay it's a deal mucho mucho gracias mi amigo thank you so much for your time
and uh and and your work and let's stay in touch and let me know if i can help you Antonio thanks
a lot you are doing you're doing enough thanks out for giving me voice if you enjoyed or learned
from this episode of the great simplification please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast
platform and visit the great simplification dot com for more information on future releases
