There is this Byzantine media blitz that's all over the place on Twitter and elsewhere
that the US is a oil exporter. Can you just briefly unpack how much oil and oil products
the United States uses daily or yearly and how much we produce domestically versus how much we
import? If you could just summarize that in as simple terms as possible, because I think there's a
lot of confusion about that. Right. So when we hear people talk about, oh, the US is a net exporter
of oil, they're talking about crude oil plus refined products like diesel, gasoline, etc.
Now, nobody else in the world except the United States defines net exporter that way.
A country is a net exporter of oil if it exports oil, if it exports more than it imports.
But since we're an energy launderer, we get to redefine what it means to be an exporter.
Exactly. And again, I'm not trying to be critical. The US imports a lot less crude oil
than it did, say, 10 or 15 years ago. Because of the shale situation.
Right. We had to import a lot of light oil 10 or 15 years ago because our production had declined.
So we've pretty much eliminated that. We no longer have to import other countries light oil.
But since we don't produce very much of the heavy oil ourselves, we, never as a strong word,
it's very unlikely that we will ever stop importing other people's oil until the world just doesn't
use oil anymore. As long as we're in the business of exporting refined products, we need heavy oil
or we can't do it. That's just that simple. So when people say we're energy independent,
first of all, it's really not true. It's really not true.
Well, compared to Japan and Europe and the UK it is, but go on.
Well, but it's still not true. I mean, we're a whole lot more energy independent than
then Japan and Europe. Okay, absolutely. But now we're talking about, well, who's,
of a bad lot, who's the best? Well, so we're 80 to 85% energy independent, yes.
But let's talk about, I mean, you could break that down if you like, but I want to talk about
the oil part especially. I think we're at, we consume 20, 21 million barrels of oil per day
and we produce 12 or 11. Well, again, now, you know, we consume, so,
nobody consumes crude oil. Right. Except the refineries.
Except the refineries. So America consumes 20 million barrels a day of refined products,
not oil. Okay. Okay. So to keep the arithmetic straight,
you know, let's talk about how much crude oil goes into American refineries.
And the amount of crude oil that goes into American refineries is something around the,
you know, around 13 to 14 million barrels a day. Okay. The United States produces
about 11 or 11 and a half million barrels a day. And so you could say, oh, well, we're almost there.
You know, a couple of more million barrels a day and we're there. Well,
but what I just told you a little while ago is except that we turn around and export three or
four million of our produced barrels elsewhere because we can't use it in refineries here.
So we have to then import more appropriate oil to replace that and also get back to the
13 or 13 and a half million that goes into our refineries. And we consume 20 million barrels
worth of product. Product. Now, and somebody is going to say, in fact, you said it to me in an
email not very long ago, well, wait a minute, that doesn't make sense. How can we have 13
million go in and we get 20 million out? And the answer is, the simple answer is that a lot of
what we consume are natural gas liquids, many of which don't come from from this refining column
at all. They come from natural gas, completely different source. And so, you know, an awful
lot of what we consume go into the plastics that you talk about, go into all sorts of natural gas
liquids that and then there's biofuels. Okay, there's, you know, a million and I don't know
what the night number is, but it's, it's more than a million barrels a day of what we call gasoline
comes from corn. But that's counted in our consumption. And then there's another thing
called refinery gain that when you, when you take crude oil, which has a very high density,
and you refine it into products that have a lower density, there's actually an added volume,
there's more oil, there's more product that comes out than goes in. So you take all that
confusing gobbledygook that I just mentioned, and the arithmetic does add up. But, but just,
just to make it clear, and to get back to your, your, your laundering comment,
Michael Levy or Levy is the guy that he used to be an energy analyst. And now I think he's
part of a hedge fund or something like that, because he's a smart guy. But years ago, he,
he talked about, he said, now, if, if a country manufactures no automobiles,
zero, but buys five million automobiles every day from, let's say Italy,
imports them, paints them green, paints the cars green, and then exports them back to
Italy and Europe and sells them, are we a net exporter of automobiles? No, we're a net exporter
of green paint. That's what we've done. And so the, the oil refining analogy that Michael was
talking about there is I buy oil from you, I put it into my refinery, I turn it into gasoline and
diesel and other products, and then I sell it back to you and I call myself a net exporter.
I'm selling you green paint, man. Now, I'm not criticizing the process. I mean,
you know, you want to make money, it's a legitimate way of making money and you're,
you're providing a product that people need. But let's be honest about what you're doing,
you're exporting green paint. So in this discussion, I've come away so far with two main
takeaways. Number one is we're not going to seamlessly or in any near term tie frame get off
of oil because it is central to our modern way of life. If we radically change our way of life,
we then might be able to get off of oil. And then the second takeaway is our system is so complex,
our global supply chains and the systemic risk from any international hiccup
due to Russia or China or a financial meltdown or any other international risk
really can gum up this just in time global import, export of green paint. In this case,
the hemoglobin inputs to our modern economy because in autarky or a world without trade,
the US has plenty of oil, not as much as we used to. And what we have now is mostly
light tight oil, which depletes very rapidly. But we still have a lot, especially relative to
most countries in the world. But we cannot produce the things we need just from our oil. It has to
be either build different types of refineries. And why would they do that? Because they're not
getting the signals from the market to do that. Or we need to continue to merge our oil, mix it
with heavier fractions that we get from other countries, flavors and types of oil.
