So oil is just a chain of molecules that have a carbon
center with various hydrogens around the outside.
And so natural gas, methane, is the simplest.
It's got a carbon in the middle and four hydrogens.
So it's CH4.
And then you start doing, even though I wasn't terribly good
at math either, I mean, you can do the original.
C2H8 and so it's just a very simple step
that the lightest stuff comes off first,
because it has a lower boiling point, if you will.
I mean, that's kind of what we're talking about here.
So butane has got a few more carbons
and a few more hydrogens than methane.
Propane's got a few more than butane.
There's a bunch of other stuff that
there's heptane and octane and all that.
But then you get to guess.
What are those used for?
Those are used for similar, they're
flammable substances that are used for different kinds
of fuels also.
But they're a little bit more.
I mean, we don't consume them ourselves.
They're mostly used as feedstocks
for other petrochemical processes.
Creation of plastic bags and medicines and football
helmets and things.
Yeah, yeah.
So I mean, yeah, like baggies and all the plastic
that we use come from these natural gas liquids
that come off before gasoline.
So the heavy type, I mean, the light type of oil
that we have in the United States
is good for those plastic product precursors.
It's great.
Absolutely great.
OK, so precursors, plastic, octane, things like that.
Then propane and butane, then gasoline.
And at this point, how much of the barrel of oil
is left roughly?
Oh, probably 80%.
So the, yeah, so we're talking about, yeah.
So I mean, roughly speaking, something a little bit less
than half of a barrel is gasoline.
OK.
And like 20% is diesel.
And then the various natural gas liquids,
those are about 15%.
So we take off the 15% right away,
and we've got 85% left to play with.
But 40% to 50% of it is gasoline.
Yeah, yeah, it is.
And then 20%.
So what comes after gasoline?
After gasoline comes diesel.
So gasoline comes off first, kerosene, jet comes off next,
and then diesel, and then heating oil, fuel oil.
Sorry.
Oh, yeah.
Well, I mean, I don't, I'm in preparing for this podcast.
I'm actually learning some of these things.
So what is kerosene used for currently?
Same lighting and lamps and such?
Well, not so much.
Kerosene, I mean, so the words kerosene and jet
are usually hyphenated, OK?
Because they're not exactly the same,
but their principal use, as far as humans,
as consumers are concerned, is for aviation fuel.
Got it.
That's the main use.
OK, so gasoline, then kerosene, jet, then diesel fuel.
Right.
And diesel is also called distillate,
and it also functions as heating oil.
For example, on the east coast of the United States,
very prevalent.
Yeah, well, I mean, heating oil, technically,
is actually a little bit heavier.
There's a fair amount of overlap between kerosene,
jet, diesel, and fuel oil.
It's a spectrum, OK, of which kerosene is the bottom,
and fuel oil is the top.
OK, and fuel oil is what, for ships and such?
It's used for ships, you know, and again,
like ships are required to shift to a lighter type of distillate
when they're within territorial waters
for environmental reasons.
They get outside of jet.
Because the heavier stuff is more polluting?
Exactly.
So the heavier stuff is what you'll hear.
It's called bunker fuel.
Don't ask me why.
OK, so when you're within the territorial
waters of a country like the United States or Europe,
where they have concerns about emissions and air pollution,
the ships are required to use a lighter form of distillate
that doesn't pollute.
When they get out to sea, they can do what they want.
Although, and just to cover that and complete it,
the marine community got together a couple of years ago
in 2020 and said, all right, we need
to regulate more carefully what we burn at sea.
And so a tremendous effort was made to lower the sulfur that
was emitted and to basically clean up the act when it's at sea.
But still, it's a double standard.
So octane, chemical precursors, butane, propane, gasoline,
kerosene, jet, diesel, fuel oil, what's left after all that?
Just some really heavy gook.
Heavy gook, which is used to pave our roads, asphalt,
various kinds of lubricants.
When you lubricate your bearings,
I mean, if you've ever looked at the stuff that
comes out of that tube, I mean, it's thick and pasty.
I mean, it doesn't look anything like oil.
And then there are things called paraffins, which are very,
they almost look like wax.
And they're used for, well, I mean,
when you want to keep mosquitoes out of your yard,
when you're having a barbecue, you
might put some kind of a thing that
looks like a candle into something on a pole
and you light it, and that's paraffin.
So yeah, by the time you get to the bottom of the distillation
tower, I mean, you're basically talking about tar.
I mean, that's what it looks like.
It's black, gooey tar.
So in the same way, well, not in the same way,
in a very different way, but the same metaphor
that Native Americans used every part of a buffalo,
current Americans use every part of a barrel of oil, it seems.
We do, yeah, because it all contains energy.
So this is a tangent, but we've emailed about this before.
The whole electric car, battery, emission story,
that's a topic for another day.
But in each barrel of oil is the roads
that the electric or regular cars up will drive on.
And how in the heck will the world create roads
if we don't have the bottom 10% of the sludgy asphalt
from every barrel of oil that is the leftover, which we use
to not only create roads, but to maintain and repair them.
I've just went on a bike ride today
and someone just smoothed out the asphalt, which,
without it, I would have had a bumpy ride.
Is this a topic?
I don't even remember hearing or reading
about how we're going to replace asphalt
if we have to go fossil free.
Yeah, these are some of the details
that somehow often get left out of the story
because we, the public, are assumed to be energy blind
and maybe the politicians who spin these stories
are nearly as energy blind as the public
that they're speaking to.
But if you read our mutual friend, Vashlav Smil,
who, for anyone who wants to get a little bit more deeply
into energy than we're talking about right now,
the guy's written more than 40-
He writes as many books as I have podcasts, but go on.
The guy's amazing.
He's written 40 books, right?
But still says...
I keep pestering him to be on this show
and eventually I think he'll crack.
But he's like, I'm too busy writing books, Nate.
I don't want to do any interviews.
But go on, Art.
Yeah, so he says that the four pillars of modern civilization
are plastic, steel, cement, and fertilizer,
all four of which require petroleum.
How does cement require petroleum?
Well, you've got to extract the materials.
I mean, if you've ever seen a sidewalk that's broken
or somehow cut, you'll notice that it's full of rocks, right?
And so the cement-making process is very energy-intensive
that you have to extract, just like you extract iron ore
from a mine in South America, or you extract oil
from deep in the subsurface.
All of the operations that go into getting the materials
and assembling them for cement require fossil fuels.
So you've got plastics that come from oil and natural gas
liquids.
You've got steel, which has to be extracted.
The iron has to be extracted.
It has to be transported.
It has to be heated at very, very high temperatures,
usually using coal.
We don't really have a very good way.
I mean, we could theoretically smelt metals using electricity,
but it would be unbelievably complicated, super expensive.
And we're not engineered to do that at this time.
So steel, fertilizer is something that most people don't even
think about very much.
But I mean, most of the reasons that we have nearly 8 billion
people on planet Earth today is solely because of fertilizer,
which is made from petroleum.
So at the end of World War I, the world population
was a little bit more than 2 billion people.
And without fertilizer, it would have
stayed at about 2, 2.2, 2.3 billion people
because the planet couldn't feed more than 2 or 2.3 or 4
people, billion people.
But a couple of German guys figured out
how to liquefy air under great pressure and temperature, which
provided the source of nitrogen needed to create fertilizer.
I mean, humans have known how to make fertilizer forever.
We just didn't have enough free nitrogen on planet Earth
to do it until Haber and Bosch came along, figured this out.
And all of a sudden, we could fertilize the world
and we could start growing the population because fertilizer
expanded the productivity of the soil.
And so most of the problems that we have on planet Earth today,
in my opinion, are because we got too many people.
And we got too many people because of fertilizer.
But you can't do fertilizer without petroleum, mostly
hydrogen from natural gas, other fossil energy.
So those are Schmeel's four pillars of modern civilization.
And I mean, I'm as sympathetic as I know
you are to people that put the environment first.
And I think you do and I do.
But when they talk about, well, let's just
get off of fossil fuels, they're cutting the pillars off
of the four elements that uphold modern civilization.
It's OK if you want to do that.
But it's not that it's got real consequences.
I mean, you're bringing down the civilization
that you want to keep.
So you can't have it both ways.
