And it's not even like you can say well if we could somehow force everybody to do this
that would fix it because you actually need totally different incentive structures
and in the current set of structures like there's no way individual humans can make that
left hand turn. So like how do you deal with that problem as an individual? Like how do you
not contribute but also not give up the things that make life meaningful and valuable to you?
Greetings. Today's episode is with my friend Ashley Hodgson. Ashley is an associate professor
of economics and runs the economics department at St. Olaf's University in Northfield,
Minnesota, which is very close to where I live or she teaches behavioral economics.
Ashley's YouTube channel is called a new enlightenment where she explores topics on
economics, governance, and the epistemics of a world of social media and increasing
concentration of power. In this episode Ashley and I discussed our systemic predicament from
a perspective rooted in behavioral economics. For those of you who watched last week's episode
with Steve Keen, you might understand that I don't have a lot of practicing economic professors in
my circle of friends but Ashley is one of them. I love her curiosity, her teaching ethic, and
similar to me she has a compulsion to share these ideas with the public. Please welcome Ashley Hodgson.
Professor Hodgson, good to see you. Good to see you.
I'm waving to you 25 miles across the river. Do you ever do these in person?
I have never done one in person though you and I could have because you are
by far the closest guest that I've had. You teach in Northfield, Minnesota, which is a
less than a half hour drive from me. I don't have the equipment to do it. I mean this office that
I'm sitting in is really like six foot by seven foot. It's really small. I don't think that you
could fit in here but over time maybe I think I don't ever expect this podcast to be super popular
because it's speaking too much truth to power and it's not necessarily a feel good thing.
But I do think there is an energy and a humanity of two people being in the same space
that's different than doing it remotely like this. So who knows?
I think of your podcast as being comforting actually because if people are aware of this
kind of thing I think you have an attitude and a perspective that actually makes it seem more
hopeful and manageable. Well thank you for that and the podcast theme and purpose is to
send a bat signal to people like you that feel that way. I just meant it's never going to be
uber popular because it's complex, it's threatening, there are no easy answers
and I'm not trying to gloss over and wave away the problems. I'm trying to look at them head on
and integrate them. So welcome finally after three delays. Not only are you the closest person to me
but you've also been the most delayed podcast because of my schedule and farm emergencies etc.
So finally we're here. You are a professor of economics at St. Olaf's University. You have a
YouTube channel, two YouTube channels, one where you do lectures on behavioral economics and the
other is something called the New Enlightenment. I think at the end of the day there's energy,
there's ecology, there's climate and environmental issues but it's our behavior
that is going to dictate what is possible and what pathways are open to us. So can you give us a
broad overview of how you think behavioral economics can apply to our cultural transition
which I labeled the Great Simplification? Behavioral economics is basically building
the insights of psychology into economic models and I think what needs to happen is there needs
to be kind of like a rejiggering of the nervous system of the superorganism. Like there's the
three layers of like economics, governance and knowledge systems and those the incentive structures
and the way resources flow, the way information flows across the body of the superorganism.
That's what needs to be rejiggered and in some ways it's built on top of human beings like the
human soul, human groups with all of their quirks and all of their biases and all of their ways
of interacting with the world that are not necessarily, that are not always helpful or
rational at an individual level and I think sometimes can get more unhelpful and more irrational
as you move up the layers of the system. So behavioral economics is really, okay if we're
going to design a system for real human beings, how do we take that into account?
And does behavioral economics look at individual behavior or human aggregate behavior as a
nation or as a global society? So I see it as both. I think many behavioral economists would
say it looks at individual behavior because it's mapping individual sort of quirks and individual
irrationalities. I use that in air quotes because it's mapping that into sort of models.
I think models can map how humans work together in different roles and different systems and
sort of this interaction between, I don't even want to say groups, I want to say systems
and individuals and so I think it's trying to be a bridge between those.
Is behavioral economics, I know when I was getting my PhD started it almost 20 years ago,
people were looking at David Leipzen and Kahneman and others. Is it becoming more
accepted within the field of economics or is it still kind of out there as a crossover with
psychology? I think it's more accepted. I mean sometimes it's a little bit hard to tell like
what is the ethos of the whole field of economics given that most people I interact with are into
behavioral economics or at least kind of accept it and see its value. But I think it's a little
more accepted, you'll see it in introductory textbooks. Is game theory, would that be under
the umbrella of behavioral economics? So game theory is, in some ways if you think of game
theory as having payoffs, how do you come up with what are those payoffs? Behavioral economics
basically helps you build in these human biases into those payoffs. In some ways I don't view
game theories being under behavioral economics. I view behavioral economics as like feeding into
game theory models. I know since we've talked several times that you follow this podcast
and that you actually have a video coming out which I think will be out by the time this one
airs on the super organism that you've shared a draft with me. So given the super organism framing
and the great simplification framing, can you give us an example of how game theory
could apply to the situation that I've described on this podcast? How could it be
useful or a frame that might be informative? Yeah. So I think one of the dilemmas- Not to
put you on the spot. No, no, this is good. This is like exactly the stuff I'm thinking about all
the time. I love the super organism analogy. I think it's going to be central. And I think if
we think about your podcast- Why is that? Why is that? Because I think it's really hard to move
into a new system and you need analogies that build on people's brains, what I call the mental
infrastructure, like the common understanding of how things work. You need ideas and things people
are familiar with. And the super organism is sort of this- It's like going from a single
cell to a multi-celled organism. We're sort of going from individualistic society to a system that
sort of makes human beings work together. And we certainly have a human super organism now
that is not functioning well. And many people are experiencing the downside of this. But to move
into something different, that's not going to happen naturally. It's going to require really
good analogies and really good ways for people to understand what they're moving into. And I just
think this one, it's sort of like, yeah, the body system, it has these incentive structures and
these informational structures that make the body work and that heal it when it gets wounded and
that sort of aggregate information across the body to prioritize pain and all of that. And I just
think this analogy, I just think we're going to need it. But you asked about how does game theory
relate to your podcast? And I do think a lot of people who listen to your podcast probably have
this problem that they recognize what's wrong with the world, with the system. They recognize
its complexity. And yet they're also embedded in a system where their job and their material
well-being and their relationships and everything that's of value to them is embedded in the system.
And so at that point, you have this dilemma, which is, on one hand, I don't want to contribute to this
problem that I see, destroying everything. But if you try to be like, okay, what can I do that would
make me not contribute to this? You've got the drop in the bucket problem, which is part of game
theory where your individual efforts cannot change the system. And it's not even like you can say,
well, if we could somehow force everybody to do this, that would fix it because you actually
need totally different incentive structures. And in the current set of structures, there's no way
individual humans can make that left hand turn. So how do you deal with that problem as an individual?
Like how do you not contribute, but also not give up the things that make life meaningful and valuable
to you? And the solution to that, I think, is going to have to be a collective action solution
of some sort, which is the game theory solution. It's sort of like, okay, this is a multiplayer
prisoner's dilemma. Well, I agree. And if everyone cooperates by consuming less and
respecting nature, the whole system would be better off. But if everyone's not going to
cooperate, everyone defects and keeps consuming and Netflix and chill and ordering those brown
boxes from Amazon and still worried about the future, but compelled to stay in the present
sort of thing. Yeah, well, like with the worry about the future, it sort of sucks people's energy
away. It's like, you may need to contribute in a way that like brings your human energy and your
emotions and your spiritual well-being into the equation. And if that energy, that spiritual
well-being is degraded through like looking at the problem in the face, looking at reality and
being worn down by your helplessness in the face of that, it's a hard problem to solve individually.
Here's a quote that I saw yesterday that I might have to do a frankly about and it speaks to what
you just said. It's from Rilke. The future enters into us in order to transform itself in us
long before it happens. And I do think that is a risk for those of us who are working on
these scary, complex futures that don't have a direct pathway, that we imagine all this stuff,
and it changes what we're doing and how we're thinking and how we're living today. I digress
from your point. No, I feel like that's exactly the point I was trying to make is I think in some
ways the right response to this dilemma is to look ahead and to think, what are the skills and what's
the like infrastructure that I could be building now that could be part of that collective action
mechanism that switches us from one system that's serving nobody well to a different system?
And how do you do that when nobody can actually see what the new system would look like? It doesn't
exist in its current form. It's probably like fragmented ideas here and there that will need to
be patchworked together to create something eventually. But I kind of view the two parts of
this collective action mechanism that could get us there. Like one of them, I think will be digital,
like digital algorithms of some sort. And the other part that has to be matched with that
is going to be more creative, more like relational and community oriented and trust oriented.
And right now those two sides are not coming together yet. They're kind of in separate spheres
and developing in yourself the skills and in at least the sphere of like trust and relationships
and community. And then if you have the skills to develop the infrastructure that's digital,
they could complement that. It's sort of like a lot of this infrastructure cannot happen
automatically, like it can't happen quickly. So when the right moment comes for that switch to
happen, are there enough people, which doesn't need to be everybody, but enough people who
have those skills? So is that what you broadly call the new enlightenment? Yeah, that's pretty
much the new enlightenment. Okay, could you unpack that? Why did you call your YouTube channel that?
And how does the new enlightenment compare to the old enlightenment? Maybe you could briefly
cover both of those. What was good about the old enlightenment? What were they thinking about at
the time? And then how do you envision a new enlightenment? Yeah, the old enlightenment.
So I view it as this paradigm shift in all three of these realms, the economic, the governance,
and the knowledge systems. And I think the purpose for those thinkers back then was how do you get
out from under the thumb of tyranny? And they were thinking really carefully about different types
of tyranny, like tyranny of the majority, tyranny of the leader, tyranny of all these kinds of things.
And they were developing ideas and concepts and processes that included things like the idea of
human rights and due process and checks and balances on power. In the knowledge realm,
they had the scientific method, which helped them sort of get out from under some of the
knowledge based forms of oppression that at that point came through the church.
And the problem is systems depreciate. And so even if you set up a system that's intentionally
designed to get around some of these forces of tyranny, eventually, like there's going to be
some form of power to the powerful that gets ahead of the system's ability to fix that.
And I think that's where we are now.
From a biophysical standpoint, I could understand why systems depreciate,
but you're talking about it maybe from a different lens. Why do systems depreciate?
Yeah, well, I think the biggest one here is going to be this power to the powerful notion where
if you have a system where when you get a little more power, you can use that power to gain advantage
and get more power. You get resources and other scarce things. I mean, attention is a scarce
resource kind of sucked more and more toward a smaller and smaller few, unless you have mechanisms
to sort of stop that, recognize when one group is getting too powerful and sort of sucking up
resources. And I think part of the problem here is it's not just resources, it's not just like
status that's getting sucked up through what Peter Tertian calls the money pump,
but it's like the ability to write the rules of the game so that the economics and governance
and knowledge system rules, those increasingly get handled by a smaller and smaller few.
And then if you add on top of that the digital age, it just speeds all of this process up.
Well, the parallel in my work is that in hunter-gatherer times, there was no way to
accumulate advantage. You could have higher status than others, but then agriculture created hierarchy,
then fossil fuels created energy surplus, which created an accordion effect of the power law,
distribution of wealth, then fractional reserve banking and fiat currencies and digital claims
on reality exponentially increased it. And now AI is going to exponentially increase it again.
So can you talk more about, I know you did a YouTube video on Peter Tertian's work.
How do you think that's relevant here on the concentration of wealth and advantage?
Yeah. Well, Peter Tertian, he's a cyclical view of history person and he's looking at data to figure
out when will these moments of revolution or these moments of violence that sort of overturn the
existing order, what predicts those historically? And he finds the top two are elite overproduction
and mass immiseration. And of course, he's looking historically, so he's measuring people's
height and looking at kingdoms. Mass what? Mass immiseration, I think is what he calls it.
Like misery for more and more people? Yes, exactly. Exactly. Sort of increasing poverty,
increasing, well, historically, it's the lower heights of people, which meant that they weren't
getting as much nutrition and all of that. And when you have sort of frustration in the population
that's growing because of their economic situation, combined with a lot of people who are buying for
those elite positions, where few of them will get them, it's kind of this recipe for the frustrated
elites who want the elite positions, but don't get them, can recognize the injustice and they can
use the frustration of the masses to marry the power that those aspiring elites may have.
They have access to more avenues to change things. And when you combine that with the
energy of a frustrated populace, that's a recipe for some sort of major change in the system.
And how do you see the, I mean, I think that describes what's happening right now. Yesterday,
I did a roundtable, which will be out in a few weeks on poverty in the United States, and 41%
of American families are what's called ALICE, which is asset-limited, income-constrained,
but employed, 41%. So poverty is much wider and deeper in this country than most people are aware.
And yet, if you look at the average wealth and income in this country, it's quite high,
but the average, the mean is quite different than the median. So how do you see
the digital age affecting kind of Turchin's thesis?
Yeah, I mean, I think what the digital age does is it speeds up the interconnections people have,
and it creates more interconnections such that people can connect meaningfully with people all
over the world, kind of like you do. But that means these networks also had this Matthew principle.
Matthew principle. What is that?
Yeah, so the way I explain this in class is if you do an experiment where you give everybody
$100, and you start off with a luck-based experiment where everybody can bet half their
money, and if it's heads, you gain, you know, if you bet 50, you get your 50 back plus another 50.
If it's tails, you just lose your $50. If you do that experiment, starting everybody from the same
point, obviously that's going to create inequality over time because some people are lucky for all
10 of the first 10 rounds. Some people are unlucky for all of those 10 rounds. But I think the thing
that surprises people is after 10 rounds of that game, the person who's the average luckiness, which
is like 50% lucky, 50% unlucky, they're not at $100 after 10 rounds. They're at like $23.
And if you were to... Why is that?
It's, I mean, it's just a mathematical reality. It's sort of like that people who have more when
they bet their next round, well, they're at $150, so now they can bet $75. People who
lost the first round, they're down to $50, so they can only bet $25. So just the nature of
the mathematics. So who ends up having the most? The consistently lucky people?
Yep. Well, in this little experiment, it's consistently lucky. But of course, the real
world isn't just luck, it's also skill and hard work. But if you were to like redo the experiment,
except how you win the bets is like, where are you on that spectrum of how hard you work? Like,
if you just say, okay, people at the 50th percentile, how hard they work. In a system like this,
they would be sort of falling farther and farther behind as well. And if you sort of add on top of
that the fact that when you get more resources, it's not just that you can bet more and lose more,
it's also that you can influence the rules of the game. You can sort of control pathways of
upward mobility. Those properties, when you add them together, mean people who are even sort of
in the middle are going to get farther and farther behind in many systems where gaining,
wealth and gaining power leads to this, the greater power. And that's the Matthew principle
based on the Bible quote that says, to him who has more will be given, to him who is not,
even what he has will be taken away. That was in the Bible? Yeah.
That's kind of a nasty phrase. Yeah. So the United States is often described as a plutocracy
where the power lies with the wealthy, who are some combination of lucky, hardworking and skilled,
and also probably recipients of the cantaloupe effect, which is when new money gets created,
they're closer to the source of the money in their investments, etc. So does this wealth inequality
translate in our country and in the world to power inequality as well?
Yes. I think power is actually the more important aspect here. I've started not even thinking of
it as power to the wealthy. I've started to think of it as power to the people who were placed around
the important nodes of power. Because I'm sure if you rewind sometime in the system, it was,
okay, yes, the rich are getting richer and that's the main force at play. But if you think about
this sort of Matthew principle where, okay, first the bottom 10% gets sucked dry and then
the next 10% and it sort of moves its way up to where, okay, now if you want to suck people dry,
it's going to be the 60th percentile or whatnot. Eventually, that system sort of leads to the
only people who are able to use resources to suck towards themselves are people who are really well
positioned on other dimensions of power, where here we're talking about resources like oil,
like do you have control over one of those nodes or media power or military power or administrative
power, institutional power, there's sort of these different nodes at the top of the system.
And in a lot of ways there's negotiation between those nodes, but a lot of really rich people
actually don't have any leverage at one of those nodes. And I think many of those people,
even if they're super, super wealthy, may be looking at the system, they may even be like an
aspiring elite who's like, wait a second, I see these problems that are serious. I would like to
use my resources to do something about the problem, but they just don't have access to that power
node that's a specific resource. Well, since I'm talking to an economist, I just had a nerdy thought
that I'll express while you were talking. There's resources, which are very important to our economy.
Then there's the control of the resources, which might be the first derivative of the resources.
Then there's the control of the control of the resources, which is where the real decisions and
the behavioral dynamics happen at very influential nodes of the system. And my fear is, like you
were saying before, you've sucked the bottom 10% dry. And then the next is that with AI and blockchain
and the rapid fire technology that we're going to end up 10 years from now with like 2,000 humans
that own everything on the planet. I mean, not exactly that, but that's the direction that we're
headed. What are your thoughts on that? Yeah, I really like the way you just framed that. I
completely agree. And I think when you said, okay, there's the resources, the control over
the resources, and then the controller influence over that, I think a lot of the energy trying to
solve the problems is that a layer that's like lower down in the system where it's like, okay,
how do we tweak around the edges of these people who control a node and they have some power,
but actually there's multiple layers above them where the real power is happening.
And so if the energy to fix the system is not pointed at a pretty high level, if not the very
highest level, I don't think it'll get fixed. So there needs to be a change of consciousness
of the elites in the world for any real change in the super organism. Otherwise, it's just going
to continue on that second derivative of control over control of resources and optionality for
more monetary wealth, which is a claim on social power until it consumes the earth and
sucks the bottom quintiles dry to summarize it. Yeah, well, and I think the question is like,
does it need to be all of the elites? I don't think the whole populace can go against all of
the elites to accomplish this. But like, yeah, how many people need to be on board with a system
change to make it happen? Yeah, this is a deep conversation and also a threatening and uncomfortable
one, especially to a tenured professor. I don't think it's the fault of the elites that have
gotten us here, but it now is the responsibility of many of the elites to help steer and change
a way out of this. And then we run into game theory for them, which will be a barrier,
like you were saying before, right? Yeah, exactly. So the collective action mechanism,
I think it's going to have to operate on different levels. It's going to have to operate on the
population level and on the level of the elites who are willing to change this system, which is
almost certainly not going to be all of them. It's been a while since I took an economics class.
This is not the stuff that they talked about in economics classes when I was in grad school
or undergrad. How do you do all this? How do you manage thinking along these lines and doing your
online lectures and your new enlightenment videos? Plus, you run an economics department
at a pretty prestigious school. How do you manage all that?
I mean, I don't know how I manage it, sort of sometimes barely above water, but I mean,
once you start to realize these problems, like I went into this field because I cared about the
problems and then you start realizing, wait a second, when I'm trying to solve this problem,
I can't and I have to zoom back and I'll try to solve it from a different level and then I'll zoom
back. And I feel like my whole career has been doing that. It's been zooming back another layer
and another layer. And once you sort of realize, wait a second, we're in a place as a system that
I mean, it's scary in terms of what could happen, but it's also exciting because it
means there could be a moment for real change. I can't not think about this stuff.
So it's like my YouTube channel is just like this outlet where I can be like,
I need to get this out and I'm hoping to talk about it with other people and that's just a
good way of like organizing my ideas. It's yeah. Well, I'm glad I found your YouTube channel and
I imagine if you zoomed out nine times, you found my YouTube channel, but I feel the same way. I
can't stop thinking about this and my franklies and this channel are, the franklies are my personal
expression on ideas that I come across and then the Great Simplification Podcast, you and I right
now is highlighting other people that have found this and are thinking about it and trying to
change the software of the operating system of the super organism. And we have to change the
software in order to change the hardware. I don't know how good a metaphor that is.
I like it.
Okay. First time I've used it. And it's not, it doesn't look great, but it's also not impossible
and we are functioning akin, as you said in your, your super organism video, we're functioning akin
to a cancer which is unbridled growth that is slowly but inexorably impacting the life support
systems of the only planet known in the universe to harbor complex life. But that doesn't mean that
that is our epitaph or a foregone conclusion. And that's, and that's my hope. So, so what sort of,
what sort of hopeful or possible trajectories under the new enlightenment
are you advocating for or steering towards?
So I think the knowledge systems are going to be the foundation because, yeah,
the economic systems are built on top of knowledge that, that moves incentives. And so rethinking
how knowledge networks work, I think is going to be the most important. And that's going to be
considering group think towards a, sorts of biases just because communities of thinkers
like academic communities, they can develop sort of a social dynamic and a power dynamic within
that community, which can be bent toward power. And that's one thing we'll have to get out from
under. I think it'll have to involve salience, like a lot of the facts that we disagree with
strongly online, like when there's communities at each other's throats.
I think they sometimes think they're disagreeing about the facts, but they're not
really, they're disagreeing about the salience of particular facts. And it's like, how do you
place this particular fact in a worldview? And if your perception is, okay, this fact is
representative of something bigger that's harder to see, and it's growing, you're going to have a
very different relationship with that fact than if it's just like an isolated fact.
So facts are secondary to ideology? Is that what you're saying?
No, that's not what I'm saying. What I'm saying is how a person takes a series of like facts that
may be scientifically validated or indicative or whatnot and constructs those facts, like pulls
those facts together into a worldview that places them properly so that you can use them and you
have an accurate perception of reality, the mechanism that helps you place facts into a
salience frame. That's really important. Because like salience, it's like, there's most facts out
there are invisible to you. And most facts probably should be invisible to you. But like, yeah, it's
a behavioral economics concept that I always use the example of when my friends have children,
suddenly they see daycares that were that they could never see before, like those daycares were
invisible to them. But their salience frame changed when they had children because it's relevant.
So how do you take like information about reality that's been perhaps validated using the scientific
method and figure out what parts of this should be invisible, perhaps what parts of this should be
really salient. But right now, they're not reaching the brain of the super organism. I think sort of
rejiggering that is going to be key. So are there, I assume when you've read Turchin and others that
you've looked at historical cultures, are there notable past societal responses to turmoil
that are suggestive of possible pathways for our current situation?
So I don't know if I'm the best person to answer that because Turchin looked at
the New Deal in the 1930s as a positive example. And I think I could be convinced that that's a
positive example. But I'm not yet like if the New Deal had happened without World War II,
would there have been more of a leveling like there was an inequality? And did that did the
New Deal even like solve things the way they need to? I mean, I don't think that's even remotely
close to what needs to happen. I think it's going to need to be like a much bigger system change.
And then yeah, I think what's going to need to happen in the digital age is just so different
from past societies that like the closest thing I can think of is going from going from apes to
humans where humans have this this moral mechanism in our brains and our hearts and our human nature
that sort of helps us enforce a collective action mechanism such that you don't get a bully like a
single alpha male like in the chimp groups that rules everything. Like humans can act against
that using moral communities. And in some ways, I think that is the closest parallel. Even though
human communities vary widely in terms of some of them are super egalitarian, but that's enforced
using moral communities and concepts and some of them are more hierarchical. So yeah,
maybe that's I don't I don't necessarily have a good answer to that question.
Yeah, it's it's an interesting one. So you I assume that you standardly teach your students
micro and macro economics and the things we're talking about on this podcast are not
your bread and butter of your teaching, but you spend a lot of time with young people.
What is your sense of being a college teacher? I haven't taught in a few years.
What is your sense of of young people and are there
intergenerational dynamics that are going to be relevant to potential systems change?
I definitely think we're going to need a collaboration across generations,
because my students, they're very aware of how social dynamics work,
both in the digital space, but also the way the digital space spills over into real world space.
And I could never be at their level in terms of that kind of social understanding. It's like the
part of our brains that is socially attuned for them that part developed in the digital world.
And I'm almost certain whatever change we we're going to have is going to have to use digital tools.
So you need people who understand how that works on a level that no model could capture.
And I think the young people are going to do that. I also sense that there's more awareness among
that generation of the frailties in the system than say in my generation,
because in some ways they're trying to envision their own careers, their own pathways.
And I think they recognize, wait a second, when I try to envision
forward, what is my role in the system? It doesn't always work.
So they do, I think many of them have an intuition about this kind of stuff,
even if they're not explicitly watching your podcast or
keeping up with some of the other people talking about this stuff.
So in a way, they've grown up with social media and digital world. They've outsourced a little
bit of their system to the cloud in a way. Their social physiological system resides
in these devices in a way that you and I grew up in a little bit different world.
Yeah, exactly. And that could be an advantage or it could be a disadvantage if there's sort
of a lot of mechanisms inside the phone that point understanding toward power.
And so it's like, how can we switch that the phone and the way people outsource their knowledge
and their trust in a lot of ways from the phone to a version of the phone that's healthier,
which might still mean that many people have different pathways that they're going to in the
phone. I don't think we need everybody to think the same way or use the same trust pathways
to reach information, but almost certainly the pathways right now bend toward power.
So when you walk into your classroom, are the kids talking to each other or are they kind of
on their phones and then you get their attention? I've been intentional about, I have had semesters,
especially since COVID where people were not talking to each other, which was different.
I've been intentional about getting them to do icebreaker questions, or sometimes they just
kind of know each other and are talking. So right now this semester, there is conversation between
them before class, but I do think it's a real thing where there's a little bit less comfort
with that. The skills for in-person communication are lower among that generation, which I think
most of them acknowledge. Yeah, our generation does have a lot of our social building online
where you can kind of smooth out the hard edges that most social skills is figuring out,
how do you smooth over awkward moments and hard edges and those little uncomfortable parts of
interaction? Yeah, Jonathan Haidt, a social psychologist, was on my show earlier and recently
he's been researching and tweeting out a lot on how bad social media is for young people's
mental health, depression, self-perception, self-image, all that. So it's both a vector
for positive change because it connects the kind of the global brain of humans and the
superorganism, but it's also got this sucking your mental energy constantly out of it. So I don't
know what the ultimate answer is. Yeah, it's definitely going to have to involve something
where incentives are pointed more toward real world communities and maybe that pointing toward
is mediated through the digital world, but there needs to be incentives to just show up and be
with people and persist through the inevitable conflict that happens with human communities.
What you mentioned briefly earlier, Blockchain, what are your thoughts on Blockchain, Bitcoin,
etc., as one possible avenue towards the new enlightenment?
Yeah, so I don't know the answer to that. Other than, I mean, I think the kind of
switch we need to a new system is going to be, it's going to require tools and I think the hope
of Blockchain is that it does offer some really helpful avenues, like having a universal computer
that anything written on that computer, whether it's rules about how the game works or rules about
governance or whatnot, having a place where people can trust those rules are not being
manipulated by someone behind the scenes in favor of power. I think that's going to be essential.
Now, I think the question is, are the current iterations of Blockchain, could those withstand
a shift to a new system? And I don't know the answer to that, but I do think the people who are
investing in those tools and building that out, I think they're doing essential work that is likely
to move us to something better. And so even if perhaps some of the incentive structures or
mechanism design behind some of these may or may not work out, it could work out absolutely with
the current set of tools or it could not. I think the endeavors are really important.
I agree with that. So let's circle back to this shifting the super organism idea through
the new enlightenment. So at the beginning of this conversation, you said there were three
major areas to guide the building of new institutions, economics, governance, and
knowledge or epistemics. So how do we begin to shape these three elements to address some of
the issues that I cover on this podcast that we just talked about?
Yeah. Well, so I mentioned the changes in the knowledge systems. I think that's
sort of the biggest part, but they're intertwined. The economic systems, I think we need to get out
of the ruts we have of the current debates, like the debate over socialism versus capitalism.
I think if you start talking about different systems, it's really easy for the conversation to
veer off toward the same debate people have had for years and years and years.
And I think if you spend too much time in that particular rut, you can't think your way out
of it. It's sort of like there's this impetus that's either you're super afraid of capitalism or
you're super afraid of socialism and both of those fears are totally valid. And if we need
something that's different, I think we're going to have to focus more on the feedback loops that
capture, like, is this system depreciating? Like, is there a power to the powerful thing,
a rewriting of the rules of the game by people with power? Is that happening in this particular
institution, which could be like a firm, it could be a government institution, but it could also be
like the institutions that are written on our hearts, like our moral code or what we view as
legitimate or illegitimate uses of power, what we view as the obligations behind money and
debt and things like that. So I think we're going to need to recognize that almost any institution
will depreciate and recognizing when one has started to depreciate and having ways of
channeling resources away from those that are becoming cancerous. And in some ways,
I think this will need to involve some kind of creative destruction of institutions where like
creative destruction, basically it's where we don't want to point adversarial resources toward
things that aren't working, because then you get this big fight and they fight back. But when the
resources just sort of get re-channeled toward like a healthier institution reinvested there,
I think something like that is going to be key to like the changing of the economic structure.
Could you give an example of redirecting resources towards a positive institution?
Okay, I need to think more carefully about, I feel like any example I give is going to be
embedded in something that's really not working right now.
So I mean like capitalism has one source of creative destruction. And it's an imperfect source
and it's subservient to institutions that aren't subject to this kind of creative destruction.
But the source in capitalism is if you have a company that is not doing well,
the idea is that it would financially not work out. Like it's going to go out of business and you
would, and people instead would start buying from some other place. Now that particular
version of this mechanism is no longer working in the way it should be. So there's sort of
institutions at a higher level that are actually influencing that whole game in ways that are
not healthy. So that's a theoretical one version of this. I think you could have similar versions
with social media or like say influencers or podcasts where if you have a thinker who starts to,
I don't know, just talk about ideas that are bad or be disrespectful or something goes wrong
with that thinker, people may just like stop listening to them. So like people are choosing,
I'm not going to put my eyeballs on them. They've started to go crazy. I'm going to go elsewhere.
But that's another one that's like totally out of whack given a couple of layers up inside the
system right now. So like I don't think it's going to be easy to get this right. But I think the
focus if we're going to try to rejigger the system does need to be on those feedback loops
that hold parts of the system accountable to their social value and that instead of
instead of inciting a lot of battles like you there will need to be battles like adversarial
energy and lawsuits and stuff like that. I think something like that will still exist and be
important. But there's not infinite energy for that. So just having ways of re-channeling I think
it's sort of how I'm starting to think about this and I haven't fully fleshed out this vision.
Yeah, that's the task of the channel is to bit by bit try to figure out
what could be an element here. Your channel and your concept of the new enlightenment you are
figuring it out over time because you're curious and then you explore some concept and then you do
a video on it and you're learning and figuring out what paths are false and what paths are
dead ends and what paths are possible. Yes, yeah and the false and dead ends that's actually a
really important point here. I actually think we need a lot of ideas that are not viable because
a lot of times people will put out an idea for a new system and people will look at that with
a critical thinking brain that's been developed inside the current system and they'll say actually
that doesn't work and it's not that the criticisms are wrong it's that okay if we're going to have
a new system it's not going to arrive in anybody's brain fully formed it's more like we're going to
have a bunch of different ideas from different people they're all out on the table and there's
going to be a mixing and a matching and by the time the mixing and a matching leads to an actual
new system it will be different enough that we're going to need different ways of thinking about
critical thinking so I think people need to be not afraid to to put out specific ideas that won't
work. Why? Like why do we because with the more unviable ideas that we see and recognize is unviable
the the more we get steered into the the direction of things that actually might work is that what
you mean? No I mean I mean if we recognize that something's unviable it could be that
that thing that is completely unviable in the current system with people's current set of
expectations and you know mental infrastructure and social infrastructure and all these institutions
it's like okay in this environment that's not viable it could be that if you take like
50 of these unviable ideas and mix and match them together and duct tape them together to
move toward a new system each of them is actually going to function really differently in a new
system so something that's not viable in this system could actually be part like a very viable
part of a different system that we can't yet envision. Got it yeah I agree with that so do you
advise graduate students or do you just teach undergraduates there? I just teach undergraduates.
So so how might graduates of your school and graduates of schools around the world and other
academics begin to work in these areas towards a new enlightenment? Do you have any thoughts there?
Because the academy which you're a part of and I used to be a part of is kind of a miniature
superorganism in many ways. Yeah I mean well I think the first thing is you kind of have to if
you're interested in solving this problem you have to somewhat let go of the incentive structures
inside of academia because if you if you're on the path of oh I'm gonna publish a lot and get my
accolades through the system it will steer you away from this kind of thing so like that's that's
number one is like let that go even if it means letting go career opportunities but then after
that I think there's not going to be just one type of thinker we actually need people who develop
out expertise in really different fields who can talk to each other so it's not about getting rid of
biases like you can't get rid of biases and in some ways following a particular intellectual
pathway is going to lead you down a journey that will create its own biases and that could be good
especially if the biases you're developing are like different enough from current systems so in
some ways I think it's it's about figuring out where does your brain fit in the system like
what are your passions it's like understanding enough of the whole superorganism to find a place
in that that is meaningful to you that you feel like could be one little piece of the puzzle
in rejiggering the system I am going to ask you some personal questions
Ashley that I ask all my guests I'm sure you know what they are what sort of advice do you have
for people aware of these issues choosing to take in the the full enchilada of the
meta crisis and and think about the future do you have any personal advice I think for this
collective action mechanism to happen I think we're going to need people in different like
idea bubbles who are capable of developing trust with people in other bubbles and I think this is
the biggest thing that that anyone can develop but especially people who are into this kind of thing
is that recognizing okay in every little idea bubble people in that bubble are aware of some
problem and they're deeply aware of it and they have this language for like describing the problem
that is a little bit inside the bubble but the problem is a lot of slogans and and like buzzwords
and people come to represent the the bigger idea set and people inside that bubble know oh yeah
that little slogan I understand the depth of that but people outside the bubble what they
experience oftentimes is just people in that bubble dismissing their ideas so like if each
bubble has something they're in touch with it's a real problem they're really frustrated when people
outside the bubble dismiss them and so they start to dismiss those ideas like you're trying to fight
for your problem and you're putting your problem above mine so it's like social media gives us
this intellectual armor for dismissing people who say things that are threatening tasks this is why
this podcast is increasingly difficult because there are so many bubbles that are covered
in the content and I think what you're describing in the past I've referred to as
memetic tribe diplomats that we need translators that can walk between the bubbles and suppress
their own identity in order to broaden the conversation yes that's it that's it that's
so I agree with that advice I agree with that advice and that that may be in our society
one of the the key things that we need I'm really nervous about who no matter who wins
the next election there are going to be these ideological bubbles in this country that are
going to be potentially violent and we're going to need translators no matter who wins we're going
to still face the same set of problems yeah and it's like usually in most of these bubbles even
if there's a little bit of incorrect information or false perceptions and all that there's usually
something inside every bubble that's like that's a serious problem that needs addressed but they
can't hear each other and it's like okay wait all of these problems are connected at the underlying
layer of the system so do you have any other recommendations for listeners aware of the
meta crisis well so I mean my number one recommendation is to try to like learn about
other bubbles but I think my other recommendation is almost it seems counteracting to that which is
we're going to need communities and like strong relationships and I feel like putting your
relationships at risk by trying to learn about the other bubbles through people in your close
relationship circle who disagree with you I do think there's this danger to that because there's
these like the structure that we've inherited from social media has set up ways that that we
can't perceive each other's painful spots we can't perceive the language that's like
contemptuous that our link our tribe uses or is that that's interpreted as contemptuous so like
putting relationships in community above any of this but then with that in mind developing
those skills to cross the boundaries I think that's a hard thing to navigate how would you change
your advice for young people and as a college professor I'm sure at the end of the semester
you become friends and you wear different hats if I recall I was their teacher I was their counselor
I was their coach I was their friend what advice do you give to early 20 something's
headed into the things that we face I mean it's really developing these skills it's developing
the skills especially the in-person skills of just like communicating with people apart from
social media land and sort of recognizing when is the social media space bleeding into these
relationships and into these communities and trying to foster spaces that are separate from that
because I think the in-person skills are essential and they're easy to lose I agree
what do you care most about in the world Ashley I mean I think I care most about like
my relationship with God and like I think the serenity prayer captures it it's sort of like
the wisdom to know the difference between what I can change and what I can't and sort of
following following out what I can actually change and finding my place and letting my place in
the world be different than other peoples and letting them have the space to to be doing something
that I don't understand or can't understand but you know interacting as best as I can with those
people I'm struggling with that too at the moment I'm trying to do too many things and
I think you're right we each have to do what we're best at and let others do what they're best at
I think you also care deeply about learning don't you yes that's that's like an obsession
yeah it's good I curiosity is really important skill especially
for people that can pass the baton to others as teachers like you can
if you could wave a magic wand and there was no personal recourse to your decision what is one
thing you would do to improve planetary and human economic societal futures
well so I don't know if this is allowed in the thought experiment I love the thought experiment
but it would be for everybody to have three communities that they knew well like where
they knew the personalities they sort of had had enough like experience like meeting once a week
or just being together to where they could function as a community handling challenges
challenges and crises because I feel like that would be the the infrastructure upon which a new
economy could be built why three and not one so there is risk with communities and sometimes you
need to take risks to like speak up and say things that will disrupt the power balance of the community
or that will you know be outside of what this community is normally used to hearing and when
you have multiple communities like that it lowers the risk it's sort of like okay if I take this
risk in this community I'm not risking my whole social structure I'm risking a big part of my
social structure but I think it'll make people more willing to take those risks so I do think it
needs to be multiple I like that idea I I recently in episode 100 which comes out next week talked
about people having three core groups one people they just have fun with one people that they have
an intellectual affiliation with and one that they do stuff like hands-on stuff like three different
groups of five to seven core friends because you can't expect that one would have all the things
that you're interested in and I think there is a health and a diversity and a diversification
that happens there so I agree with that idea but that was salient that you said three and not one
yeah no I like that and it lowers the pressure on any one group to be everything to everyone in the
yeah totally agree this has been great so I know we just scratched the surface of your
thinking on these things I will offer that the next let's do a follow-up podcast in 2024
and we'll do it in person we'll find a studio in Northfield or Red Wing or Minneapolis or even
maybe here I could rejigger it and we'll take a deeper dive what's one topic that overlaps between
the two of our interests that you would be willing or interested to take a really deep dive on well
so it's one that you suggested for this podcast and I kind of mixed which is economics in general
like the field of economics you know this is the field that's looking at scarce resources and allocation
of scarce resources and incentive mechanisms it's so essential but you know this group think idea and
the notion that communities of knowledge can be bent toward power even if it's a small amount that
compounds over time I would love to talk with you about that and I think you and I might think of
it like slightly differently and I didn't want to talk about it this podcast because my fear was if
we tried to do it in like five minutes or ten minutes that it would just lead to misunderstanding
and I think we're kind of on the same page mostly but I would love to talk with you about that and
in person would be fantastic okay it is a plan thank you so much Ashley for being here today
for teaching young humans about the world and and for your channel the new enlightenment
and stay warm and be careful of box elder bugs I just recall the the name do you have those there
in northfield you must I know what bugs you're talking about but I yeah I haven't seen one in a
long time there are thousands in the office here and on the walls so I'm I'm gonna have to deal with
that um to be continued my friend definitely if you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the
great simplification please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit the great
simplification dot com for more information on future releases this show is hosted by Nate Hagan's
edited by no troublemakers media and curated by leslie badloots and lizzie siriani
