I love hearing well articulated arguments that are that I absolutely disagree with.
I don't know, it hasn't always been that way. Like again, coming from like even the hard left,
the romantic left, the Marxist-Leninist left, I wouldn't say I was ever like a, you know, again,
I'm a member of the disgusted party. I've never really felt at home in any ideology, but on the
extreme or hard left, as on the extreme or hard right, I think there's an idea that like, you know,
people that don't agree with us are just kind of stupid if they only knew, if we could just explain
to them, they'd be converts. And then those that don't agree, I mean, in sort of Stalinist Russia,
they should go to the Gulag or, you know, get lined up against the wall. There's a total intolerance
on both sides of the political spectrum for free speech, for diversity of opinions, and it cripples
societies. I'd like to welcome my friend Chris Kieffer to the program. Chris is a Canadian
ER doc, somewhere near Toronto, I believe. He's also the president of Canadians for nuclear energy,
as well as the host of the very popular Decouple podcast, which examines how science, technology,
and politics can hopefully allow us to decouple the benefits that humans receive from modern
industrial societies from our ecological impacts. This was a no-holds-barred, wide-ranging discussion
starting with Chris's experience as a wilderness trapper, talking about nuclear energy to podcasting,
to healthcare, and many other things. Chris has a podcast of his own, and he and I share
a kind of a similar philosophy of educating and inspiring people to understand how our global
system is interconnected, and I'm also going to be on his show in the near future. Please welcome
Dr. Chris Kieffer. Dr. Chris Kieffer, welcome. Nate, it's good to finally be here. It's been
wonderful corresponding with you over the, it feels like years now, but it feels like it,
I think it's probably one year, but sometimes weeks happen and, or what's the word?
You're quoting Lenin.
That has happened within weeks.
You're quoting our friend, Vladimir Ilyich Lenin there. Absolutely, yeah.
Oh, shit. I didn't know that.
Inadvertent, but you are.
Let's restart. I'm sorry that we've had to reschedule so many times, but here we are.
I respect your work. You host the Decouple podcast. You are the president,
correct me if I'm wrong, you're the president of an organization called Canadians for Nuclear Energy.
You are an emergency room physician, and offline you've kind of told me about some of your things
you've done in the past. You were a trapper. You had an intentional community to tie this
all together and bring me to the current moment. What is your path and how did you arrive here?
And contrary to most of my guests, you also are a podcast host, so I think there's a fraternal
handshake here of sorts because we both deal with similar challenges in communicating to the
public. So you have the mic, my friend. Bring us up to date on the life and history of Chris Kiefer.
I will aim for brevity, but as you mentioned, there's a lot of stopping points along the way.
It's interesting when you apply to something like medical school, you have to kind of create this
narrative arc and make sense of it all in a compelling way to claw your way into medical
school. So I've done this before, but I'll try for the great simplification here. I'll try to
simplify it. Yeah, without being self-indulgent, going way back into my youth, awkward kids spent
a lot of time in the woods sort of just to deal with not being terribly socially gifted. I think
we probably share some commonalities there, just a deep love of nature. Did they share the woods
or they're not socially gifted? Wow, probably the woods more than anything. I won't make any
deep commentaries there. Nate, don't know you well enough. I spent a lot of time in the woods
as a young person. I was really a neo-ledite. I saw technology as kind of the root of all
evil of social stratification, really romanticized. Our hunter-gatherer passed a time of greater
equality, a time in which we could basically all manufacture that toolkit that we needed.
I took that so far. A time of greater equality except for the animals, maybe.
Yeah, and a time of maternal mortality and early child mortality of at least on the child side,
a good 50% up until the hockey stick of the Industrial Revolution. But we'll get into that
later. At the time, really romanticized that. I was actually not a survivalist in terms of a
prepper, but I learned how to make a bow drill fire, making fire with friction. I was a survival
instructor for a summer camp. But that wasn't enough, Nate. That wasn't enough. Those canoe
trips and things like that. I wanted to take it further. It's quite a romantic and a bit of
a privileged kid, so I could afford to start university late or even think I wasn't going
to go to university. I ended up in the Yukon Territory. I spent some time. My high school
English teacher's uncle was a trapper in Northern Ontario. I found his knowledge of the land to be
just extraordinary. You know, there's conservation biologists that go out for a field trip,
you know, maybe a month a year, and they cordon off a small piece of prairie grass,
and they know every species in there, and that's very admirable. But seeing the way this guy
understood sort of sustainably harvesting his trapline, the behavior of animals,
and almost kind of like a spiritual connection to the land, that really touched something
deep in me in terms of, and again, these are these are partially kind of romantic
aspirations, but a pretty credible history we have as a species, scraping in existence and
out of pretty meager resources. Anyway, so that took me to the Yukon Territory
where I decided I was going to go and meet a trapper. I'd learned how to make fire with sticks.
I'd learned how to gather wild edibles, but I didn't come from a hunting family,
and I figured that was part of learning how to kind of survive in the wilderness.
So, yeah, managed to pull that off, ran a trapline for a winter,
and then ended up getting a job, never having ridden a horse before as a horse wrangler and
hunting guide in a remote concession in the Yukon Territory. And, you know, basically,
we did everything off of horseback, not the hunting part, but, you know, pack animals,
things like that. It was a pretty primitive life, but, you know, still complemented by
airplanes that would bring in supplies. And, you know, this was an outpost of a fossil
field civilization where you got a bit of a taste for pre-modern life.
So, I'll just add an interjection there. I've been to Whitehorse, and I talk on, as you know,
about the disparity between humans and our farm animals relative to wild mammals that we outweigh
them 50 to 1 in the world, not in the Yukon. The Yukon is the opposite. Yukon is one of the few
places that megafauna far outweighs humans. Right, right. No, I've seen and, well, I've killed
and eaten my fair share of that megafauna, as our ancestors did. Not to the point of extinction,
though, Nate. It was pretty sustainable. Moose, caribou, mountain sheep. Anyway,
I promised I would try and be brief in this, but I think that question of sort of how do you go
from being a romantic neo-ledite to an advocate for one of the most complex technologies that we
have is probably an interesting one. I ended up, you know, deciding I wanted to get myself an
education after a while, or a non, you know, kind of mountain man education. And, yeah,
was very inspired by an amazing doctor named Paul Farmer. I've always had a sort of humanist trend,
the humanitarian trend, and figured I'd like to get some tangible skills to be able to serve
my fellow humans, as you want to call them. And so, yeah, I got inspired and got into medical
school. That definitely was an education in, I guess, kind of the beauty of complexity.
You know, this healthcare system, you know, we'll probably talk about this later, but
there was a time when almost every human being was involved in energy, as you know. I mean,
in terms of agriculture, in terms of growing food, harnessing photosynthesis, something like 90%
of us were farmers remotely. And now, you know, 15, 16% of us are health workers. It's incredible
what our wealthy societies are able to devote to human well-being. Often, there's a bit of
inefficiency there, and we could talk about the US and Canadian healthcare systems. But, yeah,
it was interesting. And I think I started to shift my perception of technology and really
appreciate the benefits. And that's obviously been strengthened by my own son surviving a very
premature birth and, you know, an incubator saving his life. We talked earlier about, you know,
childhood mortality, sitting at 50%. I've learned not to romanticize that and have some appreciation
of the modern world. After finishing my emergency medicine fellowship, I took out a big loan, bought
a farm on the border of Canada's largest indigenous reservation. With the attempt of kind of setting
up a bit of a embassy between progressive Canadians and indigenous people and a sort of permaculture
community trying to solve, you know, some local problems with water supply, you know, food sovereignty,
healthy food, that kind of stuff. So most intentional communities disintegrate within
about two years, and we definitely fit the mold there. It was a very interesting,
romantic project, learned a lot from it. So you're seeing me sort of go through the
hunter-gatherer period, the agricultural revolution. And when my son was born five years ago,
I started to think a lot about climate change and get pretty worried about it, got very doomy.
Wasn't any fun at parties. My ex-wife at the time said, you know, can you just stop talking
about this shut up and do something? And she probably meant, you know, start the recycling
better, take out the compost. And I think, you know, thank God, I'd gone back to even high school
to get my core sciences in order to get into med school. And I had that sort of empiric training
to start looking around and say, hey, what are the solutions to climate change? And discovered
I lived in nuclear-powered Ontario, where about 50, 60% nuclear power, one of the lowest emitting
electricity grids in the world, despite not being blessed with tons of hydroelectricity.
And so that really intrigued me. And I discovered this technology that's much maligned. I've sort
of always fought for the underdog. And, you know, my 16-year-old neo-Luddite self, again,
might have put out a contract on the life of my, you know, 37-year-old self as I got into this.
But for whatever weird dopamine reward system I have, I've been, you know, pretty obsessively
interested in this space, definitely matured in it from seeing nuclear energy as a kind of absolute
sort of panacea, you know, being educated by 232 guests now. And being involved in advocacy
within Ontario for more nuclear has taught me a lot of lessons about the kind of pace and
scalability possible. But I'll wrap it up there, Nate. Hopefully that wasn't too self-indulgent.
No, I don't know. We're going to drill down into each of those things. You have a picture,
I recall, on your Twitter feed, you and Justin Trudeau. So you've actually brought up this to
the political level in Canada, yes? Yeah, yeah. I've had the opportunity to speak. And this is
truly bizarre. Again, my previous sort of advocacy and activism was in the health space. I founded
one of Canada's first seasonal agriculture worker clinics serving Mexican and Jamaican workers.
I worked at the Canadian Centre for Victims of Torture. You know, in that advocacy, you develop
a social network. It's interesting. But yeah, the nuclear thing has been absolutely mind-blowing.
As you said, meeting the Prime Minister, leaders of the opposition, the Premier of Ontario,
the heads of all the big labour unions here, the CEOs and the executive suite of the big
nuclear companies and supply chain companies. So it's been, and as you know, the social capital
of a podcast, it's been absolutely a wild ride. So I have covered the basics on nuclear just once
or twice on this channel. And again, you're an ER doctor. That is your profession. But you have a
podcast that's called DeCouple. By the way, what's the origin of that word? Because I can think
about 20 ways of decoupling in our world. What was the origin of your choice of that word?
Well, I started the podcast very shortly after my divorce. And so a lot of people assumed it was
a relationship advice podcast. I am in no position to offer relationship advice, although I have a
wonderful fiance now. So maybe that rests in the future. A lot of people will think about...
We'll see if you rename it Recouple. There we go. There we go. Well, I'm in that process. Again,
wonderful fiance. But yeah, no, it definitely... I was inspired by the eco-modernist tendency,
which again, wrestling with that question. Okay, it's fine to kind of romanticize the past, but
there's a reason that the human population was stable really up until the industrial revolution.
And that's because the average woman had five to six children and 2.2 of them would reach
reproductive age. A lot of kids died, right? And so appreciating... Was this just in the last
a thousand common era to 200 years ago, or does this go way back? This goes way back. I mean,
at least according to paleo demographers who look at Peru, 400 BCE, for instance,
or I think Mallorca, Spain, even further back, I'm not in a position to assess these paleo
demographers' methodology, but I'd assume this is pretty solid. And again, I think it's borne out.
You can look at skeletal remains, but you can also just look at if you have a stable population
and your birth rate is five or six kids, that infers that again, only two of them are reaching
reproductive age, maybe three and then some daft in their thirties or something. But
that's dark. And so kind of coming from a romantic, lefty, progressive, maybe kind of
de-growth their mindset, certainly came to appreciate the nuance, and especially being in
healthcare of the wonderful world we live in, in which very few parents have to mourn the death
of their children. It's 0.3% now in modern industrialized countries. So how do we keep
the gains, the good things that have come from development, from industrialization,
while minimizing the ecological impact? So essentially, that was the question, sort of
decoupling human well-being. A lot of it, maybe a lot of the environmentalists out there don't
want to admit maybe the basis for this, but I think the trends are quite clear, has to do with
increasing energy consumption, increasing wealth. And again, yeah, so how do you navigate that
contradiction? And I think some of your work, quite frankly, has put me in a little bit of
crisis about the actual potentials for decoupling, that tight linkage between energy use and GDP
or material use and GDP. There's not a sort of dematerialization of our economy as much as we'd
like to imagine it. But a few technologies really stand out. Nuclear, obviously capable of decoupling
at least electricity production from carbon emissions. And the environmental case being
that because it is such an energy dense form of energy, that means we can use less mining. It's
less land intensive, et cetera. So the podcast has been pretty nuclear focused, but we've also
looked at biotechnology, ways of producing more food on less land so you can re-weld. These are
some of the sort of tenets of eco-modernism, which is an ideology which I'm not completely on
board with. I think there's some interesting ideas from it. But anyway, this was the perhaps
kind of romantic origins of the podcast. What ideology are you completely on board with?
None. I have a friend who talks about sort of his political allegiances and he says,
I'm not a Democrat, I'm not a Republican, I'm a card-carrying member of the disgusted party.
I don't really find a home anywhere, I think, because I'm just really restless. But I do
really, genuinely appreciate good arguments that I disagree with. And so nuclear has been a big
part of that because, again, we have a set of sort of unexamined beliefs, the kind of package deal
of the politics perhaps that we grow up with. So being on the progressive left, that was anti-nuclear.
I hadn't done my research, but that's part of the package deal. I used to kind of hold my breath
when I drove past one of our nuclear plants, which is really hilarious because it was built instead
of a four gigawatt coal station where I really needed to hold my breath. But realizing that my
tribe had really gotten it wrong and needing to listen to other voices, often on the political
right, which tends to have a little bit more engineering discipline, a little bit more literacy
and math and the understanding of the built world, it didn't mean that I accepted all the
kind of positions that come along with the unexamined beliefs of the political right,
but I did appreciate certain analyses that were there. And so it's really helped me to have a
much broader appreciation for the need for robust debate and a whole number of opinions.
And that's obviously, we're really suffering in this social media dominated hyperpolarized
landscape to navigate the human predicament, as you call it. And partially it's because of that.
So I kind of owe that to nuclear strangely enough.
I want to take a deep dive in your insights on nuclear. But before we get to that,
maybe you could just start by laying out since you don't claim to be a nuclear expert,
but you've had 200 guests on your podcast, many of which are nuclear experts. So you're
a very, very qualified layperson, ER doctor on nuclear issues. Please lay out for us the breadth
of opinion on the nuclear issue from both extremes and kind of what's in the middle
and we'll go from there. Well, Nate, as you probably noticed, most of it is the extremes,
which is a little bit frustrating. People either love nuclear or hate nuclear,
or I guess they're indifferent. And perhaps we'll just acknowledge that they're not sure they don't
know. So on the extremes, let's deal man the two extremes, why people love nuclear and why
people hate nuclear. Sure. Well, let's start with the hate. I think this is fundamentally a dual
use technology. This is swords and plowshares. And this goes back to the beginning of time.
Every technology has a sort of beneficial application, a productive application and
a destructive application. And the famous metaphor would be swords and plowshares.
And the problem is that the sword of nuclear is apocalyptic, certain, I don't know about life on
earth, but certainly in terms of any kind of life that human beings would want to live.
There are several men in the world that can put in some codes and essentially initiate the destruction
of human civilization. That's a potent reason to be scared shitless, frankly, about all uses
of nuclear energy and sort of lump them all into one basket. And so a lot of those apocalyptic fears
are, in my opinion, misplaced onto the peaceful uses of nuclear energy. And that's not just energy
production. That's the production of medical isotopes, which absolutely enable modern health
care. Our candor reactors here in Canada have a quirk of being incredible mass production
machines for medical isotopes. 40% of the world's single use medical devices are sterilized with
medical isotopes we produce here. So there's a lot of positive applications, but the sort of
edge case fears that people have about nuclear are really a transference of those fears about
nuclear annihilation. So that's, I think, what drives it. You know, my dad did duck and cover
drills during the Cuban Missile Crisis. I'm deeply empathetic to people that are, again,
scared shitless about nuclear energy. The environmental movement really kind of latched
on to it. And again, maybe just going back to the weapons thing, the fear of radiation
was a vital tool in stopping, say, atmospheric weapons testing, for instance, the insanity of
sort of where we're heading with nuclear weapons. Like if you look at the actual data in terms of
the atomic blast at Hiroshima and Nagasaki, the vast majority of the deaths and injuries were
blast injuries and burns and good old fashioned, you know, explosive trauma injuries. But the
radiation induced injuries, you know, were a potent motivator of kind of shock and horror
around the use of these weapons. And so there's a kind of long history of how our fear of radiation
has been exaggerated. Certainly, high dose radiation is absolutely deadly, but our kind
of fear about low doses, I think, is greatly exaggerated. And again, these physicians, primarily
actually, who are really involved in getting atmospheric weapons testing prohibited, partially
by looking for, you know, a few atoms of decay products that you only get from weapons testing
in the milk teeth of babies, right? Finding some strontium 99, for instance. That was, you know,
a potent motivator to politicians say, okay, we're going to just do the test underground now,
basically. But there's a temptation to try and put the nuclear genie back in the bottle and stuff it
in. And I think I understand the motivations there. That's the anti side on the pro side.
Hold on just a second. What about Fukushima and the fact that they're storing all this stuff and
some of it leaches into the ocean? And is that too diffuse to worry about? Is that overblown?
Or do you have any comments on that? Well, Fukushima is really interesting because it's kind of
pretty close to the worst case scenario. Three gigawatt scale nuclear reactors melting down
essentially simultaneously. And the health impacts from that are really, I don't want to
sound blasé, but they're negligible. People will hear that, you know, 20,000 people died as a result
of the Fukushima accident. Those 20,000 people that died as a result of the Tohoku earthquake
and the tsunami that followed it. In terms of deaths from radiation from Fukushima,
there have been none. There was a single worker who got a still fairly low dose who
was compensated. A 50 year old guy who was also a smoker who got lung cancer several years after
the accident. Most serious epidemiologists don't think it was caused by it, but hey,
it's good that he got compensation and maybe had a more dignified end of his life because he had
some extra money and his family had some money. But really, we have not seen any radiologic
injury from this worst case scenario. And I think what you're probably discussing there is the
Fukushima water. So a lot of water got onto the site, got contaminated with radionuclides,
has been filtered. The only significant radioisotope left is something called tritium. It's a very
weakly radioactive element that ends up binding to water and creates essentially a water molecule
with a heavy form of hydrogen. That's the only one left. The half-life of all the others has
already dissipated. No, no, they've been filtered out with resins and things like that. So in terms
of the water they're talking about releasing into the Pacific, they're diluting it down to, and again,
this is the issue with radiation, you have to go down a huge rabbit hole to understand
dose. And even the way it's measured, the units involved are hugely confusing. But
I like to sort of put it into just money values like dollars and cents, but essentially the
safe drinking water limits, say in Canada, are 7,000, we'll say, becquerels per liter,
atomic decays per liter for tritium, they're getting it down to 1,500. So you could drink the
stuff in terms of the way that it's being diluted to and be well underneath the
safe drinking water limits that we have established around the world.
So 16-year-old Chris Keeper would not have drank that water, but 37-year-old Dr. Chris would have?
Some of the nuclear advocates have jokingly suggested we have a Fukushima drinking team.
There was a Japanese politician who did drink some of the water. He did look like he was a bit
hesitant in the moment. So there was some reports on that. And again, I don't mean to be blasé about
this. The Fukushima accident caused an evacuation. People died because of the evacuation. It's not
to be taken lightly, but I think in terms of people's apocalyptic fears, we have there the example of,
as I said, a triple meltdown with absolutely negligible health impacts, particularly from
radiation. So you're at least confident in saying that drinking that filtered water from Fukushima
is healthier than drinking roundup. Yes, sir. And alcohol and we could come up with a whole
number of sugary drinks, glucose fructose. You're an ER doctor. Do you drink alcohol?
Occasionally. Occasionally. Yeah, occasionally. I used to drink quite often. Well, I was at a
Bioneers conference last week, and I had wine for four nights in a row. But other than that,
I haven't had a single thing to drink in many, many months. And I actually feel quite better.
It's just, it's a culture, especially the United States, especially Wisconsin, where I live.
I digress. And by the way, my dad is also a doctor, and he was the chief of surgery for
a while and has had lots of ER stories. I'm sure you've seen quite a lot of things being in a
big city emergency room. I have. I won't bore you with all of the objects. I've taken out of
people's bums throughout my career, but I wasn't going to bring that up. But seriously, you've done
that? That's a part of the job in the emergency medicine world. People do weird things. Yeah,
I heard those stories from my dad too. So it's Canadians too. So, okay, on to the pro nuclear.
Right, right. So I think people get pretty religious. They find religion. People that,
again, have the unique set of cognitive biases that lead them to this advocacy camp.
There's a really compelling narrative with nuclear energy. Again, in terms of that incredible
energy density, the promise of a very minuscule land footprint environmental impact. And frankly,
this wasn't as present before the extreme situation that we find ourselves looking down the barrel
of climate change. And so we have, in the best case or in the hopes of this class of advocates,
a solution to climate change, a solution to an existential problem. It's a fascinating technology,
and there's certainly some sort of techno fetishism that goes on. But I'd say really,
it stands from people probably who are a little bit contrarian, and who look at the available
options on the table in terms of replacing fossil fuels, and are probably a little overly generous
in terms of the potential of nuclear energy to shift things or replace fossil fuels. There's
certainly some fossil fuel services, nuclear energy is great at replacing stationary power
generation, low grade process heat for some district heating, desalination. There's some
applications that are important, but yeah, it's not a panacea. But I would say that folks on the
extreme pronuclear side are probably guilty of thinking that this is essentially energy too
cheap to meter, if done right. But of course, it's never really happened. And that was just
one statement by a guy that's been quoted far too often. So we have the two extremes, the people
who love nuclear power and don't miss a chance to advocate it as the answer to society's problems,
and the people who hate nuclear power and think it's the devil in disguise because of its
long term potential to destabilize and pollute the environment. And those people account for
the majority of commentary that we see in social media. And a lot of people, including the people
who are energy blind who just look at the cost of energy at the pump or on their utility bill,
and that's the extent of energy's influence on our economy, rather than looking how everything,
the entire scaffolding is built on the complexity powered by machines that are fueled by fossil
and renewable energy. So the vast majority of people are kind of, as you said earlier, indifferent
to nuclear because they don't know that it's needed or that it's relevant and they just haven't been
educated, would you say? Well, I mean, let me give you like a case study of Ontario, right?
If you live in a jurisdiction with a lot of nuclear plants, it tends to pull very well,
particularly in the communities around the plants. They have the best equipped sports teams around,
they've got the best swimming pools. They usually kick the ass of the surrounding communities because
they've got better coaches, etc. I'm being a bit facetious, but the benefits are there. And you
don't have the smoke coming out of the stack, frankly poisoning people that you do with coal
plants or to a lesser degree natural gas plants. Over the lifetime of a nuclear plant, the power
is very, very cheap and really underpins a lot of economic well-being. In the case of Ontario,
and this is a little bit similar to France, which is another famous case study of a jurisdiction
with a lot of nuclear. The saying in France was, we do not have gas, we do not have oil,
but we have ideas. And very similar situation in Ontario. No gas, no coal. We had water,
which my great, great, great grandfather referred to as white coal, which might tell you something,
but we were dependent on importing a lot of coal from Pennsylvania and elsewhere in the US across
great lakes that sometimes froze mine by miners that often went on strike. It was an energy
insecure situation and it was costly energy. We accidentally sort of found ourselves as a real
centre, probably the second greatest centre of nuclear research outside of the Manhattan project
in Canada because a lot of European scientists and the heavy water that they kind of snuck out of
Europe as the Nazis chased them and tried to get it, came to Canada and we ended up developing our
own indigenous power reactor design. But basically, we tapped out our hydroelectric, we built a lot
of coal stations, including the largest in North America in Anticoc, and in 1973, when the OPEC
crisis hit, the price of coal doubled and we had a power reactor that was ready to go in the form
of the can-do and we just started stamping those things out. We never built another large coal
plant. After that, we just built big nuclear plants. We have the largest operating nuclear plant in
the world and ultimately, in the early 2000s, we were able to completely phase out coal, which
had been 25% of our electricity grid. It would have been probably 75% had we not gone nuclear
and thinking the implications of that in terms of energy security, economic well-being, human
well-being in terms of the enormous amount of pollution that's estimated around 1,000 people
died prematurely per year because of our coal fleet. There's a really compelling story there.
That might be a window into not my fanaticism, hopefully my nuanced appreciation for this power
source. Other than personally liking you and us having similar hobbies or vocations with our
podcasts, I do really value your balanced view and you're not a fanatic. Nuclear is not a topic
I know well, which is why I'm really glad that you're here because I'm going to ask you a bunch
of questions that will be easy for you but that I don't know the answers to. Let's go in no particular
order. Here are some questions. To my knowledge, Ontario is like 15 million people, which is the
population of Michigan and Wisconsin combined. Most of them people live in and around Toronto.
I would imagine how many nuclear plants are there in the province of Ontario?
Yeah, so there's three nuclear stations. They're all multi-unit stations. Two of these sites have
eight large candor reactors and one has four large candor reactors.
What about the transmission of nuclear power? Can those reactors you just mentioned get
electric power all the way to the west of Ontario?
Yeah, so we have an efficient grid and that's another thing about nuclear. We call it an
expensive way to make cheap electricity and renewables in contrast, a cheap way to make
expensive electricity in terms of all of the supporting infrastructure. Nuclear is very
efficient in terms of transmission. Okay, so spend a few moments unpacking that statement that you
just made. Yeah, I mean, so your listeners probably heard of the levelized cost of electricity.
It's a way to compare. Really, it should be used to compare like with like in terms of this coal
station versus that coal station or this natural gas station versus that. It gets really skewed by
renewables, which have sort of a zero marginal cost in terms of their operations. But the problem
with renewables is that they're intermittent and they require backup and often they're located
far from population centers and transmission is a major cost. I don't want to get too
sort of sidetracked off these kind of nuclear fast questions. But I have like 14 of them,
so do your best. Sure, to try and answer succinctly and then I'm quite a tangential speaker.
We are nuclear plants, I'd say in terms of the far north of the province, we do have a biomass
generating station up there. But suffice it to say yes, yes, these three nuclear stations
are near population centers and do a good job. But getting back to the levelized cost of electricity,
how would nuclear compare with solar and wind? And what was your critique of the levelized cost
of electricity, that it's a narrow boundary metric, that it doesn't include the actual full
cost of getting the energy services to the household? So there's nothing cheaper than
jiggly electrons coming out of a solar farm, for instance, when it's producing, when conditions
are perfect. But electricity is a service, not a commodity. You don't go to a solar farm and
bring your little bag and say, I need to get 300 jiggly electrons and I'm going to put some
like coins into my toaster sort of when I need them. It's a lot like healthcare, which is again,
I would argue a service, not a commodity. It's something that needs to be reliable,
something that needs to be there for you 24 seven, something that needs to be able to
adapt to surges and demand. And the kind of narrative that I'd use or the comparison I'd
use is if we were to have wind and solar doctors and nurses, kind of fair weather friends,
they're a little bit prone to packing it in when the weather changes and they can do so
sort of on very short notice, I would say, you know, a solar doctor, some clouds would go over,
he might just drop the scalpel and, you know, go off for a prolonged break or call it quits for the
day. And so which would be a real problem if you're operating on someone's bum. Right, right.
So suffice it to say that requires a really costly backup network of reliable doctors and nurses,
you might have to pay a premium to that have to come into the hospital to keep your reliable
services going nonstop, right? And so else, LCOE level as cost of electricity ignores those system
costs and therefore is not a good tool to compare unlike with unlike in terms of, you know,
an intermittent renewable source to a dispatchable source of energy. I ask you because there is
the lasard graphs that always get touted around that so many people truly believe that solar is
the cheapest energy source on the planet. And it's only a matter of time before it scales and
completely replaces fossil fuels, which is so completely misleading for many reasons. But a
main one is what you just said, it's only the marginal cost of generation that they're talking
about, not the 24 seven access to the service. I will say in order not to sound like a fanatic
here, I think there is a role for solar probably at pretty modest penetrations in terms of carving
off load, say in terms of the air conditioning peak in the middle of the day. Too much solar,
you get into this duck curve or it cannibalizes its own value and you need a crazy ramp in the
evening to keep your grid stable. But a moderate amount can shave that. And the other application
a friend of mine recently convinced me of is solar as a power source for desalination,
because you're producing something that is very storable, which is fresh water.
What would you say in reply, people like Mark Jacobson frequently tweet, he tweeted
the other day that in California earlier this month, wind, water and solar together combined
for 106% of the electricity demand over some of the days earlier this month.
I believe the quote was 0.25 to six hours per day. So what that means is with a 100%
wind, water and solar system in California, they would have had absolute black start style
blackouts every day for the last 38 days. Are people pro nuclear in Ontario? I would imagine
they know a little bit more about it than the average American. Yeah, recent polling were on
the verge of a major nuclear expansion. We're going to increase our nuclear fleet by about 50%.
And when pulled on that, as much as you can trust polling, 70% of people are in favor of not just
keeping our existing assets, but expanding the nuclear fleet, about 18% are against and 12%
undecided. So it's pretty favorable. So you've had 200 episodes on your podcast,
and I feel like I'm getting long in the tooth here and I'm at like 120. So good on you. How many of
those have been directly or indirectly related to nuclear power? I'm probably embarrassed to say,
but I would say probably about 180, 190 of those. Okay. So I have questions and, you know,
unfortunately, one of my skills and that of my network of systems, ecologists, people is,
I'm good at saying what won't work and less good at saying what might work or what will.
So I have some ideas that I want to ask you of things on nuclear that I am skeptical about.
But let me preface that, and I don't want to spend this entire time talking about nuclear,
because you're kind of a Renaissance man, and I do want to talk to you about the podcast and
medicine and other things. And I think we should just agree that this is a first conversation
and that you could come back and take a deep dive on something else. But what would you say in your
considered expertise and in discussing and focusing on the issue of nuclear? What are the
best three attributes of nuclear power that people should be aware of? And what are the
three constraints or limitations that people should be aware of?
Okay. So top of mind in terms of being a climate hawk is the low life cycle emissions,
actually the lowest of any power generation source as confirmed by recent work by the UN Economic
Committee of Europe. So 4.8 grams of CO2 per kilowatt hour for reference. I mean,
that's pretty close to wind and solar. And almost all that 4.8 grams is in the construction of the
plant. Yeah. And so the longer you run the plant, the better that number gets. And we're really
seeing economists and engineers sort of put an arbitrary lifespan of 40 years on, really,
for economic planning reasons. But a lot of plants are getting licensed out now to 50,
60 years. And our can do plants, we can do kind of engine swap out. So they're going to 60,
70, and maybe 100 years. So nuclear is a lot like hydroelectric dam, but I'll try not to get
tangential here. So the life cycle emissions, and again, this includes the mining, the milling of
the uranium, the construction of the plant, the maintenance of the plant, the storage of the waste,
incredibly low emissions. And by the way, Chris, I'm not in your podcast, you're on mine,
so you are allowed to go tangential if you like. Fair enough. Okay. So number two,
number two, I'd say it's really a question of minimizing that ecological impact and again,
why it's such a theme in the decouple podcast. Certainly because of that incredible energy
density of harnessing the strong nuclear force of the atom, which again is so destructive in the
sword application of nuclear, but I would argue so constructive in the productive side of nuclear
power is again, that we know we have a nuclear sector, which the mines, the factories, the power
plants occupies about 30 square kilometers of land in Canada. To give you a sense of that,
that's a little larger than the Toronto Pearson Airport. So a very small impact on nature. And
when you compare that to more dilute forms of energy, particularly wind and solar, they consume,
you know, vast amounts of lands and really industrialized landscapes. And we may be sort of
conditioned by compelling narratives and aesthetics to sort of see when turbines is almost like trees
naturally growing into the landscape. They do have ecological impacts. And, you know, one of the
biggest problems with the biodiversity crisis is trying desperately not to transform land from
wilderness into agricultural land or otherwise industrialized. So I guess that would be sort
of number two compelling reason. Number three, and this kind of, I guess, goes back to my lefty
politics. I'm wearing my Union Proud T-shirt here, Union Strong T-shirt. Nuclear, it's very
efficient in terms of, you know, the number of jobs created because it's so energy dense, you
don't have sort of sprawling numbers of workers needed. But the workers that are employed are
high-skilled, craft labor, really high levels of education to me. You know, one of my sort of
Myers-Briggs personality type features is I love seeing people kind of lean into and achieve their
full potential and be unleashed to do that. And nuclear is something where, you know, you can
start working with a high school degree, I was going to call it a diploma, and sort of on-the-job
training that's available can get people up to incredibly high levels of education, not to mention
the sort of the PhD reactor physicists, the, again, the skill trades people. There's a lot of really
amazing employment opportunities in traveling to a nuclear community. I was kind of joking about
that earlier, but you really see a vibrant, healthy community. So, and again, sort of contrasting that
with wind and solar in particular, the other sort of main sort of climate solution in terms of
electricity generation, we see really questionable labor practices, particularly within the solar
supply chain with forced weaker labor and pretty credible allegations coming out of China. You have
workerless facilities with very low-wage, low-skilled construction jobs available,
basically just in the installation in Canada anyway. But we need a lot more people in solar and wind
per kilowatt hour generated than in nuclear, right? I mean, there's no parking lots outside of
wind farm or solar farm, so there's no long-term employment. You need a lot of people in the
construction phase, and I'll give it to Solar. I mean, we've gotten really good at building
solar firms very fast, very cheaply, but no, there's not a lot of long-term jobs in it.
But at the end of the day, this is kind of what we talk about, which is net energy and
energy surplus. The fact that we have fossil gas and coal and oil and nuclear plants means that
there's less of us that need to work in the energy field. The rest of us can be librarians or doctors
or inventors or whatever. 15% of us can be basically in allied healthcare, whether it's doctors,
nurses, personal support workers, occupational therapists. I mean, you're going to have lots
of critiques of modern industrial societies and the kind of wasteful spending that occurs,
but I think that's a really powerful statement. I was just in preparation for this podcast looking
at US government spending. Military spending by the US is $800 billion, Medicaid and Medicare,
$1.6 billion. And again, there's a lot of inefficiencies, and I'd argue particularly within
the US system. That's not talking about the insurance money spent as well, but just that
commentary of, again, 15% of people in a modern society have jobs looking after other people.
That's incredible to me. In our ancestral time, it was 100% of people had jobs looking after
other people. I don't know that I would put it that way. I think you'd probably have some
few shamans and healers, but I think most people were pretty occupied and trying to scrape together
the calories necessary to kind of maintain them. For their clan, but that's what I meant.
That's what I meant. Okay, so those are the three positives. What about the three negatives or the
three constraints or the things that would give you pause when in a debate with the people who
love nuclear as a fix all solution? I would say nuclear is probably the most challenging,
the most difficult form of power generation. A lot of categories occur. There's this great
quote recently. It was attributed to me by Euripides. I don't think it was him. I've been
trying to Google the source of it, but man is blind until he finds a metaphor that allows him to see.
With nuclear, I would make the comparison. The best category error you could commit would be to
say it's a lot like hydroelectricity. This massively capital intensive, high-risk construction
project. It's an expensive way to make cheap electricity. It's an asset that lasts for
decades, maybe even up to a century. Once it's immortalized, it produces very,
very cheap low-carbon power, provides good jobs, underpins a lot of economic well-being,
but it's expensive up front. There's no getting around that. I think there's a lot of folks,
particularly in the venture capitalist arena, that commit a category error of thinking that
nuclear is a lot like tech, that there's a lot of opportunities for incredible disruption, that
these dumb nuclear engineers just haven't thought about using molten salts or sodium fast reactors
or burning waste. Nuclear is difficult. It's hard. You don't do it unless you have to, and
Ontario is a place that had to. We didn't have coal, we didn't have gas. France is a place that
had to. They were burning oil from Algeria in the Middle East, and the OPEC crisis came along,
and they needed to move fast in order to not bottom out their economy. Japan burned through
its fossil fuels for the Meiji Restoration and incredible breakneck industrialization there,
but it was going to come to a screaming halt if they didn't find ways to import fossil fuels in
a way to become more energy secure as a big nuclear fleet. South Korea, the list goes on.
It's generally an energy security play. I'd say the one exception would be maybe Russia,
where you don't get high in your own supply, you free up natural gas for export by using nuclear.
There's some soft power diplomatic reasons, but basically the underlying driver is energy and
security. You don't do it unless you have to because it's technologically complex, requires
the best of the best people, and that's the limit. That's complexity, great simplification.
I don't know. We were building good nuclear plants in the 70s. When people talk about a great
simplification, or when you do, I'm not sure what you imagine if it's Vatslav Smil saying,
hey, things weren't so bad in the 50s and 60s. Maybe we can shrink back to that level of GDP
and things would be more sustainable. We could do nuclear 60s and 70s. That was one of the great
build-outs were. Yeah, open question. No. I mean, simplification is something between a
collapse and a mortar economy of continued growth. It's after we run out of the ability to paper
over our financial claims and the decoupling between how much people think they own and what
our material substrate is to do that. It doesn't mean that we go back to the dark ages necessarily,
but there's going to be a transition, and we're still going to need a lot of energy,
not as much as we need today, probably, because there's this financial disconnect.
Yeah, most of our technology has created complexity, which has required more energy.
Artificial intelligence is now a huge demand and about to get huge. A lot of people that follow
this show think that AI is overhyped. I'm talking to a lot of people very close to it that give me
the impression that it's actually underhyped. A lot of the really pro-nuclear people I talk to in
the US investors are really high on nuclear right now because of AI that we're going to need so much
more power demand that they're looking to nuclear as an answer. Certainly, if they want to meet their
24-7 clean energy targets, base loads back, baby. I mean, AI data centers require that base load
24-7 power and the US grid is becoming increasingly unstable for a variety of reasons. My friend,
Meredith Anglin, calls the fatal trifecta of reliance on intermittent renewables just in
time natural gas and just trying to import electricity from elsewhere. With the glut in
natural gas prices and that surplus for the foreseeable future, they could power those data
centers and they manned up powering those data centers with combined cycle gas turbines.
Certainly, if you're trying to be low-carbon, nuclear would be the way to do it. I am not
a nuclear for nuclear sake kind of guy. It's a means, not an end. Yes, there's a lot of
pro-nuclear advocates that are celebrating this new surge in demand and maybe it's a way to kick
start the nuclear industry so it can meet other needs and decarbonize, but right now AI is a
carbon problem. It's not a solution. Yeah, and I'm going to have more on that in the very new
future. Okay, I interrupted you and you were going to tell me your third constraint.
That's a good question and this part sort of betrays probably my...
If you run out, I have like 10 that I could offer. Why don't you start just because I'm drawing a blank
and that reflects poorly on me actually, but go ahead. So there's only two constraints to nuclear.
Okay, fuel is a concern right now. I mean, nuclear, it's real selling point should be
fuel security because in terms of storage, you have two years of fuel inside the reactor. It's
such a dense form of energy. You can stockpile nuclear fuel on site or on the national level,
but due to an underinvestment in uranium enrichment and most of that uranium enrichment
actually happening in Russia, 46% of the world's uranium enrichment occurs there.
There's questions right now of fuel and security. A lot of the advanced,
so-called advanced reactor designs actually require a higher level of enriched fuel
and a lot of the aspirations of that sector are going to be limited by that not being present
until we potentially have the sort of policy solutions to upscale enrichment say in the US,
for instance. So that's another constraint. That's one of my constraints is the peak uranium.
I mean, the fact that the minable concentrated ores, if the world were to dramatically scale
nuclear power, and there's issues with that which I'll offer in a few minutes,
that we maybe have 50 or 60 years left, I think probably because we've not tried and
if we tried, we could extend that quite a bit. But what are your thoughts on the amount of uranium
needed and available for tripling to 10X-ish nuclear in the world?
I mean, first off, I'd say it does sound a lot like you said, peak uranium. I mean,
there was concerns about peak oil going back, I believe, to the 1920s, Haber-Bosch who invented the
Haber-Bosch process to fix ammonia also were involved in the Fisher-Trop process. And I remember
before I think the Texas oil field started gushing, there was concern amongst the automotive industry
in the US, there wasn't enough oil. And so these guys were actually trying to start a business model
of, I think, coal conversion. So I think part one is there's a lot more uranium than we know about
in terms of reserves versus resources. But fundamentally, you're right. And the early,
early history of nuclear was we really didn't think there was a lot of uranium around. And so
there's a lot of interest in a reactor technology called a breeder reactor, which actually produces
more fuel. You put a fuel load in, you create more fuel in the process through the alchemy of
nuclear power. Breeder reactors have not really gone far, partially because there hasn't been the
need because uranium is dirt cheap. Right now, in terms of if you're an investor in uranium,
you're pretty happy because the price has gone up a lot. But I mean, relative to the energy it
puts out, I'd say it's the most undervalued commodity in the world. So with breeder reactors,
you can extend, you know, my friend Nick Turan, who is not a fanatic, I'd say he's very reasonable
middle of the rotor type guy, but he's done calculations where you start getting out to
millions of years. There's uranium present in seawater. I haven't looked at the efficiencies
of extracting it, but for all intents and purposes, with breeder technology, I wouldn't say that's a
limitation, except that breeder technology is a bit harder. Give me a one to two minute overview
of the mechanics of what a nuclear breeder reactor, how that would work and what it would
accomplish. And are there any? I don't think there are other there are. So I'm stepping out of my
wheelhouse definitely, right? But we're getting into slow neutrons versus fast neutrons. So the
current kind of thermal reactors that we have, in order to split more uranium atoms, we moderate
the neutrons that are being released as part of the chain reaction, slow them down. And that is a
bit of a limitation in terms of using what are called fertile elements, where if you maybe add
a neutron to them, they become fissile and you can split them again. So breeder reactor,
in my understanding, again, as a medical doctor, but with lots of expert advice,
is able to use that fast neutron spectrum, blah, blah, blah, blah, and make these fertile elements
that are present into fissile elements, thus generating more fuel. Are other breeders active
right now? Certainly a lot of countries have poked around in it with this interest of closing
the fuel cycle. I'd say the Russians are probably the furthest along. They have a sodium fast reactor
program that's 50 or 60 years old. They've scaled that up to, I believe, 800 megawatts recently.
Have they felt a need to expand that? It's not as economic as their light water fleets, frankly.
It's more of a sort of, I think, research and development arm with the goal of maybe closing
the fuel cycle at some point using waste within those reactors, but also extending the uranium
reserves that they have. So I'll cut it there because I'm going to acknowledge the limits of
my expertise. Well, also, I have so many questions and there's a lot of other topics, too, that I
want to cover. What about the cost and complexity? One of my beliefs is we're kind of out of time.
We have a decade before this geopolitical financial system kind of unravels, and so I think
there's so many times that a nuclear plant is over budget and over deadline, and even if you agree
with all the positive attributes you said, to do a crash course nuclear thing only would make sense
if AI and productivity or some genie for our culture is able to extend our timeline. So what
do you think about that constraint? I'd say the timeline constraint is pretty much universal in
terms of looking at really any technological solution to our predicament. I agree things are
moving quite quickly. That's not a dodge, by the way. In terms of the ways that nuclear can improve,
really it has to do against hydroelectric dam. We got to get better at project management and
construction. The fastest built nuclear plant was done in just over three years in Japan by a highly
competent supply chain workforce and excellent project managers. They built a nuclear plant
from scratch in three years. Yeah, from what they call the kind of concrete base mats of the
reactor itself to grid connection. We've got Kanda reactors that in China went from shovel to
breaker in just over four years. So it's possible to build these things quite quickly. The innovation,
again, the venture capitalists are going, again, probably coming with that Silicon Valley tech
bias of, listen, I've made billions creating a social media platform where you had to click
less and then everyone went to it. I'm not trying to minimize some of the disruptions that
have happened in tech. That's a bit pejorative, but there's been some pretty big things.
Nuclear is far more slow moving and the innovations, if you look at the cost of
building a nuclear plant, only about 20% of it is in the actual reactor. 80% of it is in the
civil works and the balance of plants. And so the place for innovation is really in
project management, being more like the Japanese project. What does that mean? Civil works.
So nuclear plants are the most robust structures that human beings have created. Maybe you could
say the pyramids are a little more robust. But because of A, the dangers, which I think are a
little bit overhyped, again, the kind of culture of excellence in nuclear engineering that was
called the defensive depth is wild. Every potential thing that could go wrong is considered.
And obviously earthquakes are part of that story. So in terms of preparing a nuclear power plant,
you're digging 100 feet down. You're putting in certain types of fill that can absorb seismic
shocks. You've got a kind of a base mat of concrete. Again, I'm not a civil or structural engineer,
but those civil works are a lot. The water intake channels, it's a lot of concrete and
steel. And again, that contributes, as we were saying earlier, to the life cycle carbon. That's
really the main source of life cycle carbon emissions for nuclear. But that's what I refer to
there. All right. So one of the biggest concerns that I personally have had with regards to nuclear
power is the assumption that civilization will always continue and that there won't be
a hiatus due to an EMP pulse or a solar flare or a war or some massive reduction in complexity
that causes the 500-odd nuclear plants to then have their environmental costs all be
backloaded and Chernobyl on steroids. I watched the TV show Chernobyl. It was like a four-part
series. I thought it was excellent. Of course, you see the other TV shows that show the wolves
and the wildlife are thriving now where Chernobyl used to be. But you also hear stories of cows
with five legs and other things like that. So given the followers of this podcast are at least
emotionally and cognitively aware of the systemic possibility of diesel fuel that is used in the
backup generators at a nuclear plant suddenly being unavailable even after two weeks of backup
diesel supplies and that people then don't go to the nuclear plant because they can't get there
or their ATM cards don't work because of some loss in complexity. And so what are those risks
that in such a scenario and we could debate whether that's 1% or 20% possible in the next
century. But under that scenario, what are the nuclear waste, radiation, etc. risks to the areas
around nuclear plants? What can you say about that? Right, right. So first off, that electromagnetic pulse
scenario has been factored in since the 80s into this defensive depth mentality that nuclear engineers
have. And so nuclear plants are designed and hardened with that in mind. Narrow boundary though.
They're looking at the EMP to the plant. I'm talking about the EMP to society.
No, they're looking to the whole system. They're looking at the way that that's magnified through
electric lights. Trust me, these are some of the smartest people on the planet and they're
thinking through every eventuality. And one way to generate an EMP is stratospheric nuclear
detonation in terms of a nuclear weapon. So that has been very carefully looked at. The experts I've
talked to is that it would lead to a scram in terms of just a reactor shutdown, all the control rods
going in, and then the emergency cooling systems running. So not to say it's a nothing burger,
but this is a familiar territory in terms of because of people's apocalyptic fear of nuclear
weapons and that transference to nuclear energy, these kind of edge case scenarios are often brought
up to imagine, well, how can this turn into a nuclear apocalypse as we would see with weapons?
As we saw with Fukushima, again, the simultaneous meltdown of three large boiling water reactors,
and you can look at this because you're going to hear, but I heard a study that this many people
died from radiation from Fukushima. That's more the case with Chernobyl studies that you'll hear
say Greenpeace say a million people are going to die from Chernobyl or the Green Party of Europe
commissioned a study that said 50,000 people will end up dead because of Chernobyl prematurely dead.
The quality of that literature, you get to the unskier reports, this is eight UN agencies,
three countries participating consensus decision making hundreds of scientists,
and they're going down to 50 confirmed deaths and a possible three to 4,000 from thyroid cancer.
So you get these huge kind of disparities, but Chernobyl is even far, far worse than Fukushima.
I mean, this is a reactor without containment that blew its lid that caught on fire and burned for
12 or 13 days with a radioactive plume that went across Eastern Europe and into Europe.
And again, this is something that's a big part of medical education right now, critical appraisal
skills. As we saw with COVID, you find all kinds of studies, preprints, and in terms of the way
that social media amplifies things, if you find something that fits your cognitive bias, you
don't read the paper, you don't look at the methodologies any good, you share it. And that is
I would leave it to people to critically appraise the studies in terms of the health impacts of
nuclear accidents, even Chernobyl, which is far worse than Fukushima. And we don't build nuclear
plants like that anymore. The safety culture is so different. The health impacts very minimal and
less than running a coal fleet, certainly, where you're just constantly putting out PM2.5 particles
that even in what we consider to be good air quality conditions have a four to eight percent
increase mortality rate from things like lung cancer and cardiovascular disease.
So in terms of imagining these kind of worst case scenarios, it would be really bad if the world's
430 nuclear plants all simultaneously lost the ability to cool themselves. As you mentioned in
a war zone, this is not great, but the Zaporizha nuclear plant, I believe it's four large gigawatt
scale reactors, they're in cold shutdown now, but they manage those despite a war zone type event.
Not a Chernobyl style plant. And so the ability to keep the reactor core cool for
as long as possible, the reactivity comes down exponentially. But I'm not saying it's a nothing
burger, it's not a problem. But in terms of these apocalyptic fears, both for humanity and for the
biosphere, I can't think of anything that's more grossly exaggerated. So let me ask a follow-up
to that, Chris. So let's say that there's two different scenarios. There's one scenario where
something happens that none of us can anticipate, and these 430 plants don't have any warning,
and then they react. The second would be that we have a month notice of something happening.
There's a big war or whatever it is, and the operators of these plants have time
to shut them down properly. Is there a big difference then in the radioactive externality,
pollution risk between those two scenarios? Definitely the longer you can keep the core,
and Fukushima to be clear, they were able to keep the cores cooler. I think it was on the
scale of hours, but even hours, you're dropping the level of reactivity massively, the amount of
heat and energy that that core is producing. But again, in terms of that Chernobyl-esque,
far worst-case scenario, the health impacts we see are very small. So I don't want to minimize
and say there's no difference. Obviously, you can get the plant, I think, pretty close to cold
shutdown after a month, in which it's not much active energy required to maintain that core,
as it finally cools down into a state of cold shutdown. But in that worst-case scenario,
I don't want to minimize that. But in terms of, again, our apocalyptic fears of, what did you say,
five-footed moose or something, because this is a big story. There's a whole
Chernobyl children's charity, which brings children from Chernobyl, often with congenital
heart defects and other problems to Ireland, to Canada, and gives them a radiation retreat and
respite. And it's a beautiful organization in terms of these disabled children getting to live
in a wealthy country for a few weeks and be cared for and maybe get specialist care they
couldn't back home. There is absolutely zero evidence that Chernobyl caused these congenital
heart defects and other things. Indeed, there was a whole genome sequencing study that came out
a couple years ago, which looked at folks that got some of the highest doses at Chernobyl
and looking for germline mutations between parents and kids in a large sample of people
with high radiation exposures in the general public. No increased germline mutations were found
whatsoever in this study. They did find germline mutations if the father smoked, for instance.
So this gives you a sense of sort of, I don't want to say that radiation is a nothing burger.
Like, for instance, nuclear waste, that irradiated fuel, fresh out of the reactor,
if it's not shielded, you'd get a lethal dose in seconds and die, a horrible death.
And yet in the history of civilian nuclear energy in terms of storing and handling spent fuel,
not reprocessing it, but storing it, there's not been a single incident in terms of someone dying
as a result of exposure to radiation. And that's because radiation is very easy to measure and
it's very easy to shield. So there is a danger there, but we're able to manage those risks
very, very well as that 70-year track record of, for instance, handling spent nuclear fuel is
demonstrative of. So here's my last question on this and you could use this as a segue to
a follow-up question or my last kind of constraint. I got a lot of criticism when I had my great
simplification video, the animated video that we put out last year. People are like, ah,
he didn't mention nuclear. That means he doesn't know what's going on. So there's energy properties
and different energy qualities. And if we are worried about oil peaking and declining, which
is inevitable, I think AI may prove to extend the peak we don't know yet, but we're at or close to
the peak. Many countries have peaked already and most of what we plan on consuming in the future
is in countries like Iran and Iraq, which we may be at war with in the near future, who knows.
But one of the things that I'm curious about is nuclear is generator of electricity,
like solar and wind are, when only around 19% of global energy use right now is electricity. So
there's a mismatch with the end services of what humans currently are using. And there's a lot of
decentralized transportation in cars and trucks and things like that. So that's something that
I call attention to, but I'll let you comment on that. But then you can follow by answering this.
Assuming that there are different energy facilities in the future that use nuclear power,
what would be the three or four or five best use cases for if we're able to scale nuclear plants,
what should that base load power in those plants be best used for in our current society?
I'll let you answer any way you would like there.
Yeah, I mean, I'm very aware partially through your work and others, this question of energy
fungibility or energy quality, just because we have units like kilowatt hours that disguises
the kind of utility of each form of energy that we use. And for instance, liquid hydrocarbons,
I think you're very right to be concerned about peachy boil. You've mapped out supply chains
in your book, which I have here on my table. It's incredibly complex. And we have
complexified the hell out of our, we have six content supply chains. I mean, I was just reviewing
you know, there's a famous essay on how to make a pencil, right? And it's like
mine in Brazil, India, China, right? Need like aluminum and copper alloys for the little racer
stub. You need petroleum products for the eraser. This is a major concern. A nuclear
does not solve that issue, that service that liquid hydrocarbons provide, whether it's,
you know, agriculture running tractors, whether it's, you know, the vast majority of marine
propulsion, that's not aircraft carriers or nuclear submarines, whether it's, you know,
diesel trucks, which we're so dependent on, you know, diesel powered diesel electric trains.
So that is a major limitation. I think the problem with a lot of the energy transition debate
is that we have this existential problem and we're trying desperately to make,
I always forget if it's round pegs fit in square holes or square pegs and round holes,
I imagine they don't go well into either. But there's this, there's this forcing of we've
got to make it work. And you see that, I think, in some of the really, you know, frankly,
bullshit models from the IPCC in terms of bending that emission curve down. And often it relies on,
you know, insane amounts of bioenergy capture, carbon capture and storage, for instance, to kind
of force the model to work. But similarly, you know, amongst the Nucleus, the Panacea folks,
they'll say, listen, this is, you know, essentially limitless abundant clean energy.
We can use it to run a number of processes to make synthetic hydrocarbons. And don't worry
about it. I'm not of that mindset. I think that's similarly to yourself. We are running a red line.
Energy is the economy. I'm not going to repeat all your talking points here. But, you know,
if the price of oil goes to $150 or $200, a barrel that risks really tanking our economy and our,
you know, I'm not going to, people who are listeners of this podcast are familiar. So,
no, I don't think Nucleus can do that. But what it's useful for, I mean, so stationary
electricity generation. And you could argue, you mentioned about 19% of the world's energy
uses electricity. You could argue that we have a global electricity shortage. If we were serious
about decarbonization, for instance, you know, high temperature process heat, that's provided very
well by electric arc furnaces. But we don't have enough electricity to dedicate to that,
for instance, right? That's kind of hard path, you know, big hydrodams and nuclear plants that
kind of would allow that use of energy to get around some of those fossil fuel services.
We either have an electricity shortage or a complexity longage.
Or like a, you know, a surplus use of fossil fuels. And I know you'd probably say,
listen, you know, every time we discover a new form of energy, it's just additive, right?
And yeah, that's probably true, right? So far it has been.
There's no biological organism that will go, wow, there's a sweet, you know,
concentration of nutrients. Which is why I'm not so sanguine on AI's possible
optimism on developing nuclear fusion as an answer to all our problems.
Do you have any thoughts on that? I'm incredibly bearish on fusion. I mean,
from the first splitting of heavy elements, nuclear fission, 1932 to commercial nuclear power,
1956, that's a really short timeline. You know, our first sort of induction of fusion,
basically in bombs until now, we are still nowhere close to getting a positive Q value in
terms of the energy out versus energy in. And the engineering, these machines I've talked to,
you know, Eiter physicists running the Topomax in Europe, and they say this machine is eating
itself, you know, the kind of neutron bombardment of the materials, the complexity there. If we're
struggling to build a very complex nuclear plant, like the AP 1000s we just built in Vogel,
you know, multiply that complexity by 10 fold and tell me that you're going to deliver that
project more easily. And a lot of the hyperonfusion is it solves the so-called problems of nuclear,
these intractable problems of, say, waste and proliferation and accidents. And it really doesn't.
I mean, do you think that fusion research is not critical to thermonuclear weapon development?
Like, I've got friends who work in big laser laboratories like Lawrence Livermore. And
most of that research is for making sure that bombs will go off, right? There's a total link
there. There's kind of more intermediate level waste that's created, not so much high level
with fusion. But the biggest issue is these are engineering solutions to communications problems.
Nuclear waste is not that big of a deal. We don't need to develop a technology, I mean,
that I just frankly don't think we're going to harness anytime soon. If we are able to get that
positive Q value out, are we going to be able to build the goddamn thing? The project management,
the construction skills that are evasive to us in a much simpler, easier to force, you know,
harnessing of atomic energy? I don't think so. But there's my position.
And that doesn't even get to my point, which is, let's assume we have too cheap to meter or even
free electricity. Given our current cultural value system aspirations and scoring metrics of GDP,
we would fry the planet by bringing in lots of other non-carbon or carbon resources with
that energy underpinning it. Yeah. Yeah. I don't disagree with you,
so nuclear fusion, if it ever arrives, would have to also arrive with a better form of coordination,
governance, and cultural values in my opinion. And to take it to extremes, as your guest,
Thomas Murphy has shown, I guess, eventually with this limitless clean energy, would have to find
a way to get all the waste heat off the planet before we boil the oceans. That's right. That's
right. If with a few more doublings, I forget how many we would boil the oceans just from the waste
400 years of two to three percent growth. So I have a lot more to ask you. One more thing on
nuclear. What about the small modular reactors and SMRs and molten salt and some of the things
like that versus the tried and true conventional, large conventional plants that we know work today?
What is your sense on that landscape? So the nuclear industry is, as an anthropologist of it,
having met lots of people that work within it. It's absolutely fascinating. It's mostly these
really, really nerdy, smart engineer types, and they're brilliant engineers. And the way they think
is engineering. And so they come up with engineering solutions to social license problems and
communications problems, as is mentioning with waste, but also social license problem. Well,
if nuclear is unpopular, right? Then you rebrand it as a small modular reactor. You don't even use
the N word in there. And maybe you can convince people this is friendlier, it's different, it's
better, it's shinier, right? Or another issue, another reason that SMRs were in vogue, and I'll
really argue they're falling out of vogue, was this idea that government will never finance
nuclear anymore. So you need to get a plant down in terms of the financing to about a billion dollars
if you want the private sector to finance it. So there was a whole sort of paradigm that's a
little more than a decade old that went against everything and the entire track record of nuclear.
The big cost reductions that we see in the first 10, 20 years of nuclear, absolutely from scaling
from these 20 to 100 megawatt reactors up towards the gigawatt scale, where the grid size permits
it, we have always scaled to a gigawatt because economies of scale are real. The SMR advocates
are big fans of Wright's law, which is basically an economies of multiples. If you double the amount
of units, then you should get a sort of positive learning rate and it should reduce by whatever
percentage it is. We often don't see that a nuclear. That's really evaded us in terms of those
positive learning rates that are remarkable with things like wind and solar. And again, even the
use of the term SMR, it is like renewables, an incredibly imprecise term. It's this massive grab
bag. Probably what your listeners, in terms of those who kind of imagine the best case for SMRs,
they're like, oh yeah, these are plants you can deliver on the back of a truck, and there's minimal
civil works and they just snap together like Lego, connect them to the grid. And that's certainly,
I think the industry and the trade associations are guilty of selling that story and they've
really overpromised and they're about to under deliver. So scale is very real within nuclear
and the imprecision of SMR. So again, we're lumping together so-called advanced technologies,
things like molten salt reactors, sodium fast reactors, anything that's not sort of water
moderated and water cooled is now kind of considered an advanced reactor, despite the fact that
these reactor concepts were attempted in the 50s, 60s, and 70s. And for economic reasons,
they didn't make it. It's not to say that we shouldn't research them more and maybe develop
them, but they really need to be a side project of proven nuclear, which is already struggling.
But again, there's this narrative that's really exciting because, hey, you can breed more fuel
than you use. Maybe these things can consume nuclear waste. I mean, these aren't real priorities to
us in the here and now at the moment. And so I've consistently in my podcast, and I've been a bit
of a contrarian in this, been an advocate for, again, focusing on the project management,
focusing on the construction skills, the boring stuff of nuclear, right? And embracing the high
value long-term asset that is a nuclear plant, just like a big hydrodam is a long-term low-carbon
asset. It's a bit more of a boring narrative, it's less inspiring, but it's certainly what's
proven in what we know works. And in places that have sort of followed those rules of a
building a standardized gigawatt scale reactor over and over again, at least we don't see a ton
of negative learning curves. We see, you know, in France, for instance, 56 reactors commissioned in
about 20 years. And now, you know, essentially decarbonizing their electricity accidentally
in the 70s and 80s, a similar story in Ontario. I mean, there's really kind of cool and inspiring
stories here with doing what we know. And, you know, in terms of what has risen to the top,
what has actually advanced in terms of nuclear technologies, it's done it for a reason.
These things are easier to operate, easier to maintain. You know, we've been handling
high-pressure steam as a working fluid and pressure vessels, you know, since the dawn of
the Industrial Revolution. Adding fission into that wasn't a huge leap. Molten salt reactors,
you know, having a fuel that's melted, all the alchemy of a nuclear reaction happening,
you know, as a kind of liquid that's all throughout the reactor versus contained in a fuel
pellet and a fuel element, you know, I'm getting into specifics here. But I'm not particularly
bullish on advanced or small modular reactors as you can hear from this brief diatribe.
There's not an easy fix, Nate. There's not an easy fix to this.
I, there's a lot more I want to ask you on nuclear, but we might have to save that for
around two, because I want to give a whole view of Chris Kieffer renaissance man
podcaster in this first interview. One final nuclear question, though. How does the political
attitude towards nuclear differ between your country, Canada, and mine, the United States,
and is there a heavy political divide left versus right on this issue?
So I will say, looking from Canada, south of the border, I can identify one and only one
issue that seems to have bipartisan support right now, and that is nuclear energy. So
the Biden administration is all in on nuclear. The lone programs office, jigger Shaw, the
Department of Energy, they're all in. They're frustrated with the nuclear industry. They're
trying to push it along. There's massive incentives in the inflation reduction act for
nuclear, I think production tax credits that approach 50% if you build on a brownfield site,
use union labor, which basically is there sort of goes without saying and use a local supply
chain, which nuclear tends to localize its supply chain. So the social license is big. What's
different between Canada and US is the nonprofit industrial complex. So there's a beautiful tax
avoidance mechanism in the US, which is if you're a very wealthy individual, lots of generational
wealth, you start a foundation and you can decide how you want to essentially spend that
tax burden. You can move it into your pet causes. And so if you look at the value of the
nonprofit sector in the US, it's a larger economy than some pretty respectable economies around
the world. And particularly the combined revenues of Sierra Club, of Greenpeace, of Friends of the
Earth is approaching not into the double digit billions, but I think at last I checked five
or six billion dollars. They've been resolutely anti-nuclear. They've been very influential. A lot
of staffers that are sort of cultivated within the environment's movement become political
staffers and have been very influential. And so in Canada, we don't have that same strength of a
nonprofit sector. The anti-nuclear activists have been less influential and have really waned in
terms of influence partially as they've just grayed out because there's not a lot of young
people that are enticed by an anti-nuclear narrative anymore. But again, partially just because
not the same kind of money is at play in terms of influencing politics. And I will say the
anti-nuclear or the NGOs that have been pouring a lot of money into anti-nuclear, even the Rocky
Mountain Institute has really softened its views on nuclear. And I think the Sierra Club recently
defunded their main sort of legal branch that was fighting for the closure of nuclear plants,
for instance. It's a remarkable transformation in the last five years.
Thank you. That was a pretty good whirlwind overview. So Chris, please now shift hats,
put on your podcast hat. Is your podcast audio only or are you having a video on YouTube as well?
First 40 episodes, audio only, biggest mistake of my podcasting career. Yeah, YouTube is a
is a great place for a lot of the conversations happen in the comment sections on YouTube for
whatever reason, that's where a lot of interaction happens. And yeah, it's both.
So knowing what you know about our societal, our spectrum of societal narratives,
what do you anticipate will be the comment section this podcast so far on what you've
said on my channel? I think it's going to be interesting because I think you have a pretty
varied audience. Certainly, I think you attract for better or worse, a kind of certain degrowth
audience, probably sort of progressive environmental audience as a sort of core
listenership. And I know it's much more diverse than that. And I think they'll probably take
issue with the blasé way that I've probably talked about nuclear risks as they would perceive them.
So I imagine there'll be some of that. I think as well, in terms of again, you've
I think elucidated very well, a nuanced perspective on what you imagine a great
simplification to look like. But this isn't us going back to the Stone Age, perhaps.
But I'm not sure about your listeners in terms and there's a lot of romanticization,
you know, and I even I won't accuse you of it. But in terms of your question about child mortality,
like, was that just the last kind of, was that just since the agricultural revolution that it
got bad? Or, you know, was there some kind of illustrious hunter-gatherer past when we
lived in harmony with nature? One of my favorite physicians, Hans Rosling, has a great quote,
he says, you know, humanity never lived in harmony with nature. We died in harmony with
nature. And it was mostly women and childbirth and children under five. So I think that's a
fundamental tension to wrestle with. You know, and these gains in terms of, you know, early
childhood survival are recent. This is the last, like, 50 hundred years. I mean, Somalia, that's
still 14% of kids used to be 50%. And that's that's kind of throughout human history. So
I think that's the thing to wrestle with, because I think some people, I mean, we might get into
this later, but Cuba provides a really interesting example of an economic shock when they were cut
off from their Soviet sponsors and their GDP shrunk by 35%, you know, over a couple months.
And I used to be a sort of Cuba solidarity activist, it's a very, you have to be very
careful of discourse around Cuba, because ideologues are drawn to it on either side of the
political spectrum, like moths to a flame. But I imagine the comments section of this podcast
might wrestle a little bit with these questions of like, like, how bad is it going to be? The
Dumeras will probably be all over that. But I think, you know, romanticization, this idea, you
know, even in terms, I know that you touch on agricultural topics from time to time, Vandana
Shiva's been a guest several times. I think there's an idea based upon, if we imagine this
simplification future, we may think of like a camping trip and we're like, camping trips are
great. I love cooking over a fire and you forget that you drove there and you had a great tent made
in Pakistan with really waterproof fibers. Or you think about like a transition village you
visited or a permaculture farm you went to. And these, again, are islands in a sea of a
fossil field civilization and often have enormous fossil fuel inputs into them. So I think we have
a really hard time imagining and there's a lot of sort of idealism of sort of, oh, this industrial
society is really terrible. Why don't we simplify to something that's nicer? And I don't think you
share that delusion, but I think that that might be a theme. So I do want to ask you about
healthcare and medicine approaching during and after a great simplification. But let's stay in
the podcast theme. Since 180 of your 200 odd episodes have been on the topic of nuclear,
presumably you have attracted an audience that is very interested in the nuclear question.
Whereas I'm covering anthropology, neuroscience, climate, biodiversity, debt, energy properties,
geopolitics, everything, and invariably, and it's getting worse, whatever episode I cover,
the ideologues will show up and criticize. I mean, it's not everyone. There's more positive
comments than negative. But my question to you as a podcast host is in this polarized social media
ideological tribal identity laden world, how do we have a conversation and integrate the broader
societal narratives and suppress our identities, at least temporarily in order to have a discourse
on the things that matter? What have you learned? And what are your core insights on this?
I mean, I've really learned to sort of depersonalize and not take anything personally,
and also delight in ideas that well expressed ideas that trigger all of my cognitive dissonance.
And that's maybe it's like a training process. But I love hearing well articulated arguments
that I absolutely disagree with. And I think as a society, I do explain that. I don't know. It
hasn't always been that way. Like again, coming from like even the hard left, the romantic left,
the Marxist ledonist left, I wouldn't say I was ever like a, you know, again, I'm a member of the
disgusted party. I've never really felt at home in any ideology. But on the extreme or hard left,
as on the extreme or hard right, I think there's an idea that like, you know, people that don't
agree with us are just kind of stupid. If they only knew if we could just explain to them,
they'd be converts. And then those that don't agree, I mean, in sort of Stalinist Russia,
they should go to the Gulag or, you know, get lined up against the wall. There's a total intolerance
on both sides of the political spectrum for free speech, for a diversity of opinions.
And it cripples societies. One of the reasons that I think, you know, there's many reasons that the,
you know, liberal capitalist system went out in the Cold War. I don't want to simplify this too
much. But the free exchange of ideas is just so vital. Like, we're in a whole number of different
predicaments. And if we don't have a breadth of opinion, and maybe I hate to kind of weigh into
COVID because it's so politicized, right? But this is potentially an illustration. And I'm sort
of drawing from Jonathan Hayd's work in the righteous mind. You know, we are a species that
evolved as a social species, in terms of a sort of selection pressure. We always see within,
you know, basically every human society, people on the left, people on the right,
conservatives, liberals, authoritarians, communitarians, libertarians, right? And that might
frustrate us in our various political polls. But when we recognize that all those voices are
really necessary, that's a good thing. So let's take COVID, for instance. You know, when I'm
working in the emergency department in Toronto, and we're seeing these tsunamis, right, in Iran,
for instance, in Italy, in New York, right, doctors, you know, freezer trucks outside in terms of,
you know, for dead COVID patients, doctors intubating in scarves, like we were terrified in
Toronto. I was a huge advocate. I was messaging my MP and saying the military should be out in
the streets enforcing lockdowns, right? And that kind of authoritarian impulse in the face of a
threat that, you know, we thought there was a case fatality rate of 5% with COVID, you know,
that 10% of people would end up in the ICU, that 20% of people would be hospitalized. And I ran
the numbers in my emergency department. And I was like, you know, we're going to lose 15,
20 people in this department, right? There's going to be 40 of us that will end up on
ventilators. And in that context, with the limited information we have,
an authoritarian impulse, I think absolutely appropriate, right? As both, you know,
natural immunity, vaccine induced immunity, and an attenuation of the virus occurred,
there was a kind of hangover that authoritarianism that went on too long. And so libertarian voices
came in, you know, they didn't necessarily, they weren't sort of savory voices per se,
maybe like, you know, have a different opinion, or there's a diversity of opinions on, say,
the trucker's protests in Ottawa. But I would argue that that authoritarian impulse
was stale, it had gone on too long, it was no longer appropriate, it was causing damage.
You only have so much sort of public health social capital until you burn through it.
And, you know, there was a hangover that needed a course correction. And so the libertarians
came in. And that was, this is just one example where it's, I think, important,
we're faced with novel challenges and a sort of diversity of opinion is super important in terms
of both understanding the new predicaments and how to engage and deal with it.
So more important than being able to suppress your identity and be a good listener, what I'm
hearing from you is, is the ability to change your mind. Absolutely. And again, just to reference
Jonathan Haidt for a second, he had this great example, right? If a farmer is trying to get the
most eggs out of a chicken, if you select an individual, you find that hen that just lays
like crazy. And you try and breed her, you end up with less eggs, because alongside that trait
for laying more eggs is aggressiveness. And they peck each other to death. And the overall
production goes down. So what you do is you grab groups, you segregate chickens into groups of
12. And whichever group lays the most eggs, that's your breeding stock. And it's, it's,
I think a lot like humans, which evolve, and I'm just quoting Haidt here, this isn't, you know,
my original thoughts, but we evolve collectively in small groups of hunter-gatherers, you know,
25, 50, 100. And there's a reason, genetically, I think, why there's this political spectrum.
Like in every society around the world, there's liberals and conservatives. Like why, why isn't
there some country or some village where everybody is super liberal? I think there's a reason for
that. And I think there's a evolutionary advantage to a diversity of opinions. And again, this,
this contradicts my sort of hard left past, but I'm really glad for that nuance. And again,
a big journey of myself, not into the political right, but for appreciation of certain arguments
and elements and viewpoints from the political right is, is, is that, is that understanding
that we do need a diversity of viewpoints to identify and understand the problems that we have
and to generate solutions. And for our solutions to change over time, as the facts on the ground
change is in the sort of COVID example I gave. So, so given your experience as a podcast host,
in addition to your emergency room role and as the president of the Canadian Nuclear Society,
what, how do you think we can change that? How do you think we can change the discourse
in the direction that, that you would aspire to? Are there, are there, is there anything you've
learned that gives you some hints or clues or, or avenues that give you hope?
Well, you have this magic wand question that I know you asked, right?
Well, I'm going to ask you that.
Maybe if you had, well, maybe I'll intercept it early on, but if you had a magic wand, maybe you
could, you know, make Twitter disappear or make TikTok disappear.
So you think social media is the cause of polarization?
It's not the cause, right? But Nate, I think, you know, like we all have like a window into
reality. We all have cognitive biases. I think you've elucidated very well in your work. We all
have blinkers. You know, again, we can't see the world until we have a metaphor that explains it,
and the metaphors that we have are all constrained by our individual experiences of the world.
So everything is very narrow. And now the way in which we perceive the world is largely,
and the information we gather is largely through our smartphones and the screens we have,
and then the platforms that present us the information. And, you know, and, and the platforms
that are trying to keep us on them as long as possible by presenting us with information that
suits our cognitive biases and makes a little dopamine receptors fire, right?
So that's incredibly damaging to, you know, again, a diverse, robust, tolerant,
you know, environment that's, that's prioritized as free speech. So I'm, I'm, I think that's a
major barrier. It's not that the root cause, right? The root cause is just our basic kind of
paleo psychology that persists today. But your question of how to overcome that, I think the
podcasting medium is, is really interesting. Like everything has become short attention span,
right? TikTok is, you know, down to a minute or whatever, right? Like, and people probably,
if you look at the metrics, you know, people probably, they watch the first 20 seconds before
they're distracted and move on. The emergence of long form podcasts that are, that are popular,
it speaks to something, it satiate something, I think in people that crave nuance and want to go
deeper. So I'm actually shocked by that myself. Like I, I don't listen to podcasts unless I have
to for prep reasons, or they're really, really exceptional. Like I watched Tristan and Daniel
Schmacktenburger on Joe Rogan, for instance. But I'm shocked that so many people have the appetite
to listen to a 90 minute conversation between two people. I really, it actually is heartening to me,
because I think most people, like you say, have a two minute or less time span. So maybe that is
an emergent phenomenon of nuance and complexity and context that our society needs.
Well, you don't have the patience maybe to listen to many podcasts, but you engage in hour, hour
and a half, two hour long conversations on a regular basis. And that's also, and again,
in terms of like the social capital of podcasting, I mean, how, how like maybe like, I love going
to parties where there's really cool people and I generally pick one or two of them and we just go
deep for an hour. These are weird parties. This is not your average party going, right?
So maybe we do that in our natural light, but it's very rare to sort of like, we're kind of
looking each other in the eyes across this platform and having a deep conversation, exploring
each other's work and thoughts. So even though you're not a listener, like you're engaging in this,
the same thing, you have a thirst for it as well. And that's why we, you know,
do this insane thing of putting an episode out every week or I think you do, you do more than
that. But well, maybe if, if I was far less busy, I would listen to a lot more podcasts. I just,
I just don't have the time. So that was a good answer. I like that. And I need to think about
that more. Okay, switching hats again, because I don't want this to go three hours. I mean, to be
honest, Chris, I have so many questions I'd like to ask you. Let's just do what we can on this and
have you back for, for that one to two hour party deep dive on something. So wearing your
emergency room physician hat, I've been very concerned about this. I've had a former governor
of Oregon, John Kitzhaber on, I've had Robert Lustig on, talking about the healthcare system.
The United States healthcare system is 20% of our GDP. Americans have 50% of the world's,
the entire world's medical prescriptions, which implies we're either sicker, our doctors are
prescribing them more for some kickback thing, or we're babies or some combination of the three.
But I do not believe that our, our current growth based system and by implication, our medical
complicated just in time throw this plastic tube that used once out system is sustainable.
So it's my belief that in the not too distant future, and I can't put a date on it,
we're going to have to gradually or suddenly go to getting 80% of our healthcare and medical needs
with 20% of the resources that we do today. And I'm sure you've thought about it, especially from
your, your trapper intentional community, Cuban solidarity past, what insights can you merge
with your decouple hat and your medical knowledge, knowing about a potential great
simplification in the future? What are your, your thoughts? Well, I mean, first off, I think
we'd be unlikely to see sort of this 80, 20 rule playing out. I think 10% of the population would
continue to get outstanding, you know, healthcare and 90%. That's what we see, right? And if we
want to talk about like more sort of simplified societies, I mean, there's an upper crust elite
usually with the private healthcare system that gets, you know, US style or similar sort of levels
of care and there's MRI machines and everything else. If society has 20 or 30% less resources,
your, your view is just stretches. So got it. Absolutely. But, you know, but I do think it's
a really interesting question. You know, I was looking at some Medicaid data recently, and I
don't have a photographic memory for numbers, but there's this idea of super utilizers, right? So
something like three or 4% of people on Medicaid use 25% of the resources, right? And these are
people with a lot of comorbidities, diabetes, heart disease, et cetera, that predispose them to
be sicker and who need a higher level of care. So how do we, how do we manage that? While still,
you know, I hope maintaining an idea of sort of universality, universal respect for human rights
and human health. And this is where I do not want to romanticize Cuba or the Cuban system. I've
done that in the past as a, as a kind of, you know, 20 year old Cuban solidarity activist. I
think there's really, really interesting things about the system, a lot of nuance there, right?
But in Cuba, for instance, which, you know, the health spending would be a fraction of what they
have in the US, they have pretty similar life expectancy stats, you know, child mortality
stats as the US on a, on a much smaller dime. How do they accomplish that? There is a huge element
in terms of preventative care. You know, things are stretched now because they send a lot of
doctors on humanitarian missions to earn foreign exchange to prop up the economy. It's actually
most of Cuban foreign exchanges earned through export of pharmaceuticals that they've, they've
got a biotech sector, but also human resources doctors, right? They're kind of like the Philippines
in that way, I guess, in terms of not remittances, this comes back through the government. But
they have a very interesting healthcare system that was constructed after the 1959 revolution.
And what it consists of is about 12,000 family doctor offices. It's a family doctor and a nurse,
they live embedded in the community and they make house visits. Every Cuban is labeled with a number
one to five. And one means you're healthy, you got no issues. And you might get a doctor's visit
a couple of times a year. Five on the other extreme is, you know, again, you're diabetic,
that's had one of their legs cut off, their glycemic control is terrible, they've had a heart attack,
you're getting a visit a couple of times a week or every week, are you taking your medications?
These are the super utilizers, right? And so there is a very aggressive preventative medicine
side of things and chronic disease management side of things, which occurs because of a, you know,
highly structured and centralized and organized healthcare system, which does value universality.
And I'm not romanticizing it again, because Cuban resources have been stretched thin and has the
highest, you know, doctor to patient ratio in the world, something like one doctor for every 200
people. But about 50,000 of those doctors are off on medical missions, earning the government
foreign exchange. So talk to the average Cuban, just like any, any person in the world, they're
going to bitch about their healthcare. But what one doctor for every 200 people, and that's the
highest amount of doctors in the world? Yes, sir, per capita. How much is it in Canada or the US?
We're talking one per, I don't know the data in front of me, but high hundreds, one per 700.
There's countries where it's in the thousands, obviously. So anyway, so you have this, this
primary care network, doctors and nurses embedded in the community. Like, again, how do you achieve
really low neonatal mortality? Well, you're on top of your prenatal care, right? And their schedule
for prenatal care puts us to shame. You know, maybe it's even excessive, but like, you're
getting blood pressure checks frequently does detect something called preeclampsia or pregnancy
induced hypertension. You're getting a lot of health surveillance throughout your pregnancy.
People don't fall through the cracks partially because, hey, this is kind of a police state
that has information on everybody. But there is a kind of nanny state element where people are
looked after and, you know, and preventative medicine is really essential.
You know, so the health system is organized again, with these primary care clinics dispersed,
you know, right throughout the country, right? There's not areas where there's,
you know, the rural areas in particular really prioritized. And then you have, you know, this
next section of poly, they're called polyclinicos, probably about 500 throughout the country. And
they have, you know, basic specialties, internal medicine, pediatrics, obstetrics, gynecology.
And they're kind of referral centers for those, those, those primary care doctors. And those are
also really dispersed throughout the country. And then you have 13 specialist hospitals. So,
you know, neurology hospitals, trauma hospitals, transplant hospitals. So they have,
you know, very specialized care available in terms of doing, you know, complex congenital
cardiac malformation surgeries. But the focus is really in terms of getting the bang for the buck
on that preventative care, that chronic disease management. And I will also say, if you go to
Cuba, everybody plays an instrument or play sports, like it is insane, the sports culture.
The number of Olympians that Cuba produces is absolutely nuts. And again, I'm starting to
sound like a blathering Cuba solidarity activist. And I really want to acknowledge complex society,
a lot of nuance, a lot of stressors internally imposed and externally imposed. But the health
system is fascinating. I spent, I've been to Cuba seven times. I got to, I did a research project
with American scholarship students studying medicine in Cuba. Fidel gave as a bit of a
FU to George Bush, he gave 500 scholarships to mostly black, Chicano and indigenous
Americans who couldn't afford to study medicine in the US. And they went to what's, I think the
world's largest medical school, which is a scholarship school for the global south, apparently,
to come study medicine in Cuba for free. And they were really interesting windows through
which to see Cuban society, because they're Americans, they shared, you know, my cultural
formation and background and questions and curiosities. And they were embedded very deep
into Cuban society, providing healthcare, like nothing puts you in touch with human beings,
like providing healthcare to them. Like as an emergency doc, I see kids, I see elderly, I see
women, I see men, I see the whole spectrum. And it's an amazing window into life. So anyway,
so they've been really useful at giving me sort of a nuanced sense of a Cuban reality. And the,
you know, some of them had kids down there and could comment on that obstetric care.
So anyway, just to, just to sort of, I guess, give you context for, for these, these opinions.
So as an ER doc, although you just said something different than ER or emergency,
you said you're an emergency doc, which is kind of an interesting Canadianism. Yeah.
Is it? Okay. Yeah. Well, I would think that, that there are emergent things that happen in,
in those facilities. So like how much of our medical system is just treating the symptoms and
not the disease? And how much of our effort as a society, as a culture, as individual
responsibilities should be towards prevention and sports and music and all those other things.
Because once you get to the hospital, it's almost too late. You're in the system and,
and all that. Do you have any words of wisdom on that front?
I mean, we're really like, one thing you didn't mention is infrastructure, right? We talk about
social determinants of health, things that make people sick. And, you know, there's biologic
determinants, like maybe just have really bad genes, right? Philadelphia chromosome, and you're
going to get leukemia as a child or something like that. But there's, there's social determinants.
And some of those, again, are sports or diet, nutrition, you know, mental health as a product
of living in an alienating environment. But some of them are just infrastructural. And maybe that's,
you know, to the environmental crowd less sexy, there was a really interesting study done in
Mexico as a health intervention. And it was giving families a few bags of cement.
And this had a huge impact on local health. So if you have a dirt floor,
you have worms and parasites on that, you have kids crawling around on it,
you have kids infested with worms, they're anemic, they're having diarrhea all the time,
they can't go to school, the moms are looking after them, the moms are depressed.
Being able to pour a cement floor, you know, I don't have the stats written in front of me,
but dramatically reduced diarrhea illnesses, like by 70% reduced. And I also read that, that those
people that spend a lot of time in the soil and the dirt when their kids
don't have allergies when they're adults and that we should take our shoes off and walk in the
bare soil and get hookworms. Yeah. No, I mean, there is something called the hygiene hypothesis.
The, the IgE immunoglobulin branch of our immune system is targeted at parasites at things like
worms. And so if it's got nothing to do because we live in such a hygienic environment, then yes,
I mean, allergies are the price to pay for, you know, kids not having anemia and like almost
all kids, right? Like, and again, this, this is where the hunter-gatherer lifestyle, you know,
there would be a different sort of health challenges, right? But humans living close
together with animals presents, you know, all kinds of zoonotic diseases, like where does,
where does the flu come from? Where does smallpox come from? All of these infectious challenges,
not all of them, but a lot of them are from concentrated humans with living with animals.
And so, no, crawling around on a dirt floor where there's animals and everything else,
like roundworms are, let me tell you about the roundworm life cycle, it's horrific, right? So
they come in usually through your foot, they bury themselves, embed themselves in your skin,
and you'll see this long little, you know, it looks like a little bit of rope or something
under the skin surface, they get into a vein, they ride the vein up into your lungs, right?
Because of bad cough, etc. Then they crawl up your trachea, and then they get swallowed down
your esophagus, right? And then they lay their eggs in your intestine, they hatch some worms,
etc., which, you know, leech off your blood supply, you poop out eggs, they get back in the soil,
and the beautiful cycle continues. I mean, it's like a, it's a disgusting sort of tour
to France through your body. And so, yeah, like, again, there's romantic ideas that it's nice to
play in the dirt and to a degree, yes. And particularly for kids in nice industrialized
countries where the dirt's not, you know, where I would keep our animals in factory
farms, I don't want to, I'm not going to go that far, but, you know, where we're not living,
piled on top of our animals, and the soil's not full of parasites. Yeah, it's great,
let your kids crawl around in the dirt. So clearly, you have a lot of wisdom on this topic,
and we can't do justice in this conversation, but do you have any advice or at least directional
thinking on medicine and the great simplification or healthcare in general?
Yeah, yeah, I think the Cuban example is insightful. Is it replicable? Not really,
right? Like, it's the product of a unique moment in time of a series of political ideologies and
sort of social values that became encoded in the system that I think did really well in
education and healthcare and screwed up a lot of other things. You know, we're not about to have a
sort of centralized government in the US that rationally distributes healthcare according to
the needs of the population on, you know, the values of sort of universal equality, etc.
But I do think, again, that question of if we want to reduce healthcare costs,
a big thing is we have something called an acceptable mis-rate, right? So in a merge,
we order an insane amount of diagnostic tests, because our tolerance to miss a heart attack
is something like 1%. If you have kind of, this isn't how lawsuits happen, right? But like,
we want to get people down using some Bayesian reasoning to a risk level of around 1% or 2%
with something as serious as a heart attack. And so basically, every single person with chest pain
gets a troponin drawn, which is a blood test that looks for an enzyme that should only be inside
heart muscle. If we see it in blood, then some heart muscles of, you know, cells have broken open
and spilled troponin. You know, so that is an enormous burden. We also have medical interventions
that, you know, frankly, don't have a big payback. A lot of actually cancer screening
has very poor evidentiary base in terms of on a population level actually saving lives.
That's not a popular thing to say, but it's objectively true. There's, you know, a lot of
therapies. I mean, there's cancer drugs that extend life by a month or two, right? That come at great
cost. I mean, I just lost my dad to cancer. He wasn't on one of those really expensive drugs,
but like, I get it. I absolutely get it. You know, very interestingly, just as a sort of side
note back to nuclear, my dad got a medical isotope that's produced in a candor reactor.
You know, it's tagged to a molecule that specifically finds, you know, a receptor on
prostate cells, binds to them. And it's kind of like a radio pharmaceutical that like radiates
just the cancer cells in that way. Anyway, you know, like, I don't know, if your loved one had
a really complex medical condition and need an expensive treatment, I think it's hard to say
no to that. So I'm not sure what it looks like, but certainly there's a lot of, you know, excessive
testing that goes on. And borderline treatments, like again, like things like, and I'm not about
to give medical advice on your podcast here, but like a lot of people have this concept that's,
you know, one intervention, one cure, right? It's called the number needed to treat. So if you
have appendicitis, and I either, we can manage it sometimes just with antibiotics, but if I do
surgery on you and I take out your appendix, I've done one intervention, I've saved you, you know,
saved one life, right? There's things like trying to manage cholesterol to prevent heart attacks,
right? And then the number needed treat goes from maybe one for appendicitis up to sort of three,
four hundred, you know, to prevent a single heart attack, you might need to be on that
anti cholesterol medication, or you might need hundreds of people to be on an anti cholesterol
medication for, you know, five years diligently to prevent one heart attack. On a population level,
is that worthwhile? Maybe. And with antihypertensives, we certainly think so, right? So there's,
there's a lot of nuance here, but you know, if you were, if you were kind of ruthlessly develop a
cheaper healthcare system, you'd probably look at the numbers needed to treat the numbers needed
to investigate to prevent bad outcomes. There's a way that the math whizzes could could do that.
I'm just not sure that we just as we won't willingly sign up to degrowth, I don't think
we're going to willingly sign up to sort of degrowth therapeutic options.
No, we're not. But I think as much as our society is unsustainable, our current Western
healthcare model is unsustainable. So maybe we come back and do a deeper dive on that sometime.
So in lieu of asking you medical recommendations for my viewers, what about just general lifestyle,
behavior, poly crisis, human predicament, preparatory recommendations for my viewers? Do
you have any? It's going to be, it's going to be very generic, right? I mean, like eat well,
get good exercise, stay fit. I mean, I think stay positive. And I'm kind of because I listened to
your podcast so much, Nate, I do know some of the questions that are coming. And a big part,
I think a biggest part of like, if you're wrestling with this question of a great simplification,
and, you know, I wrestle with it. Sometimes I discount it all together. I look at it as a
kooky idea, I come back to it, I read your book, I read your work, etc. But, you know, certainly,
it's do me, it can provoke a doom reaction, right? I know, and I know that's, that's not your
intention. But certainly, I think a lot of people come across it and they go, we're fucked, we're
in big trouble. And what's the psychological reaction to that? And the sort of mental health
reaction, I think, very important that this message is coupled with an idea of agency,
like the, the, the kind of climate concern amongst Western youth, for instance, is crippling,
like people commit suicide over the stuff, people fall into, they see therapists about it for years.
The antidote to anxiety is empowerment, right? And, you know, I would, like, I mean, a couple
friends have thought about this, but never taken it on. So I'll spill the idea out here. And if
someone wants to run with it, I'd be very happy if they did. But, you know, this kind of 50 careers
for climate book we were thinking about, like for myself, when I was thinking about getting into
medicine, or as a youth, if you're looking into like, you know, I don't know what I want to be
when I grow up, you know, teacher, okay, but there's so many uninspiring teachers, when you find that
one teacher, that one role model that just blows your socks off, that makes you want to be a teacher,
you want to be like them, you want to identify someone who's done something heroic and otherwise,
you know, medicine can be a really boring profession. There's a lot of mediocre doctors or
uninspiring doctors or unfriendly doctors, you know, you need to find someone who inspires you.
But I think, like, really having a culture of try of excellence, like, yes, we have a brutal crisis
ahead of us, equip yourself, empower yourself, so you can help your fellow humans, right?
Like, I think that's the vital part, you know, in terms of trying to answer your question there
about, you know, how to stay healthy in this, in this kind of coming meta crisis, if your
predictions are true to me. I totally agree with you. What I don't want to see is the sort of,
like, and what I do see all the time is the tune in and drop out, right? I guess, is that like
Timothy O'Leary? I can't remember my drug, 1960s drug culture lore well enough, but like, you know,
in terms of like the kids out at the climate protests, it's sort of like, yeah, okay, we get
to quit school for a day, awesome. And we don't make up for it by studying more on Saturdays so
that we can become whatever it might be, like one of these careers for climate, maybe you become a
biotechnologist and you become, you're able to genetically engineer a crop that's heat tolerant
or saline tolerant or instance, right? I mean, you can do everything. Maybe you become an artist
or a musician and you raise people's spirits in a difficult time. But don't tune in, drop out,
try, and like, let's organize our society. I mean, like, in response to the Cold War and the
space race, you know, there was a massive effort in the States to have rocketry clubs and a big
investment in education because we didn't want to fall behind on the missile gap. I mean, the
motivations might have been terrible. But like, when you face a crisis, empower your youth, right?
Invest in them, provide them with it with the compelling narratives, because I'm just worried
that with, with, you know, some of the reactions people might have to your message, they get
depressed, they get deactivated, they, they, they get disempowered. And so I think that's like,
that challenge of how to communicate realistically, as you see it, a bit of a, well, frankly,
pretty pessimistic future, how to couple that with like, humanity has been through brutal,
dark times. Like, fuck, we've been through the Holocaust, we've been through World War II, like,
the last 40 years have been pretty amazing. Some of us have been through the Holocaust.
But I, but I get your point. I totally agree with you. A few follow-on comments and, and
clarifications. I'm not so much predicting the future as I'm laying out the different scenarios
that I see and, and neither one is good. Business as usual, headed to a mortar economy,
fueled by new productivity increases, continue to widen the size of the straw that draws down
our finite natural capital and the ecosystem's sink capacity of the earth will eventually,
itself, lead to a simplification. Or if, if that doesn't manifest, we, we have the musical chair
situation of, of our financial claims not being supported by the underlying resource access.
So it's more of painting the, the scenarios. But I will say, if the result of this podcast is
generally tune, tune in and check out, I will have failed.
No, and I'm, I'm certainly not suggesting that, but that, that is a common reaction.
It's not in my control. It's in control of, of the viewer's response. And I guess I have a
responsibility as do you as a hosting of public conversations to steer towards the empowering
of people. But I'm just a guy. You're just a guy. We're just trying to unpack with the nuance,
complexity and context a very, very complicated emergent evolving situation. And it's, it's not
easy. So I, I really recognize the potential for getting mental stress from hearing these topics.
And so far, I still fall on the decision that that is much better than the alternative,
which is some sort of toxic positivity. Oh, no, no, no, that's doomers stuff. Ignore that.
We've always solved problems before and we will again. In order to solve our problems,
we have to understand the system that we're a part of, which is your work and mine.
Well, Nate, that's exactly where this question of like having diverse viewpoints is so important.
One person can't take on the burden of like, Hey, my message is a bit worrisome. I'm going to make
a few people anxious. And, you know, you're one voice in a wilderness of different voices. And
your voice is, you know, it's been very influential and powerful for me. And I think many others
that follow the podcast, but you don't need to take on all that responsibility. There's a number
of other voices. And like, thank God, there, there is a diverse opinion. Like the super
abundance people drive me totally crazy. This is, this is an example of, of, you know, sometimes
when, when well articulated, I'm like, Oh, it's interesting. That makes me think about it a bit
differently. But I mean, just to kind of summarize the thesis, it's like, listen, you know, Julian
Simons was right. Paul Ehrlich was wrong. They bet on a bunch of commodities. They got cheaper,
not more expensive, despite resource quality going down. It's all about human ingenuity.
The more humans, the better, as long as there's a free market and kind of liberal democracy or
whatever, right? And humans are the master resource. And it's like, it's interesting.
And it does point to the importance of technology. But like, as I've come to see it,
you know, there are three sort of fundamental variables to how long we can ride this, you
know, this, this roller coaster we've been on. And there's kind of materials. And we know that
we access the best first, or grades are declining. You know, we're in a bit of trouble there in
terms of materials, we're papering over that with, you know, still very abundant and relatively
cheap energy and technological innovation. So the super abundance people are right. Like the
technology, the human ingenuity part is really, really important. They're delusional, because
they're, they're ignoring those other two factors. They're saying they can just be papered over.
But like I ecosystem thing, which is a big part that's missing. Yes. Yes. I tend to like Nate,
like I'm, I'm definitely in camp human. I'm definitely like on the human side, like if I'm
in the zoo with Harambe and the kid falls into the enclosure, I'm sorry, I'm going to shoot the
gorilla. Right. And part of that comes out of being a father, like, again, I'm just saying, you
know, anticipating your questions. What's most important to you? I guess like my son, right?
My fiance is right, right up there too. I don't, you know, if she's listening, mom, etc. But like,
we are social creatures in the social web. I think there's a temptation amongst, you know,
people that probably don't like being called Malthusians of, ah, man, we're a virus. There's
too many of us. And of course, that is always sort of begins at the end of your moral community,
of your social network, of your family, friends, you know, when you get to sort of being able to
dehumanize people because you just don't have any social relations with them. But that's a really,
for me, this is like the most difficult thing to disentangle, because yes, I love the natural
world, right? And we need to also just for the benefit of humanity, you maintain biodiversity
and pollinators and insect populations and stuff like that. But I'm not sure what I'm willing to
sacrifice in order to do that. And I don't pretend to have an answer. But I think again, it's, it's
part of music, why should I'm confused? I haven't reached a conclusion. Why should I be talking
about this? But like, this is the discourse that we need. And we need those delusional super
abundance people, we need people that are saying, Hey, there's firm limits. You know, we need people
who say, Yeah, but we've overcome them before, many people will say, Yeah, but that that ends
somewhere. And maybe that ends because of material constraints or energy constraints, right? Because
technology ain't going to keep soaring if we don't have these other two, leaving with the middle
finger. You know what I'm saying? I'm going to take your previous answer on removing Twitter as
your magic wand answer, which leads me to the final question. If you were to come back to this
show, and I expect you will, what is one topic that maybe we touched on or didn't even cover today
that you would be interested in taking a deep dive on that you think is relevant to human and
planetary futures? You know, again, like I'm someone who's not siloed, I don't have like
medicine might be kind of an area where I've got a bit of deep depth and, you know, knowledge
because of all the years put into studying it, like, I find it incredible. Sometimes my influence
specifically kind of politically, like we've had really enormous success. And in terms of the
long shot campaigns we've run in Canada to save a nuclear plant called Pickering, for instance.
And I'm like, you know, why are people listening to me? I'm a doctor, hobbyist, podcaster.
And it's because I'm able, I think, to kind of weave compelling narratives and tap into an incredible
network of experts while not being an expert myself. So sometimes I'm a little insecure if
I'm coming on your podcast and we're going to deep dive something, I got to confess,
yeah, I'm not an expert on really any one thing. It's more sort of pulling together the information
that I have into narratives. I do think this question of trying to like for you and for your
project, you know, there's a lot of time spent in imagining a future of what a great simplification
looks like. I think that needs more voices. Again, I haven't listened to every episode, right? But I
think the people that you generally have on to kind of imagine that with, you know, if I'm frank
in terms of my judgmental opinions, which are under researched, I'll be fair, but tend to be
folks from the kind of progressive environmental left, you know, permaculture sort of crew,
and I would like to see and maybe could contribute as someone offering a bit of a different
perspective that doesn't, you know, it's not that I don't appreciate those voices. And I think
it's important that there's people that study some of those concepts. But anyway, so I don't
know if that answers your question, but I don't know that I'd be able to come on and talk, you know,
deep dive a topic, but like everything we've touched on today has been, you know, interesting
and we've scratched the surface so there's more depth. Okay, so we'll have to think of a title
for this episode. Oh, man, good luck. But the title for the episode that you come back will be
something like a non progressive lefty permaculture view of the great simplification.
Yeah, I don't I'm not in the permaculture camp, unfortunately. So you can't you see
a disgusted party, you can't you can't. Okay, the disgusted party. Dude, this has been great. I
really appreciate your authenticity and the fact that you're not siloed and the fact that you're
non political and the fact that you deeply care about all these things. Do you have any closing
words for the viewers and listeners? No, I mean, Nate, I again, your work sent me on a bit of a
roller coaster of my own in terms of, you know, I was like, should I keep calling my podcast decouple
is decoupling even possible? You know, for brand recognition, I definitely kept the name. But yeah,
I've really enjoyed and I'm not just trying to fluff your ego here. I've really enjoyed your
contributions to this question of the human predicament. It's shaped me quite deeply. So I
don't I just I want to express some gratitude. I would love it if people from you know, in terms
of some shameless self promotion, I'd love it if people who were interested in this conversation
wanted to jump over and, and check out the decouple podcast, actually the very first episode,
the audio is not the best, but it really sort of, it's a time capsule, it kind of elucidates my
thinking from 2020. This idea of decoupling, which I think has has holes in it now. But yeah,
I mean, let's just keep learning together. Let's be tolerant. Let's really pursue free
speech as a as a core core value. And let's, you know, fuddle through this and make the best of
it that we can. Thank you, Dr. Kiefer to be continued, my friend. Absolutely. If you enjoyed
or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification, please follow us on your favorite
podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com for more information on future releases.
This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No Troublemakers Media, and curated by Leslie
Badloots and Lizzie Siriani.
