Let's be really, really clear and honest with ourselves here.
We are at war with Russia under international law.
There's been no declarations of it, but by providing, targeting, by having our military
personnel providing specific intelligence, Russia has every right already under international
law.
Leaving aside the issue of whether the invasion is right or wrong, none of that matters.
The simple point is we are combatants in this conflict.
Today I'm welcoming back to the program my colleague Chuck Watson.
Chuck's been on the show five or six times highlighting geopolitics, war, particulars
about nuclear weapons and the risk homeostasis that we've all taken for granted these last
decades on the nuclear situation, and particularly what's been happening in Ukraine in often
prescient detail over the last couple of years.
Why did I ask Chuck to come back on?
Because we are slowly moving from a proxy war to potentially an open war, and most of
us are kind of asleep.
Things have kind of slowed down in Ukraine, not to Ukrainians they haven't.
We've lost 400, 500,000 Ukrainian humans in this war.
But recently France, Poland, and others are making noise about directly involving their
troops, their equipment moving into the arena, which would potentially trigger Article 5.
Russia would retaliate, and then we are quite potentially off to the escalatory races as
Chuck has talked about before.
So as much as I'm an energy systems finance ecology analyst, I think geopolitics of this
sort is the mother of all risks, and I feel a fiduciary to share what's going on to the
followers and hopefully decision makers among you.
Why should we listen to Chuck Watson?
Chuck worked on the technical aspects of international relations and foreign policy for over 30 years,
detached duty from the US Air Force to the State Department and National Security Council
in the Middle East under Robert McFarland and Donald Rumsfeld.
Then in the 1990s and 2000s, designing foreign aid projects around the world, coordinating
use of declassified Soviet and American Cold War spy data, and more recently climate change
studies and other natural hazard models, all at the intersection of military aid, intelligence
worlds, economics, technology, and foreign policy.
He's one of the few people that I trust on this topic, and I think this is a really important
topic. Please welcome Chuck Watson.
Good morning, Chuck.
Good morning, Nate. It's a wonderful spring day with all the pollen coating everything.
So if I seem reddish or yellowish, it's from the pollen.
I have very sticky hands right now, which you wouldn't know because they're off screen,
because I just had to squish a bunch of grapes to feed them to my ducks because the
full grapes are too big for their mouth, but they love grapes.
With that aside, the ducks and the spring are beautiful, but we are in a world of unseen,
unfelt peril, which those of my viewers that have seen year four or five conversations with me are
aware of. Things behind the scenes are seemingly getting urgent, and I wanted to touch base with
you and bring us up to speed on what's going on and what's relevant. So just as a little bit old
wave backdrop leading up to the present moment, Western leaders have always said this war is
about Russian aggression, and the NATO efforts are defending the international order, democracy,
and the people of Ukraine. Is this really the case, and what is this war ultimately really about
from your system's historical analyst perspective?
Yeah, Nate, that's a great question because if you're going to craft solutions to a problem,
you've got to start with what's the underlying basis. When you get right down to it, this is like
a lot of great geopolitical crises over human history. When you get down to it, it's about
resources, it's about revenge, it's about history. Part of it is there's this attempt to, in order
to get support, and it's a lot about domestic politics, there's an attempt to make this about
this wonderful crusade of democracy and whatever, and also to make it a coherent narrative across
Europe and the US. But Europe, the US, and even within Europe, there are a lot of very distinctive
reasons why this conflict has gone forward, and most of them really don't have that much to do
with Ukraine. Ukraine ultimately is a civil war. Again, we can, you don't have to go back to the
rise of the amphibians like Vladimir Putin does in his three-hour discussions of history,
but it is important to realize that Ukraine, the very name Ukraine, means borderlands in
Old Slavonic, and in Russian, modern Russian, Ukraine means outskirts, and the reason it has
that name is it is a borderland. It's between the Slavic world, Europe, it's, even within the
Slavic world, it's kind of a boundary area, and it's the various parts of it have been controlled
by Poland, by Hungary, Romania, Russia over the centuries. So you've got different cultures,
different histories, so you look at Eastern Ukraine as more Russian-affiliated, Northwestern
Ukraine is more Polish, Southwestern is more Romanian or Hungarian, and so when you look
at how we got where we are and that skip over a lot of that history, it boils down to the collapse
of the Soviet Union. The boundaries of the Old Soviet Republic were used, but it really threw
together a bunch of people who historically are different and haven't lived together. They have
different cultures, different languages, different attachments, and what they could have lived and
wanted to live together peacefully, they were trying to build a federal republic, but quite
frankly the U.S. and West decided, particularly the U.S. and Great Britain, decided that this was a
great opportunity to further weaken and disrupt Russia, and so they took some existing tensions
which would have been worked out domestically, politically if Ukrainians had been left alone.
We interfered, caused it to disintegrate into a civil war, so where we are now is to the underlying
reasons why. Again, resources, and a lot of that boils down to China, and one of the things that I
think we should mention at some point is this Rand report that came out in February. It's pretty
fascinating because it's obsessed with China. You listen to U.S. leadership, there's this
obsession with the rise of China, and of course China is an economic powerhouse at the moment,
but what they don't have are resources. What Russia has are resources, tremendous natural
resources. We've discussed that before, the oil, the mineral resources are an incredible fraction,
you know, food. You look at wheat production and all the things we've discussed in other podcasts.
From the U.S. standpoint, it's about controlling those resources, partly for profit, partly for
our corporations, but a lot of it is a game of keep away because we don't want China to have
access to those resources. You look at some of the other players, France. You look at the French
president now is making some very provocative statements, and that's a lot about revenge,
because Russia has been helping various African countries that were former French colonies to
gain more independence from France. Partly that's a diplomatic move on the part of Russia. It's also
helping China out. It's helping to further compartmentalize, in a way, the world economy
and get it away from U.S. domination, and so that's helping China. That's one reason why
China supports Russia so much is that, you know, not just Russian resources, but Russia is creating
a world where China has more interference-free access to African resources. You look at Eastern
Europe, that's just pure revenge and history. You know, we like to talk about something called
periodization when we do these kind of analyses. Wendy's start history, and in the Middle East,
that's a huge thing, because you start with the formation of Israel. Do you go back to
biblical times? Same thing in Eastern Europe is, okay, who first killed whose family is what this
boils down to, particularly with Poland, because Poland and Russia have a long history of conflict.
Poland and Ukraine, the Polish people in large part, particularly in southern Poland,
they hate the Ukrainians only slightly less than they hate the Russians. The Volian massacre
during World War II is still a very bitter memory on the part of the Poles. And then you look at,
you know, the UK has a long history, the Great Gain. Britain feels like a lot of its fall in
the late 1800s, and problems was as a result of Russia and that competition. And of course,
the Crimean War and the, we have the, you know, the Charge of the Light Brigade, there's a long
history of war between Russia and the UK. And Germany has history as well. And of course,
the recent, with World War II, there's still amongst the German military a certain bitterness
over that. They feel like they should have won and defeated Russia. They feel that, or the Soviet
Union at the time, but they still see it as Russia. And there's a very complex psychology there.
And finally, what's particularly fascinating to me in one way is this, what you would call the
values argument, Western post-Christian values versus the more traditional Eastern European and
particularly Russian values as expressed through the Russian Orthodox Church and the Orthodox
Christianity. So US domestic politics splits out kind of the same way that, you know, Russia's
the convenient enemy. We don't have a lot of economic connections. We can do sanctions against
Russia. It doesn't really hurt the US. It's catastrophic for Europe, but it doesn't hurt,
doesn't really hurt the US that much. China, we can't do, if we did sanctions, serious sanctions
against China, it would wreck the US economy. So again, you get down to why is there war with
Russia? It's the usual stuff, its resources, the high sounding democracy, and those sorts of things
are just a cover. Had we aired this interview, what you just said two years ago, most people wouldn't
have believed it, but you have continually kind of had prescience on what's going on. Let's hope
you don't have too much presence with your articulation of nuclear missiles, or at least
you're worried about that. But I think it's starting to be seen that this narrative of this is about
defending the Ukrainian people and democracy is becoming a little unbelievable, given that
I don't know how many hundreds of thousands of Ukrainians have lost their lives by the extension
of this conflict, which apparently was attempted to be a peace treaty made almost two years ago,
and the British government apparently scuttled it. But for me, I like to follow the news,
and I like to think I'm an analytical, clever person that can disseminate signal to noise,
but this particular issue, NATO, Russia, in Ukraine had really opened my eyes,
in thanks to you and half a dozen other people that showed me that what's happening
isn't what we're hearing in the media, and so I've learned that, and I think people that have
listened to your prior conversations have also paid attention to that. Well, let me drill down
on one thing you said so that I can understand it. How does France versus China and access to
resources in Africa, mechanically, what do you mean by that? Like, can you give a tangible example
of how what Russia is doing impacts France economically or in a material resource way?
Yeah, this gets into a whole, we may have to channel Putin and go back in history here at
least somewhat, because if you look at France's relationship with Africa, France had a lot of
extractive colonies in Africa. After World War II, it was forced to give up a lot of those colonies,
but when it did, it did so under extremely favorable trade concessions, and so
in some people call it neocolonialism, there's a fair amount of resentment about it in Africa,
and that France in particular has been quite aggressive in maintaining military forces in
Africa. Of course, there's the famous, the conflicts over Algeria, and that's
a bit of history that folks that are interested should explore, but if you look at particularly
Central Africa, the Francophone areas of Africa, they have a long history with France in the
sense of France dominating their internal politics, manipulating the internal politics
through economic levers to try to keep leaders in place who would maintain that
extractive colonial relationship. So the specific example, of course, would be uranium,
and as we know, France is very dependent on its nuclear energy for electricity,
and where does that uranium come from? Well, there's not a lot of it in France, it comes from
Africa. There could be alternative supplies in Europe, and where are those supplies located?
Oh, let me think, they're in Russia and Ukraine, so you can see where this becomes a real problem
for France in that within France, there's a number of revolutionary movements that are
coming to a fore that are trying to get a more equitable basis of their trade relationships
with Europe and with France. And so more equitable means your profit margins drop,
and you don't have direct control over central resources. So that was one of the points I just
mentioned, resources and control are so critical. And with France in particular has developed a
very toxic relationship with Russia, because Russia through some of its proxy, I say proxy,
some of the corporate paramilitaries like Wagner Group, there's the Z-Force Group is another one,
there's some others that they have been assisting, providing security assistance and training to
a lot of these groups in Africa. And recently a number of countries have thrown France out and
have changed their economic and trade relationships. It's been a cascade across Central Africa.
So France obviously resents that a lot. They have been pumping both material, but also
it's no longer really in Ukraine a proxy war. We're now in a secret open war between Europe,
some parties in Europe, the US and Russia. And a good example that is France. There have been
French foreign legion forces within Ukraine helping with the scalp missile targeting and
providing assistance. Well, Russia eventually got tired of that and hit one of their big staging
areas and killed a number of French, foreign legionaries a few weeks ago, hasn't gotten a
lot of coverage in the West. That may have been the proximate trigger for Macron's recent comments
and the spiral of escalation in that France was using Ukraine to extract revenge against Russia
for Russian diplomatic and security help for these French former French colonies,
which cuts off their potential access to resources.
So getting back to the two wars, there's the
kinetic war and then there's the propaganda media war. We're now getting as usual conflicting
messages about the progress of this war. Russia is weak. Ukraine needs only a little more help to
win. So we send them more missiles and F-16s and funding versus Russia is now about to attack NATO
and Blitzkrieg all the way through Europe. Can you give an update how things stand according to
your analysis and information? Who's winning? Who's losing? What's the situation?
Well, first off, let's be really clear. The big losers in this situation are the people of Ukraine.
The civilians caught in the middle of this. Most of them, the ones in the West probably would
prefer to be under Russia, the ones in the East. And by the way, that was not true 15 years ago.
15 years ago, I think if you look at the Poland, the majority of people in Ukraine wanted to be
an independent country, but not forced to choose between Russia and the West. They wanted economic
ties with Russia, cultural ties. Because I mean, the current, they give me an idea of how crazy
this is. The current head of the Ukrainian military, his parents live in Moscow. His brother,
I think, lives in St. Petersburg or whatever his family is Russian, they now hate each other.
This is a battle of brothers. This is more akin to the U.S. Civil War than it is World War II,
where you have Germany invading other countries. Do we have an estimate of how many Ukrainian
civilians and military humans have died since the beginning?
You know, the numbers are all over the place. My estimate is that in terms of
dead and permanently disabled, it's probably on the order of $500,000 to $700,000.
You can cross check this with, if you look at satellite imagery, you can see acres and acres
of new fresh cemeteries. You can, if you monitor the various social media within Ukraine,
private chat groups, you can't discuss this publicly because the Ukrainian
special forces will hunt you down if you talk about this openly. But if you get access
with your friends and relatives and it's catastrophic, there's tremendous casualties.
And by the way, you don't see that on the Russian side. You're not seeing any indications that
certainly there's casualties. It's probably in the tens of thousands, not in the hundreds of thousands.
So there's a huge asymmetry. And that gets to your question about how's the war going.
By the way, I wouldn't have known that. I wouldn't, based on what I read in the media,
I wouldn't believe what you just said. Well, it's interesting because if you look at BBC, for
instance, and the BBC English Service reports radically different numbers than the BBC Russian
Service does. And the reason is any Russian speaker would look at BBC Russian and look at
the numbers and go, yeah, that's about right, you know, 50,000, something like that. You look at BBC
English and they're saying hundreds of thousands of Russian casualties. But no Russian would believe
that or no Russian speaker would believe that because there's no secondary signs of it. You
would see it. You would see the reports of families. You would see, again, if you're an analyst like
me that has access to high resolution satellite data, you would be looking and going, where's the
cemeteries? You know, it's just not there. And so that's where this gets so poignant that I think
is so critical. You know, the problem is, I say stuff like that. And as you know, in the early
days, and I withdrew from public speaking about this to a large extent, because you were immediately
trashed as being some Russian Putin fanboy or, you know, Russian agent or something. And I had
people asking me how much the KGB was paying me, which, of course, bust out laughing because KGB
is internal security in Russia now. I'd correct them and say it's the SVR that's the foreign
intelligence service. And then they get even more angry because you know so much about Russia. You
must be a Russian, anyone who knows anything about Russia must be a Russian agent, seems to be the
logic of the day. But, you know, that's a real problem.
To point it out, you were a Russian expert when you worked for the U.S. government back in the
day. And I'll just say for the record, I know that you would rather not do these conversations.
And we discussed yesterday about how urgent things are. And you felt fiduciary to share this
information, because all we can do is what we can do. We're just a couple of humans that care about
the future of complex life. And that's why we're trying to share this information with other and
hopefully rational minds can integrate this and result in better decisions. But sorry to interrupt.
Keep going. No, I think, Nate, that's a great point. It's probably worth
spending a few seconds here to discuss that. Because, you know, a lot of people that are
speaking out on this, I say a lot, there's some, and I don't want to name names, but they are
Russophiles. I mean, they, you know, they like Putin. They like, and I don't want to say authoritarian,
it's a little, you get into political arguments over things. But, you know, I study, I was
being trained as what we used to jokingly call ourselves demonologists, you think, to study the
Soviet Union. And yeah, there's aspects of Russian culture and the language is fascinating. And
that's, that's an aspect of it. But, you know, I'm an American. I love this country. I love my
civilization. And I don't want it to go up in a bright flash of 3000 degree light. And so,
you know, it's like most cultures, you know, understanding a culture, understanding a world
leader doesn't mean you agree with them. It just means that you're trying to see what they're,
whether or not their arguments are valid and demonizing the other, as you well know, is a
long human technique to try to gain support for conflict. Because inherently, you'd walk the
streets of Moscow, you talk to people, guess what, their concerns are no different from the
average American. And you go and you crane the same way. And to get to you back, you know, get back
to your question about who's losing, again, the people of Ukraine, because, and you ask about
casualties, because they're caught in the middle. It was a civil conflict that could have been resolved
peacefully. Because of outside interference, it turned into a civil war, which evolved into
a proxy war briefly. But now it's a secret war, in essence. Yeah, Ukrainians are largely the ones
fighting it. And by the way, on that point, I do need to sneak in here. You know, the majority of
the casualties and the majority of the forces fighting in Ukraine, on the Russian side, are
Ukrainian quote unquote, they're the militias of the Donetsk and Luhansk People's Republic,
which are now part of Russia. But it's those militias that originally formed in 2014 to resist
the attempt to derusify what Eastern Ukraine, they're the main ones fighting. So essentially,
you could argue they're fighting for their own liberation. Wait a minute. So a substantial or
even a meaningful percentage of Russia's forces engaged in this war are from the Eastern Oblast
Ukrainian regions themselves, fighting against what were not so long ago, they're their own
countrymen. Exactly. Yeah, that's one of the dirty little secrets of this conflict. You go back to
2014. Now, what you'll hear is, oh, well, these, what Ukrainian national, ultra nationalists who,
by the way, are largely from Western Ukraine and are actually largely of either Banderas or Poland's
affiliate, but that's a different argument. If you look at the way that, the way this
shaked out in the way that the revolution in 2014 started, it was indigenous. And Ukrainian
nationalists will say, oh, it was Russians that were infiltrated from Russia. It wasn't real,
quote unquote, Ukrainians. Well, then what are you going to say about their current,
the current head of their military? His family lives in Russia?
I want to continue on this question of who's winning and who's losing and what's the current
situation. But I wanted to briefly recap a story. You know, I was just in India. I was in a town
called Auroville, which is an international community to begin with. But I met people there
from Russia, people from all over the place. And it's in times like that that there's this
fellowship of humans that realize that our governments are crazy and there's power dynamics,
but they just like music and good food and community and the same things like you were saying
everywhere. But what was interesting is of the three Russians I met in India,
two of them, when I first met them, they were staying at my little hostel.
They introduced themselves and said they were from Germany. And I said, oh, it sounds like you
have a Russian or Ukrainian accent. Well, yeah, I'm living in Germany now. They were afraid knowing
that I was American to introduce themselves as Russians. And after a day or two, we became
fast friends. I went biking with this woman, Olga, often learned a lot about their culture.
They're the same as people in Wisconsin and Minnesota at that level was my take. Anyways.
No, that's absolutely right. And in fact, that's that was kind of the point. And why,
you know, when we start our discussions, we'll end up talking about the pollen or the cats or
something like that. And, you know, that's how most discussions between two human beings,
whether they're Chinese or Russian or German or whatever.
And this is what, well, we would normally talk about dogs. In your case, it would be cats. But
this is what ultimately gives me hope is deep down, there is a brotherhood of the common human being.
It's, it's, there's the scaffolding of the war and the power and all that that is imposed,
especially in a, in an era where we've come accustomed to a huge amount of energy surplus.
And that may be flattening or declining. So that in that that that energizes our,
our in group, out group dynamics. And that's what's going on right now. But it does give me
hope there are Ukrainian people who follow and comment on my podcast. And I have to copy paste
and put it into Google translate to see what they're saying. But there is a an awakening of
humanity of the stakes of our times that does continue to give me hope, despite all these,
these bottlenecks ahead of us. Sorry for that. Please, although it's important, I think, please
get back to the current situation. I guess there are three things, right? There's the proxy war,
there's you just referred to it as an open secret war. And then there's an open, not secret war,
but an open public war. Are we headed there? What's the situation?
Well, you look at Macron's comments recently, and this is hard to say what's going on and how
much real support there is for this. But Poland has been negotiating with Ukraine for the last
18 months, basically, about moving their own forces into and apparently there are already
significant Polish forces in the former Polish areas that are currently part of Ukraine.
And there's a lot of fear on the part of Ukraine that if they let Poland in, Poland's never going
to leave. And the Poles have said, yeah, once we're there, we're not leaving because it's
our land, it's our people. So, you know, the French going in, and you know, it's hard to,
I suspect that a lot of this is either laying the groundwork or testing the waters. If it happens,
first off, it's important to realize that even the Poland has significant military forces
on their own, neither Poland or France have the ability to stand up against Russia alone
or combined with Ukraine. Again, you don't get this impression here in the West, but
Russia probably has still 75% of their combat potential in reserve. You look at their people
here go, oh, they're having to buy artillery from shells from North Korea. They're being very smart.
The domestic protection is being stockpiled and the stuff they're getting from North Korea and
other sources are what they're using operationally, which is they're building their combat potential
on the assumption they're going to have to face off against NATO in some way.
And that's a scary thing, but it's also important to realize because what Poland and France in
particular and probably the UK as well, they're looking to, they are afraid that the US is pivoting
away from Ukraine. You look at Victoria Newland leaving and unfortunately, I can't remember his
name just off the top of my head that the guy who was appointed to replace her, he's very much a
China hawk. So he feels the real conflict is with China and this whole thing with Ukraine is just
a distraction. Whereas Newland because of her Eastern European connections and for a lot of
reasons was very aggressive in saying that no, it's about Ukraine. So her leaving is an interesting
sign. You even look at Lindsey Graham in the last day or so has been saying things that
seems like he's positioning himself to abandon Ukraine. And he's the guy that was saying
dead Russian is a good Russian or some crazy stuff like that. Oh, I've got a video of him
singing a Nazi era song with a bunch of band terrorists in Ukraine a few years ago. I doubt
he knew that's what he was singing, but the guy, he's really flipping. Now he's saying, well,
you know, we can't give just the last night, I saw a video clip this morning. I guess he made
these comments yesterday. He was saying that, oh yeah, Ukraine, we can't be giving them money.
It's a loan and they need to be, we need to make sure they can pay it back.
And how the hell are they going to pay it back? Well, and that's the whole point because by
saying that he's essentially saying we can't give them more money because everybody knows that
there's no way that's ever going to happen. So that's laying the groundwork to go, gosh,
we'd like to help. But you know, we have, and he was talking about our $34 trillion of debt and
how we can't be giving money to Europe or to, or to Ukraine. So he's, he's changing.
And if you lose a major shift, that's a huge shift. Again, Newland leaving. And I apologize,
I can't remember the gentleman's name, but he's a well-known China emphasis. It's,
you know, the song, all the signs are the US is getting ready to abandon the Ukraine.
And what actually abandons the world, what the US wants to do is turn it over to Europe,
and particularly to France and Poland and the UK. Germany, it's a little bit of a different story,
but the problem is the French military only has artillery reserves for three days of combat with
Russia. And then they're out of ammo. You look at Poland, you know, Poland would be the front lines.
And so the Poles are going, well, wait a minute, you know, if war starts with Russia, then, you
know, you know, we're on the front lines and we're screwed. So I think where this is headed is
Macron's comments and the Polish comments, if they start something, it's not with the objective
of taking on Russia. It is with the objective of trying to draw the US in, which raises an
absolutely vital point, the NATO treaty. There's a widespread misunderstanding in this country.
It's the NATO treaty is simplified. And even political leaders have said, well, it means an
attack on one is an attack on all. That's actually, you're talking about article five, article five.
That's not what it says. If you read the gory details and the actual legal basis for it,
it's a lot more complex than that. So for instance, if France went into Ukraine,
then that's them unilaterally without NATO authorization or consensus because it's a
consensus organization. If they go in, and of course, Hungary would never approve a NATO
action in Ukraine. So let's say that France goes in. Well, Russia would be not just within
its rights, but strategically and strategically, it would make a lot of sense for them to start
striking French manufacturing sites in France, start attacking French bases that were providing
logistical support perfectly legal under and not just legal, that's the norm under international
law. Well, then France would start screaming, you know, NATO article five. Well, no, because in
that case, it's not, it would not be an unprovoked attack on France. And again, the article five
specifically says that the parties will consult. It doesn't say they will intervene. So the U.S.
would have every would not be violating the treaty by saying, yeah, you know, we looked at this,
you started it, it's not our problem. So let me understand this. So Ukraine is doing much worse
than the public stories have been, which means that the NATO efforts in Ukraine are doing worse
than than we've been seeing in the media. France and Poland and maybe some others want to aggressively
get involved because by doing that, they kind of forced the U.S. to get more involved at a
time when it seems like U.S. is pulling back its unanimous support, and we have a big election coming
up, and there's Taiwan and other issues. And is that going to work? Are they going to pull the U.S.
in? It seems to me that if we get to the point where Russia is attacking physical infrastructure
in the country of France, are we off to the races then with escalatory back and forth things that
end in Archduke, Ferdinand times a thousand? You know, that's interesting. And again, it's a lot,
you know, there's a difference. In fact, let's be really, really clear and honest with ourselves
here. We are at war with Russia under international law. You know, there's been no declarations of it,
but by providing targeting, by having our military personnel providing specific intelligence,
Russia has every right already under international law. You know, leaving aside the issue of whether
the invasion is right or wrong, none of that matters. The simple point is we are combatants in
this conflict. Russia has every right to shoot down our intelligence aircraft. They have every
right. They could actually start bombing our port facilities because we're providing logistical
support. All port facilities in the domestic United States? Yes. Under international law,
again, just not making value judgments about anything. The reason they're not, of course,
they're deterred because we have nuclear weapons and our leadership is bonkers and would immediately
go berserk if that happened. So there's a practical reason why they're not doing it.
Legally, they would be fully justified. So when you start to talk about a French intervention,
I would expect that they would not strike directly in France unless they had to because
they can probably kill off any French forces that are sent into Ukraine. And Putin has demonstrated
in the Russian leadership, we shouldn't speak all about Putin because, yes, it's very centralized,
but it's a complex leadership structuring. That's one of my pet peeves about the way it's reported
here in the West is if you talk about the US, you talk about Biden, but then immediately people
talk about the Republicans and the Democrats and our convoluted political structures. Well,
Russia's political structures are somewhat simpler, but he's still under tremendous pressure from
nationalists and it's not as simple as Putin decides and it happens. So let's be really fair
about that. But Putin and the Russian leadership are being pretty measured and their strategic
patience in this has been our saving grace so far because legally, they could strike at
German, Polish, French, US facilities, particularly British facilities. Now,
real quick before I forget because I think this is an important point that,
you know, I don't know. I think with France, they're talking big. I think to make Germany look bad,
to improve their leverage. And when this falls apart, France will be able to say,
we wanted to save Ukraine and couldn't. Poland, I think, wants to grab those Northwest
areas. I think they want to, they're walking a fine line between how they do that without
creating a wider conflict with Russia. So it's a very complex nuance situation. The problem is
and the scary thing to get to our, I think our key wrap up point here is how dangerous it is
because through this whole conflict, the rhetoric of Western leaders has gotten so far ahead of our
actual potential in the conflict. And so Macron talking like, yes, we're going to intervene in
France. Nobody seriously thinks that a French full effort military intervention in Ukraine would
be successful. It would end up slaughtering a bunch of French military people. It could potentially
bring havoc on France. Yeah, it would hurt Russia, but Russia could survive it. Same with the Polish
intervention or, you know, Baltic interventions, you know, yeah, Russia could sweep through
the Baltics if they wanted to. It's just the problem is these leaders are talking big to try to
position themselves for when Ukraine collapses. At what point does your rhetoric paint you into
a corner? And that's my fear with the Biden administration. And that's a little bit less
in with the departure of Newland. I think there's, talk about how do we get out of this? I think the
way that we, one way we get out of this is, you know, with the Biden administration politically,
they've got a great opportunity to say, oh, you know, we wanted to help Ukraine, but the
Republicans blocked it and it's all their fault. And France, I think, is playing that same game to
an extent. Yes, they're angry about Africa. They're scared about their resources. You know,
are they so delusional to believe that an intervention would be successful? I hope not.
So we are in an open secret war right now. We being NATO in the West against Russia,
which has evolved over time from a proxy war. And like you said, let's set aside how it started
and all that. But I think we have to start with civil war, proxy war, secret war.
If we go to open war that is not secret, how does that have any hope of resolving in a way that
doesn't have bright flashes? I doubt it, because we're already very close. Where we are now,
there are pathways and it'll be presented as Russia winning, but it's really not
in a lot of ways. It's Russia achieving some of its objectives, but those objectives
and the stability that would ensue if with a partitioned Ukraine, the partitioning Ukraine
is the only way this is going to end peacefully. Because if the conflict continues, neither side
can lose. Well, actually, I should rephrase that. Russia cannot lose this because it's existential
for them. The US could allow Ukraine to go because, again, rand in their seemingly random,
pardon the pun, worldview last year was saying, well, Ukraine's not really a strategic interest
of the US. And they're absolutely right. It's not. So just to clarify, if we go to an open war,
it's no longer secret with or without the US involvement. So it's two separate questions,
part A and part B. What happens then, likely? Yeah, that's a real problem. I don't see, if it ends up
open war, I don't see politically how it stays confined in Europe, depending on the administration,
and that's why the next six months are so critical and dangerous because I don't see
a Trump administration intervening, let's say France and Poland get into a shooting war with
Russia and then try to invoke the NATO treaty. I don't see the US under Trump doing that.
But isn't it kind of likely, based on the tea leaves, that such an intervention by France
and Poland would happen before the US election or not necessarily?
Yeah, I think it has to, because Ukraine may not exist at the end of this year. I know that's
increasingly becoming aware to the US public, but I think that by the end of this year,
it'll be de facto partition. And again, I would not be surprised to see a Polish intervention
in Western Ukraine, but they will studiously avoid attacking Russia. They'll basically move in,
take those areas, and Russia had no intention of going into those areas anyway. That's another
myth, by the way. Russia doesn't want all of Ukraine, they only want the traditional Russian
areas of Ukraine. That's been very clear from their statements.
So again, just to be clear, if we go to an open war with or without the US,
you don't think that it will then be confined to Europe. And then, intentional or not, there are
just multiple avenues of a runaway escalation of response, counter-response, bigger response,
nuclear weapons. So we're on that runway if this gets to an open war.
That's what it feels like. I find it difficult to figure a way that the US could lose
a conventional war in Europe without going nuclear. And again, the conventional correlation of
forces, there's a famous quote from Omar Bradley that amateurs study tactics and professionals
study logistics. The logistics of a war with Russia over Europe just don't work for us.
There was some Princess Bride quote to that effect.
So the implication, Chuck, then, the strong implication, the message that you're sending here
is we have to avoid the open secret war turning into an open war.
Yes, absolutely. And again, there's no-
How do we do that? Is there a reasonable path forward to that?
You know, it's, I think the way you do that, first off, there's domestic, you know,
there's political concerns. Because again, just like with France, in fact, more so than with France,
the Biden administration doesn't want to get stuck with the accusation they lost Ukraine.
And they have an opportunity. Republicans are blocking future aid. It would be very easy
for the Biden administration to do what they're doing and say, you know,
we've got to disengage from Ukraine. It's not really our strategic interest yet. It's bad that
Russia won, but it's the Republicans' fault. But at the same time, they need to tell the Europeans,
look, we're not going to fall for it. We will not, if you intervene in Ukraine without
NATO consensus, you're on your own. And we will not save you if you do that, even if you try to
invoke Article 5, because Article 5 does not apply if you initiate the conflict. So I think that's
you know, and you could do it. You then the French, the Germany actually would go along with this.
Poland would probably be fine with doing something like only Polish forces moving into the traditional
Polish areas. You probably get Romania and Hungary moving into their traditional areas,
like Transcarpathia. Russia would then, yeah, take the rest of Ukraine. We'd have a new iron curtain,
but it would be a very stable situation. It would be a stable situation with respect to nuclear
weapons and a nuclear escalation, but it would be an acceleration of the great simplification for
the European continent economically, right? Would it? Would it? That's the interesting question,
because already tremendous amounts of resources from Russia are still making it to Europe.
It's just now there's a middleman, and it costs a lot more. So you look at during the Soviet era,
where did the very, the big pipeline, what's the word in Russian? That's friendship, you know. So
how long would it be before, first off, the indirect Russian flows are already in progress?
You know, you look at stabilizing food markets and resources. Those resources, given the way
commodities work, and I don't need to be preaching to Mr. Economics and resources, Nate,
but you know perfectly well that if those resources are flowing into the rest of the world,
that's going to help stabilize the markets. And how long is it going to be before a lot of those
barriers in the form of sanctions start being, you know, look at how many sanctions are waived
already to keep it from collapsing. And again, it's to, you know, if China's the big threat,
it would think it would be of the US to allow the situation with Europe to stabilize between
Europe and Russia, just to keep China out. So I think if they're willing to set the emotion
aside, I think that there's a lot to be said for that. I mean, I was raised in a Cold War
anti-communist environment, but it was also made very clear that, yeah, you can do deals with them
if you're careful. Again, Reagan trusts but verify, we could return to that world, and that
would help stabilize Europe. And the simplification is coming either way, but it would certainly
make a soft landing much more likely than a catastrophic collapse and a hard luck landing
at Royal Freighton. Thank you for a sobering update on this situation. Are there any closing
words for our listeners that are worried and aware and paying attention to this situation?
I think the big thing is just be aware of the biases in the media and the reporting and try
to see beyond and see what the underlying motives are. Again, we started this by saying it's not
really about democracy or even a Russian invasion. It's about resource control. It's about history.
It's about revenge. You know, as we often joke about being fire apes, you know, apes that learn to use
fire. I think that kind of blends into it that there are these other and are domestic political
concerns. And again, try to see past that to the fact that, you know, there's that famous 80s song
by Sting. You know, the Russians are people too, and they love their kids, and we all do. And it's
our leadership. And our leadership, sad to say, you can argue that sometimes they act just as
irresponsibly as those in countries that we are, you know, claim that we're enemies with.
So bring stuff. Thank you for sharing your wisdom and perspective. I am hopeful that we
navigate a way out of this without going to open war, because we also have a lot of other
challenges to face as a culture, as a species. We do. And again, there is a way out. It's been
where there's been a way out of this conflict ever since 2014. Everybody knows what it is
politically. You know, it's, you just have, we just have to take that path. And it's a political
fight and political face saving, which again, sadly is the human condition. But, you know,
that's, that's, as so many of our, your guests have said, that's what we're down to. It's
rarely about technical decisions. It's usually about human emotion.
Well, one of these conversations between you and I, I would like to talk about
not war, not Russia, not NATO, but governance systems and what is possible in the future,
given not only the geopolitics, but climate, energy depletion, finance, all the other risks
that we face, what sort of governance systems might be feasible in coming decades? Because I
know you're, you're very interested in that topic and have a lot to say.
Yep. And that's part of our problem is that, that's why our podcast ends up being so long
is because we have lots to say and you have great questions and perspective. And, you know,
it's a, it's interesting stuff, even if it is scary.
This one was supposed to be 20 minutes. So we, we went over a bit, but thank you for, for your
continued sharing and, and trying to make this situation resolve.
Thanks. Take care.
