It now seems that from that perspective,
there are thousands of potential Archduke,
Ferdinand pathways and vectors
that you and I can't even predict.
But how likely are we going to navigate diplomatically
this minefield in coming months?
Wow, Nate, I don't,
I have a really hard time seeing how we get out of this one.
The U.S. has really painted itself
under a set of rhetorical corners here.
And particularly in the Middle East,
how do you, you've got a very intransigent Israeli leadership.
You've created a situation where you've got
several million refugees,
multi-generational refugee system.
The level of hatred and resentment
between the parties is such that it's going to be very difficult
to come up with any kind of an acceptable stable state of mind.
Very difficult to come up with any kind
of an acceptable stabilizing solution.
You can maybe through enough application of enough force,
maybe beat people back down to the point
where they're not actively resisting.
But again, does that pop back up in six months
or a year or whatever?
The long-term solutions are very difficult here.
You can go back to at the end of World War I
with between Turkey and Greece,
where there was an exchange of populations
and you had stabilization that way.
But that's the UN resolutions around Israel
or just the opposite because they guarantee a right of return
and all of that.
So we've structurally created a situation
in the Middle East where it's intractable.
There's no, there isn't,
I don't know where there's a solution
because neither side really,
everybody talks about the so-called two-state solution,
but neither side accepts that.
They both want a one-state solution.
So I don't know, other than coming in
with overwhelming force, separating the parties
and enforcing a piece at the point of the gun
for at least a generation or two, how do you solve this?
I don't know.
But even if you did solve that,
what happens with Iran, Iraq, and all of the Saudi Arabia
and all of the oil nations,
the nations who have the oil that the world uses
under their land, how do you solve avert them
from getting involved?
Let me ask you this.
And I'm really curious as to your answer.
So I often say that I got my masters in business
from the University of Chicago
and the word energy was never mentioned
in the two years I was there.
I've been talking with you a lot in the last few years
and so I know you've had really good calls
and are on top of the situation.
Yet since the Israel Hamas situation started
on October 7th, the long-term oil futures
are up like $2 or $2.50, like six, seven, eight years out.
And the short-term is up like $4.
And the stock market is actually up since this happened.
So most people with voting with their dollars
strongly disagree with the risks
that you've just outlined.
Well, why is that?
Risk coming a stasis.
We've gotten away for the last 30 years
with ignoring the Middle East for practical purposes
and okay, there's an occasional flare-up,
2006-11 on war, okay, yeah, there's some terrorism, blah, blah.
But as you say, the spice still flows,
the oil is still coming.
So I think people tend to,
they think, well, we muddled through last time,
we'll muddle through this time.
And that's where we have the hard task here.
Is it different this time?
Because it's gonna be different at one point.
You're gonna run out of road at some point.
And the people who say that, well, we'll figure it out,
what's different this time?
Well, for one thing, we've blown up
the whole energy connection with Russia,
which has, as we've discussed, such a huge influence.
You look at, my God, the Wahhabi Sunni leadership
of Saudi Arabia is talking hourly,
daily, if not hourly, with the Chia radical, quote, unquote,
is radical leadership of Iran.
That has never happened.
So if you're talking about coordination
between the different oil producing countries,
and they have other markets too.
You've got now, China's coming in
willing to pay for resources.
You've got the rest of the world is,
we're not the biggest market anymore.
We're on the downside of that.
People don't need the West anymore
is where this is headed.
And once that critical mass happens,
I think it'll fall apart very quickly.
