Today I welcome back to the program my colleague Chuck Watson. Chuck was a special attaché
to secretaries of defense, MacFarlane and Rumsfeld, with expertise in Soviet and Middle East affairs.
He was in the Air Force communications officer as a long history of looking at
geopolitics and nuclear risks, which is why I called him this morning to find out what was
going on when Russia pulled out of this nuclear de-perliferation treaty. He told me this has
been in the works for a while, but it's worse than that because there have been new tests,
new nuclear weapons by the United States in the last few weeks. I'm like, whoa, whoa, whoa,
I didn't know that. Stop, let's do a podcast conversation on this if you're willing.
And he reluctantly agreed to do such a podcast because both of us feel
that more people need to understand what's going on, what's at stake. I'm not an expert in this,
which is I'm fortunate to have friends that are experts in these issues. I do host a podcast
and the world is converging on the greatest problem and our geopolitical move from a unipolar to a
multipolar world is one of those problems. I hope at the end of my days on this planet,
I can look back and I was a chicken little with respect to nuclear war risk because I do think
that a escalatory exchange of nuclear missiles would be the worst case scenario for complex,
large life on planet earth. And so I'm willing to spend a little bandwidth on this channel
making people more aware of how this fits together in the tapestry of the human predicament.
Please re-welcome Chuck Watson.
Hey, Chuck, good to see you again. Well, I don't know. The last few times we've talked,
as I said last time, hasn't been such pleasant topics to go with.
Well, that's the blessing and the curse of having you as a friend and a colleague.
You just did a podcast with me two weeks ago updating on the world situation,
including Israel and Hamas and what that means for Ukraine and Russia. And then just this morning,
there's some other news, which is why I'm having you back for an urgent
kind of episode to talk about something that most people are unaware of. But maybe before
we get into that, you want to just set the context of this conversation.
Yeah, thanks, Nate, because you sent me a link to, I think it was an Al Jazeera article about
a change in US policy and a Russian reaction to it. And first off, I want people to really
understand something here is that I served the US government in this country, essentially my whole
life. And I shed blood for this country. I have many going way back. I've had relatives that serve
this country that had a number of very close friends that actually made the ultimate sacrifice.
They lost their lives in service of this country. So what I'm about to say in some of the stuff may
kind of rub people a little bit harsh, but understand that one of the figures in American
history is Carl Scherz, the Civil War general, and later became senator and secretary of the
interior. And he said on the floor of the Senate that, you know, yes, my country right or wrong.
If she be right, I stand by her. If she be wrong, I strive to set her right. So I feel
normally, as you know, I try to stay very neutral about things. And I'll say the US rather than
my country. But in this case, I feel an obligation to those who did lose their lives for this country
to really point out a major, major policy problem and how I don't think we're living up to the
standards that those lives deserve. Thank you for that. I don't have your history with the
government and your service, but I feel the same way as a member of this country and as a member of
our species to try and speak truth to power of what's going on. And I've known you for 15 years,
and we don't agree on everything, but I know you to be very knowledgeable, but also a man of extreme
integrity, which is why we're friends and why I keep asking you back on this show. So let's start
with a brief refresher way back on, I think, episode 17 on the Great Simplification last year.
You shared to my naive surprise at the time that the United States was the only declared nuclear
nation in the world that did not have a no first use policy. As a backdrop for what we're about
to say, can you briefly refresh what that means and why that is? The other nuclear powers have all
said that they would only use nuclear weapons in response to a nuclear weapon. In other words,
we're not going to use them first, but if we are attacked with nuclear weapons, we will respond
with nuclear weapons. That's been the policy of up until recently, the policy of Russia.
China has a very clear no first use policy. I believe both India, the UK, the British government,
France, both have pretty strong no first use policies. India, Pakistan, their doctrines are
a little fuzzier, but still basically no, we're not going to use these ultimate weapons unless
somebody uses them against us first. The US is amazingly the strong exception to that. We actually
we say we'll use nuclear weapons in response to all kinds of things. We say we'll use them
against non-nuclear powers. We say that we will use them in response at one time during the
Trump administration. We even had a written policy. We would use them against cyber attacks on
infrastructure. We would reserve the right to use a nuke against whoever used it. That Biden's backed
off on that a little bit, but still the list of reasons we would use a nuclear weapon first
is long and actually pretty distressing. I don't want to focus overly on this,
but I live in the United States and I didn't know that until recently. Does this piss other
countries off? Oh, absolutely. And in fact, that's something we can talk about in a minute,
how US policies and this, you know, we've started using the phrase rules based order lately, and
that has really ticked off a lot of the world because who makes those rules and who is the
arbiter of them? And what it boils down to is the US says, well, we make the rules and we're the judge
of whether or not you're following those rules. And by the way, we don't have to follow those
rules. And I can give you one of the things I think you want to ask. I'll give you a very specific
example of that when it comes to treaties. So yeah, it does. The rest of the world
is not happy with us over this attitude. So when we spoke earlier this week, and this week seems
like a month already, you mentioned that there have been some recent events between the United
States and Russia that have been pretty much overtaken and obscured by the coverage of the
Middle East situation, one of which involved the United States performing nuclear weapons tests
and developing new weapons during the month of October.
Can you tell us what the US has been doing and why this is concerning enough for us to do a
special episode? In a nutshell, there's two things that have happened in the last two weeks,
actually. The first is on October 18, the US conducted a non-nuclear test within the Nevada
nuclear test range. And it used chemical explosives. There were radioisotopes involved,
and so there's allegations that it was what's called a subcritical test. And that gets into
the technical details of how nuclear weapons work. But you can learn a lot about how nuclear
weapons behave by putting together smaller bits that don't actually start a chain reaction.
And so our declared purpose for this was nonproliferation to try to assess and do seismic
tests and radioisotope sniffer tests. But these are also the dual use kind of tests that you would
need to do if you were going to resume design and production of new classes of nuclear weapons.
So a lot of countries, Russia in particular, does not believe, China also has said that they
don't believe it. Even some of our allies have said, no, we're not so sure what you're up to here.
And the reason for that is based on an announcement that was made October 27,
even though the decision has been kicked around and rumored for months, we're developing a new
class of high yield nuclear weapons. It's the B61-13 is the designation. It's an aircraft
delivered bomb with selectable yield, but extremely high yields upwards of 300 to 500 kilotons. Now,
these are, there was a trend towards smaller weapons because with more accuracy and also
you don't want to wipe out a whole city, you just want to hit smaller targets. Well,
we've reversed that trend by developing this new class and by making it more accurate and more
destructive. That's a step away from historical arms control, historical weapons trends,
and is a pretty dangerous escalation. So in response to that, and, and again, this has been
brewing over time. This isn't something that just happened. Russia was warning it would withdraw from
the 1996 comprehensive test ban treaty. China has also expressed concerns and said that they
would no longer be a party to the treaty. And that's important. The original test ban treaty
was done by actually John F. Kennedy in 1963 with Khrushchev. And it was because the atmospheric
tests were getting out of hand. And so all this radioactive contamination was ending up in the
atmosphere from all these nuclear tests. And folks kind of went around, looked around and said,
wait a minute, this is a bad idea. There's also something called the spearfish test,
which was in space. And so to make a long story less long, we realized that nuclear testing
above ground is a bad thing because it contaminates the earth. And then by the mid nineties, we said,
look, let's just stop all nuclear testing. Because why do we need new classes of weapons
nobody's supposed to be using anyway? So Russia signed it and ratified it. And that's an important
distinction. China did as well. The other nuclear powers did. And this gets, and I think maybe this
is a good point to talk about. In the 1960s, all these nations signed this, this ratification.
The initial test ban treaty, partial test ban treaty was in 1963. The comprehensive treaty
that banned all nuclear testing was 1996. But there's a catch. There's a catch, Nate, and it gets
to the question that you brought up earlier of why countries don't trust us. Well, you know,
in the US and under our Constitution, there's two steps to a treaty. The administration, whoever's
president, his administration has to sign it. But then Congress specifically, the Senate has to
ratify it. Well, in our system, and you know how dysfunctional we are internally, just look at what's
happened in the House of Representatives the last few weeks and between the political parties,
getting treaties through the Senate has been a very difficult time. And so the comprehensive
test ban treaty was signed in 1996 by the Clinton administration. It was never ratified,
which means it does not have the force of law. So the US never actually became a full participant
in that treaty. Russia has been warning since 2004 with increasing urgency, look, you need to ratify
this treaty, commit to it legally, or we're done. We're not going to, we're not going to participate
anymore. And after this test, the eight, so in, I believe it was in August, the Duma passed a law
withdrawing from the treaty. And so their system is actually similar to ours in that the president
can't sign or abrogate a treaty on his own. He can sign it, but it's not legal until the parliament,
in Russia's case, the Duma passes off on it. So in August, the Duma said, okay, we want to withdraw
from this treaty. Putin kind of held that in his pocket as leveraged to try to say, look, don't go
forward with this test. The US went forward with it anyway. And so Putin signed it. And now Russia
has revoked their ratification of the treaty. So on the surface, those are just words. But it sure
seems like that's not a good step in a de-escalatory direction for the world. Like that is a strong
move, wouldn't you say? It is on its own. The Russian withdrawal is just another step
and made pretty close to the final step in dismantling this whole framework of
treaties and around nuclear weapons that got started in 63 with the test ban treaty.
And over time, up until the mid 80s, early 90s, we built this framework that it consisted of the
anti-ballistic missile treaty. And that was basically saying, we don't want either side to
develop a capacity to shoot down the other side's missiles, because then you start to
another arms race. And what's worse is one side may think it has an advantage in launching attack.
The other absolutely vital piece was what was called the Intermediate Range Nuclear Forces Treaty.
One of the things you also don't want is for one side to have the ability to quickly launch
a nuclear weapon at the other side. And they only have a few minutes to figure out whether it's real
and what the target is. Because then you get into these scenarios where you get launch on warning
or launch under attack, which means you've only got a few minutes to make a decision. Well,
Nate, in fact, I think I sent you a picture recently of Putin's visit to China. And now
following him around, just like in the Cold War days, is an officer with a briefcase with the
nuclear launch codes. And that hasn't been seen for quite a while. So of course, our president
always is followed by the officer with the football. We've never really discontinued that.
But now everybody's doing it, which that in a nutshell is what's happened is that
in every one of these cases. And again, this is where I get a little bit emotional and angry
about it. We started it. You know, we withdrew from the ABM Treaty under the Bush administration.
We withdrew from the INF Treaty, the Obama administration set up the withdrawal process,
and then Trump finished it off. We withdrew from the Open Skies Treaty, which allowed monitoring
of each other's nuclear facilities. We never signed the CBT. So it really frustrates me that
this framework that got us through the Cold War without a nuclear confrontation has all been
dismantled. We're almost back to the 50s, where it's the Wild West in terms of nuclear weapons
development and deployment. Okay. I had hoped or I had planned this would be a very short podcast,
but now as is usually the case when I talk to you, I learned things that I'd never heard before.
Sorry about that. And I have questions. No, no, no, that's okay. That's why we're talking. So on
the ratification since President Clinton all the way to today, have there been groups of senators
that wanted to push to get this ratified? Or has it always just been swept under the carpet?
Yeah, every now and then it comes up. And by the way, it's not just in the nuclear realm.
The Law of the Seas Treaty, I could name probably a dozen treaties off the top of my head that the
U.S. has signed but never ratified. And so that's why there's a Russian expression. It's one of these
compound words, which basically means not agreement capable. And a lot of other countries are picking
up this as well, that how can you trust the U.S. to do a treaty if the president may sign it,
but then the next president can say, well, you know, I'm not going to go forward with it until
it's ratified by the Senate. It doesn't have force of law. So what tends to happen is, you know,
whichever president signs his party goes, yes, we'll agree to this. Well, you've got to have a
two-thirds majority. And so neither party has had a two-thirds majority in forever. So the other
side basically says, well, we don't like this treaty because your guy signed it. So we're not
going to sign it. And you get this back and forth thing where because of our internal politics,
the treaties don't get signed. That's the big picture. The smaller picture on the weapons side
is, you know, there's a lot of people in the U.S., the defense industry, various very high-powered
lobbying groups that, you know, nuclear weapons, and it's, man, that's profitable business. So
unfortunately, that's an aspect of it. That all gives me a really bad feeling. And I've had
a bad feeling already. Welcome to my world, Nate. Yeah. So as far as the nuclear test,
you said there was one in Nevada. Did you ever see the movie Oppenheimer yet or haven't you gone?
Yes, I did. Yeah. I thought it was quite good. It was quite good, but they had the nuclear test
there in the desert where they put on the goggles and everything. But why do we need to test
nuclear weapons like that? Is it because we really want to see if they work so that we can use them?
Or is it kind of like two sumo wrestlers that are kind of dancing before they get in the stages?
Is it more of a demonstration of flexing to say, we are willing to do this, we have it?
Or is it something else? Yeah, I'm trying to remember the biology term for doing threat
displays and that kind of thing. You know, the gorilla pounding its chest. So, I mean, that is
one piece of it. It's partly for what's called... Well, it's sexual selection in biology. Sure.
So, there's basically three components to it. The first is what's called weapons assurance,
so that you pull one out of storage and fire it off to make sure it works. That's what we used
to do routinely. You know, computer models and simulations and component testing only get you
so far. If you really want to assure yourself that this thing works, you got to put it all together
in one piece and light the fuse and make sure it goes off. And there are stories out there
that are suggesting that as much as half of our nuclear bombs that are in silos around the country
are so old that they might not work. I mean, I've heard stories to that effect. I'm no expert.
Yeah. And there's also a set of people who say, well, none of the Russian nuclear weapons work.
And, you know, okay, how many does it take? One, ten, twenty out of several thousand. So,
that's not particularly comforting to me, but people have been arguing that on strategic
grounds to say, yeah, let's go ahead and start something with Russia because none of their nukes
work anyway. So just insane. And I also think wrong because they do similar things to what we do,
which is component testing. So they'll take the core out of the weapon and then just light off.
So it's everything except the nuclear component. And so they do similar kinds of testing in a
lot of that, of course, is classified. You can't get into, but there's a lot of testing that goes
on. So the first thing is if you really want to know it works, you've got to light off the whole
thing. The second component is, yeah, it's the threat display. It's the, you know, to show,
yes, we still have it. We can still do it. The third one is weapons design. You know,
it's been 20 years since we've fired off a nuke. We've learned a lot. We've done a lot of simulations.
We've were developing these new classes of weapons. You know, they, we think they work
theoretically. We've done lots of computer models and simulations, but are you really that confident
a sophisticated design is going to work? So if you go back to Oppenheimer, and that's actually
a really interesting case because the little boy bomb, the uranium bomb, very simple device,
very simple design. Everybody had, they did subcritical tests. Everybody was so sure that
that would work. And we also didn't have a lot of uranium at the time that they were willing
to risk using the first one and dropping it. But the plutonium bomb, we tested much more
sophisticated design, much more complex design. And so as you increase complexity of the weapon
system, you start to reach a point where you need, and plus we're talking high energy physics
under extreme conditions. And so, you know, we've learned a lot about nuclear weapons during the
testing, but we've now got a lot more sophisticated systems. And so if you put your Dr. Strangelove
hat on, you go, well, of course, we've got to test these things to make sure they work right. And
who knows what we'll learn, you know, and you can even argue, hey, you know, we could learn
something to solve our energy crisis by resuming nuclear testing. And you can say that with a
straight face. In the meantime, it's good for GDP. Sure. How many do we need, though, there's
like 12 or 13,000 warheads, 100 of them would do in our entire civilization. Why do we need more?
It's just so maddening to me. Well, and that's an interesting thing. Because if you look at
the Pentagon press release from the 27th, it makes a big point, we're not changing the number of
weapons. Okay. And if, you know, nuclear weapons are so complex, if I can use a brief analogy with
if you've got, say, a manual bolt action rifle, and you've got 10 bullets, okay, that's got a
certain risk level and mean something. If you have 1000, okay, that means a little bit more. If you've
got 10,000, you know, what's the point, you know, you can only fire, you know, 10 or 15 rounds a
minute, that's a certain point, it's just pointless. But then, ah, what if you've got a semi automatic?
Oh, well, now you can shoot, you know, 80, 100 rounds per minute. You have a full auto, you can
unload a whole magazine in a few seconds. Well, the other piece of it is, what are those bullets?
If it's just a simple lead being solid core, okay, that's maybe you can do target practice,
you can maybe hunt with it a soft point, well, maybe that's better for hunting.
What if it's an armor piercing incendiary bullet? Well, okay, there's not a lot you can do except
blow holes and things and set them on fire. So if my next door neighbor has 1000 rounds and a
semi automatic rifle, and it's deer season, and I know he hunts every year, I don't care.
If he's got a bolt action rifle with a couple dozen armor piercing incendiary rounds and a
map of all the local gas stations, okay, all of a sudden I'm worried. So the point is,
obviously with nuclear weapons and aircraft and submarines and missiles is a lot more
complicated, but it's the same basic principle. There's two pieces, the number after a certain
point becomes irrelevant. What you care about is what are the capabilities of the bullets?
What's the capability of the gun? So what's the capability of the nuclear weapon itself?
And what's the capability and characteristics of the weapon system, the thing that shoots that
nuke at your desired target? So I'm an energy systems finance ecology guy, and this is not my
area, which is why I'm grateful for your expertise on this, but it sure feels that we're slouching
towards Bethlehem to use a Yeats poem. I don't understand how this is not more widely in the
news, because it seems to me, and please explain, our Russia and the United States are both
de facto becoming more aggressive, more escalatory via this dismantling of the treaties
and these protections that were built consciously 50, 60 years ago against the use of nuclear weapons.
I mean, are we on a really scary path here? Yeah. Without the American public, and I would say
probably without 90% of our elected leaders knowing it, we re-entered a nuclear arms race
with Russia in 2004, 2006, somewhere that timeframe when we withdrew from ABM.
And you can go look at individual decisions in isolation like withdrawal from ABM.
If you look at why we say we did that, it was because, well, Iran, North Korea,
all of these smaller parties are developing missiles that can send chemical or even just
regular old conventional weapons, and we need the ability to shoot them down, and that interferes,
the ABM treaty was interfering with that. Okay. Well, Russia said, look, we agree,
let's renegotiate the treaty and come up with a joint system for dealing with that threat.
But the US, and again, Nate, I'm saying this out of love for this country,
it pisses me off that we come in as, no, we're going to do things our way, and we don't want to
talk to you, and we don't care what you think. And so when you do that, okay, we could get away
with that from the 90s through the 2000s because we were the unipower, we were the strongest
country in the world. We're reaching a point where I don't think we can get away with it.
First off, we never should have done it on ethical grounds, but now, practically, it's
very difficult. So we, you know, we didn't take into account Russia's concerns or China's, for
that matter, they also expressed concerns about it. China was talking about wanting to enter
some of these treaties that were bilateral. They wanted to enter INF and the ABM treaties,
which were just between the US and Russia. But we said, no, we just we're going to dismantle that.
And, you know, part of it, our argument is, well, we don't trust treaties well,
then why do we insist on other countries following their treaty commitments?
You know, it just, it's a mess. Here's another naive question. Is this kind of like the,
the bully who has very high status because he's the strongest guy in the playground,
but then he gets a little older and he's not in the same popular group. And that in order to
maintain our optionality advantage in the world with de-dolarization and stuff going on in the
Middle East and all the bio-physical phase shift, that the only way we can do it is through
military power. And the only way we can do that is through better, bigger, more nukes. I mean,
that's a simplification, but is that the direction? I don't think so. I don't think there's a plan.
I don't think that, I don't think that it's thought through that well. Honestly, you know,
the thing to remember is the people that are doing this aren't evil. They're not Dr. Strange Love.
That would make our discussion so much easier because you could just point the finger and say,
these guys are crazy. The problem is they're not crazy. This is a symptom of something that,
Nate, we've talked about for years, going back 15 years probably, that people get stovepiped.
And so, as you know, economists only talk to economists. They don't talk to energy people and
the energy people don't talk to the biodiversity. And so, if you look at this in that context,
you can look at just the ABM Treaty and convince yourself from the standpoint of the U.S.
that, you know, it doesn't make sense. We need to withdraw from it. But that's losing sight of the
secondary and tertiary, much less quaternary ramifications of doing that. And so, I don't
think it's that the U.S., I don't think we are bullies. I get mad and use that terminology sometimes
and I really shouldn't because I don't believe that we're bullies. I don't think that's our
philosophy. I think that the problem is we look at the world, we know that we have
tremendous military capability. And I think a lot of our actions, and when I talk to people in a
nice quiet moment, senior people, you know what the real driver is? It's fear. And it's not,
it's fear of losing control. It's, you know, you see that in the current things around Israel
or around Hamas or a lot of these. It's driven by fear. You know, we don't, we have a very hard
time trusting. And the problem is trust leads to trust and fear leads to fear. And so, that's,
unfortunately, we are now in a fear spiral, whereas through the 70s, 80s, 90s, up until
probably the early 90s, we were in a trust spiral. And so, that's now broken and we're in a fear
spiral. And a fear spiral is you become more insular and less cooperative and more defensive
and more risk averse. And so, all those things make some of these military movements a little more
understandable. Let me move on to this. You mentioned there were studies in the 80s on
previous podcasts called Prog Profit and others that show once you use even one nuclear weapon
that the incentive is to keep escalating using more and bigger nukes, which eventually results
in something called nuclear winter. Yet now, as you've articulated, we're making bigger, more
advanced weaponry and there's a spiral of nuclear weapon modernization that can never
really be used without getting on this pathway of destroying much of life on earth as you've
articulated in the past. Where are the voices within our country raising concerns about nuclear
modernization and why do they from this naive podcast observer seem so silent?
Note, this morning when I called you, I didn't find that Russia news that they had pulled out of
the treaty, except I found it on an international news source. It wasn't anywhere in the US that
I could see. Yeah, you know, again, I think that the, you know, why isn't it being discussed?
There's a couple of things. First off, there's an insidious level of security around any nuclear
issues. So, security is rightfully, because you don't want somebody building, learning something
and building a nuke in their backyard. I mean, that level of security makes sense. But when
security becomes paranoia, that's a bit of an issue. And particularly around doctrine and weapon
systems, I tend to think more transparency is better because then you can talk about it. But
you know, there is a fear around that and it's a catch 22. So, a lot of these things
tend to not be discussed because of security issues. The other issue is it's very technical,
requires a lot of knowledge. Just think about, okay, we were going to talk for 15 minutes and
now we're pushing 40. And a lot of it's because you start going down these rabbit holes because
nobody knows about it. It's just not, you know, not there. But there was a huge anti-war movement
50 years ago and that's like almost non-existent. Well, and part of the reason is we went through
that phase where, you know, every, there was Russia scared us with Sputnik in particular.
And in there, we suddenly realized, wait a minute, it's not just this backwards primitive bunch of
serfs, you know, living under communism. All of a sudden, they had satellites and we didn't,
they had the first man in space and we didn't. You know, even going back into the 50s, all that
with the nuclear bomb scares, you know, we thought we had a monopoly on them. And then all of a sudden,
oh, wait a minute, Russia has nuclear, you know, or the Soviet Union to be correct.
Soviet Union has nuclear weapons. We got scared. Now, what happened in the 80s? We were scared.
And in fact, fortunately, our president was scared. You know, Ronald Reagan went through
proud profit and it terrified him. He said, I'm going to do something about this. And he did.
So then we get to the 90s. Soviet Union collapses. It's, you know, we took all of our weapons off
of standby. You know, we kind of forget the days, we kept aircraft nuclear arm B 52s constantly in
the air, because we were afraid they would get destroyed on the ground. So, you know, we took
our weapon in the 90s, we took our weapons off of alert. Everybody people started joking about
Russia. Well, they're just a gas station with nukes, but they never took the nuke part seriously.
And so we then got wrapped into the war on terror. And so, you know, we lost another 10 years,
basically, of the fear of losing our fear. Nobody cared much about nuclear weapons.
And the US became the world's dominant hyperpower. And so the average person never experienced
that fear. And we've we're losing that generation that went through World War Two in Korea.
The average American does not know what a destroyed city looks like. Now, sure, we're
seeing stuff of Gaza right now. Do you realize that the destruction you're seeing in Gaza,
we've put about, I said we the Israelis have dropped about 20,000 tons of bombs on Gaza.
It's taken them three weeks to do it. You could do that in one nuclear weapon in 18 milliseconds.
That's 20,000 tons. That's 20 kilotons. 20 kilotons. Yeah, a little bit bigger than that.
And you were just saying that these dialer yield on some of these new nukes is up to
500 kilotons. Yeah, 33. I can't I don't want to say the exact number, but it's
the way you classify nuclear weapons. 100 to 500 is considered a very large
strategic nuclear weapon over 500. And there are over 500 is over 500 are
the largest and we have had we've we've had on alert megaton scale weapons, which are catastrophic.
Does do you think Secretary of State Blinken grasps the true threat of of nuclear weapons
given his position on bringing Ukraine into NATO and his position on the Middle East war
in Israel? That's a really interesting question. And you know, I'm going to I don't know what
Tony Blinken thinks personally or what his level of understanding is. So I'm going to broaden that
out to say the US government leadership. And again, I want to go back to a key point. I don't
think they're afraid of nuclear weapons. I don't I think that they have increasingly seen them as
just something else in the weapons mix. I think they don't want to use them in the sense that
if there was another way to do it. But the thing about a nuclear weapon is they are
and I'm going to use Dr. Strangelove terminology here, they're attractive. You know, you can
cause tremendous if your goal is to rapidly reduce an enemy to the point where they can no
longer fight back in there. You know, obviously, the objective of war is to bend the enemy to do
your will, which is, you know, from from Klausowitz. And so if you want to do that, a nuclear weapon,
it's very efficient. Doesn't take very many of them. You know, they're actually fairly inexpensive
in the great scheme of things. It's easier to if you're talking about, say, destroying a city,
well, it's a heck of a lot cheaper to do that with a couple of 300 kiloton weapons than it is to
do it with, you know, any other means. So I think that it is kind of a dangerous place if you don't
have the fear of them. And we've kind of painted ourselves into a bit of a corner by creating
more usable weapons in the sense that they're more accurate, and we can kind of convince ourselves,
well, we're only going to use it against a military target. Well, okay, but then what about
fallout environmental effects? And, you know, we could talk about the Geneva conventions and
accords and the annex one and how we, you know, you're not supposed to blow up cities, but, you
know, that that's kind of a whole separate rabbit hole that we probably don't want to go into. But
so I think the biggest issue is that I don't think US policy right now, our foreign policy has been
geared so much toward the military. I am concerned specifically about Secretary Blinken,
Assistant Secretary Newland and others. They are more militaristic than the Defense Department.
And so rather than looking at treaties and negotiations, they tend to look at application
of military force as an early option rather than a last or late resort. And that's a huge change in
US foreign policy over the last couple of decades. And I think it grew out of the war on terror,
because we looked at that. And now we've got this whole, and it's hard to, you know, we just had the
20, what the 23rd anniversary of the 911 attacks and the 20th anniversary of the invasion of Iraq.
And, you know, I look at myself and I go, in one sense, I go, I'm not that old, and then I see
the gray and it's like, well, maybe I'm that old. But so you remember, you know, people like Blinken,
Newland, Sullivan, Jake Sullivan, our National Security Director, even General Austin, you know,
they grew up in an era where the US was by far the dominant power. They also grew up in an era when,
you know, how do you negotiate with, you know, Al Qaeda or the Taliban?
You know, I disagree. I think there were, there are things that we could have done,
but it's just like Israel is doing in Gaza right now, their attitude now is,
there's no use talking to Hamas, because we're mortal enemies, one of us has to die,
it might as well be them. And that's, I don't mean to joke about that, but that's kind of the
attitude that you get to. And we couldn't afford to do that with the Soviet Union,
because we knew they had enough nuclear weapons to kill us. So we felt like we had to talk to them.
And I think that dual thing of not being as afraid of nuclear weapons, and not having that
realization that if we don't talk to them, it's the end of the world. And so those two things have
got us where we are. So since this was not limited to 20 minutes, I'm going to ask you
penultimate question, and then a final question. You just mentioned Israel, I think it's pretty
clear to the world now that a two state policy that that ship has sailed. And that's not going to
happen, especially after the events of the last month. If it doesn't happen, this looks like it's
going to be a long drawn out Israel and her supporters versus the Palestinian people, Hamas,
and their supporters, with all kinds of possibilities and risks. What is the situation
with nuclear weapons in Israel? Are they also non first use, or is that complicated, or what's the
deal there? Israel hasn't said a whole lot about their nuclear use policy. So what I'm saying is
based on personal discussions and impressions from what their doctrine has published, and what is
believed to be their weapons mix, they probably have on the order of 50 to 100 of tactical nuclear
weapons, they may have a few larger scale in moderate, which would be up to 100 kilotons or so,
and probably a few above that, they certainly have the means to deliver them either from submarine
launch missiles, intermediate range, I don't know that they have any strategic nuclear
missiles, but they do certainly have intermediate range missiles that could reach Europe, Iran,
you know, the key players that way. And of course, aircraft delivered weapons.
I suspect that their doctrine is very similar to the US doctrine in that
and they actually, we know that they do not have a no first use doctrine. In other words,
they are willing to use nuclear weapons first. They've essentially said as much.
It's one of these things where so it's not just the US, it's just the US and Israel US and Israel.
Yeah. And the only reason I didn't mention them at first is because technically,
Israel has not declared itself to be a nuclear power. So
we, you know, we're, you know, they have them. I mean, there's no, and what they do is they play
their goal is what's, and it's a tactic that I have qualms with, but I understand why it's used.
It's called strategic ambiguity. They don't want to get tied up in all the treaties around
nuclear weapons. And if they said they had them, that triggers all kinds of stuff with the UN and
with various treaty conventions that they don't want to do. But I think it's an important point
to say that, you know, Israeli officials have actually said, well, if we had nuclear weapons
and a large Arab army came to attack us, we would use them. So, you know, that to me is
as solid as US doctrinal statements of saying that we would use a nuclear weapon in the event of XYZ.
So dumb question is a use of a single tactical nuclear weapon. Does that
break the seal as it were and constitute a nuclear weapon? And therefore the countries
like Russia and China that did sign the non-first use, that is a, that was a first use even though
it wasn't a huge one. Yeah, I think it does. For one thing, I've heard it said by people
who really need to go back to school and study military strategy and tactics, if I can be so
blunt as to say this. You know, nuclear weapons make a tremendous difference on the battlefield.
You know, if you, for instance, you could concentrate, say, a brigade or division level
force to assault and you look, for instance, look at what the Israelis did with Gaza. They
concentrated, you know, several hundred thousand troops there in a very limited area to attack Gaza.
Well, if Hamas has the law, somebody had a credible nuclear deterrent, you might not want to do that
because that would be a prime target to use a tactical nuclear weapon because to wipe out
that formation. So it means you have to disperse your forces. It means you have to what's called
mop up, mop as a military technical term of using protective gear. It really changes the
whole pace of warfare. So that's one aspect of it. The other is once you cross the line, okay,
so you use a 10 kiloton to attack an air base. Well, then I go, well, I'm going to use a 25 to
take out a port. And then you go, well, you just destroyed a port. We're going to destroy this
factory yet happens to be sitting in a city, but it's important to your war effort. So we're going
to use a 200 kiloton to wipe out that industrial center. Well, now you've just escalated pretty
quickly into hitting strategic city targets. And, you know, so yeah, that once you break the seal,
as you said, it opens the whole range of it's very, it's very hard to show. And this was what the
exercises in the 80s, and I hope they're still doing them now. That's what those exercise should
when you have two guys sitting around playing gaming it out. Once somebody uses a nuke,
you start going back and forth and it escalates. And that's why I keep highlighting your words
and your experience on this, because all the other things that we are working on and concerned
about biodiversity and plastics and global heating and the energy transition and sustainability,
all of that work goes out the window if that seal is broken, because then we're in a different world.
Yeah, we are. And okay, one or two, even a, you know, a few nuclear weapons, the environmental
effects are local. You know, we've talked about this in the past. You know, you start to get
right, but the economic effects are a huge domino and it crashes the entire global system of
international relations and governance, because once you cross that line, there's no more taboo.
Well, then why and you know, you mentioned Israel, one of the scary things is let's say that Israel
gets desperate, suppose has block comes in and starts moving in or and you start lose, they
start losing territory and they decide they need to use a tactical nuclear weapon to stop it.
How does Russia react? How does China react? Do they decide, look, these guys cross the line,
we have to take them out to make a point that nobody should ever use a nuclear weapon again.
You know, how does the US step up? It just the whole thing unravels. And again, I want to be
really clear here, because this is something that came up after our last podcast. I think that
Israel would be very reluctant to use a nuclear weapon, except, except under two
circumstances. The first is desperation. They're being overrun. And they did in 73. They had,
we believe, three nuclear weapons at that time. And there's a good authority from internal
documentation that they had them prepped and ready to use when their armies were being defeated.
So I think that, but so under desperation, I think they would. I think they might against
Iran. If they thought Iran was on the verge of getting a nuclear weapon, I think they might
in cooperation with the US. I don't think, I think that they would use one in desperation,
regardless of what the US said against Iran, they might do it in cooperation with us kind of to
make a point, but also to ensure Iran never got nuclear weapons. Those are low. That second one's,
I think, a fairly low probability scenario. I don't want folks to think that the Israelis are,
you know, foaming at the mouth and have their finger on the switch. I think it would,
but I think that their calculus is such that there is a very real risk in certain circumstances
of them going nuclear. Thank you. Just to clarify my previous point, I didn't think that a few
tactical nukes would have a huge impact and destroy the environment, but I think it would,
because of the ripple effect, destroy the environmental movement.
I actually think it would. I think you're right. You just left a step out. I think
a few nuclear weapons would ultimately destroy the environment because I have a hard time seeing
how it stays limited. If it's between the US and China or US and Russia, I have a hard time
seeing how it stays limited. India, Pakistan, or Israel, and some potential Iranian exchange,
where you're talking a dozen or so, yeah, that could stay limited just because of the physical
numbers. But I think once you get the major powers involved, I don't see how it stays limited.
And this is why I've had you back, you know, with only two weeks in between because there's
so much going on. Okay, so what should people listening to this watching this and in the halls
of power in our nation or in the world be thinking about and working towards, given the implicit
unbelievable gravity of the risks that you are outlining here?
Well, I think there's two aspects to that. I think the first is doesn't involve nuclear weapons at all.
Americans need to be much more engaged, aware, conscious of what our government is doing in the
realm of foreign policy. We need to push hard for our elected leaders to participate in global
governance structures. Yeah, it's inconvenient. It doesn't always go the way we want to, but
the alternatives are what we're seeing now, chaos. So that is the first big step is, you know,
we're not always going to get our way. We can't always be the hegemon. We can't, we're not going
to be the world's hyperpower and politicians that say that need to be voted out of office,
quite frankly. I don't care which party they're in, and they're in both parties, unfortunately.
We need to have people who see international affairs first through the prism of diplomacy.
And yeah, you're gonna have to deal with unsafety characters, but it's got to be diplomacy first,
not diplomacy as an option. Then you can start to talk about what kind of a military and what
kind of doctrine we need to fulfill that goals. What are the real threats? What are the real risks?
Do we really need things like more bigger nuclear weapons, or are we really secure
with the weapons mix that we have now? Should we be abrogating these treaties, or should we be
engaging with other countries? You know, we dealt with the Soviet Union,
the evil empire. Ronald Reagan negotiated with the evil empire. In a modern Russia, modern China,
are, despite the rhetoric, nowhere near the level of ideological confrontation we had with the Soviet
Union. And if Ronald Reagan can talk to, you know, Yuri Andropov, my God, I mean, we can certainly
talk to Putin or Xi because they're in a different class, in my view. So again, what can you do first
Don't just let foreign policy be the realm of experts. You know, be aware of what your country
is doing. Push for rational foreign policy that involves diplomacy. And the second is be aware
that we're talking about horrific destruction, not in another country. It can happen here.
Those scenes you're seeing in Gaza, that could be Minneapolis or Savannah or Atlanta or whatever.
And again, think about it, three weeks to just to turn Gaza, northern Gaza into rubble,
18 milliseconds to turn a city into rubble. Thank you in quotes. And I really appreciate your
wisdom and expertise. And I'm hoping that we don't have another podcast for many years.
Well, you know, we could always you could make me cohost so that whenever one of your
guests says something, I can chip it and go, wait a minute, it's worse than that.
You could be the systems ecology. Who's the guy on Johnny Carson show that would always laugh?
I forgot his name. Oh gosh. Ed McMahon, Ed McMahon of the podcast.
I'm glad we can still laugh about it. But thank you. I called you this morning to wonder what
was going on with this Russian news. And here we are having a conversation about it to be continued,
my friend. Thank you. Absolutely. Thank you. And I appreciate you doing the state because I know
a lot of your listeners may look at and go, you know, this is an ecology, energy, economics.
But as you said, and I really want to emphasize, none of that matters if we blow ourselves up.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of the Great Simplification,
please subscribe to us on your favorite podcast platform and visit thegreatsimplification.com
for more information on future releases.
