What are the social and geopolitical risks or interactions currently that increase the risk
of a nuclear exchange? You can talk about Russia and the US and NATO and Ukraine,
but just generally, what is the situation? Maybe you could just briefly describe what is
the first use doctrine and how has it been used and start there.
That's a great point, Nate, and it's one that I would bet most Americans don't realize that
we are the only country in the world that has never had any kind of a no-first use.
And in fact, we say that we can use nuclear weapons against non-nuclear adversaries.
We've said that the nuclear posture review is currently going on.
The classified version has been released, hopefully the public version will be out here in a few
weeks. Basically, the one that's currently enforced says that we would use a nuclear weapon in
response to a cyber attack that took down our electrical grid. I mean, literally, that is US
policy. Biden people are hopefully going to change that and rethink it, but we've said that we'll do
it for biological warfare attacks for all kinds of non-nuclear. And again, to me, that's irrational
for all the reasons we've just gone through, because nukes are different. Yeah, it's US policy.
Oh, if there's a major terrorist attack, we'll nuke your country. We're the only country in the
world that says that. Is this because we want to scare people into doing what we want? Or does
this just piss people off? I mean, internationally, I know nothing about this. Why is it that we're
the only country that's not in that club that says we're not going to do first use?
And it's arrogance. And we've already used them, hubris, I would say, rather than
arrogance to be really bananaic. But there is that fear factor. It's like strategic ambiguity
is a concept. And I mentioned that word before, just to be clear, what that means is if you don't
in game theory, if you don't know exactly what I'm going to do and you think I might do something
crazy, it's going to limit your actions. That's the simplest kind of phrase. Well,
the problem is you're talking about strategic ambiguity around an issue that has the potential
to end civilization on this planet. I don't think that's a place where you want to have
ambiguity, because ambiguity works both ways. You're saying, maybe I will, maybe I won't. Well,
the other side may go, okay, I'm going to roll the dice that maybe you won't.
So I think that's an incredibly dangerous thing. It may work for some kinds of
conventional scenarios. And I can see where it is useful. You look at the whole, like,
Taiwan issue, ambiguity may have been beneficial because it gives both sides some room to maneuver.
But when it comes to nuclear weapons use, I think you need very bright lines that says
here is where we will use them. And in effect, that's pretty much what Russia has done. It's
certainly what China has done. Russia has been modifying their nuclear use doctrine. And you
get into these chicken and egg arguments, but largely based on our changes. So we've escalated
and put nuclear weapons into Europe that under INF were actually previously banned. And so now
Russia has said, well, we're going to respond in turn. And so you get into this again, we've been
in a soft escalation spiral, probably since the mid 2000s, 2005 or so, it got worse after 2014.
And now we're in a very dangerous place in that spiral. How does using a small nuke
automatically or likely lead to using big nukes? In other words, how do things escalate like that?
Well, first off, you run the accident. I'm going to say accidental. As we discussed earlier, let's
say that you have decided to use a nuclear weapon to disable. So you've got Russian, let's use this
scenario, you've got big Russian formations and swept through Ukraine. They're on the Polish border.
You're afraid they're going to cross the border and you want to stop it. And you know that NATO
conventional forces aren't sufficient to the job. Well, maybe you say, well, we will use tactical
nuclear weapons to break up those formations. So you launch, you know, you activate, you launch
weapons against that way. Well, obviously, Russia is going to say, well, we want to stop,
we want to disable the storage sites for those nuclear weapons to stop you from using them again
or in the first place. So that takes a... Now, Russia's got some additional flexibility because
of their hypersonic weapons. But if we used a nuke on them, it would be very logical for them to
respond by hitting those air bases. Well, now you're starting to get cases where there's going to be
secondary effects. What you have a nuke go off, there's going to be fallout, you're going to have
civilian casualties. The time to respond gets shorter and shorter because you're using missiles
with five minute flight times or aircraft with 15 to 30 minute flight times. And so
you see activity and you start shooting at it and you start to get where there's an exchange,
then you get popular pressure of, wow, we've just lost now two or three million civilians
from a limited nuclear exchange. Maybe we need to go ahead and I can... Maybe we should go ahead
and do a counter force strike, the technical term saying, we'll worry the other side's going
to launch their strategic weapons or their city destroying weapons. Let's hit them first.
So if there's a missile that goes across a country's border, like between Russia and Germany
or I don't know, pick your destination, how do people know that it's not just a conventional
bomb or it has a nuclear war? Right now for ballistic missiles, only nuclear weapons are on
ballistic missiles, the long range like submarine launch. Now there are theater ballistic missiles
that... We use cruise missiles mostly, but there are tactical ballistic missiles that are conventional,
but generally like a submarine launch missile or an ICBM, those are all nuclear because it's an
expensive piece of hardware. You're not going to put... So if there's a submarine launched
missile somewhere, the actors involved can assume it has a nuclear warhead. Right. And what you
don't know is how big that warhead is and you don't know... Initially you know the general area
it's going. Right now you... But does it matter? I mean, does it matter seriously? Does it matter
if it's at the lower end of the dial yield or all the way on the higher end? You know, it depends
on who you are. If I'm the decision maker, I may look at it and decide to ride it out
and then respond once I know... If I know my force is survivable, maybe I decide to let it ride to
see what actually happens and then use other means. And this is another thing where you get into
deterrence and the reason why I think Russia is not likely to be used first, it's not their doctrine
to use first except in an existential threat to the Russian nation. But the other reason is
they've got so much moral authority on this, they've never used a nuclear weapon. The U.S.,
we've used nukes. You know, we're the bad guys and in the international community that carries
quite a bit of weight. People don't trust the U.S. to not use a nuclear weapon because we've
demonstrated the ability. And you look at all the arguments now, people say, yeah, we were right to
do the Hiroshima and Nagasaki blasts. But there's a pretty big body of literature which says wasn't
really necessary. But just to be clear, I think it was probably the right thing to do at the time
because we know a lot more now than we knew then. But still, just from a credibility standpoint,
again, we have a explicit first use doctrine which outlines all kinds of things. There are
people right now saying, well, we need to fire a nuke at Russia to show them we're serious. I mean,
my God, you're saying use a nuclear weapon to make a point? But you hear those discussions,
I'm sure you've seen and read it, some of them by members of our Senate. So it's crazy.
