two key differences really with nuclear weapons, dialy yield, I think that's critical. The other piece
is if you look at conventional explosion, that's 90-something percent of the energy goes into the
blast wave, the shock wave that's destroying buildings, and you get a little bit of thermal
heat and fires from it, but the vast majority of the energy is the shock wave. Nuclear weapons are
very different. The first, that we tend to not talk about too much, but it's important is the
fireball. It's literally the temperature of the sun. It's going to vaporize anything within that
range. Fairly small, a few hundred meters across to maybe a kilometer across from the very large
weapons, but I don't want to forget to mention that because the fireball is what's causing all
these other effects. So the shock wave, that blast wave propagates out. At first, it's supersonic.
It's actually moving faster than the speed of sounds you can imagine. You've heard a sonic boom,
well, you can imagine what that's doing on the surface from a bomb blast, and that causes most
of the immediate structure damage. The other thing that happens is the thermal radiation.
It's burning. It's the temperature of the sun. You're taking a piece of the sun and putting it
on the earth. So it's causing flash burns and fires of anything combustible, sometimes 23
miles from the detonation site. So that's a huge thing. So the first thing is the blast wave
tears up the buildings and stirs things up. Then the thermal radiation sets everything on fire.
So you're getting the worst effects of a shock wave and a firestorm. And then the radiation.
One of the scary, fascinating things about nuclear bombs, and particularly this gets to
the small yield. So you look at, say, a B61 that's set for the 300 ton setting,
the blast size is maybe 300 meters across, but the radiation is deadly out to 600 meters. So
that's where some of your older listeners may remember the neutron bomb or enhanced
radiation weapons. Those went out of fashion in the 80s, partly for the reason that it's kind of
creepy that you can set this bomb off and kill people, but leave the buildings and tanks and
things fairly much intact. And so that went away in the 80s. But, you know, just like fashion and
MTV, we're back, you know, it's back to the 80s. And we've now built those weapons that at the time
were speculative. So that's the key things. You've got the shock wave, you've got thermal radiation,
you've got immediate ionizing radiation. That's your immediate effects. Longer term. Well, you
have, those are delayed effects, things like the fallout. So a lot of material gets sucked into
the blast, is irradiated, becomes radioactive, you've got debris from the bomb. You know,
even at a high end nuclear blast, you're only consuming 30 or so percent of the
material in the device. So the rest of that radioactive material just gets spewed all over
the place. And so that becomes radioactive fallout. That can fall for hundreds of miles
away from the site and last for hundreds of years. So you think about Chernobyl, you know,
we're still talking about the fact that people driving through that area stir up dust. You've
got areas in Europe, hotspots, where you can't drink the milk from the cows because the radioactive
isotopes are still in the soil, it ends up in the grass. And this is not in Russia. We're talking
about in parts of Poland, in parts of Germany, where you still get radioactive milk from cows,
eating stuff that's left over from a nuclear reactor accident 40 years ago. Well, imagine
you set off a few dozen or a few hundred nuclear weapons, again, a limited exchange. You're going
to have these hotspots all over the world for decades that's contaminating our food and water.
And that's just the immediate radiation effects, the particulates, the dust, the soot. That ends up
getting blasted into the stratosphere. It's going to hang out there for years. So you potentially
can end up with even a small exchange of a few dozen weapons could cause cooling in the atmosphere,
which could impact crops, the particulates, the settling, the obstructing of the normal sunlight
can interfere with the oceanic food chain. You collapse or damage the oceanic food chain,
you've just caused a real problem for all life on this planet. And that's not even from,
that's before we get to the really bad scenarios of thousands of nukes going off.
You, in a recent email to me, said there are three countries
that have the potential to destroy life on earth. That was your quote. Can you explain
how that would happen? And to be clear, because I actually, I actually had a, there was an ecologist
that corrected me on that. Of course, we're not talking about destroying life on earth.
We are talking about destroying virtually anything bigger than a cockroach. So to me, that's-
Right. Right.
Yeah. I mean, you're, so to be clear, you're-
Complex life.
Complex life. Yeah. So
That seems fantastical exaggeration to me. So I would like you to be explicit on how that could
happen. It isn't. The reason being that for twofold, first off, with a large scale exchange of,
say, 3,000, again, remember that strategically each side has, you know, on the order of 2,000
strategic weapons. These are the big missiles, the submarine launch. Let's say that half of those
on each side get deployed and go off. So you have, that's 2,000 nuclear weapons going off
in the northern hemisphere, a few in the southern hemisphere.
So the amount of radiation, the amount of material ejected into the atmosphere,
roughly equivalent, we think that the problem with some of these is that the modeling tends to get
into classified materials, but there have been some public studies, that kind of an exchange.
You're talking same level of impact as the asteroid impact at the end of the cretaceous
that killed off the dinosaurs. So right there is your- Because of what? Because of the particulate
in the atmosphere and shutting out the sun? Yeah, exactly. That's the nuclear winter scenario.
You get particulates, you get soot ejected into the stratosphere that causes a tremendous
diminution of sunlight and energy reaching the surface. And that's a separate, that's separate
than the radiation. Completely separate from the radiation. You're talking about having 30% of the
northern hemisphere uninhabitable for several centuries, not to mention all the radioactive
dust blowing around and contaminating everything else. So even assuming you don't have catastrophic
ecosystem collapse from the cooling and loss of sunlight, the radiation is going to be such a
severe problem. And that's not even getting to some of the other issues that we talked about,
that obviously that kind of exchange, you've destroyed all of the mechanisms of human civilization.
Forget economies and energy use and all those other things. When you've killed off 2 billion
people and destroyed most of the functioning economies in the world, the people that are left,
it's not going to be a pretty sight. But again, the most likely scenario is you have catastrophic
nuclear winter, you end up with catastrophic ecosystem failures. And that's before you even
get to the radioactive effects and radiation effects. I wanted to have this conversation with
you because I think more people need to understand the seriousness of this risk. And I was hoping
that people would listen to it and think about it and share it. But my initial reaction is,
I'm going to lose listeners because of this conversation. Here's the thing, we can do something
about this. We're going to get to that. We've already, and again, it is depressing, but
we already did something about this once. In the 80s, we actually did significant de-escalation.
But back to the topic at hand, that big exchange, you get into arguments whether or not it's possible.
I think it is because I think people in the heat of the moment get dumb pretty fast.
Well, at that point, it's almost the evolutionary game theory of spite, which is,
oh my God, all these missiles are heading our way. Those bastards, we're done. We better take
them with us. If I can't win, I'm going to lose and make them pay more sort of thing.
That's absolutely true. Although it does raise an interesting question of during the Cold War,
we came very close to exchanges. They were prevented not by policy, not by brilliant
technical systems. They were prevented by single moral and ethical individuals who said,
wait a minute, the consequences of that, I'm not going to follow instructions. That's the irony of
the preventing nuclear wars. A lot of times, it's people going against the rules and saying,
you know, I don't want it in civilization. Isn't that just a profound insight that there's this
tragedy of the commons and collective action problems and the cleverness of our species
in nuclear weapons is the pinnacle of cleverness, trumping wisdom and the superorganism and all
that. But the things that actually provide wisdom are at the individual human level
and that that's how this has been avoided in the past.
Individual human beings making the humane decision.
Could that happen again?
I think it could. I hope it could. I would like to believe that it could. It scares me that,
unfortunately, part of the thing that we're discussing. I grew up with the threat of nuclear
weapons. I knew what it would do. Are the young officers, the middle grade officers and middle
grade people in the State Department, even at the upper levels, are they aware? Are they just
going to let things go on autopilot? Are they as frightened of nuclear war as they should be?
That's, I think, a very important point. That doesn't mean being paralyzed. It doesn't mean
that you just give up. What it does mean is that you understand at a deep human level.
That's what I was referring to earlier. The problem is it's so easy. As an academic exercise,
it's horrific. I see it in myself how fascinating it is. You see the physics. You see the complexity
of the problem. You start to go down those little rabbit holes. We're talking about human life here
and the life on earth. I would like to think that is foremost in people's minds. The guys making the
decisions in the 80s had to do duck and cover exercises in elementary school. The guys making
the decisions now didn't have to go through that. I'm not sure that's a good thing.
