So the super organism is like if you take this multipolar trap that has all of these different
actors in a race with each other, you would say that's a property of the super organism.
Now we're dropping down a layer to say that property of the super organism is what makes
it to where all these players don't feel like they actually have the capability of doing the
ethical thing because they will just be kind of priced out. Even if they're ethical individual
humans, their position within the economic hierarchy doesn't allow them to express their
ethical view. Yeah, in general, I think we talked about this once that
if we look at China's taking of Tibet or colonialist taking of Native American
territories via genocide in the founding of the US, it wasn't based on who the more
ethical actor was. It wasn't based on which civilization should be in terms of some
philosophical true good and beautiful. It was based on effective dominance, which is the
combination of violence and economic productive capacity. And so given that what ends up winning
in a very Darwinian sense and what is good in an ethical or philosophic sense or even in a
long-term viability sense aren't the same thing, that's at the core of something we have to address.
Where you have a scenario that what wins in the short term forces everybody to race towards
that thing, even if everyone racing towards that thing makes an entire system self-terminate in
the long term. And that's what we call the multipolar trap. It's expressed in the tragedy of
the commons, the military arms race, the market race to the bottom. And you could define it as
a property of the superorganism to exploit all the energy in its environment and then hit a cliff.
And we know that like typically you have the peak number of cancer cells in a person's body
right before they die and then all the cancer cells die when they kill a host. So the cancer cells
individually are utilizing metabolic resource faster than the other cells and reproducing
faster than the other cells. So it seems like they're winning at a very short-term game.
But they are actually then killing the host that they depend upon. And so
lots of people have drawn the analogy that human presence on the biosphere looks a lot like a cancer
where it is maximizing its extraction from that which it depends upon in a way that is actually
breaking the substrate it depends upon. So is the purpose of this conversation to
educate and influence cancer cells to become self-aware to change their behaviors?
Well, I think one of the things we're also talking about that's tricky is
where it seems like the cancer cell behavior is actually following rational self-interest
defined by the game theoretics of if I stop being a cancer cell the body's still gonna die.
Right? Because I can't stop everybody else from doing it. And so unless I can stop a certain critical
mass from doing it and this gets down to the if we don't cut the trees down but we don't have some
rule of law that makes sure nobody does then all it means is the other tribe that's in competition
with us cuts all the trees down. We still don't get to protect the forest and they'll use that
economic advantage against us in the next tribal warfare and we're fucked. So not only are we going
to cut the trees down faster than we need we're going to race to cut them down faster than the
other guy because we can't get everyone to agree not to. Which is why at least at first hearing
about the ecological, biophysical narrative of the superorganism and you're going to tell me
where where yours fits in here at least at first feels to someone that they don't have any agency
because what does one person's change do to this larger dynamic that you're describing?
So if we take an example if we try to get hopeful and we say but let's look at where we did change
really bad things because some small number of one person's really did stand up for something
they got other one person's to stand up they got a critical mass and we shifted it.
Let's take a couple examples that are often given. Let's take cigarettes or
mothers against drunk driving and seatbelts or HFCs, CFCs and ozone. We could give plenty of
examples but the it's true that we have not that we don't have a history where we've never solved
anything that matters ecologically or socially like there are some times where people out of
concern for the commons have went against some profit stream and actually won a thing but they
are different in kind than what we're facing now and I want to point out where they're different
in kind and different in scale but go on. They're different in scale and and different in kind in
a way that's connected. So if we look at cigarettes and four out of five doctors choose camel cigarettes
we obviously haven't gotten rid of cigarettes but we've made it to where you have to be 18 to buy
them and they have to have a surgeon general's warning that this will kill you before you use
it and we've definitely decreased a total number of people that use cigarettes and they can't use
them in the buildings and stuff. That took a lot of work a lot of people died of lung cancer and
second hand lung cancer first etc. For a vested interest profit stream that knew it was wrong
from well before it was regulated but the sale of tobacco as big a deal as it was was not at
it was not the engine of creation for the economy as a whole. It was one sector of the economy as
one product. When we're talking about climate change as you focus on there are no industries
that don't need energy. There is no such thing as even the possibility of any good or service
that doesn't need energy. So when we're trying to deal with something that is the by-product of
using energy itself it is connected to the machine of creation rather than one little area in the
same way that it's like HFCs and CFCs not every single industry was based on aerosol propellants
and so you were able to change that without having to change macroeconomics you really only had to
change an industry and so you could get enough force to do it. When you're trying to change
something that is at the heart of macroeconomics itself the vested interest that are against it
is everything and it's not only that every industry and thus every single business requires it it's
that also every nation states geopolitical position requires it. So literally power itself
is bound to it so the entire machinery of power will resist anything that would
decrease its relative power capacity and this is why from backing out of the Kyoto treaty to
whatever the whole history of the thing why has it been so hard is because if any
so there you know the market can get us to organize based on incentive but if incentive
isn't adequate and we actually have to use a anti-incentive we have to use a deterrent the
market doesn't really do deterrence well so you have a state that does that which is you make it
illegal and someone will get arrested if they break the law or their business will stop being
in the operate. So we this multipolar trap that we talk about where there is some near-term incentive
where if any agent does that they win in the short term and it creates a race for everybody to do
that we've figured out how to solve multipolar traps inside of a nation state by rule of law
and monopoly of force and enforcement so we can say no we're not going to cut down all the trees
we're going to have a national park we're going to keep trees in the national park and no lager is
allowed to cut there and what that means is a monopoly of violence will forcibly stop you if
you're cutting there and take you to jail to protect the rule of law right and so inside of a
nation state we're able to prevent most multipolar traps but we do not have international governance
to deal with global ones and so then we end up getting the various nation states competing
with each other and that you know this is both this is why there is a desire for something
like global governance is because the global oceans or the global atmosphere or the global
biodiversity or global commons that we depend upon can't have a situation where each country if they
make the right choice gets disadvantaged so that nobody makes the right choice the reason we don't
want a one-world government is because how do you have something that has that much power that
doesn't become corrupt and how do you ensure that there are checks and balances on it so
we do need something like effective global governance which does not have to be a government
it can be a decentralized process but that still allows us to solve the multipolar traps
