it would be better if more people understood what is wrong with the progress narrative
and understood what authentic progress actually entails and understood the caution and restraint
that it requires, understood the emphasis on maintaining, understood that very often the best
way to solve a problem is to remove its causes which actually involves reversing some stuff rather
than always create new stuff but the obviously market incentive is on create new stuff, the history
books incentive is on create new stuff but as we think about how do we actually solve problems
in a way that isn't a racket right that isn't solving a problem that was caused by the result
of our previous problem solving and that will in turn create more of that.
Today I am rejoined by Daniel Schmockdenberger who is the director of the Consilience Project
and the co-founder of Civilization Research Institute where he and his colleagues have just
written a new paper called Development in Progress which is the topic of this long horizontally
and vertically deep conversation with Daniel. We talk about what is progress, the history of
progress, who gets to write the progress narrative and whether progress itself actually means
betterment for society, for the well-being of the human species and the natural world.
You might not be surprised to hear that this episode raised more questions than answers
and in fact I didn't even get to my questions because we were unpacking his paper.
Those are going to have to be discussed in a follow-up conversation.
I think we have to understand the problems, the generator functions, the dynamics and start
asking questions about where do we want to go and how do we get there from here and I think
these conversations with people like Daniel at least start to define the parameters of the
conversation and where we need to go. Please welcome Daniel Schmockdenberger.
Daniel Schmockdenberger, welcome back. Good to see you my friend. Good to see you,
holy crap, you look different. One part Gandalf, one part Zeus, one part Surfer dude.
You didn't mention Appalachia Mountain Guy, just stopped cutting it when I moved to the
mountains out here. All right, well you look happy and healthy. I am happy. The sun just came out
like just a minute ago from where it was raining and storming and there's a huge rainbow over the
mountains right out my window right as we're starting to talk. Wow, yeah the last podcast we
did we had a background of just bright verdant green outside your window and I know you have
a new set up there so we can't see it. Okay, welcome back. We believe it or not, it was a year ago
that we had our last podcast which was on artificial intelligence and the superorganism
and this is kind of the first follow-up to that conversation. One of the core themes we talked
about before we got to AI itself was the delineation between narrow boundary goals and wide
boundary and wisdom and that brought you to talk about what you called then naive progress versus
real progress and you have now written a paper which I've read on this concept, you're now referring
to it as immature versus authentic progress and that is going to be the theme of today's conversation.
How would you like to start? I played a role in writing this paper is our team wrote it so
multi-authored. Yeah, the relationship between what progress actually is, how we think about it
and what our goals are and how we go about achieving them.
If we are having narrowly defined goals as we discussed last time that can be achieved while
externalizing harm in other places and we do a lot of that and we look at all of the goal
achieving and not all the externalities, we can call that progress and for those that happen to
make it through that process that are not the losers of the war and not the species that go
extinct or not the animals that are in the factory farms or the cultures that are genocided or anything
else, there's a survivorship bias of being able to say those narrow definitions, those narrow goals,
we are the beneficiaries of the progress of those narrow goals kind of differentially and so you
can make a progress narrative associated with effective achieving of narrow goals even if they
are driving rivalry and driving externality and you know it's not a great definition of progress,
it's generously, it's a naive definition of progress, less generously it's propaganda
and apologism for winners and the way that humans think about what is progress,
what is actual betterment of the world, what are our lives in service to in that way is
pretty important because it's significant to how we orient ourselves individually and collectively
so that's why it's an interesting topic. Well, while I was waiting for you, I looked up progress
in the dictionary and it has different definitions pretending on the context but as a noun it's
described as gradual betterment and as a verb as to develop a higher better or more advanced stage
so why don't you unpack a little bit on why the concept of progress in our cultural goals,
our aspirations, our narratives, the stories of modern human culture, why it's so important?
I think most everybody watching your show, this is kind of obvious right, they don't think that
the totality of things that are technological advancement or that drive GDP or you know other
things aligned with primary civilizational metrics that we're optimizing that we consider the metrics
of progress are comprehensively good. I think that people listening to your show know that
what we consider progress by those definitions is not necessarily good for nature
and is something that is not good for nature that we depend upon a good definition of progress
is not equally distributed good for across wealth classes, across global south,
across you know so many things like that but we can just give a couple examples
so in your definition it mentioned both advancement and betterment which are different
things and it's kind of important to think about that because advancement could be purely a
technological thing with no definition of good right so we can say that this iteration of the
iPhone is more technologically advanced, has more computer processing, more capabilities,
etc than the previous one so it's definitely progress from the definition of advancement.
Is the world better as a result? Better is a question that science actually can't answer on
its own because it's a question of good right which is related to ought not just is and so now
we get into moral philosophy, we get into something that is connected to but outside of the domains
of the philosophy of science itself which is what is actually good and so let's say that we
look at the graphs that are very clear about how screen time associated with phones corresponds
to teen suicide, suicidal ideations and self-harm and you can watch that as cell phones started
to become ubiquitous and as people spend more hours per day on the cell phones and it's easier
to spend more hours on the ones that are more technologically advanced because they do more
things and end up being more addictive that body dysmorphia and suicide and mental illness go up
and so it's more advanced. Is it better for the people that are using it? No,
in a lot of metrics that really matter right and if you look at the total supply chain effects
of making those and you look at the conflict zones associated with those mines and supply chains
and everything that's all part of the story of is the world better as a result of doing this thing.
There's no question that better living through chemistry, leading up to the world that Rachel
Carlson wrote about in Silent Spring, like leaded gasoline did stop engine knocking,
so it was absolutely better from the perspective of the efficiency of engine
process not knocking. DDT killed mosquitoes. Yeah, very effectively. So from the narrow
definition of kills mosquitoes and provide some convenience, super effective and it was a great
act of technological progress to be able to figure out how to do this thing. Now, did the DDT
start killing everything and causing ecocide at scale and human health effects at scale and
pollinators and ecological collapse and did the leaded gasoline take a billion points off of global
IQ and make us something like 4x more violent? Yes, it did that too. And so this is the thing
is to think about and again, everybody knows from who's listening here that GDP goes up with war,
military spending for private contractors. So if market size is a measure of civilizational
progress, then war is awesome. GDP goes up with addiction because if someone is addicted to
McDonald's, addicted to their smartphone and purchasing, addicted to whatever leads to more
market activity, it goes up with diseases that are treated through for-profit processes.
And so there are a lot of ways and there are kids who do very well at the primary metrics
of school like SATs but who are suicidal or sociopathic. So from the narrow definition of did
this way of raising kids and educating them do well, SAT, sure. From did we raise
healthy human beings that can also contribute to a healthy society? It's a very different question.
The idea that humanity has been making kind of these strides of progress as we have had cumulative
knowledge and we've definitely had cumulative knowledge and there are definitely things about
it that are good. If someone was trying to figure out math from scratch on their own and there hadn't
been recorded knowledge, they'd never get as far as Roman numerals, right? They'd get like
maybe counting. But we can learn all of this knowledge and do things with it.
So there is progress of stored knowledge. There is progress of capability of achieving things.
Are the goals well-defined? Are they good goals is a really important question.
And the progress narrative, the idea that technology in particular is advancing rapidly
and is making everything better and better along with the market and democracy and science.
And that this is the best time to be alive and that the Hobbesian view that the state of man
in nature, their life is brutish, short, nasty and mean, we have civilized ourselves, everyone is
literate, et cetera. Nobody would want to go back to the days before Novocaine. We have so much more
wealth now, et cetera, et cetera. And we're right about to develop AIs that will usher in a phase
of so much more rapid exponential progress that it will bring about abundance and utopia for everybody.
That narrative really took off following kind of what we call modernity, the enlightenment,
the scientific revolution leading to the industrial revolution and the rapid changes
that have happened in the world. And that corresponds with what you talk about of the
carbon spike. And it changed everything radically and rapidly in a way that there was no precedent
for that much change that quickly, going from half a billion people to eight billion people
in 200 years where it had taken 200,000 years to get to half a billion people of humans being here.
I'm just wondering if the carbon pulse and the related economic growth enabled people to follow
this idea of progress? And if we wouldn't have had growth, they would have complained or we would
have thought of different ways. But as long as it was possible for them to be part of the winners,
then this was all accepted. But now things are becoming too obvious to deny what's happening
to the planetary ecological situation, inequality, lots of pollution and other things.
So has there always been a critique of progress? And it's just the last century or so it's been
diminished because everyone could ride this wave or historically, what do you think about that?
Okay, so I want to come back to how the progress narrative kind of formalized in modernity.
But let's go back before that, well before that, well before the carbon pulse.
It's a pretty simple thing to state that history is written by the winners of wars.
The losers of wars don't get to write history books. And the history that is written by the
continuously written by the next winner of war creates a progress narrative because the winner
typically says it was a good thing that they won. It wasn't a bad thing that they won.
And so they will say things like we are civilizing the savages with our colonialism. And it's
actually a great act of benevolence that these naked barbarous savages are getting taught English
and Christianity and literacy, they were all illiterate. And so we will
gruesomely straw man their civilization or culture if not totally villainize it.
And then paint a story of what we did that goes along with the power conferred by doing it.
And so if one view, kind of a real politic, a real view of history is just study conquerors for
a minute. Just study the history of conquerors. Genghis Khan killed roughly 50 million people in his
life. And the estimates vary 50 million is a pretty standard estimate. But like this was
well before industrial technology, there were no tanks, there was no air force, right? Like this
was cavalry. And he and his men killed 11% of the entire global population.
Mind blowingly brutally, unnecessarily. And to then also recognize this that
something like 10% of the population of Asia are all believed to be his descendants now,
because in addition to the amount of killing, the amount of raping that happened.
So then you look at Attila the Hun and then you look at Alexander the Great. You look at
Caesar, you look at Ivan the Terrible, you look at the progressive history of that. And
there were cultures that were way more peaceful, that lived in more harmony with nature, that were
not focused on growth of empire at all costs. If you actually look at indigenous culture,
it's a very interesting thing. The thing we call the beginning of civilization.
It's such a funny thing, right? Like typically somewhere around Babylonia, Mesopotamia, early
Egypt, we call the beginning of civilization. Maybe now we say gobleki tepi, but it's very
recent, like some 10,000-ish years. And it has to do with animal husbandry, agriculture,
and growing large populations and permanent settlements in the written word and a few things
like that. But humans have been here for a couple hundred thousand years before that. They had
worldviews and systems of medicine and systems of music and art and poetry and dance. And
like a lot of things, they had the same genetic brains we have and wisdom and they didn't live.
Old people didn't live to be 30 years old. That's just utter gibberish, right? Like,
yes, infant mortality was high. But old people were old people throughout history. And
you'll notice that there's a reason why all those cultures stayed pretty small,
right? They stayed within one of the Dunbar numbers. And it's not that they couldn't grow,
it's that they had very strong reasons not to. And we discussed last time a little bit that
pretty much any definition of wisdom that anybody offers usually has restraint as an embedded concept.
Wisdom involves what not to do, where you could have personal advantage, where you could have
some near term advantage. But it's actually not the right thing to do. And so, if you think about
the Dunbar numbers, right, kind of the first one.
What do you mean by first one? Well, the original Dunbar number proposed was roughly something
about 150, 150 to 220 somewhere in there. And then other people have done kind of progressive
Dunbar-like numbers, which are different numbers of people where different coordination systems
are possible up to that number. And there are some that are smaller than that and some that are
larger than that. But let's just take that one, because that was a very significant one.
Up to that number, everybody can fit around a tribal council and all be in a single conversation
without amplification, right? They can all hear each other and possibly all contribute to a really
significant choice that's going to affect everybody's life. Everybody can know everybody,
so if I'm making sacrifices for other people, they're not anonymous strangers that I think are
assholes. They're like people that have saved my life. They're people that helped raise me. They're
people who I helped raise there. And so, at the scale where everybody can know everybody, everybody
can love everybody, everybody has some connection with everyone, and where we can all have a say in
that which our life will be bound to, there's a lot of reason to not get bigger than that. If it
gets bigger than that and there's a decision to make and there's not time or capacity to hear
everyone's voice, some people will have to subordinate and now my life is subject to things
I don't have a choice. So, in some senses, there's a negative feedback to progress and because of
so much social reciprocity that potentially informs wisdom and restraint at that scale.
Well, it's that they had some insight that a larger number of people was not progress.
And it was not betterment and the definition that they were interested in because it meant
actually less having a say in your own life and less intimacy with everybody that you are
in engagement with, right? Well, for a lot of part, a lot of those millennia,
they were running up against limits like they couldn't support larger populations necessarily
because of the natural resources and food and such.
No, I think there were a lot of places where they could and you had multiple tribes in the same
place that ended up creating tribal relationships with each other. You can see this in the recent
parts that we have in writing with the Iroquois Confederacy and like that and yet rather than
all make one giant city, they actually stayed in these separate bands or tribes and had relationships
with each other. And they actually had things about restraint that were very clear and actually
kind of amazing. So for instance, when you look at the Indians of the Pacific Northwest where
the kind of caloric abundance was really high because of the salmon and other things like that,
when they made technological advances like in better fishing hooks and longer lines,
there were rules to use that efficiency to spend less time fishing, not catch more fish.
So it was like an embedded anti-Jevons paradox rule.
Yes, and that's wisdom, right? That's a way to think about what the Sabbath is, right? We've
talked about this before. The Sabbath, amongst other things, I'm not reducing it to only this,
is a binding of a multipolar trap. It's a binding of a maximum power principle,
right? Which is if anybody works on Sunday, they can get enough differential advantage and get ahead
that they will end up beating everybody else, then everybody has to work on Sunday. So now we
have a world where everybody works all the time, nobody enjoys it, but everyone has to do that and
it's miserable. No one can connect with their families, restore, regenerate themselves, connect
with the divine or anything else. So you just force, nobody is allowed to do that. They made
it punishable by death, right? And Leviticus. But what it meant was it bound a multipolar trap
for everybody. It was actually using law to bind that thing. There's wisdom in that and that came
from a wisdom tradition. And the thing about the potlatch, and let's get rid of this surplus,
let's not keep this surplus and grow our population, let's not keep this surplus and have a reason for
another group to come war with us to take the stuff. Let's actually get rid of the surplus and come
back into depending upon nature and being in kind of that relationship. Similarly, with the,
we got better fishing hooks, we could catch a lot more fish and then we'll collapse the fishing,
the fish population and create problems for our social structure and etc. So let's just
spend less time fishing and now we have more time for art and love making and meditation and other
things, right? And so the technological advance didn't lead to a Jevons paradox because in the
same way that we talk about now with Jevons paradox, if you have more efficiency that could
lead to using less, only if you create law that binds that that's what it must be. Otherwise,
you just get return on investments of efficiency and maximum power principle, right?
Maybe we'll explain that briefly for anyone that is coming in this time who hasn't come in before.
Well, maximum power principle is that we
don't necessarily need energy, but energy per unit time is what we're trying to maximize. And
that in nature, organisms and ecosystems self-organize so as to better access energy because
energy is needed for movement, for anything, cellular metabolism, digestion, all things
relate to energy. So historically, those organisms and ecosystems that had more access to energy per
unit time had an adaptive advantage. But I have deep questions about the relationship of authentic
versus naive progress as it pertains to maximum power as this conversation unfolds. But is that
suffice for your question? The thing I want to add is that just if anyone's hearing about
Jevons Paradox for the first time and what maximum power principle at the level of civilization means.
Well, the more technology that we invent, like LED light bulbs, then they become so cheap and
ubiquitous that we actually use more lighting in the world. So there's a rebound effect as we
develop more technology that actually uses more energy globally. And this you see in so many
different ways. I'll just add for the people who kind of understandably think
couldn't technological advancement create more efficiency such that we could use less stuff
and still have economic quality in our life. The Jevons Paradox is a really key thing to
understand, which is if you make, if you figure out how to get copper more efficient today,
or you figure out how to get nitrogen more efficiently or energy more efficiently, it
also means that the cost of that thing goes down, which also means that now the
market input to a whole bunch of areas that weren't quite profitable open up. And so now
you get a whole bunch of new market areas and the net result is that when a thing becomes more
efficient rather than using less, you use more. Use more of that plus all the other things that
are industrially connected to it. And as a consumer, as an individual, if I save money on
some new technology, I'm going to spend that money at Home Depot or Walmart on something else
that requires energy and resources. So if we had the equivalent of the Indians in the Northwest
that you mentioned before, the Native Americans, that we had some wisdom, some Sabbath equivalent,
we can't fish more hours, if we had that in our system, then this technological innovation
that we have might not be a result in immature progress.
So let's talk about, you know, I think it's pretty clear that making the lead of gasoline
and making the DDT are definitions of progress that for a narrow purpose are, but are like
obviously pretty terrible. And the same is true when it comes to advances in weaponry and
making, I mean, there's so many examples like making food that isn't perishable,
great technological achievement. If you consider food perishing a problem to solve technologically
as opposed to a feature of life we're supposed to relate with that keeps us living close to the
living ecosystem and aware of biological things break down, which also keeps us aware of our own
death, which keeps us aware of the meaningfulness of life and, you know, so many things like that.
So if you look at the emergence of fast food and convenience store foods that have much more
addictiveness and much less micronutrients and are comprehensively bad for the population,
physiologically, psychologically, you know, et cetera, they're still progress. And so I think
that kind of progress everybody can probably get. All right, there's a problem with that.
But even let's say that we're talking about things that don't seem to be market driven,
but are even like trying to make progress on solving global problems.
So let's look at climate change for a minute.
So the first paper on climate change scientific paper was published in 1938.
UNEP was created, United Nations Environmental Program was created in 1972 to look at major
global environmental issues and have international coordination. Obviously climate change had a U.S.
vice president popularize it has had almost every kind of celebrity, you know, NASA and NOAA,
and the largest scientific databases and computational capabilities in the world are
backing it. There's a trillion dollars in climate finance per year, nuclear energy,
hydro energy, solar energy, et cetera. And the total amount of fossil fuel energy
that is used goes up every year that entire time.
And there's a place where we just have to pause a little bit if we take that in to say,
wait, wait. So everything we've done towards climate hasn't decreased fossil fuel energy.
It hasn't even slowed the increase in the amount that we use each year relative to the year before.
We're continuing to grow the total amount we use. Like, what? Okay, so if you think about that for
a minute. So because we want to get off fossil fuel energy, we're going to make a hydroelectric
dam. And it's going to destroy a whole ecosystem by, you know, flooding that whole area. It's going
to stop migratory pathways of fish and correspondingly birds. It's going to cause geopolitical conflict
between the countries that were involved. Maybe it's all those problems. Maybe all that would
be worth it if it was stopping the fossil fuels use. But if it's just like, oh, there's another
source of energy, awesome, we'll use that energy and the fossil fuels energy because there's still
positive returns on both. They're both profitable to continue to use. And think about all the nuclear
energy we've made, right? Like, all the risk of nuclear waste having to be managed forever,
all the risk of nuclear power plants being able to be things that can be targeted in war and become
nuclear volcanoes even by non nuclear powers, the increase in visible material, all that risk,
and it didn't even decrease fossil fuel use. And so you're like, okay, well, the way we've
been trying to solve the climate problem empirically is not working. And many of the solutions add new
harms without actually even addressing the existing ones effectively at all.
So this is also not a good definition of progress, right?
But how much of your critique or the paper critique of progress is a critique of GDP
as our cultural aspiration by a different name.
Okay, let's go back to Genghis Khan for a moment and friends because we were pre-GDP at that time,
right? And we were pre-carbon poles. So it is not true that all of the tribal populations
were as big as they could be throughout history, limited only by scarce food. That's part of the
rewrite of history that assumes that cities in bigger populations are better and that progress
has been linearly happening and et cetera. No, when I said that earlier, I meant like 100,000
years ago, not 10,000, 5,000 years ago, but go on. The archaeology gets less good the further back
you go, which means it becomes more subject to the projection of your narrative because you have
less data and so you read this stuff through your narrative. So if you have a Hobbesian narrative
that says their lives were British or nasty and mean, but that same narrative is why we had
manifest destiny. It is the manifest destiny of us colonialists to take over North America,
to take it away from being a vast wilderness for squalid savages and to civilize it so that it
can hold civilization. You read quotes from many of the chiefs of like, it was only considered a
wilderness to them. We filled with like terrible beasts and stuff. We considered it a beautiful
paradise and we were friends with all the animals and it was only them that considered it full of
squalid savages because they didn't have any interest in coming to understand the depth and
intricacy and beauty of our culture. But it was progress because the winners wrote the books.
Yes. And so if there was a culture that didn't orient to its maximum size and maximum colonialism
and empire expansion and whatever, because it wanted to not train the kids up to go die in war,
wanted to train the kids up to have a beautiful life, it wanted to not turn all of nature into
military equipment and stuff and agriculture land, but to have some deep appreciation of what
nature was, those cultures usually lost in war to the cultures that did the other thing.
Exactly. So what if there were 10 cultures, 10 tribes back in the day and nine of them were
peaceful in harmony with nature, music, community, love making inventions. If there was only one tribe
that was a Genghis Khan type thing, that's who won, won in quotes.
This is a really important part of the story of history in my opinion, is unless the person doing
the tribal warfare, unless the other 10 all noticed it and went and stopped them from even being able
to develop that capability, then yes, the person who starts in the group that starts investing in
offensive tribal warfare is going to win. And then what, and this played a role in the thing
that we call cities and the movement to larger civilizations, is once we're in the age of tribal
warfare, smaller numbers are going to do much less well than larger numbers are. And so if there is
any group that is now starting to do the offensive warfare thing, now a couple smaller groups need
to unify together, people will have less say and they'll have less liberty, but already more of them
will have to train in military than in the arts and other types of things, because that multipolar
trap is now in place. But there's a very important thing, we've talked about multipolar traps here
before, right? In arms race is a multipolar trap where everybody's racing to make faster
hypersonic weapons and multiple reentry vehicles and more effective autonomous weapons and whatever,
because we have to do that because what if the other guy gets it, even though we're making a
world that is our own risk of dying it, all those things goes way up and is a comprehensively worse
world. So the arms race is a multipolar trap, the market race, even if what it's doing is driving
massive externalities is a multipolar trap, the tragedy of the commons, we have to extract the
resources, even if we destroy the ecology before the other guy, because if we don't, it doesn't
protect the ecosystem, the other guy is going to destroy them all first and use that increased
resource has competitive advantage to beat us. So the multipolar trap is one of the reasons why
we can't do anything about climate change very effectively right now is nobody wants to price
carbon properly at a country level that has the rule of law to be able to bind its own economy,
because it would put them so radically behind everyone else who wasn't doing that economically,
and that economics has converted to military power and technological innovation and everything else.
No one wants to slow down their AI to try to do it safely, slow down their synthetic biology,
so it's just kind of a full race dynamics. Now, we've talked about this before, but there's
something even deeper that you just mentioned, which is the multipolar trap is usually initiated
by a psychopath. And in our tribal past subdued by numbers, there was strong social reciprocity
that would inhibit the potential power of a psychopath.
I want to build this out a little bit more and then I'll say that. Not everyone wants to go
initiate tribal war and have their children die in war so that they can have the glorious
large empire. That is not everybody's desire. The people who have won at doing that thing
can't imagine anyone not desiring that unless they are betas who just couldn't win at it,
because they can't imagine anything like fulfillment that is not oriented on conquest or
intimacy or things like that. So not everybody wants to do that thing, right? But if somebody
wants to do that thing, there's something wrong with them. There's something really deeply wrong
with them. But now everybody else has to do something that can deal with that or lose by
default. This is very much like the emergence of a cancer in the body, right? The cancer is not
just another cell having its own individual freedom to express itself in a slightly different way,
and it should be allowed to have its own individual expression. The other cells,
there's a difference between the liver cells and the blood cells and the kidney cells. They're
all different but they all have a shared genome and they're all working as parts of this larger
whole and they're constrained by that and that's okay because they would also die. A kidney outside
of a body is not that interesting. It doesn't sustain itself. So all of the cells are constrained
by being a part of a body to serve the good of the body. So they get to have individual expression
but they also have interconnectedness and with that an obligation. The cancer cell is like,
no, fuck the obligation. I'm going to do my thing and I'm going to actually consume resources faster
and replicate faster. And if it does that and metastasizes that idea, right, then the rest of
the body, the immune system has to kill that thing or that thing will kill the rest of the system.
Including itself.
Including itself, right? And that's the thing is that the cancer cell is having amazing progress
at consumption and replication. It's betterment for its own goals.
Yes, it's succeeding at its goals and then there are the most number of copies of itself right
before it kills the host and kills itself. Oh boy. So certainly in the deep ecology movement,
there are some people that view humanity as a cancer cell and based on the last five minutes,
you're suggesting that it's not humanity. It's some individuals that through some positive feedback
in tandem with energy surplus broke free of the wisdom and restraint of small groups.
And it's that multipolar trap that is created that has created a lot of these negative effects
on the planet. Nobody can argue that we, that there are a lot of cultures
that have no descendants today because Alexander or Caesar or Genghis Khan killed them all.
And their memes and their cultures and their genes didn't make it through
that particular selection process. And that does not mean that they didn't have higher
qualities of life or more sustainability with nature. It means they weren't good at war.
And they weren't good at, even if they were good at war individually, right? Because some people
might take objection, tribal warriors, they were not good at scaled violence, effective,
scaled, coordinate violence. And we are the descendants, unavoidably, of the people that
scaled empire with all of the ecological harm, warfare, genocide, et cetera,
we are genetically and memetically and culturally the descendants of those processes.
I think that's a profound insight, but I'll push back a little and say we're also the descendants
of those humans that killed off the Neanderthals.
Yes, there is. So I'm going to make some conjecture here that I don't have the data to support.
And I would really like to get the data.
Which I know you by now well enough these past few years is something you rarely do,
but go on. The data for this is not available that I have seen,
because it's ancient and our archaeology has too many conflicting things.
So our early toolmaking, call it stone tools, and then fire, like very early toolmaking,
was a radical change. And obviously that didn't start with sapiens,
that started with Homo habilis or something like that.
It was a pretty radical change in selection criteria from everything before.
And because now the selection criteria were not the result of a genetic mutation that was
corporeally built into our body, it was the result of us understanding how to extend what
our body does extra corporeally, where the ability to advance those technologies was much more rapid
than evolution's advancement of our body's predatory capabilities or whatever kind of
selection capabilities. And that was the beginning of a really significant asymmetry
that did not exist in the rest of the natural world and the rest of natural evolution.
In natural evolution, the mutation forces that are acting on something that
produce a bunch of useless mutations, I'm using kind of standard evolutionary theory,
they produce a bunch of useless mutations, but a few of them are effective and they get selected for,
those mutations, pressures, whether we're talking about gamma rays or oxidative stress or whatever,
or just, you know, transcription errors, are operating across the entire ecosystem, all of the
beings. There's an even distribution of kind of the mutation pressures. And then there's also a
co-selection process. So the mutation that leads to a predator getting slightly sharper teeth or a
slightly stronger jaw or slightly faster running, it's only slightly, right? You don't get like
a massive jump like we get with AI systems from one generation to the next. So let's say there is
a mutation that leads to a capacity that makes them slightly more effective at their niche.
Let's say it's a predatory niche. Simultaneously, similar types of mutation pressures are happening
on the things that they eat that make them slightly faster, slightly better at camouflage,
have slightly sharper senses, you know, whatever it is, right? And so neither of them are getting
a massive asymmetrical jump relative to the other. They're having similar kinds of very,
very gradual increases. And then let's say the predator had one first. So it's going to start
doing slightly better at eating prey. It's of course going to be statistically eating the slower
ones more often than the faster ones. And as a result, the inbreeding of the faster genes also
leads to a change in selection dynamics. So both the distribution of mutation and co-selection
lead to a process where there is a symmetry of power that is maintained across the whole system.
And it's not just in a one-to-one relationship, right? It's the predator with the prey.
It's that prey animal with the plants, right? As it gets the ability to digest more stuff,
the plants start figuring out how to put out more volatile oils or spread seeds faster or
whatever it is. But your point here is that it was symmetric and it was really slow.
Yes. And as a result, you're actually not getting power asymmetries. You're not
getting concentrations of power. You're getting distributions of power. And the distribution
of power is what's allowing there to be a harmony across that whole space. And it's why you don't
get that what is good for lions as a whole is bad for gazelles as a whole, right? Of course,
this lion eating this gazelle, that might be the case, but lions as a whole and gazelles as a whole
are actually symbiotic species. If the lions went away, the gazelles would actually do less well,
right? They would have the weaker genes and breed more often and etc. If the gazelles went away,
lions would do less well. So at the micro level, it looks like competition and even zero sum,
but at the macro level, they're symbiotic. But the key reason does have to do with the
symmetry of power in the relationship. In the same way that like
fighting in your weight class is a thing, right? If you're competing and the kind of original
definition of competing means something like to strive together. If I'm competing with someone
where they get a little bit better and it like it inspires and teaches and forces me to get a
little bit better, you know, there is some kind of co-progress together. But if I am going to fight
with a guy that's just 10 times my capability and he just kills me, right? I don't get better
from that. There's not a, you know, similar kind of progress. The progress does involve a certain
kind of symmetry and the ability to navigate the situation. And so if you, the first question
with progress is progress for whom? Yeah. And then we would say progress of what, across what
metrics, across what way of assessing what is valuable. And progress that is progress for some
that is totally bad for others, but also bad for others that that sum depends upon is a very
narrow definition of progress. And even like the cancer cell that will eventually kill its own
host. It's a definition that is not actually long-term even viable for the interest of where
the progress seems to have been true. So I can begin to surmise why you and your team spent so
much time and effort writing this paper. This is a central chasm in our discourse that we need to
address. Yeah. So we've talked before that the metacrisis, you know, we have lots of different
global catastrophic risks just in the domain of ecology we're facing, right? We could really
mess the biosphere up just because of PFOS, just because of pesticide, just because of mining
waste, just because of biodiversity loss, just because of damage to oceans and dead zones and
coral, like we have lots of different from the extraction side and the pollution side,
catastrophic risks that are the result of our success at progress.
And by the way, all those things you mentioned are considered externalities that are currently
not priced in our decisions and our success metrics at all. And what is the cost of the
Great Barrier Reef? Like what should the value of it be? What should the value of healthy soil
microbes be? Well, everything dies without soil microbiology. But like everything dies without
air and the cost of air is nothing. And the reason the cost of air is nothing is because
everybody still has access to it. And I can't patent it. I can't have differential access to
it. So it's just no need to bother putting a price on it. But that also means that it gets
damaged through industrial process continuously through air pollution, through
burning things where you're using up the O2 and turning it into CO2, etc.
And there is a slight decline in oxygen globally because of the burning of fossil fuels and much
higher in the oceans. Ocean oxygen has declined 2% in the last 50 years.
Obviously, the O in the CO2 is there was carbon. There were hydrocarbons that were getting burned,
which means oxidized, right? So of course, you're going to have those things happen together.
It's very interesting. So not just the most important things like the soil microbiology and
the phytoplankton and the air that we are rapidly destroying that are the
most priceless, priceless things there could be, right? But if you look at people's deathbed
reflections at what they said was meaningful, and I was very fortunate when I was growing up,
my mom took me to old folks' homes to spend time with them. And I got to hear a lot of
deathbed reflections and it was very influential in my life. The highlights of what people say was
worth it had nothing ever to do with anything that the market ever gave them. And everything it had
to do with was only the things that could occur in the time that they were not an agent of the
market, where they were not working, producing, etc. It had to do with their time with their family,
their time with loved ones, their time in nature, their time in religious experience.
But the market can't supply those things very well, so it doesn't value them at all.
And it emphasizes reward circuits that it can monetize.
So I don't want to diverge too much from your paper, but if there were a billionaire, I mean,
there's multi-polar traps, but there's also social traps. And if there were a billionaire
listening to this agreeing with the logic that you're laying out, but saying, I'm powerless to
change my behaviors in trying to maximize my own Bitcoin fiat currency lead over my competitors,
because everyone else is doing it this way. So I see the world as being very messed up and getting
worse. Yet for me, in my position, I'm doing the thing that is best for my family, irrespective of
what the future is. How do we get beyond those, I call them the 1500 elites in the world, have to
recognize this trap that you're describing. So the idea of an externality, that we're building
a technology or a business or a law or a nonprofit or whatever to do something, we're building it to
try to usually solve some problem where we can assess that in a narrow metric, whatever that is,
or a small handful of metrics. But that technology and the supply chains that make it and the power
dynamics it confers, whatever do other stuff, they affect other stuff other than the stuff we
intended to affect. And a lot of it ends up being negative, we call those externalities.
There can be positive externalities too. And that's an important thing to consider.
So there's this story that it's impossible to forecast externalities because the world is so
complex and you couldn't possibly know in advance. So all we can do is make something that is
innovative and awesome. And then when we see the problem work to solve it, and the continuous
solving of problems is what humanity's here for and part of progress. This is gibberish.
Right? This is just total gibberish. But it is self-motivated gibberish for the people who did
not want to try to anticipate the externalities or didn't want to admit them because they were
going to privatize gains and socialize losses and then later say it's impossible to predict
what the externalities would be. So I think it was a Dow that just got a $10 billion
lawsuit settlement for PFOS remediation that they have to pay like $10.3 billion.
Which is significant. And it's because some of the investigative journalism showed that not
only is PFOS in every drop of rainwater in the entire world, in Antarctica and
on all the continents and is it on all the water surface areas and is it not just affecting human
health but it's affecting all biology down to the soil microbes in the phytoplankton in ways we
can't understand all of. And it doesn't break down. There are no biological processes because
it was built as an industrial product to be a thing that doesn't break down to resist corrosion
and to resist all of the various types of things. Okay. So just I think it might have
actually been Minnesota, your state. Just one state's PFOS remediation was estimated at costing
$20 billion if they were going to try to use known technological methods to get the PFOS out.
So this $10 billion from the primary producer globally is a joke. I can send the stats but
it was something like $16 trillion a year to do total PFOS remediation over the course of a decade.
So the entire global GDP to remediate one class of chemicals. It doesn't include
agricultural chemicals and mining chemicals and everything else.
Well, that explains why we're not doing it. Okay. So stay with me. I'm trying to construct
something and taking a circuitous route. So it turns out that
investigation showed that that company knew PFOS was a carcinogen before it was ever put
into the environment or put into any industrial application. They hid the science. It had caused
cancer in the lab rats. And so there was just like a direct cover up. And the same thing was true
with leaded gas, right? The people who were inventing leaded gas were all getting sick in the
laboratory. It was known to be toxic, et cetera. And there was just direct suppression of that.
And if that's true, and I believe you that it is, why were those people suppressing it? Because
of short-term gain for them and the winners write the history books sort of story?
Yeah. So the short-term gain is, hey, if I stop this engine knocking thing and engines are the
new thing, cars are everywhere, right? And I own the patent on this tetraethyl lead thing and I can
add it to all gas that's needed by everything. We're going to make a lot of money. And probably
it's not going to be that bad for people. It'll be an air. It'll be dispersed. It'll be the parts
per million will be low, whatever. So there are lots of times where we actually know the harm
something is going to cause, whoever it is, industry, whatever, ahead of time and do it anyways,
cover it up. That's a known thing. There are other times where we just don't try very hard
to do an analysis of externalities because if we put money and resource into looking at,
is this going to harm things? And the other competitor doesn't, they're going to get first
mover advantage. They're going to later be able to say, we couldn't have possibly known.
And the money that I put into seeing those harms might just tell me not to do the project. And now,
how do I get a return on that money that I put in? And if it does show me a safer way to do the
project, it's probably so much later and with less margins than the other thing. And so at minimum,
there's a kind of negligence of if we do do diligence, we do this box checking plausible
deniability version, because we know we're going to be able to privatize the gains and socialize
the losses, right? The Apple's a $3 trillion company that played a major role in smartphones
in everybody's pockets. And the fact that teen body dysmorphia and suicide and
porn addiction and mental health issues and everything went up, they don't have any liability
for that. And so they also have no incentive to really limit their privatized gains to
avoid causing those externalities.
Let me interrupt you one more time, which is en route to the billionaire question.
So like you said, in the day of unleaded gasoline, they were able to make a lot of money and they
thought, oh, well, this will be disperse, it won't be that big of a deal. But now, I think a lot of
people that work at corporations that are paying attention to the metacrisis and the human predicament
and climate and oceans and PFAS and social inequalities and addictions and everything else,
they have to be in these boardrooms wondering, this stuff is a little bit louder, the externalities
are more obvious than they used to be. This is a different question that I would love to answer,
but if I do it, I'll never get back to your first question. Keep going, keep going. Remember it.
It's exactly the next place to go. Okay. One is about
dark triad traits and sociopathy, the other is willingness to be complicit with it.
Okay. Please continue. Which are basically the two types of psychology that are conditioned for in
the system. Whoa. Can you briefly describe dark triad again? I've done it on a frankly, but maybe
you could describe it. Yeah. Dark triad is the three qualities of sociopathy, narcissism, and
Machiavellianism. And then sometimes it's referred to as the dark quad, where sadism is added as a
fourth. And these are like particularly dark aspects of human psychology that can co-occur. And
so we're not looking here at a DSM diagnosis of a narcissist, meaning narcissistic personality
disorder within cluster B or sociopathic personality disorder. It's sets of traits that
people can have higher or lower amounts of. And the same person in different environments can have
higher or lower amounts of, you put a really lovely person in a terrible prison and they're,
they better develop these traits, they're probably going to die, right? They're adaptive in some
environments. And so people can look this up more, but narcissism is roughly kind of an inflated
sense of their own entitlement, their own importance, their leadership worthiness, that kind of thing.
Sociopathy is a lack of empathy for other people. Not really caring to take their worldview, not
really asking, will this be progress for them? Not feeling remorse if they end up being where the
externalities land and harm is caused. And Machiavellianism is the ability to think strategically
through, you know, a complex play, right? So if that Machiavellianism is in service to
self-oriented goals, self-aggrandizing, expanding goals that are not that attuned to others,
you get problems with that thing, right? But those also make great leadership qualities
for the multi-polar trap version of progress. And there's some...
Especially in an institutional structure where we have corporations and things like that relative to
500 or 1,000 years ago. Well, the corporation, I mean, it's a great example, right? So
14th Amendment was really, everybody knows, to give personhood rights to Black people,
following the Emancipation Proclamation and the end of slavery. It was for personhood rights for
things that had not been considered persons. Black people were not considered persons during
slavery. And the loophole in what was so obviously to give personhood rights to
people who had been previously slaves was then used to give personhood rights to corporations,
by corporations, that saw the legal advantage of being able to have all of the due process and
everything the persons have. And I think in the first year after the ratification of the 14th
Amendment, the Supreme Court saw something like 15 cases associated with the 14th Amendment,
associated with Black people, and it saw something like 350 cases associated with businesses
and corporate personhoods. And the corporate person, the entity that is the public corporation,
is an obligate sociopath. It can't not...
So is a corporation an institutional equivalent of a human dark triad trait?
This is what I'm saying. A corporation is a... You can think of it as a cybernetic entity,
right? The operating agreement, the legal agreements of what it is plus its whole operational
machinery does not depend on any particular person because you have an org chart and if you lose
this assembly line worker or this cheap marketing officer, you replace them with a kind of market
equivalent all the way up to a CEO. And so the entity is controlled by... The cybernetic entity
kind of controls itself aligned with these legal operating agreements, not controlled by anybody
in particular, and recognized as a corporate person. So it protects the directors from legal
responsibility of what that corporate person does, even though of course it couldn't do it without
running on the people. And then you have a fiduciary responsibility to maximize profit,
which is a measure of extraction. And of course that corporate person doesn't have empathy.
It cannot. It's not a sentient thing, right? It is a cybernetic thing, but it's not a sentient
thing. So it doesn't have empathy. It does have planning, i.e. Machiavellianism. It does have
my own growth should continue forever and I should be the market dominator. That's narcissism.
And so yes, it is an obligate sociopath and it is actually legally required to maximize its
shareholder return on profit by the directors of the organization. So the idea that you cannot
possibly anticipate externalities is not true, but it's a useful idea of those who are going to
benefit by causing externalities. And the people who benefit by causing externalities because
they're privatizing all of the gains get to write the narrative in the same way the history was
written by the winners of war previously. It costs a lot of money to affect the narrative of the
world. You see this in political campaigns. You see it in marketing campaigns. But if an idea is
spreading, who is writing all that stuff and who's up regulating it and who's paying for the
commercials and who's getting the data to do the personalized microtargeted ads and who's...
So the ideas that spread are not just spreading through a kind of natural selection of the goodness
of the idea. They are getting oftentimes amplified by interests that want those ideas to spread.
Duh, right? We know this. This is how political campaigns work. This is how advertising works.
This is how propaganda works. This is how, you know, on and on. This is how religion works,
right? There's a lot of money that goes into proselytizing and getting the ideas to spread.
So there are a lot of ideas that are marketing and or apologism for the dominant class in terms of
power. So the dominant narrative is usually apologism for the dominant power system.
And that's why when we were in the age of colonialism, the narrative was that it was
generous of us to bring this colonialism to civilize the savages. It's why we were in the
age of spreading Christendom through all of the various processes that bringing Christendom to
all of the non-Christians was the most charitable good act we could do in the same way that,
like when we talk about externalities, when Facebook was in its early phases,
there were people like, you know, Jared Laney famously was saying this very publicly, but there
were people coming from the McLuhan School and, you know, coming from various, coming from the
Mumford School who were saying, hey, look, this technology where you're monetizing people's
attention and you're going to race to effectively monetize their attention. And unlike where TV
commercials did that, but it was the same for everybody, you now get to have them interact
with it, to gain personalized info, to split test how sticky you monetize their attention,
a lot of the things that are going to engage their attention more are going to be limbic hijacks.
There are going to be things that make the person scared or horny or distracted or
in-group, out-group identity or whatever it is. And this is going to be really bad for society.
It's not that no one was saying that then. It was being said, it was being ignored, it was not
being studied and researched and pursued because, and then later they get to say, we couldn't have
possibly known it was going to polarize society and break democracy and decrease everyone's
attention spans. So we couldn't have possibly known as a bullshit story. If you think about,
well, am I saying that you can't anticipate everything? Of course not, but am I saying you
can do a million times better than we even attempt to do now? Yes, of course. So in the process of
developing a new technology, say, could we proceduralize thinking through the total set of
effects, not just the intended set of effects in the market benefits of those, but thinking through
if this technology really takes off and goes to its full scale? What is the pressure of that on
all the supply chains to make it? And what is the environmental effects of that? What are the
geopolitical and et cetera effects? If people use it, is it conferring some power? If so,
what other thing is it obsolete? How will that change power dynamics, et cetera? You just kind
of think it through. Now, we have a process that we've developed called yellow teaming. Red teaming
has now become pretty famous, which is you're wanting to do something, you want it to succeed.
Red teaming is a process you can do to see how it might fail, how somebody could beat it or how
it might fail. Yellow teaming is if it succeeds, where might it mess other things up? So could we
yellow team? Well, yes, you're not going to predict everything, but you predict a lot of the things,
and then you keep watching. And when you notice other things, you procedurally internalize them.
Now, in the same way, all this was the buildup to the billionaire question,
the long buildup. The people in a multipolar trap
who are at the front of the race could stop the multipolar trap,
but they don't want to because they believe they can win. So they use the multipolar trap
as a story of their own lack of power to do anything else as plausible deniability.
The littler guy cannot necessarily stop the multipolar trap,
but someone who's at the leading edge of an arms race, if they wanted to apply the same energy and
same sophistication to agreements, to pursue, because of course, there's a situation that if
my country becomes more secure relative to other countries, which means develops better weapons,
it automatically makes everyone else less secure. So now they have to do the same thing. And
it just means that you have an arms race of increasing weapons forever and increasing
budgets going to it forever, which is great for defense contractors. It's actually great
for GDP and it's bad for everything else. Now, if we could just say, let's make an agreement to
all spend less on weapons, we can be proportionally less, proportionally less such that relative
security changes. Well, of course, people say, well, we can't possibly do that. We couldn't get
China. We couldn't get Russia. There's no way to enforce it, et cetera. And we're saying that right
now with regard to AI. Well, even if we wanted to stop this thing from advancing that has,
that accelerates every global catastrophic risk, we couldn't possibly, because there's so many
places racing and we couldn't stop China and blah, blah, blah. Therefore, the only possible
answer is to win the multipolar trap because losing at it is too bad. If you look at the
resources we invest in figuring out AI, if we invested those same resources in actually creating
healthy diplomacy where we were not assholes to our international neighbors and really tried to
create global coordination to bind the multipolar trap, we could. And so the billionaire that says,
well, I don't know how to solve the problems of the world. I'm too small, right? It's a
hundred trillion dollar economy. I'm almost nothing. I'm this little guy. I couldn't solve the
problems of the world. Therefore, me continuing to just pick up all the game theory tokens I can
under a world of increasing uncertainty, the optionality of that is what's best for me and my
family. Look at how much time you spent figuring out how to gather all those optionality tokens,
understanding markets, understanding how to do lobbying, understanding your industry,
understanding financial markets, et cetera. And look at how much time you spent trying to say,
if I applied all of that same energy, time, thoughtfulness, resource to solving some of the
great problems, could I? You have not put enough time to say that you couldn't possibly. It's just
not in your interest. This is what Jeremy Grantham's big point at the end of our podcast was, and I've
talked to him about it subsequently. He wants the elites, the rich people to divert their attention
to the ecological crisis. Not only climate, but plastics and oceans and many other things,
because they haven't. They're unaware it's just out there, and it's a big drive of his and some
others, and fingers crossed because that's what we need. And yet, I've encountered so many more
people who are conscious of what's happening to the environment. But like you just said,
they plan to give away some of their money in the future, but for now, they're focused on their
investments, and they want to have a little bit more so that they can give more to good causes
in the future, which I just scratched my head when I hear that. But you could understand
someone listening to this past hour. You've just articulated that winners write the history books,
and the situation is so bizarre and scary and complex right now that if I don't have an answer,
I might as well just try to be a winner, which means more optionality tokens.
Yes. And I think there is a, I mean, that is definitely the state of AI in development,
very centrally. It's definitely the state of like the posturing in geopolitics.
And just financial markets, it's the way of that too.
Yeah. Now, if you look at that path of winning and realize it's actually self-terminating,
and it's not even a win for you, that could be the beginning of a pause.
And then if you look at that, okay, so, you know, people talk about like what the
biggest Nobel Prize you could want to win, the biggest problem to solve for humanity
oftentimes is like cure for cancer. If you look at the graphs of incidents of different types
of cancers from 1950 till now, you see a rise in heaps of cancers, right? Lots of rise in endocrine
and reproductive cancers, in different kinds of childhood cancers, in very aggressive turbo
cancers. And that rise in those cancers in terms of year-over-year rise maps very closely to the
rise of carcinogenic chemicals put into the atmosphere. And so when you look at the 230
million chemicals in the database of the American Chemical Society, and you look at the huge number
of them that are put into the atmosphere and environment through the VOCs and the paint and
the walls and then the carpet to the industrial chemicals to the agricultural chemicals,
the percentage of them that are carcinogens is very high. The other ones are neurotoxins
or endocrine disruptors or whatever. So correspondingly, the increased rate of autoimmunity
of autism and Alzheimer's and neurodegenerative disease of infertility and reproductive failure
follow those curves quite closely. Is that the only factor? No. Is that a major factor? Yes.
The other factors are also the result of the progress of this society in other ways,
like the processed foods that follow similar curves that mess up the microbiome and micronutrient
profiles of the body and stuff like that. In your paper, you make a point of highlighting
the Haber-Bosch process and crop yields and food, and that's been viewed as progress,
but there's a whole lot of stuff it doesn't include.
Yeah, so I want to stay with the cancer case for a minute.
If you look at all of the scientific advancements trying to cure cancer,
why don't they start with how do we stop putting carcinogens in the atmosphere?
And in the food supply, where there are continuous studies by groups like the Institute for
Environmental Medicine that show there's roughly 300 carcinogens, the industrial toxins that are
carcinogenic in the breast milk of nursing mothers in the United States and whatever.
Why don't we work on getting those out? Because the vast majority of cancers we have are
anthropogenic. They're caused by human activity. We don't need to try to solve cancer in abstract,
like let's start with that, and oftentimes the right problem solving is reversing something
that was already the wrong path, but I can't patent that. I can't market that very well.
The new pharmaceutical solution that I can patent that doesn't address the upstream causes at all
might have enough ROI to pay for the research that I need to do.
But if there's a thousand of these entities out there and 990 of them
take the higher road, and why are we putting these chemicals in there? Let's do it a different way.
It's those other 10 that decide to do it in our current institutional corporation structure,
and it's just like Genghis Khan.
Okay, so this is important.
If we build new types of energy, but we don't create both cultural values and particularly
law that binds the use of the other energy, we'll just use all the energy because more energy is
awesome. More energy means more GDP means more, you know, all the things associated with what
interests of power. So creating a new thing that is supposedly more positive in a way is
not actually solving the problem if you're not binding the harmful thing because you will just
get both, and it'll end up being market diversification and more total market size. Similarly,
like the organic food movement has been awesome in a lot of ways. So there's a lot of people who
shop at the Whole Foods and buy organics and want there to be less pesticides and whatever,
and yet more pesticides have been used every single year during that entire time. So clearly,
it's not actually decreasing total pesticide use because we're bringing increasing amounts of
pesticides to conventional agriculture, to the developing world and the populations, whatever.
So it just, okay, it's like, great, we will add that organic niche market on top of the
existing market and get more total market share. There has to be more of a focus of actually binding
the things that have to stop. And so when you're mentioning if somebody does that thing,
the interests of everyone else who want to, again, if there were nine tribes that were
really wanted peace and wanted to be in peaceful arrangement and trade and whatever with each
other, and they saw an early phase of another tribe moving in another direction and they did
interfere and not let it continue in that way, they could possibly have peace for everybody.
And that actually becomes the obligation. So like I said, we have a, the system that emerged in
the context of power competition selects for people who are oriented to power competitions
and other people who are complicit with it. Those are the two things it selects for.
And is that dynamic that you just described, what underpins Malak, Watiko, Kojana,
Scottie, the super organism?
Yes. The generative dynamic can be described a couple ways. One is
humans get conditioned by their environment, right? I grow up in a tribal culture. I grow up
in a modern technological culture. I grow up in a city in the dark ages, whatever. I'm going to be,
I'm being conditioned by the environment I'm in, in terms of my language, my worldview,
my technological capabilities, desires, identities, all those things. So the civilization is conditioning
the minds, which means patterns of perception, identity, value, and behavior of the people.
And those minds are in turn creating more of the types of things that they were conditioned to.
And so there is a feedback loop between the individuals influencing the whole,
the whole influencing the individuals, and there's a particular thing that is getting
upregulated. So let's talk about theory of hyperagents for a minute.
I think we mentioned this somewhere before, but we'll do it again quickly.
The Genghis Khan's and the Alexander's and the Caesar's were obviously different types of people
than most of the people that either worked for them or they killed, right? And the kings following
that and the robber barons and industrialists and whatever, they all have that in common,
up to today of that how much power they have consolidated relative to most everyone else
is extreme. And they're, and it's not arbitrary. There were things about their psychology that
had them pursue that and be good at it. So agency, our own ability to achieve our goals and do the
stuff we want to do, you could say that a hyperagent is someone whose focus is maximizing returns on
agency. They want to do the things that make them capable of more doing, right? They want to,
and they want to use their- Towards what end? Winning?
This is a great question, right? Towards what end is, you were just mentioning it with your
billionaire friends who were like, well, the future has a lot of uncertainty. The money gives
me the ability to live in one place or another place to build this kind of tech or that kind of
tech to employ tech or people or land. It gives me the ability to influence minds through media.
It's a generalized optionality token. So I'm just going to keep working to grow my total
optionality tokens so that I always have the maximum freedom and the ability to do what I want
to do every scenario. Now, one of the reasons is that, one of the reasons is winning, one of the
reasons is their own fear of death and wanting to be remembered in the history books forever,
whatever, right? Some set of reasons that are associated with
personal expansion of power. So a hyper agent maximizes kind of return on agency. It's important
to state that return on capital can be return on agency, but it's not necessarily. There are
hyper investors who are really good at applying capital to create more capital, but are not using
that to influence the world to a vision of the world they want beyond that heavily, right?
Like Warren Buffett was not trying to change laws and politics and culture all around the
world. He was a hyper investor, not really a hyper agent, whereas Kissinger had much less
money personally than Buffett ever did, but had radically more influence on world systems
through the influence of a lot more total money of state funds and whatever.
So hyper agency is the more fundamental concept, which is kind of the return on agency. There are
people who are also motivated to do that. They're just not good at it, and maybe they become like a
very controlling middle manager or a gangster or something, but the people who are good at it are
good at scaling. And that's through both the influence of a lot of people and the employment
of technology. And that can be social technology, like writing laws and influencing capital,
which are social technologies, creating narratives like the rise of Nazism or Mao or whatever,
right? So like, but they're good at being able to scale. So the kind of tier one hyper agents,
the ones that have the most influence in the world, are not just oriented to maximize returns on
agency, but they're good at it. And if you look at the distribution of traits that humans have
in a population like empathy, they'll usually follow a Gaussian distribution, right? You'll
have most people are here, they have some level of empathy for some circle of people,
you know, kind of average. There are Bodhisattvas on one side that are hyper empathetic, and there
are sociopaths on the other side, no empathy. And we could also take say Machiavellianism,
how good someone is at like long gaming chess. And there will be most people are kind of here,
you have some that are really amazing strategists, and some that really suck at it. And
there is a kind of naive sociology that looks at the Gaussian distribution of human traits and
tries to explain the world by that distribution of traits, and it doesn't work. And it's because if
you look at the distribution of power, which is what's influencing the world, it doesn't have a
Gaussian distribution, it has a power law distribution. The power law distribution means a
few people over here have almost all the influence. That's true in money. It's true in the stats of,
you know, the differential between the top wealthiest and the bottom poorest people continue
to get more and more extreme. And the graphs that look at the power law distribution of money
from 1960 to 2000 to now are amazing how much deeper that curve gets. But I think it's something
like the top eight wealthiest people have more money than the bottom 4 billion people currently.
Right. But does that power law also work within the top 1%? There's another power law within that
top 1% where 20% have 80% of the wealth? Yeah, obviously 1% is a lot of people,
8 people having more wealth than 4 billion people is pretty significant. And so this is true in
terms of military power. Not that many people can push nuclear buttons. This is true in terms of
media power. This is true in terms of financial power. This is true in terms of technological
innovation capabilities is that there's these kind of power law distributions. And so the people
at the top of the power law distribution explain the shape of civilization much more than everybody
does. And those people don't come from the center of the bell curve of almost any psychological trait.
And in ancestral times, we still had the same Gaussian curves, but we didn't have the energy
surplus and the scale because power, you know, 10,000 years ago with 150 people or whatever,
and power in nature, there is only so much endosomatic energy that an organism or a human,
pre-modern human could use. And so it's the scale of size of people and the civilization
coupled with this giant dollop of historical magic dumped in our economy a couple of hundred
years ago that allows this accordion to spread upwards. They didn't have the same Gaussian
distribution. Okay, why? Okay, so going back to this idea that the people who are at the top
of the power law distributions that have the most influence are not at the center of the bell curve
of psychological and behavioral traits. They're usually like two standard deviations to one side.
More sociopathic, less empathetic, more driven and motivated towards narrow goals,
better at technology and propaganda and long range strategic thinking and whatever, right?
And just to interject there, did those people design our structures or did our structures
self-select for those? Recursively both, right? Someone is born into structures. Someone who
wants to be at the top of the power law is a desire. It's a particular type of desire that
really, really wants that and that is good at it and can win enough win-lose games to ladder climb
to the very top of it and can drive enough externalities and rivalry and whatever to get there.
So they are, the current systems are selecting for the people that can win at the current systems,
but then those people in turn change the systems in a way that continues to optimize their winning,
which is just like evolution. Is the animal created by its environment or does it niche
create to make more of an environment that's good for it? So we are both being shaped by the
niche and the niche creating in turn. But the other thing is that it doesn't just mean that
they're making, so that looks like somebody gets to a high position in finance and law
in the current system and then they change laws. They do, they remove Glass-Steagall,
they do financial deregulation, they interpret the 14th Amendment as corporate personhood rights,
they interpret the L'Oreal case or whatever as to do fiduciary responsibility for profit
maximization. So the people who can change the system to continuously be better, they decide that
bailouts for the banks that failed and too big to fail and golden parachutes made sense.
So it's simultaneously or like someone is good at war and then they innovate at war.
Right? So it is this recursion. Now the people who are in those top positions are not only
changing the system to be better for them, they also are obviously invested in that success. So
anyone else who would be very successfully doing something that would mess that strategy up,
they have a maximum incentive to make sure don't succeed.
I did it frankly a few months ago. I forgot what the main topic was, but I talked about
dark triad and in my research it said that around 10% of our modern population is dark triad,
but that that is probably an underestimate because of someone that's Machiavellian is not going to
answer those surveys in the way that would show that they're a dark triad. But are you saying that
10,000 years ago, 50,000 years ago, 10% of our population were not that combination of traits?
It's something modern?
Look at the story of how the Spartans raised their kids.
The, you know, they're kind of famous stories that if when the infant came out, if it looked like
it had any deformities or was small or a run kind of thing that it was killed right away,
infanticide of ones that didn't look like they would be kind of maximally dominant.
And then how early they were being trained in warfare and, you know, the process that happened
when they were six where they had to kill adult slaves with tools. And if the adult slaves killed
them, great, they're dead. But only the ones that make it through are the ones that have this much,
you know, kind of vicious capability. So is that conditioning the gout? If you're in Spartan
society, is that conditioning the Gaussian distribution of everybody?
Of course it is. If you are in a, and this is why looking at the kind of extreme outliers of
the things that we think of as human nature under different conditioning is so important,
is you can have the Jains who across the whole population, nobody hurts bugs.
I met some Jains when I was in India. They were just wonderful, wonderful human beings.
Yes. And so it's clearly not just a Gaussian distribution or a genetic thing because you
can have an entire culture where everybody who gets raised there doesn't hurt bugs.
And then you can have the child soldiers in Darfur, Liberia or whatever where if you
make it to adulthood, you have killed people. You have packed people apart with machetes.
So our culture is recursively building out the percentage of our population that exhibit
dark triad because of incentives and self-selection and other things, yes?
Yes and no. I would say that there are not, there's not the kind of data that I would
feel was meaningful to try to make really strong statistical claims. But I'll say some
things about trends that I think will feel intuitively resonant to most people.
The digital universe as a native universe generationally has narcissistic conditioning
pretty built in, meaning that if I'm in the woods, the woods don't rearrange themselves for
me. I can fall out of a tree and get hurt. I actually learned that there is this unforgiving
nature, Eric likes to call it, of reality that I have to actually respect it and interact with it
in a respectful way and it doesn't conform itself to me. If I have a digital universe where the
newsfeed is literally conforming itself to maximally entertain and engage me and I have an
infinite amount of options and I can just, all I have to do is this and the whole universe changes.
Now I'm in this universe, now I'm in this universe and it's maximized for my kind of dopamine
optimization. Do I have a world in which my conditioning is the whole world is supposed
to conform itself to what I'm interested in and I'm supposed to do very little and be able to
get lots of reward. So you're saying that what we assume is the good life and our own choice,
our own volition is actually manufactured demand by the winners in our current society?
Again, if we go to the old people on their deathbed reflecting on what was meaningful,
most of what the people spent their whole life pursuing is what they wish in reflection that
they had not spent their whole time pursuing. And most of the things that they called successes
and progress are not part of what is in their mind as they're dying that they wish they had
spent more time with. Well, that begs the question, at what point in their life could they have
realized that and made different decisions? And we will see times where someone decides to
leave the rat race and keeping up with the Joneses where every time they get a raise,
they increase their cost of living so they have to keep working more and paying someone else to
raise their kids because the other person charges less than they can make and on and on.
And where they're like, oh, fuck it, I'm out, I'm going to lower my cost of living and I'm going
to try to do something where I can spend time with my kids and I can spend time in nature
and I can reflect on why I exist at all before I die. And the sense of meaningfulness and
fulfillment almost always goes up when people do that, as does the harm footprint they cause on
the world to go down, as does the intimacy and meaningfulness of their relationships and the
quality of life of the people they touch. And where do those people fall on the behavioral
Gaussian distribution or who knows? Well, there, so like I said, the selection criteria selects for
people that lead things that end up winning at power and other people that are willing to
follow and participate with that thing. So, very famously in the Nuremberg trials of Nazis
after World War II, when the Nazis were being tried for the war crimes and they were all asked,
did you believe that everything you were doing was good? About 90% of the Nazis said
only at first. At first, we were, you know, we had been in terrible poverty in the Weimar Republic,
our kids couldn't eat and you know, etc. The Jews had all this wealth. And, you know, we believed
that we were getting supported to be able to, you know, do well for our people and whatever.
But as time went on, like no, we did not feel good about putting kids in gas chambers. And we
didn't feel good about seeing them starving, like we felt really bad about it. Like 90% of the Nazis
said no, I did not feel good about it. And then when they were asked, did you try to stop it,
they all said no. And then they quoted the same German phrase that translates to officer's orders,
I didn't have a choice. And yet of course, if 90% of them had all said that simultaneously,
which is a coordination failure here on their part, there would have been no holocaust. But
anyone on their own is like, if I try to defect, I'll get thrown in the gas chamber too. So it's
best for me and my family to just go along with it. It's kind of a gruesome microcosm of what we
face on so many levels today. Yes. And so the Ash conformity studies and the Milgram studies were
so important. And I think actually under represent how deep those principles are, right? The idea
that when the authority was telling the person, the scientific authority, hey, you're in a study,
do this thing, and we're doing electroshock therapy, whatever, that the person following
authority would shock the other guy to death. Because of I don't have a choice, the authority's
telling me. Or in the other one, in the Ash ones, that if 10 people in the room were all saying,
this line is longer than that line, the person would defect on their own understanding to go
along with that. These are very powerful insights. And the smoke filled room. If there's smoke coming
under the door and other people don't notice it or don't care about it, I don't speak up.
We are social creatures, social conformity as a core driver.
If there was, so imagine that you have that tin tribes and kind of harmony world. And for
whatever reason, somebody hits his head, gets traumatic brain injury that knocks his empathy
out. And now he's an asshole and wants tribal warfare where it was not necessary before and
figures out how to try to make a story that it'll be in everybody's interest because the other
tribes are really plotting against us even though they aren't or whatever. You could imagine a
scenario where the other people were like, dude, you're crazy, like, no, we're not going to do
that thing. And you need to chill out or you're going to get banished. And that happened, right?
That happened a lot. But if that guy succeeds, because he scares people enough, right? Let's
say he's really big or whatever it is or kind of brutal, that nobody wants to stand up because
even though if everyone stood up together, they could deal with him individually, nobody wants
to stand up to him, you can start to have a situation where everyone else has their survival
strategy being not like getting the goods that guy is going to deliver. He's going to deliver
safety and he's going to deliver economic growth and he's going to deliver whatever and you don't
want to piss that guy off. And so you get a kind of fealty that Stockholm syndrome
with that kind of leadership and also a recognition that if you go against it,
it's not going to go well for you and still won't change the scenario. So then again,
you have this plausible deniability best for me and my family is just go along with it.
But that combination of distortion, like profound ethical distortion and leaders
and complicity in others and the environments that were already created in power conditioning
those psychologies and then the psychologies to get to the top of the power stack conditioning
more of systems that continue to do that, the recursion on all of that is the thing that we
call mo-lock or whatever it is the set of system dispositions that continue to orient in a particular
direction. And this is why they have continued to orient in the direction of more extraction,
more technological power, more military capability, more money, more and its advancement
technologically. Is it progress in terms of good? Well, obviously none of the species we made extinct
through doing it thinks so. And obviously none of the animals and factory farms think so.
And obviously none of the, you know, some odd 50 million people that are in conditions of slavery
today doing forced labor to make that system work thinks so. No Native Americans in North America
think that the U.S. progress story was awesome. American descendants of slaves don't think the
progress story was awesome. And not only that, you know, like even the people who are winning,
so even the billionaire, his body is being exposed to the carcinogens that the industries have caused
that the medicine cannot solve. And
even if you look at the quality of life there, it is actually with decreasing actual fulfillment
and the replacement of fulfillment with mostly addictive flashes, right? Reward circuits that
provide kind of addictive flashes, whether that's, you know, food, drug or new yacht or new position
of market dominance. Now, this is actually another part that's so important. I want real progress.
I think it's a very important thing to see that we can grow and that we can add our life energy
to the world in a meaningful way. And
this is why really thinking about what would constitute actual progress, that the world is
better as a result of us having done this, better the world, not my tiny world, not better in this
metric, but the world long term, thinking seven generations ahead, thinking about all the other
species we inhabit it with, thinking about all of the different aspects of self, like does my,
did my cell phone enhance a lot of things? Yes, did it diminish a lot of other things, even for me?
Yes. So what does better mean if I really kind of think and feel through that well?
And so I want us to pursue real progress. I want us to rescue it from the kind of bullshit progress.
But also in a healthy life, progress is not as important. It's not as central because if life
is fulfilling now, if life is a gift now, I'm not exclusively focused on making it better in the future
and making it better that corresponds to winning usually. Or, and I'm not even focused on changing
it as much as I am also maintaining it and appreciating it. So progress gets a
undue emphasis when there is a disconnection from being where now is miserable, so good has to be
in the future by me doing some new thing. And if you, if you think about the unlikely miracle
of our existence, right, and you think about the billions of years of stuff that had to happen
to make a biosphere with the complexity that we could exist,
and you think about the miracle that we get to see colors and we get to hear birds and we get to
exist and that we get to love children and we get to like all the things and
and appreciating what already is that is so profoundly unlikely that took billions of
years to make and so much activity, like there should be most of our life should actually just
be an odd appreciation at what is and then the desire to maintain and protect it because it is
so unlikely and so much work went into bringing this about. But nobody makes the history books
for maintaining things. They make the history books for making new stuff or destroying stuff.
Or you put the two together, creative destruction, which is the creed of society right now. But
like 99% of life should actually be maintenance. 99% of life is you feed the kids and the meal
that you made then is gone and then you make another meal and you wash the plates and then
they're dirty again and the but you're actually maintaining the sacred thing. And then true
progress is where I can add a new thing that really is factoring everything good for the whole.
Then yes, I will add those things and that's progress, but it has to really be good for the
whole factoring everything that's involved. And most of my attention is actually needed to maintain
all that's happening. So I both want to kind of like reclaim what progress is, which is important
and sacred, but also move it out of the center and that it's only in the center in the same way
that like when someone is more unfulfilled, they have more addictive tendencies because they're
looking for a hit of something. When someone is more fulfilled, they have less addictive tendencies.
There is a way that when someone is in appreciation of what is and they're in meaningful intimate
relationships, the so much of the impulse of progress that is actually coming from emptiness
and the desire to be somebody. I got that Nobel Prize, I got that PhD, I got that position,
I won, I whatever is a compensation for actual like trauma and emptiness.
And so it's not only that it's not authentic progress in the world, it's that where it's
even coming from in me is not aligned with the fullness of the world and adding fullness. It's
aligned with my own emptiness and the desire to do something that will fill that up that is not
the right thing. So it's the hungry ghosts are consuming alcohol and pizzas and building shopping
centers and getting stock options and all that to fill a trauma and a loneliness, not actually to
achieve something monumental that's great for society and the future.
Yes, but it will be sold as that.
So is there any evidence that the people that are in the dark triad or those people that are
riding high atop Moloch and the superorganism have a higher incidence of trauma and loneliness
and emptiness? I don't know stats on like ACEs, childhood trauma associated with those positions.
There are certainly plenty of very traumatized poor people and it's not like everyone responds
to trauma in the same way. The total nuances of how trauma ends up affecting someone are
not easy to put an algorithm together to predict. So someone is physically abused when they're
little and they grow up to physically abused children. Someone else is physically abused
when they're little and they grow up to be the most nonviolent person who doesn't ever want to be
like that. Maybe even to the place that as it's an overcompensation, they don't stand up enough.
Right? Someone else has the healthiest response and actually becomes a protector of children.
It is not necessarily saying that the people who are in the highest positions of power are most
traumatized, but they had types of trauma that oriented themselves to both power seeking and
types of education that oriented themselves to good insights about how to do power at scale
effectively. So I can tell you an n equals one experience. I was recently in India and I spent
a lot of time with 30 people every day chanting, singing, humming, eating, doing sports, doing
yoga, etc. And then I would go for bikes in the forest and record sounds of birds and I came back
and my addiction impulses were much lower because I had six weeks living on more of a
maintenance. I'm maintaining the thing. I don't need other things. And I was like, oh my gosh,
this is what we need to change the culture. But the other part was when I came back, it was a week
or two and I got sucked right back into the vortex of everything going on in this culture.
So we need both. We need the personal discipline and change in a community,
but we also need the infrastructure and the institutional change and that crucible.
Think about this. When you were in that environment with those people in India,
the reward circuits that you were experiencing on a day-to-day basis were
the type of pleasure, the type of reward that comes from intimate communion with other people,
that comes from listening to birds, that comes from people having authentic conversations that
don't have status climbing as part of them focused on meaningful and real things. It came from all
that, right? And so there's a fulfillment in that that is not oriented with how many likes
a thing got or how much we did this thing or whatever. Those things weren't available. I mean,
I had internet there, but there weren't all those other distractions except there were
parties with music and there were musical concerts every night of the week there. Those were the
options. Right. But someone's not craving the other thing because the reward circuits are full.
Exactly. Someone's actually in a state of fulfillment and they're in a state of fulfillment
for things that make them healthier, the relational network healthier,
and that can align with stewarding the world well. Now, if you go to an environment where
you go to a different environment where there's nobody around you and there's no real intimate
connections, and so again, we're social primates. This is such an important evolutionary thing is
that there wasn't a lone dude with stone tools in the Serengeti making it with the lions and the
hyenas. There were tribes of people that would make it and so the the idea of umbuntu, I am because
we are, that was this foundational concept of human beings before the thing we call civilization.
Right. I am because we are was like just at the most prosaic level, nature did not select for
individual sapiens. It only selected for groups of sapiens. Individual sapiens in evolutionary
environments were all dead. And so what's best for me that fucks the tribe is not a concept.
That's not a thing, right? What is best for the tribe that I can't exist without of? I am because
we are. I would not exist. I'd be dead without all of us. That's like the basic insight. So
I am because we are obviously just starts with I couldn't survive without us.
But then it's also deeper, which is I think in words that I didn't invent,
that all these other people invented. And but my own most intimate thing, my thoughts with myself
are in a language that I didn't make. I am my my thoughts were made by other people, right? The
language of my thoughts. My understanding of the world was transmitted to me largely by other
people. The tools that I use, the things that I benefit from the all of that, that I am almost
all the things I think of as I am because we are right because of things that were created.
Okay, now I have so many questions, but and then it goes deeper because the we was never
never just meant our tribe. It also meant nature to all our relationships and all our
relationships was all life and life didn't just mean biological, which is why they were
animistic. Those cultures were all animistic, the spirit of the sun, the spirit of the river,
the spirit of everything, because it was a very clear understanding. What would I be
without the tribe? I'd be dead. What would I be without the sun? I would have never existed.
What would I be without the galactic center around which the sun orbits? I wouldn't exist.
What would I be without the gravitational field? What would I be without the soil microbes? What
would I be without plants? What would I be without all of that? I wouldn't be. I, that is not the
emergent property of we, isn't even a thing. It's not even thinking well.
Fast forward to today and when I'm sitting around by myself lost in my thoughts, my thoughts are
in English, which is a language of the winners that I'm not even aware of everything that came
before that English was selected for in this progress, a story over the last few hundred years.
Is that also part of the, this story? Totally. So,
our Umwelt, our, the things that are in our awareness is the tiniest, tiniest sliver of a
fraction of what is real in universe. And so there's, you know, like within the progress narrative,
most people don't miss the being able to actually understand what the animals are saying
in the way that indigenous people have much more understanding what the animals are saying is
they're growing up in the environment listening to them, right? Most people don't miss that because
they never had it and they don't even realize they don't have it and they don't realize how
much more communicative and alive the forest is to someone who knows how to listen. And so
they are impoverished but they don't know it. And they don't miss having a bunch of people that they
can be completely authentic with because they've never experienced that. They've never been completely
authentic with any human being. They are always fucking withholding and lying to some degree
and always paying attention to appearance so they don't miss a thing they don't know exists.
And they don't miss what it feels like to have a body that doesn't have 300 petrochemicals in it
because they have never had a body that didn't have 300 petrochemicals in it and what real
vibrancy feels like they have no idea. This has rhymes and analogies to the movie The Matrix.
Yes. And so some people take the blue pill, right, because the reward circuits, even once they see
it. And so one, people have a hard time imagining that there was a life that was awesome full of
things that they have no experience of or even awareness that was a thing. There's a cool
documentary. I think it's called Everything is Rhythm that shows how in African tribes what,
when the way somebody was weaving and the way someone was cutting something and the
were actually all making music and dancing together, right? They were actually all in this
experience of nearly continuous rhythm and whatever they were doing and part of the
communication process that was not mediated through words and semantics. Like what does it
feel like to be part of a culture where everything you're doing is song and dance in coordination
with everyone and that you feel this kind of rhythm with each other and the rhythm with nature?
Most people have no idea that's a thing. And so many things like that. So it's hard to value
things that you don't even know exist. And it's hard to let go of the only hits of pleasure you've
ever had. And so even though when you look at the graph of the reported amount of suicide,
I mean, the amount, the recorded amount of suicide for teens proportional to the number
of hours per day they use their cell phone. And that as the number of hours goes from a half hour
up with each hour up, the rate of suicide goes up. The teen doesn't want to give up their phone.
They will completely fight to keep their phone and don't want to give up the pleasure hits they
get associated with the likes they get from the beauty filter on Instagram that is what drives
their body dysmorphia. Well, that right there is another microcosm of our entire GDP focused
super economic super organism culture. Yes, advancement is not better meant.
And if you have, if you, if you go back to Descartes, so I said I'd come back to modernity at some
point. So there has always been this story all that I wouldn't say always for a very long time
there's been this histories written by the winner and the winner usually says them winning was a good
thing. And, you know, Genghis Khan united the disparate Mongol tribes and Alexander the Great
and Caesar, you know, united and expanded their great kingdom and etc. So there was always that
element of progress, but it was also kind of bound with appreciation of certain types of tradition
associated with religion and whatever. Associated with modernity and kind of mostly getting like a
decreasing the role of religion and the then kind of rapid increase in scientific and technological
progress. The progress part became almost the entire story and the idea of progress through
these new institutions science, technology, industry, market, democracy, etc. became
like the dominant narrative. And if you go to Descartes and the separation of
the objective world that you can measure, we can all measure, we can get repeatable measurements
and we can apply science, the philosophy and the methodology of science. And that's the domain of
is, right? But that science can't say anything about the domain of ought because I can't measure
ought, right? I can't measure, we can't all independently measure, is that beautiful? Is
that good? I can independently measure how fast it is or how heavy it is or, you know, how much
kinetic energy it has or whatever. So where does the ought come in? So, you know, Descartes is like,
well, that's the domain of religion. And it can deal with that stuff. But science can't. And so
science is only going to deal with the is. Well, but the is is focused on
being able to reduce a domain of reality to a model that emphasizes mechanisms that both
allows me to predict things and then create the applied side of science, which is technology
that can control things. And so it's learn how leverage works to be able to apply levers to
build megalithic construction, right? It's learn how genetics work to be able to do genetic
engineering. It's learn how chemistry and thermodynamics and mechanics work to make internal
combustion engines. But if the applied side of is of science is engineering, what is a good
technology? Well, no, no, no, we can't do anything with that, right? So which thing gets built
is, well, where did the money for the research come from?
Somebody that has money that is seeking ROI on that money. And so you don't really get science,
you get the R&D arm of the market. Because the research money is going to be pursuing something
that generally has some goal that's associated with it. And so the profitable, extractive,
you know, whatever thing. And, you know, because science can't say what ought with its
methods, because of that division of the subjective universe and the objective universe,
which not all philosophies had, even the Greeks didn't divide those, right? And as far as westerns,
and definitely the Vedic system and the Taoist system and indigenous systems didn't divide
subject and object and make object that is measurable, repeatedly real with some methods and
the other either not real or, you know, whatever. So because when you're just focused on the objects,
there is no meaning. And I can't measure those things, right? I can try to measure a neural
correlate when someone says they're in an experience of intimacy, but that's not the experience of
intimacy. So when von Neumann wrote economics and game theory, it's important that it was those
two things in the book, von Neumann and Morgenstern, right? It was game theory, the formalization
of the mathematics of how to win at win-lose strategy games under uncertainty and the theory
of the market, which was, you know, application of that same principle. So what is a good choice?
Science can't answer, but game theory ended up becoming the best, closest thing to what a
scientifically congruent thing could say is the best answer or a good choice is the choice that
doesn't lose. And so under uncertainty, assume the other guy has more malicious intent, more
military and prepared to not lose under that scenario and, you know, on and on. And so that
definition of which has nothing to do with good, right? It just has to do with not a particular
kind of bad to me, you know, under that uncertainty. So if you can study the world down to the level
of mechanism where you can then engineer to the degree that you can land a rover on Mars,
and you can split the nucleus of an atom, and you can make AIs that can beat humans at war games,
and you can scale up industrial technology to planetary scales and extinct species at scale
and make new species with genetic engineering. That level of technological power in the domain
of is applied is not bound by what is actually good in some deeper understanding, where the only
good is that which wins game theoretically. That choice making system on that level of tech will
self terminate in the same way the cancer does in the same way so many earlier civilizations did.
And so the fact that we have such a powerful system of the study of is that can lead to all
that technology, we do have implicit within us the ability to have a comparably abstract and deep
and profound system of ethics or wisdom about the nature of odd to bind that other thing. I know
you've had Ian McGill Creston and the framework of the master in the emissary that the goal achieving
has to be bound by picking good goals. And it is not the analytical break all the parts into
pieces come up with the metric part that can figure out good goals. It's the field of I am
because we are. So is this a good goal for the totality of we? Am I perspective seeking and
feeling and then being engaged with the reality for everybody? Are they all at the table such
that it could be? So if we get incredibly powerful at goal achieving with shitty goals,
very narrow goals that are beneficial and then increasingly narrow metrics with increasing
harm externalization as we're passing thresholds of harm externalization capacity for the planet,
that thing terminates. So to steward that much goal achieving power, we must
meet it with what are good goals? What is actually progress? What is worth maintaining? What is
worth for sure protecting and maintaining? What do what should be reversed that already harmed
things where the actual progress would come from reversing some of the stuff not just making more
new stuff? So what if we had the ability to take a hundred or a thousand billionaires,
but not just billionaires, but the the social power equivalent modern day of Kissinger,
as you said earlier, and like in Clockwork Orange, like force their eyes open and watch this entire
episode, what would such a group of people and beyond be able to do from the moment we are in
2024 and you know the the meta crisis at its current state? What could we do to step more
towards authentic progress and the maintenance of just the good things that make our planet and our
civilization viable and and get rid of the the bad goals? So there's this quote from
General Smedley Butler and he called war as a racket. It's very famous. I'll read just the
beginning. It's long and people can go check it out. And you know I'm assuming people know what
a racket is. A racket is like a classic example is a protection racket where a gang will come
rough up a store so the store thinks that they need protection and the police aren't protecting
them and then other members of that same gang come offer them security services for sale.
And so they are protecting them from themselves for a fee. So they are basically manufacturing
the demand and then offering the supply. The amount, if you look at
how much of our modern market and market government system meets the criteria of creating a problem
that's a result of some part of market or technology that some other part of market
and technology will come to solve that will then simultaneously create new problems. The
whole thing being a racket is actually a very important insight. But with that definition
of a racket what he says here is war is a racket. It always has been. It is possibly the oldest,
easily the most profitable, surely the most vicious. It is the only one international in
scope. That's not true anymore. He wrote this in like 1881. Oh no, 19 something.
It's the only one in which the profits are reckoned in dollars and the losses are in lives.
Racket is best described I believe as something that is not what it seems to the majority of
the people. Only a small inside group knows what it's really about. It's conducted for the benefit
of the very few at the expense of the very many. Out of war a few people always make huge fortunes.
I mean again another microcosm of our situation. But now I'm seeing war in light of this conversation
as a progress narrative erasing parts of history and writing a narrative for the masses that
feels good. It sounds about right but is really divorced from what could be possible
given our history. Now people will say that I'm romanticizing indigenous life and don't I know
that there was infanticide and blah blah blah. I'm not romanticizing it. I'm saying that the
Hobbesian story is the villainization of it and that's definitely self-interested propaganda
that justifies evil and that there was obviously a humongous range of the way tribal people lived
over 200,000 years in different environments with different groups of people. Oh this was the
unsubstantiated thing I was going to say earlier. Now it comes back. So we were saying that there
was this kind of symmetry of power that happens through natural selection where the increase in
power happens through this evenly distributed mutation with co-selection. But that when we
start developing technologies that increase our let's say coordinated predative capability faster
than the rest of the environment it can also be increasing its resilience to it, then we can
over hunt an environment and rather than have our population shrink either start farming the
environment or move on to the next population move on to the next environment and start over hunting
it. So there is some indication though it does seem like the the jury's still a little bit out on
some of this that the extinction of a lot of the megafauna and the earlier hominids was the result
of sapiens success at this strategy meaning it was uh extinctionary including to the other kinds
of humans we could be inhabiting the world with early on. So the hypothesis I have is that the
early indigenous wisdom traditions were learning from some of those mistakes and there are certainly
indigenous stories that indicate this that when some of them have stories that when they saw the
destruction that they were able to cause with their stone tools they realized that they had
to bind them with wisdom and that the kind of wisdom traditions emerge to take more careful
responsibility and that there may have been something like one phase of a unrenewability
and then lessen that led to a more kind of sustainable phase. So that's the thing I'm
saying is I can't substantiate across the board but sounds probably at least part of the truth.
You increasingly talk about indigenous cultures, indigenous wisdom and you bring up examples
that I've never heard of. How do you learn all this?
There are obviously some books in paper studying this and there are increasingly
indigenous people who are becoming scholars who are also but who speak their native languages and
are translating it but I've also just pursued making friends with people of that type particularly
the ones who have studied their own histories and kind of understand modern anthropology,
evolutionary theory, sociology and can kind of explain the parallax on those ideas and this
is an area I actually really want to invest a lot more time and attention because the thing
that we call civilization has been around for a very short period of time. The thing we call
industrial civilization in even a shorter period of time, the thing we call civilization is fair
to call the domestication, the beginning of human domestication where the other thing was more
sapiens in the evolutionary environment. We call it wild now, it was not but they wouldn't have
called it wild and the domestication of humans at scale and the domestication of livestock went
together and this is actually really fascinating right which is the and we've talked about this
before that the emergence of the plow and kind of ox drawn or you know donkey or horse drawn plow
creating grain and surplus you could call the beginning of the Anthropocene where if I'm hunting
and gathering I don't want to change the ecosystem I want to partake in the abundance of the ecosystem
right like maybe within the trees a little bit but even if I am digging with a digging stick
like an early horticulture I can't do vast spaces so I don't need to clear cut land to
allocate it to agriculture. Once I get and grains aren't useful in small amounts
but once I can have an ox draw the plow and I can do these vast kind of row crops now I can get
enough grains and I can store them better than I could store other stuff that I can get this kind
of vast surplus so we can see why the the ox drawn plow was a massive advancement in the ability for
surplus which meant that you could grow a much larger population. It meant that you could
sin that surplus along war routes so that you could support much larger wars. It meant that you
could with that large population have more specialization and division of labor so you could advance
the total tech stack you know it means all of those things but with the emergence of the plow
was also the end of animism because in the hunter-gatherer life sometimes the animal kills me
sometimes I kill the animal just like in the predator-prey kind of relationships I can pray to
the spirit of the buffalo I can apologize for needing to take its body I can say when my body
dies and goes into the earth and becomes the grass that its ancestors will eat that we are part of
this great cycle of life and we breathe our spirit into each other but I can't domesticate that
buffalo into an ox and yoke it and beat it all day long and still talk about the great spirit of
the buffalo and so then we move to man's dominion over kind of models religions that the animals
god put us here to rule over they're all here for us dominion etc and the domestication of the
animals where their well-being didn't matter they were here for us also corresponds to the
beginning of slavery. So that's all those things you just mentioned are a story that the winners
are telling? Totally and it's why the indigenous narratives of the early civilization are very
different and it's that the agricultural revolution was not an awesome thing but
if the population that does that thing will become a larger population with more specialization
division of labor and then it will win in war against the cultures who don't so one of the
insights is that when a new technology emerges there's two insights here that are important
first is technology is not values neutral we've talked about this it actually changes human values
because in using it like if I go walking around in a forest with a camera what I perceive changes
because of holding the camera I'm looking at different things if I go walking around with a
gun my perception of the forest changes if I go walking around with an axe my perception of the
forest changes the affordance of that tool attenuates my attention to the things that that tool can do
something with and so the process of even engaging with the tool attenuates attention
right changes the nature of attention and then it also makes a different behavioral pattern beating
an ox all day long is very different than hunting it's it so I'm going to have agrarian methods
rather than hunter-gatherer methods I'm going to be dreaming and thinking and feeling in those
types of ways I'm going to be conditioning my nervous system based on the movement patterns
that my body is going through in those ways I'm going to have radically less complex total movement
patterns than I had in the other environment which leads to less complex and dynamic thought and
phenomenological patterns and on and on so and then of course I can't believe that the animal
is animistic and as soon as I do the dominion model then and they were here for us then the women
are here for the men and the lower classes are here for the upper classes and the slaves are here
for the slave owners and the and the what was a forest that we had the clear cut to turn it into
agland is all fine and so that model starts to develop so the first thing is the technology
is not values neutral it will code our attention and change our behaviors and as a result change
our psyches and societies and heaps of ways so the externalities of tech are not only physical
they're psychosocial the next thing is that if that thing confers advantage game-theoretic
advantage it becomes obligate because the people who don't use it will just simply lose in power
competitions even if what wins at power sucks for all kinds of metrics of what is beautiful and good
and so the technology is both mind altering value altering attention altering culture altering
behavior altering and obligate and this is why the Sabbath was about controlling the use of
technology and controlling productivity this is why wisdom around when a new technology came out do
we build this or not and if so how do we use it how do we change those patterns to be considered
is necessary and if you do not have that then everyone becomes the result of dominant culture
dominant technology because it has to the whoever is best at running the system of technological
power and that was cavalrymen at the time of Genghis Khan and it was industrial tech at the
time of Rockefeller and it was computer tech at the time of Gates and it was the people who it is
now at the time of AI and etc whoever is best at the power associated with the tech stack will
also then determine the narratives and they will be narratives that support that power stack as good
So I know you and your organization are working on some pretty important projects yet you spent
the time these last few months to write this paper on immature versus authentic progress
presumably because you think it's critical that people understand this and think about it and
presumably because you see some sort of a maybe thin but narrow but a path forward
where we can head towards a more authentic progress for our fellow humans alive on the
planet today and in the future can you outline that or are there still foundational pieces?
Yeah so
there are many famous authors who have contributed to the progress narrative and of why
antibiotics and vaccines got rid of pandemics and plagues you know etc and why
Haber-Bosch and the Green Revolution led to being able to feed so many more people and why
you know on and on all the good things and why it's getting why the world's getting better and better
and there's not no truth to this
but it is definitely cherry-picked it is definitely what is better for those who were not
genocided or extincted or killed in war or are still in the positions of poverty that the same
system that is offering those things to some is creating for others right it's definitely cherry
picked in terms of who it's looking at progress for and it's definitely cherry picked in terms of what
value metrics it's considering and which value metrics it's not considering
it's definitely also framed that the types of value that were destroyed are not even
mentioned or talked about the types of value that are not really real value they're basically
like racket type value are overemphasized a lot of the comparisons are decontextualized
there will be things like in 1815 the average American only you know had a dollar fifty a day
and now inflation and just did they have 10 times that or you know whatever it is
you're like yeah but they grew their food in a way that didn't take dollars and they
made their own house and like the idea that dollars were mediating their life was gibberish
that's not true so you're decontextualizing the fact of dollar as how their life was mediated
which it is now to then is not true right so there's a place where that is we wrote another
paper called how to mislead with facts and it's cherry picked the facts decontextualize the facts
and then kind of lake off frame the facts and you can make specious conclusions from true facts
right so that's that story and so I'm not saying that there are no truths in it but like
okay if the if you take the best examples that there have been like the the progress stories
darlings you know hoverbosch is obviously one of them which is the creation of synthetic nitrogen
and then you know beyond that synthetic fertilizer which is now you know NPK
which did make a lot of unarable soil arable and did allow us to be able to grow a lot more
total crop through you know industrial agriculture and that did play a major role in the population
going from half a billion to 8 billion in 200 years which is a 16x in population and as you
state the in the industrialized world the resource consumption per capita was not just the food but
all of the energy for the entire system the energy the tractors are using in the lights whatever
and that's something like hundred x during that same time
and that hundred xing per capita and 16 xing the capita in a very very short period of time from
what was already kind of a steady state post agrarian revolution right which was had brought
the numbers to way higher than they were in the kind of hunter gather time
is all using resources from the earth faster than they can regenerate and turning them into
trash and pollution faster than they can be processed even calling it resources right this
is when you're talking about language the idea that a whale is a natural resource as opposed to
a sentient being with its own life is not that different than the idea that a person as a slave
is a natural resource rather than a sentient being the idea that a 3000 year old redwood tree is a
natural resource because I can make timber out of it and we you know in business we talk about
human resources which is not beings that are whose moms had hopes for them and who are going and
who have children and who are going to have deathbed reflections they are resources that
we want to employ in a way where we get more out of them than we put into them
fuck right like it is such a it's such a psychopathological worldview and the instrument
instrumentalizing of everything in that kind of way so nature is not natural resources nature
is nature nature is all the beings that were here for all this time before we were here
and that our life doesn't exist without I am because we are right so you look at the Haber
Bosch and you say okay was that exclusively good that thing where that population grew and the
resource consumption grew but there's a curve that looks at human population and species extinction
and shows how closely those are correlated and the dead zones in the ocean are the result of the
agricultural affluent from the Haber Bosch right and like where it's a three-quarter water planet
we have 500 dead zones that are the result of that mechanism and a lot of the health issues that
people have are because we're not putting everything that came out of the soil back into the soil
we're taking everything out and putting three minerals back in right a very tiny subset so you
get micronutrient efficiency so you look at that darling and you're like this was not exclusively
comprehensively good so we're just fixing the prices uh on environmental externalities energy
and other non-renewable inputs get us much of the way towards uh real progress
kind of sort of
because all those negative things that you just said none of those are in our price system at all
right indulge me quickly on the this one other example I wanted to give of a darling of the
progress story which is like the one that is so easy to sympathize with of who wants to do
dentistry in the time before novocaine like fuck that that seems dreadful torturous
okay now I can't say that I know for sure how dentistry in the time before novocaine
but in the indigenous world specifically so this is important a lot of the dreadful world
before the progress narrative was the already civilization system right people living in
cities during the dark ages and whatever where we saw the great plagues do you have huge plagues
that are zoonotic when you don't have animal husbandry where you have you know close proximity
with all of the rats and the cats and the all of those types of things with the grain stores and
the animals that are there inside of large population density urban centers no right yeah
it's a very different situation and so so many of those problems like a high population density
city high population per capita shitty hygiene and animal husbandry you know in the environment
yes that's a pandemic breeder and but the answer could have been to change the city design right
not just let's you know vaccines and you know antibiotics etc I actually think we might under
a tribute how much just plumbing and hygiene went to the benefits that occurred there but
so if you look at the so much of what we think about of how barbarous dentistry and medicine
whatever were was also again in the post the the post Caesar Genghis Khan
uh you know etc era the post civilization era you go back to indigenous world and
western prices work and I know there are questions on replication and whatever on
western prices work but western prices work when you know he's involved in founding the
american dental association he was looking at the last hunter gather tribes around can turn of
last century that had not adopted grain into their diet not gotten into agriculture because
it's not grain and hunter gather and he found that they had no cavities and they didn't have a
problem was with wisdom teeth and they didn't have major occlusion issues they had these amazing
teeth right this was a huge thing that he documented and he's like we didn't just evolve
wrong or we have wisdom teeth issues we're eating a diet that demineralizes our bones so that we
don't actually have the bone density to be able to get that last part so we have wisdom teeth that's
also the occlusion issues and it's also the cavities these people didn't have toothpaste
or toothbrush but they also didn't have cavities then watched when western diet was introduced
specifically heavy grain diet and they all started getting cavities and having occlusion
issues so again from the racket perspective do i like novocaine if i have to get my mouth
drilled on yes is it entirely possible that a huge amount of the dental issues were already the
result of having solved problems in shitty ways that caused externalities to our orthodonture and
to our dentistry itself or then now you need that thing and the right answer would have been a
comprehensively different tech stack right that didn't have most of human diet come from something
that we didn't evolve to eat do we even as a culture as a species have the ability to measure
and govern such complexity like obviously once western price and other people like him figured
that out was there a vector to change what was happening or was it the the racket in the one
person in 10 that had the dark triad traits just swamped everything else the direction of more
new technology keeps increasing novel complicating effects that are very hard to monitor but like
let's say we're let's say we're talking about humans in a state of nature right vast majority of
human civilization do we understand how the whole world works no do we understand everything about
hydrology and how all the convection patterns work and how all the funguses and bacteria and
kingdoms and everything work no of course not but does it work yes and did it take billions of years
of radically complex evolution doing distributed information processing to make that whole thing
work and it's still doing all that yes okay so things that I do that are going to change that
whole system in a way that doesn't have any evolutionary precedence I should kind of go
slow on I should kind of like really think through and do some tests and really look at all of the
effects now if so can let's talk about the complexity for a minute
let's say we discuss the movement from what we call currently conventional which is kind of this
weird industrial agriculture method where you turn natural ecosystems into basically desertified
soil that you spray NPK on you put highly hybridized row crops in that are designed for
combines and then you cover them in pesticides herbicides and fungicides that are designed
to kill the most robust creatures and then humans are both getting trace mineral deficiency
super weird genetics of the plants dead microbiome of the soil that modulates the genetics of it
and covered in pesticides and herbicides so then we have all these diseases so you see
disease on the rise but then the answer is pharmaceuticals and they're regulated by the
same industry food and drug and the NIH puts money into drug studies and stuff but not into
dietary studies which is why the food pyramid is created by the American Dairy Council and
American Grain Council and you know so so you look there's a racket right of course it's a
fucking racket and whether it was designed or emerged through shared system incentives is actually
mostly irrelevant to the point of course it's some of both and but if you say okay
how does soil work in a natural system everything that comes out of it goes back into it there's
a loop closure right so the tree when it dies decomposes into the soil the leaves when they
fall decompose into the soil the animals that are eating the things their poop goes into the
soil and their bodies go into the soil everything that comes out goes back in and it's actually
all made of the same atoms right the same distribution of atoms basically like six
elements that make up most everything in the distribution of trace elements if I take stuff
out of the soil that involves all of the living compounds and the complex chemistry the humic
and fulvic acids and the and the amino acids being produced and the etc and all the trace minerals
and I put back in three minerals that are enough to make something that looks like a plant
but has totally lower amounts of macronutrients and different phytochemicals and etc like it's kind
of can I predict exactly every single biochemical change no can I tell that's probably gonna have
problems yes that's pretty easy to tell do I want to not spray things designed to be poisonous to
cockroaches that could make it through nuclear war and designed to be poisonous to exoskeleton
creatures do I want to not spray poisons like that on the food that we eat yeah that like that
seems pretty reasonable and do we do we not want to grow food in a way that is killing the top
soil that we depend upon but this should be regenerating it so you start to look at what are
the principles all the stuff that comes out has to go back in there's going to be a balance of
things that fix nitrogen in the soil and use nitrogen the principle set to do it well is
amazingly simple and what is that this is I'm this what I'm giving an example like in this
case of agriculture like how do you do agriculture properly put it put back in the soil all the
things that come out of it make sure that the things that are in the soil have a distribution
of the different types of things that are kind of like you find in a natural system natural system
has legumes fixing nitrogen and non legumes pulling it out and then it has plants that naturally
repel excessive amounts of insects of the insects of those come to there you can see those patterns
in nature so can we build off of that you know the kind of permaculture approach that just maps
some of what nature is doing and can we tell that if the trace minerals that are in the plants are
in the animals that eat the plants that we evolved with go back into the soil and back into the plants
that we're eating I can't predict exactly what percentage that will lower ms over what time period
relative to all the other multi factors but can I versus rheumatoid arthritis versus autism but
can I guess that as we get the trace minerals back in as we get the quality of the soil up as
we get the pesticides out following the way the curves of the diseases and the curves of those
things happen together that in general the health of the soil the health of the plants health of
the ecosystem and the health of the people are all going to go up together yes and I don't need to try
to optimize every I don't need to understand every bit of how the soil my microbiology does
everything it does I have to just pay attention to what it needed to do that evolutionarily
and continue to support that I but this is that thing again we have to appreciate the thing that
is already here with its evolutionary complexity and seek to maintain it and make sure that what
I'm adding to it is not debasing that which it depends upon so in your paper you outlined
three strategies to move towards authentic progress uh and I'm gonna I'm gonna ask you uh to to list
those in a second but first I want to read a quote from your paper okay progress worth believing in
progress that is really about increasing betterment increasing the goodness in the world must still be
able to be considered good once it is taken account of all perspective and externalities
so for such here's my question for such a metric to occur doesn't there first need
to be a culture wide change in our values otherwise why would such a thing come about
there's another paper that we wrote on perverse asymmetries and the perverse asymmetries are
kind of this like entropic gradient which is if I cut the tree down or I kill a whale or whatever
I didn't kill all whales I didn't cut down all trees there are still forests I can access
I can still breathe the air so I'm not experiencing that I'm causing the problem at scale
and in fact I'm not causing the problem at scale I'm causing some tiny little
paper cut towards it and everybody else is doing that but the advantage of the tree to
my family as timber and selling it on the market is profound and obvious so there is this asymmetry
between how significant the upside is to me versus how what a tiny part I am of the downside
but then the system dynamics of everybody doing that absolutely ensures the downside and ensures
it to be something that will end up affecting everyone so there's a lot of perverse asymmetries
like that like those who pay more attention to the risks of a technology up front won't win the
technological race and first mover advantage is those who pretend that it isn't there or cover it
up and make narratives about how positive it is and scale it rapidly ultimately we have to overcome
all of those perverse asymmetries because we are powerful enough that we are not small relative
to the ecosystem anymore you know or small relative to our own survival our own species capacity
and so this is a with that much growth of like no other species could
destroy the ecosystems that they depend upon so they did not have to ensure that they didn't
end because we can we have to ensure that we don't right and this is the whole that the same
recursive abstraction that leads to the ability for technological progress and war strategy
and business strategy that that same recursive abstraction can lead to the vow of the bodhisattva
and the recognition the conscious recognition when men are not the web of life we are merely a
strand in it whatever we do to the web we do to ourselves and extending our compassion to all
sentient beings in the universe we can expand our capacity for wisdom as much as we expanded
for intelligence we can expand the scope of our considerations of what a good goal is as much as
we expand our goal achieving what i'm saying is we must now you're asking is there a cultural
thing that has to happen yes obviously our culture as we already said is being in shaped by our
tools and by our social systems so our our superstructure our culture our value systems
our social structures our economies and governance systems and institutions and our infrastructure
our tool set are all co-influencing each other all three of them are co-influencing each other
so obviously we can't as you as you saw when you're in india you change your environment and
something that no amount of moralizing yourself to do whatever work was automatic in a different
environment and so can we achieve cultural change by just moralizing people that they
should culturally change while they're still in the environment that is predisposing the culture
that is here no that's not going to work that well at the same time where is the intervention
point is some people who already recognize that that's not a culture they value enough they recognize
the fail of it they meditate on meaningful enough that they actually stop willing to be complicit
with it and not just to remove themselves which is a step which some people do but to say how do
i dedicate my life energy to changing those dynamics which should then entail a study of
change efforts that were well motivated and failed and or made worse problems so as to not
repeat that to try to understand why that happens to understand what change that would change all
that could actually would require and what it would be like now of course to really change
culture at scale we have to change the technology and what it predisposes right we have to change
the social systems as long as you have an economic system where putting the externalities are
externalized and cost then i can't empathize and take want to take responsibility for all the
harm that i'm causing if i'm competing against someone who's not internalizing those costs like
economically you can't you're economically incentivizing sociopathy through the cost
externality so of course that has to change and of course is that changes that makes possible
a different value set in the same way that like the algorithm on facebook could up regulate for
different things it could up regulate for exposing people to different worldviews and
different ideas and paying attention to only up regulating the ideas that drive common unity
rather than division so those are places where culture is affected by technology and social
system but how does it start it has to start with a culture first recognition of the i am because
we are the version of progress that is good for i that is not for we is actually not real progress
i remove myself from that thing i won't participate in the lie of it and i will
dedicate myself to wanting to understand what is what actually be good for the whole and make
sure my life energy is in service to that and then progressively that i am participating in
things that have more agency to be able to affect them so it starts with a change of values and
consciousness with some people and that expands upwards and ultimately i think you're inferring
that we need a modern day equivalent of a Sabbath superimposed on to the super organism
structure that is leading us into a terminal phase i want to speak to imposed people with a
libertarian bent will be naturally concerned by some of what is being said and i want to speak to
them okay that was my word i could have used emerge or something but go on but we did talk
about restraint and then we talked about if someone wants to do the thing that is more
like a cancer cell or more like cause tribal warfare they're not going to be the ones to
restrain themselves from doing it other people will have to that is something like law right that
is something like imposition and so then we are right to consider how those systems have went in
the past and because using force to curtail someone's liberty has its own problems even
if what they're wanting to do with their liberty has problems and that's already in in the zeitgeist
right now a lot of people are worried that climate change is such a thing that will cause people to
eat bugs and not own anything and all kinds of authoritarian rules yeah and i think if the
people who were talking about the eating bugs or the solution and not owning anything were
themselves not major capital owners who were not applying those things to themselves people might
feel a little better about it but like the dude that is a hunter gatherer and he eats a lot of
crickets and grubs and if he says like bugs are good like nobody's freaked out about that they're
freaked out about it's a situation of radical wealth inequality and class warfare and the
class warfare telling more stories of justifying radical inequality as the you know as the solution
while they have the largest carbon footprints themselves so like understandable right so the
thing that i want to say is the you you introduced me to her Vanessa on reality who you had on the
show who i had a conversation with and just thought she was amazing and really respect
was in her book she said that her the chief of her tribe the his definition of colonialism she
probably said that on your show but i'll bring it up is that colonialism was not about taking
other people's land fundamentally or about abuse of land or abuse of people or anything that those
were epiphenomenon that the core of it was believing there are separable things
hmm and you can say even deeper than that is being conditioned to perceive the world as a
bunch of separable things which is what bone said was the underlying cause of all the problems
which is what christian marty said was the cause of all the problems which is what einstein said
so if i believe there's a bunch of separable things and i'm separate from other things
and i can optimize some things at the expense of other things and then i can actually rationalize
that everything is trade-offs and that's how it is and etc and you know then
reify social Darwinism and nonsense like that so the root one could say that the root of the issues
is if people want things that inevitably cause harm to others
that's the root of the problems either because they know it causes harm and they want it anyway
so it's some kind of you know rivalry or sociopathy or something like that or because
they don't know it causes harm and it's from you know ignorance and externality they just want
that they want they're not thinking about what all the cause and effect would be because if you
then say great let's let the let's let people pursue what they want and what they pursue getting
causes harm and then also creates propagating patterns where to protect themselves against
the harm the other people have to do similar competitive things and blah blah blah and you
have a world defined by arms races but if the other answer is don't let the people pursue
what they want use some kind of enlightened law that says that's bad and prevented by force the
oppression is inherently also bad and the asymmetry of force tends to lead to an increasing corruption
of the power stack and so neither of those are good so as long as humans believe
that they are separate from everything else as long as they perceive the world separately you
were mentioning language earlier and I think similarly Vanessa was telling you that English has
like 70% of the words are nouns and most indigenous languages a very small percentage of the words
are nouns you look at whitehead as one of the kind of great philosophers of 20th century and
the reason he came to process philosophies like there's no things like the things that we think
of as things are processes of interaction of other things right a tree is not a static noun it's
the doing trillions of metabolic functions every second it's interacting biophysically with the
sun and the air it's interacting biochemically it's interacting biologically doing gene transfer
with the fungus on its roots and the soil microbes like the tree is in a live process it's a verb
it's a lots of verbs and the idea that it's a noun just makes us think very poorly makes us very
bad thinkers and the fact that we're thinking in nouns all the time and built into our language is
making us bad thinkers at scale that we don't even realize because we don't know what it's like to
have a language that doesn't see the world as a bunch of nouns that are all separate.
So changing how a lot more humans perceive their relationship to others to nature to the whole
is kind of a necessary prerequisite for authentic progress.
Yes because if I was just giving this example to someone I'm a little kid who's at the phase
when they say what is that what is that what is that right and they're trying to understand
they're trying to like learn what all of the things are the anatomy of universe
and that phase usually happens right before the phase where they say why why why why why
because they're they're trying to learn the the mechanics the the dynamics of universe.
The kid says what is that and they point to a thing we call a tree.
I don't say that's a tree or more specifically that's a spruce tree or whatever
because that's going to teach the kid a bunch of things it's going to teach them to just
accept a default worldview and not think for themselves it's going to have them confuse
the ground reality with a symbol it's going to have them think in generalizations of now
understand what are trees and what are not trees generalize all of them and stop perceiving uniqueness
it's going to have them you know like it does all that stuff to them right.
So the kid says what is that and I'm like let's go closer and we go closer and I'm like touch it
touch the leaves and then touch the flowers and touch the bark and you know touch all these parts
and like what does it feel like and then smell it and then notice the other little animals in it and
and then you know just have them engage in that way and then say do you think the tree stops there
do you think what about this moss that's growing on it is that part of it or is that not part of
it what about the the soil is that part of it or not part of it and
and and then I'm like what do you think it is to that squirrel what do you think it is to that
little bug what do you think it it is to itself and you know what do you what do you feel when
you're with it and eventually we'll come to in English we call this a tree in Spanish they call
it arbol and in this language they call it this and they do different kinds of things but
this particular one notice that if we go look at this one they're different
and in fact this one there's not another one in the entire universe quite like it
and it's not even the same as it was yesterday it'll be different today so the only way to
know it is to be with it fully more presently in this moment and you know so imagine if kids
grew up that way rather than that's a tree memorize its Latin name understand the botany
associated with it blah blah blah like then they're using much more of their whole self to understand
reality in a much more full rich way that understands that that same thing is different
from every different perspective in so many different contexts and and so
if someone is perceiving if they are supported to perceive the uniqueness of everything and
the interconnectivity of everything that nothing is fungible and nothing is separable
nothing can be standardized without actually causing harm and nothing can be optimized at the
expense of others without causing harm and they get that uniqueness and our connectivity of
everything and they get I am because we are for a we that extends to the stars
and then what they want that comes from that first hungry ghost desire is not the main thing
that emerges this like awe and fulfillment and fascination and gratitude and it emerges from
that connection and it's actually the lack of that connection that leads to the hungry ghost place
that needs more and more hits in progress so the first thing is just not that much desire emerges
in the same the same way and then the desires that do emerge are in connection with everything
else that I'm connected with like is it it will it be good for the tree is it bad for the tree
what about the squirrels in the tree I just spent time communing with them I love them I wouldn't
it wouldn't be good for me if it hurt those squirrels now the desires that arise for people
who are in connectivity with their interconnect who are clear on their interconnectivity with
everything those desires can be pursued in a way that doesn't harm anything because their
own identity is not separate from everything because their perception is clear what percent
of humans alive today would have to have such a value and consciousness change to
effectively change the superstructure social structure infrastructure going forward
I don't want to critique too harshly
but if you look at what we said that since the climate movement started
all of the work that has happened has not actually empirically decreased the
fact that fossil fuel use goes up every year and emissions go up every year
yeah and the environmental movement has not changed the fact that more tons of pesticides
are used each year than the year before and that species extinction continues
even the the not market seeking best motive there's clearly something off with how we're
doing stuff right like clearly we don't just need more of that thing that not only is not
effective but then makes nuclear and dams and other things that don't get off fossil fuels
and cause other problems so there's the mind that was conditioned by this kind of system
can't avoid making more of this kind of system
it is part of an auto poetic process and there is a need to extract oneself from it and then
actually de-program the the nature of that kind of mind that started by a language of nouns and
perceiving everything is separable and separate and then in rivalry and from a place where I think
my fulfillment comes from status and getting things and just all the nonsense right to where
there is a mind that and the and a being whose motive is not what's in it for me
who actually feels a fulfillment that they get to exist at all who feels an awe that they have
already got to see sunsets and color and feels a fullness in that whose motive is actually
in service of future beings that they get to keep experiencing it and their desire to protect and
maintain and serve life and that can perceive the interconnectivity of things enough to not
over focus on one part in a way where the solution to that part will externalize harm elsewhere
without realizing it so if one wants to really not participate in causing more harm and maybe
really change something one does have to look at how this system has actually conditioned their own
mind and how they understand what problems are and what solutions are and how to figure those
things out and how to measure them and how to scale them and how to all all like that
and come to say like how does nature work and how do I understand how nature works that's that I
can work in a way that is aligned with that and uh yeah there's there's profound
deconditioning and re and new learning that has to happen.
It feels right to me because I've experienced it and I noticed it in you since I first met you
even just the change in your language and and some of your ideas. I have 12 questions that I had
prepared after reading your paper and we're already three hours in so I think we're going to have to
do a part one and part two but but let me ask you this and then get your your input on how you'd
like to proceed. Here's another quote from your your paper. Philosopher and psychologist Eric
Fromm wrote that optimism is an alienated alienated form of faith, pessimism, an alienated form of
despair. If one truly responds to man in his future in effect, concernedly and responsibly,
one can respond only by faith or by despair. Rational faith as well as rational despair
are based on the most thorough critical knowledge of all the factors that are relevant for the
survival of man. So with that quote Daniel, what what are your goals and the organization that you
work with with publishing papers such as this one on immature versus authentic progress?
What are you hoping to influence and achieve and lastly how can our viewers help in in those goals?
Yes, this is another open loop. We were talking about
about kind of how the progress narrative really accelerated post-modernity,
that if one has that story, that things are getting better and better because of tech which
also includes having written the history as an alternate realities as you know worse than they
were. And someone doesn't think about all the externalities, they think about the
hopperbosch without thinking about the dead zones and the ocean and the extinct species and the
everything else. The default assumption is that when new tech emerges, it'll cause some problems
until we figure out how to use it, then we'll rightly regulate it and it'll be good. That's
kind of the default assumption. And so then that default assumption, when we look at technologies
that have radically more powerful than anything power than anything we've ever touched that scale
faster, that have more complexity or more not understandable and more unregulatable like AI,
like synthetic biology. The default assumption will be, yeah, it'll probably be net positive,
it'll cause some problems, we'll figure out how to solve those problems. And I actually don't
think a right assessment of the history of technology warrants that nor do I think these
technologies currently warrant that as the right assumption. And so in the face of
exponentiating technology that is also exponentiating destructive capacity. And it's not just
destructive capacity through its militarized uses, it's even through its market uses doing a thing
that we want that is narrow progress, that's driving externalities more as we pass planetary
boundaries. If it is, I want more people to have a wider kind of clearer worldview through which
they can look at things that are being called progress and promising a better future to be
able to look at the issues that are emerging right now and have a different default assumption
and a different like, where should burden of proof be? Actually, some of these things are so
harmful burden of proof should have been proving led with safe before putting it in gasoline and
aerosolizing it to everybody as opposed to having irreparable harm that could never be addressed
and then regulating after the fact. And so where there is truly existential risk portended,
burden of proof shouldn't be that it is really dangerous, it should be we actually have to
prove adequate safety through doing a detailed enough analysis of what doesn't order facts
will be before we rapidly scale the stuff. So that was the reason that we wanted to put that
paper out now is because the rate of technological, I will not call it progress, I will call it
advancement because it is definitely increasing goal achieving with it with not the refining on
what is a good goal without changing the economic incentive that leads to externalities and all
like that. But the rate of technological advancement is definitely in the verticalizing part of the
exponential curve. No one can actually really understand the speed and the portent of it,
the fact that now, you know, that there was nothing like Moore's law, right? Historically,
and it kind of ate the world. And that was progressive doubling of compute power every
couple of years. And just the hardware on GPU based AI will 10x in the next six months.
You know, the power will 10x in six months, not 2x in two years, right? And then in six months,
it will do it again in less time than that. And the software and the parameters and the data are
also going to be up 100x in less than a year. Probably something like that.
And if you look at, I think it's a million x increase in the last 10 years. And so,
you know, and if you take something like AI where we're developing it for increasing
generality, it is basically a general purpose goal achieving tool. Do you want to beat people
at chess? Do you want to beat them at Go? Do you want to beat them at Starcraft? Do you want to
beat them at missile targeting? Do you want to beat them at protein folding? Do you want to
beat them at comprehensive war planning or high speed currency trading? Great. Let's increase
the ability to do all those things. The technology will be developed for one purpose. And we'll
focus on the upside of that. But when the cost of the technology becomes cheap for that purpose,
and then the affordance allows everybody to advance every kind of goal,
that has to be really thought about as part of the externality set.
But the AI is another conversation that I want to have with you, especially with respect to
climate change and the environment. But on this topic, isn't AI being trained with the old linear
model in English and with all the perceptions of what we just discussed of progress? And isn't
it like an exponential layer of the same on top? Like you said, as humans, we have to change our
perception of our relation to the whole. Isn't AI being fed zillions of times more the perception
of what we don't want? Yes, but worse than that, it has the ability to already do goal
achieving, obviously. It does not have the ability for empathy, which means that goal
achieving without empathy is sociopathic. I'm not saying sadistic, it doesn't have interiority.
So AI is only a dark triad, not a dark quad?
The whole conversation around will AI develop sentience or not is another thing. More importantly
is that AI doesn't operate by itself, it operates inside of companies and inside of militaries with
the people that are there as part of a cybernetic system. So it already doesn't have to be
completely general to be part of a cybernetic system that is general. Because what the AI does,
what other types of AI, so the whole cybernetic system has a hybrid of cognitive architectures,
plus what it predisposes the people to do, is actually the thing that's being selected for.
So as we're in a place where technological advancement is speeding up, it is being sold as
the solution to all these problems. They're problems that our previous technological success
has caused. The harms of these technologies are being downplayed. Everyone is racing as we're
crossing planetary boundaries. It would be better if more people understood what is wrong with the
progress narrative and understood what authentic progress actually entails and understood the
caution and restraint that it requires, understood the emphasis on maintaining, understood that
very often the best way to solve a problem is to remove its causes, which actually involves
reversing some stuff rather than always create new stuff. But obviously, market incentive is on
create new stuff. The history books incentive is on create new stuff. But as we think about,
how do we actually solve problems in a way that isn't a racket, that isn't solving a problem
that was caused by the result of our previous problem solving, and that will in turn create more
of that? First, we have to say, is this actually a problem? Is it bad that food perishes? And that's
a problem to solve through artificial preservatives and making Twinkies that can last 25 years,
as opposed to fresh vegetables that start to decay? Or is that not a problem? It's actually a feature
of reality we should interact with and embrace. There's that meme that shows a picture of a
rambunctious kid and it says riddle and easier than parenting. Is our children wanting our time
and our attention a problem that we need a technological solution like an iPad for?
Well, yes, because we have to work because of all the other parts of the system,
but like tribal life was the kids and the old people spending tremendous amounts of time together
as the center of civilization with everyone else spending time supporting that. And so
the first part of problem solving is, is this even a problem? Or is this actually a feature
of reality that yes, it requires, like, do I want to automate every single thing that requires
muscular engagement where then you have a society of obese people with brittle bones and like that?
Or do you actually want that, like, the dynamism of our bodies and the development of strength in
them is actually important? It's actually required that I don't want to automate all those things
away. Do I want to remove every kind of pain like, oh, your family member just died until
you feel depressed. Here's a psych med to take your emotions away. Is it a problem that you're
feeling emotions? And the answer is a technological solution like a psych med or is in the exploration
of those emotions, the possibility that you can have a meaningful life at all because you understand
that everyone you know and love is going to die, you're going to die. What is meaningful while you're
here? Why did what does it mean that you loved that person that you're in deep questions? Some of
the depression is like, I was a shithead to that person. I didn't express my love to them as much.
I was too busy working at my job to have a cost of living that has a bunch of stuff that doesn't
actually make me happy but that I think that I need. And I feel sad and I realize that maybe I'm
not going to stop and then I'm going to die and there aren't going to be that many people who are
that touched by me and like, fuck, maybe that depression is exactly what the fuck you need
to reflect and make a meaningful life change, not a psych med. So the first part of problem solving
is, is this a problem that needs a technological solution or is this a facet of life that I
actually need to embrace and be with? The next step is, if it really is a problem, what caused it?
Was this always the case and it's a feature of reality or was this caused by other things we
did where the first step is undo the causes as opposed to ameliorate at the symptom level,
those causes continue to express somewhere else. And, you know, so there are these kinds of steps
of what would it mean to engage in problem solving in a way that does not cause more problems
and it is possible and it does result in
the possibility of having us have what we add to the world be actual progress,
meaning actual betterment. But it is different in process and different, different in process
and different in motive in almost every way. Is there a third step?
There's some papers we're going to publish on the processes that you can walk through and they're
not formal, they're not algorithmic, they're principled kinds of reasoning, like is this
really a problem that needs a technological solution or is this a facet of reality to be with?
Is this what were the causes? Have I traced it back to the causes? Do I understand them? Do I
understand the cause of those kinds? You know, like those kinds of things, one of them is yellow
teaming. Yellow teaming is once we decide there is a thing that we want to create, whether it's a
law or a business or a technology, because there is some thing where we've addressed the upstream
causes, etc., and there's still something to develop, then I really want to think through
if this thing succeeds and solves the narrowly defined definition of a problem, what is the
totality of the effects of it succeeding on all the other areas? And where is it going to externalize
effects? Because it's going to have effects other than that one area, and if it externalizes more
positives, awesome, that's a good sign that it's in the right direction. And if you look at like a
tree, a tree does a million positive things for a million entities over a million timescales,
right? The tree is causing benefit to squirrels and to butterflies and to birds and to insects and
to soil microbes. It's stabilizing topsoil and holding moisture in the ecosystem and causing
transpiration and keeping the river clean in the banks of the river. So like positive externalities
are actually the results of good design based on understanding the interconnectedness of things.
Negative external is where you don't understand the interconnectedness. You optimize it for a
narrow thing and externalize it everywhere else. So the yellow teaming is the thinking through the
network of relationships and causal dynamics such that you look at the externalities, both physical
and psychosocial, see where there are possibly harmful ones, and say either we don't do the thing
or how do we design such that that's not the case, that the externalize effects are positive.
And that is actually possible, not perfectly but progressively better.
It's sometimes with increasing frequency seems to me that we're waking up as a
species at the exact time the clock is running out.
That's the hope. That's the possibility.
Yeah. So isn't the paper in the public domain at a podcast about naive versus authentic progress
a tiny sign of authentic progress?
There are signs of authentic progress in the world. There are more people that kind of care about deep
ecology. There are more people that are interested in thinking about long-term futures well.
There are more people interested in approaches to healthcare that are not exclusively
allopathic healthcare. Currently, the rates of growth of the things that are moving in the
authentic progress direction versus the narrow progress harm externalizing direction are not
adequate, right? And like I said, many of the things and everybody that is contributing to
the meta crisis thinks that they are contributing to real progress, right?
I'm providing a product or service that the market wants, which means there's demand for it,
which means it's increasing, it's solving some problem for someone that makes their life better.
And I'm employing the tools of science and technology, which is this awesome system that
allows us to understand the world in a unified way and improve things. And that's the story.
And that's why people can come out in such defensive fossil fuels of look at all the
things they give us and of the market. And they do. And they give all of these externalities.
And while that has benefited some and sucked for others, it also benefits some
dimensions of self and sucks for the dimensions of self, even for those most being benefited.
And it is in the process of self-terminating where it will be a benefit to no one.
In which case, the damn, I really don't want to be complicit with that thing. Damn, I really don't
want to just, what's best for me and my family is continue to have optionality tokens.
And damn, I don't want to try to make things better where I end up making them worse because
I am coming from the same type of mind that engages in rivalry and does a movement in a way
that creates counter movements and that optimizes for one thing in a way that ends up causing harm
elsewhere. So I want that the activism, the protection impulse in me reconnects to the
source of reality deeply enough that I know how to participate, that I'm guided and how to
participate in a way that is actually meaningful. So I would actually like to see a slightly slower
movement into action, a deeper movement into withdrawal, and a deeper understanding of the
history of well-intended failed actions more rigorously. It's very painful.
And a deeper being with the emotions about the whole thing and really taking it all in
and noticing how much of our desire to make it better is still ego, is still
an avoidance mechanism for not wanting to feel it, is still a problem solving mode that is
reductionistic, that will end up contributing to it and like letting that stuff settle.
To get to a place where one can engage in how to shift the system dynamics of the world
in a way that are actually what's needed. Here, here. Once again, you have surprised me.
I read your paper. I understood it and this conversation went in a different way than I
expected. What would you like from our viewers? How would you like to wrap this up and what are
next steps? You mentioned 12 questions that we didn't get to and some viewers may have questions
thoughts. So if there are interesting questions, then maybe we can do a session two, particularly
if once we publish some of these papers, people have questions on them because we don't
have where we're publishing them, the ability to answer them there.
I think the thing that I would hope people leave with is deepening appreciation of the
tremendous amount of non-human activity that it took to make the world that you exist in.
The incredible preciousness and miracle of it and the desire that
the thing that makes your life and the life of everyone you love possible,
you want to have occupy more of your attention than it does now.
The places where your attention and your time and your energy are occupied by the result of a
system that resulted from selection of coordinated violence and like that,
that you really want to root that out of your own self and psyche.
And you want to just appreciate the universe and world that gives rise to the possibility at all
and then seek to explore how do I... There's something like a vow, like a Hippocratic oath,
that's like, I'm not willing in pursuing a narrow definition of advancement for me or
whatever or in being complicit to cause harm to this miraculous world, not willing.
And I'm going to look really carefully at what does that and rather than jump so quickly to,
well, yeah, but I can because I have to work whatever, try a little harder to say,
do you have any other possibilities? Don't jump to your own lack of agency so quickly.
Like we said about the billionaires that would say, oh, I don't have agency,
we also do the thing, well, how long did you spend thinking about it?
Like how many options did you really pursue? And
I think the combination of the removal of some of the energy from this world system,
the increasing appreciation of the natural world and the commitment to both not cause harm,
the study of what does, and then the commitment to be part of what can actually protect against harm
can result in like, that is the movement or the set of cultural shifts that I really like to see.
That's a hell of a start, my friend. For my part, it's about a half hour away from being dark here
in Minnesota and I'm going to bid you good night and I'm going to go sit by a tree
and reflect on it's not just a tree and all the processes and parts and relationships
and just do a little bit of a pre-dusk sitting.
Gorgeous.
This was a lot. It was beautiful and wise and has given me much to think about.
Thank you for all your work, all your thought and all your efforts on behalf of
our planet, the future and all of us striving to play a role. Thank you, my friend.
Likewise, my friend. It was a delight to be with you today.
If you enjoyed or learned from this episode of The Great Simplification,
please follow us on your favorite podcast platform and visit TheGreatSimplification.com
for more information on future releases. This show is hosted by Nate Hagens, edited by No
Troublemakers Media and curated by Leslie Batloots and Lizzie Siriani.
