So basically, shifting baseline is the notion that when something changes over several generations,
say, any generation perceives the change only that occurs only during their lifetime, their own.
In other words, young people, they become self-aware, they become aware of the world around them,
and that becomes the baseline for that they will use in the course of their life to monitor,
to evaluate change. But, but, and then they will complain and they will maybe they will fight to
maintain what they had when they were young. But they do not do the same, they don't have the same
relationship to change that happened to their parents or their grandparents, because they,
these changes are not, are not subjectively perceived, they are not real. And so every
generation resets the baseline that it used to evaluate the world. And so it shifts that baseline.
And, and so you can have a situation where, in one film that is kind of amusing,
there was a young man who says, well, this big fish, about, and it shows something that is about
one meter. And this, the same, on the same dock, or in the same, an old guy is talking about the
same fish, or they were all the way talking about two meters. He talking about a salt fish, and
salt fish of one meter are small, they are juvenile. And to that young man, this were a big fish,
because he didn't know that, that that salt fish get to be four meters tall, long. There is a thing
that is the also use a shifting baseline for teaching purpose. And, and, and the kids and the
example with the windshield, actually, I don't remember the windshield of cars being covered with
dead bugs. And, and this is, this is an amazing thing. And this is particularly scary with global
warming, because people get used to this normal. And, and this is terrifying, if you think about it,
because, because every generation has use another, another standard. And, and young people will not
want to get back to the cold winter that we had when we were young. The only way we can deal with it,
scientifically, is by, by identifying periods, doing which we have for which we have lots of data,
so that we can construct a world that is credible, that has various dimension, and, and use this as an
anchor point to assess change. Or the climatologists do that, the, the, the, the oceanographers do that.
They, they choose different periods, because it depends on the data that they have, right? You
cannot use a period going back. For example, I have a journalist, George Mombiot of, of Great Britain.
He, he, he, he has a wife who is a paleontologist and, and, and they talk about elephants and, and
rhinoceros in Britain. And they talk about that would be nice to reintroduce them.
Never gonna, this is never gonna work for the kind of work that you, that you work on. You have to
have a solid baseline. And in fisheries, a solid baseline, stupid, because, because could be earlier,
but it, it is 1950. Why? Because 1950 is the time where industrial fishing had not restarted from
World War II. And where, where lots of countries became independent, they, this before they became
independent. So you have, you have the pre neocolonel situation. And also, this is the first year
from which you, the United Nations published annual review of the world catch. So for our work,
it's, it's crucial to, to use 1950 as a baseline. But, but people who do so called
stock assessment for managing fisheries, they use the last 20 years. And, and that's a big problem.
Because the last 20 or 30 years is a period where the big stocks have all been wiped out. And then
you, you have the testimony of young people being utterly ridiculous. They, you would see them
young fishers, they would say, I've never seen so many, they have, the stocks has doubled in size.
Yeah, it moved from 2% of what it was before to 2% to 4%.
