What is the answer or what can you speculate on 50 to 100 years from now when we're clearly
past peak fossil fuels, peak growth? What sort of future city habitation structure might be
fittable for those humans? Well, I think firstly, the possibilities of a hugely
productive salvage economy where we take the infrastructure, the tools, the buildings of
the huge discretionary economy that's been created, which will actually have no real
function. There won't be a way to drive that. So what are all those buildings going to be used for?
What are all those pumps and spa baths that could be wicking beds?
Something retrofitted to aquaponics systems rather than saying, oh, we're going to build all these
sort of high tech systems to provide perishable food where people live using new manufactured
materials, which I'm very skeptical about the embodied energy and complexity issues in that.
But if we're salvaging what already exists, there's enormous opportunities that our ancestors
never had. And then if we project that deep time forward into deep energy descent,
something like stainless steel, our descendants will always have stainless steel to make high
quality knives just because of the stainless steel that we've created, which doesn't go away,
is lying around. And it can be reformatted or reformed with an anvil and heat or something?
Yes, but we shouldn't sort of see, okay, what is the final technology that might be
perpetually sustainable? We need to see how there's this reuse, opportunistic reuse and
accept that maybe that will be workable, but maybe people will just simplify again into the future
and progressively cast off things of the saying, no, let's do it a simpler way.
Well, let's not do that function. It's actually not worth doing. So the discretionary economy
itself is a whole lot of things that are actually really not even beneficial to people
in any sort of deep inner sense, in the same way that a huge amount of work is what's technically
called bullshit jobs, where even the people doing them regard them as useless to society.
So I think that's one of the most creative positive aspects of this reconfiguration that
people often don't see.
