The best project we ended up doing during the era when I was
running the agency was a thing called the West Norwood Feast,
which is a monthly community owned and run street market,
which is still going, you know, 12 years and one pandemic later
in West Norwood in South London. And we would have at six
o'clock on a Sunday morning, local people getting out of
bed, unpaid to come and put up market stalls up and down the
streets of West Norwood. And I used to think, you know, maybe
these people always secretly had a burning desire to run a
street market. But I don't think that's what it is. I think
it's that the street market is giving people an excuse to do
something that gives them a great deal. And that has something
to do with the fact that running this together as a
community. It's outside of the logics that dominate the
societies that most of us have grown up in because these
societies are dominated by this twin logic of the state and the
market. The logic of the state is people do things because
they're told to by people who have power over them. The logic
of the market is people do things because they're being
paid money. And if they don't gather enough money in the
course of a month, then they're homeless next month. And the only
reason why human beings are here at all is because for almost
all of our history, we had a greater range of reasons why we
come together and do things than those two powerful rather
sort of brute simple logics that have come to dominate a vast
area of the social terrain of modernity. And so why was I at
the same time as writing the Dark Mountain Manifesto running
these projects to create community owned street
markets? Because it was a way of learning about and practicing
the skills of coming together to do things for reasons other
than because we've been paid to or told to. And I think that
there's a hidden capacity there that's just not on the market.
Sorry, not on the map of either the market, or the state
policymaking world. And the you know, if anything is going to
make things turn out less badly than we mostly think that
they're going to in the time to come, that hidden capacity of
what happens when people come together and do the work of being
human together. You know, that's where it might come from. And
our motto when we were running those projects with
spacemakers was, you know, people are good at being people,
we've been doing it for a long time. And if we are finding
ourselves in situations where everything seems to be really
dysfunctional and really badly done, is probably because of
something we've not been doing for very long at all, that's
got in the way of our evolved and cultural capacity for being
human together and finding solutions at a human scale.
If you look at a lot of traditional historic agrarian
systems, they're very, very cleverly find ways to give
people autonomy when autonomy is what's needed, create collective
labour when that's what's needed and share the harvest, you
know, so it's not about kind of personal accumulation to, you
know, to grow as many carrots as you possibly can and sell them,
it's more that you just don't need, you know, 30 people weeding
a small patch of carrots and disagreeing about it. But you do
sometimes need to bring people together. One of my teachers,
Paul Richards, he did his work in West Africa Sierra Leone with
swidden farmers where, you know, burning, you've got to burn the
secondary forest to establish the crop. That's a big collective
job of Scandinavia, you know, interesting stuff with swidden
farming, historically, maybe particularly in Finland as well,
you know. So you bring people together and the way that the
farmers did it in Sierra Leone is by brewing beer and throwing a
party. So the farmer that makes the best beer and throws the best
party, gets the people, you know, they come do the work, and
then it's also pro-social. And, you know, you look at a lot of
commons that, you know, they are about managing the larger
aspects of the landscape. I've called it in some of my writing
the elemental commons, you know, you can't manage fire risk, you
can't manage watersheds and irrigation, you know, you can't
manage certain aspects of soil management as an individual farm.
So you have to come together as a community. But then there's
other aspects where, you know, everyone is different, everybody
wants to do their own thing. And then in terms of the harvest,
you know, we are intrinsically reliant upon one another, you
know, it's not about accumulating the most and being the best
off, it's always about, you know, putting the produce into the,
you know, larger life of, you know, your family, your
household, your neighborhood, your community. And so we can
really learn a lot from historic agrarian societies that, you
know, they faced all of this very directly. And if they got it
wrong, you know, it had very serious consequences in a way
that we've insulated ourselves from in modern society. But,
you know, the way that we've set up this conversation, we, you
know, we can't insulate ourselves from that long term. So we
really need to learn from this kind of clever dance of, you
know, household, community, commons, collective landscape
management and so on, you know, everywhere is different. But,
you know, that's, that's the challenge before us.
Why don't we have community? To have community, you have to
need each other. And when you are trying to produce your own
food, and you will notice because we had a plan to do
something when you came to my place. And it totally didn't
work out because of circumstances with this sheep. And
that's what happens when you're, when you are directly working
with living systems, if you are a gardener, if you have a farm,
like if you're interacting with living complex systems, you
will become humble. Because you, it won't work out, you may have
a plan, but it won't be like that, because there is so many
factors. And as, as Chris is saying, that's when you really
realize that I can't do this on my own. And that's where
community starts. And also, I mean, both when you produce food
and when you consume food, when, when, when we have community,
we share a meal, a small meal or a big meal or a party. And to
meet at this time of the year, like harvest time is when, when
there is such abundance, I feel so rich, I can go out and I can
just get a lot of food. And I have so much food that I want to
share it with people. And I think just this sense of
abundance, like in a, in a culture that is so focused on
scarcity, and it's actually also creating scarcity, that sense
can teach us important things.
