What is an obesogen and why are you researching that and why is that so important?
So an obesogen is a compound that generates weight beyond its calories.
That's an obesogen. So there are plenty of things in our food that are calories,
but they will generate a certain amount of weight based on those calories. If they generate more
than that. So there's some emergent property that has happened within the body. Like if you consume
500 calories of obesogen and you put on 700 calories worth of weight, something happened
to make that happen. Exactly, exactly right. So the reason is because of mitochondrial dysfunction
because you mitochondria are not working well. There was a paper that came out
about 10 years ago now, I think, that tracked body temperature from the civil war to today.
And all of us, everyone at every age throughout the entire United States is burning. It has a
body temperature that is 1.5 degrees Fahrenheit lower than we used to. Now that cannot be explained.
By any change in our environment or air conditioning or physical activity or anything else,
why are all of us burning less energy to create less heat to have a lower body temperature?
It's because we have mitochondrial dysfunction. Okay, so again, I don't want to make this podcast
about me. We're going to take this offline, but I've come to know over the last decade that my
normal temperature is 96.7, like a two degrees lower than 98.6. So if I have 98.6, I have a fever
and I've never understood why that was. This is why. Holy crap. Okay, so
are there tests that are, okay, so there are various diets out there. One of them is called
Whole30, which the premise of that is don't eat any processed foods at all. You can eat carbs,
you can eat potatoes, you can eat Lara bars, just no processed stuff.
Lara bars are processed. They are, but there's no other ingredients in there. There's just like
dates and peanuts or something. Yeah, I know, but it's a digital process. You can't, I mean,
they had a macerated to get it into the Lara bar, so it's not none.
Okay, so there is a definitional thing between processed. When I think of process, I mean that
there's chemicals added in things. You actually mean that it was formed into a product. It's not
a whole food per se. Exactly right. So there is a classification system that was developed by my
colleague Dr. Carlos Montero, who is a professor of public health at the University of São Paulo,
Brazil, and it is called the NOVA system, an OVA. It doesn't stand for anything, just the new system.
And the easiest way to explain it would be with an example. So there are four classes in NOVA.
Let's take an apple. So NOVA class one would be an apple picked off a tree. Class two would be
apple slices de-stemmed, de-seeded, maybe de-skinned. Class three would be apple sauce, like cooked,
macerated, possibly sugar added, and maybe some preservative. Class four would be a McDonald's
apple pie. Okay, turns out when you look at the consumption across the world of various foods,
only that class four category contributes to metabolic disease. But that's where the action is.
And that happens to be 63% of all the foods sold in America and 67% of the sugar that we consume.
What? 63% of the food sold is in that class four category. What is that like globally
in other countries less? So it's about 56% in the U.K., it's about 60% in France, 63% here.
What about in Africa? I don't know. I don't know about Africa. That's a good question,
probably less. Yeah, probably less. They don't have enough money and importing issues and stuff.
So I don't know about Africa. In the Middle East, it's about 90%.
90% is that category four? Yeah. And that's why they have 18% diabetes and 80% obesity.
In the Middle East? I didn't know that. In Iraq and Saudi Arabia? Yeah. Well,
there's some irony there with the carbon pulse as well. I didn't know that. So people that do diets
that are highly in the category one and category two or a whole food sort of diet,
I did a whole foods diet for a month. It was really hard for me, but I lost 25 pounds.
And then I gained it back, of course. Because you know why it's hard for you? Because the things
that you eat don't taste as good as the things that you gave up. Well, indeed, because they were
implied with extra sugar. Okay. Well, they were implied with extra sugar.
So our taste buds have been desensitized. There's a neurophysiologist scientist,
neuroscientist at University of Michigan, Monica Deuce, very, very smart lady, who has basically
demonstrated the molecular mechanisms of tongue desensitization. She showed it in fruit flies.
Point is, you can actually get that back, but you have to reduce the substrate. So our food has
been so sweetened on purpose that we have desensitized our taste buds. And so food that is whole,
as it were, natural, that came out of the ground, doesn't taste very good anymore. Because we have
desensitized those taste buds to not be able to appreciate it. If you go off sugar for three weeks,
a blueberry will taste like a balm in your mouth. I mean, it will just explode with flavor.
So sugar is a supernormal stimuli to our evolved brains the same way that pornography or gambling
or video games are. There are chemical addictions. There are behavioral addictions. We have both.
So anything that stimulates the nucleus accumbens, anything that stimulates the reward center in
the extreme is addictive. So we have chemical like heroin, cocaine, nicotine, alcohol, sugar.
We also have behaviors. We have shopping, gambling, internet gaming, social media, pornography.
All of these stimulate the same reward center in the brain. Every one of those has an aholic
after it, chocoholic, sexoholic, alcoholic. You pick it. The point is we have a reward system and
it is under fire every day by not just the food industry, but by virtually any corporate entity.
Because that's how they get you to buy.
