You're listening to The Great Simplification with Nate Hagins. That's me.
On this show, we try to explore and simplify what's happening with energy, the economy, the environment, and our society.
Together with scientists, experts, and leaders, this show is about understanding the bird's-eye view of how everything fits together,
where we go from here and what we can do about it as a society and as individuals.
Simon Michaud is a professor of geometallurgy at the Geological Survey of Finland.
He has degrees in physics and geology and a PhD in mining and engineering.
Simon's long-term work is on the development and transformation towards a circular economy,
navigating the twin challenges of the increasing scarcity of minerals
and the eventual but inevitable transition away from fossil carbon and hydrocarbons.
On this show, I often use the term energy blindness to represent how little our culture understands
and appreciates how energy, particularly cheap and abundant fossil energy, underpins our society and current living standards.
Today, Simon and I talk about minerals blindness or how, in a similar way, we also ignore mineral and material limits that will affect human futures.
This is a wide and deep topic, and Simon has a lot to say.
So please enjoy what will probably be part one of a series of conversations with Dr. Simon Michaud.
Greetings, my friend.
G'day, Nate. How are you doing?
I am doing well. How do I greet an Australian who's in Helsinki, Finland?
Hello is a good one.
Okay.
G'day is also the local technology, how to speak Australian.
And so while I'm trying to teach the bus drivers, like, you know, mate, cheers.
Well, we are going to attempt the diurnal impacting the future caffeine ethanol merger conversation here.
I'm having my coffee, you're probably ready for a glass of whiskey, given you're nine hours ahead of me.
I have coffee, whiskey and water.
Excellent. Excellent.
Could you briefly tell me your job and your position?
So mine, I'm from the Australian mining industry.
Originally, I'm now working for GTK, which is the Geological Survey of Finland, right?
And I'm an associate professor attached to the Mintek pilot plant in Finland, and I'm operating on four fronts.
My job is to develop the Mintek pilot plant, which they're digitizing and modernizing that process plant.
I'm to develop what's called geometallurgy, which is the handshake mineral engineering and geology.
I'm reinventing the circular economy into something more sensible, because at the moment it's not really that sensible.
And the fourth front is I'm mapping data patterns in the industrial ecosystem for basic jobs I have at the moment.
So you were like the finished version of the sustainable version of King Midas.
King Midas.
So actually, yeah, I don't catch gold. Gold tends to be taken off me.
Okay, so if you don't mind, Simon, I've recently been starting my polymath guests that could talk for hours on a subject with a little bit of a speed round.
So I've got a little bit of a list here and give me your best shot in kind of 30 seconds to a minute on these.
You ready?
Yep.
All right. So how tight is the link between energy and GDP?
And how tight a related question, how tight is the link between materials, your expertise and GDP?
So I believe that the different aspects are the same thing.
I see what we're looking at as a four fold entity between energy, materials and technology and economics.
Energy is minerals. Energy at the moment is oil and gas.
It will soon be solar panels which come from metals which come from minerals.
GDP is energy because it is needed to do physical useful work.
You need minerals to do physical useful work.
So what you're seeing here is when you see one, you see the other three.
You cannot untangle them really.
The other three being energy materials and GDP.
What's the fourth one?
Technology.
Technology is our ability to use all those things.
More technology is more GDP.
More technology is using energy more efficiently but also using more energy and using more minerals.
So technology also could be described as information?
In fact, from a physicist's point of view, information is also energy.
How is that?
So information is when you actually record and code something.
There is a concept that a battery is storing information in the form of electrons when it comes out.
What form does it come out in?
So from an abstract point of view, information can be seen as a form of energy and energy can be seen as a form of information.
Okay.
We're going to come back to that, I think.
So what are materials?
Give us a whirlwind list of some of the major materials needed in the complex current global economy.
Okay.
So when we talk about materials, we're talking about raw things that we make stuff out of.
Right.
So a material is we take a natural resource in some form and we do something to it to make it useful to make something.
For example, we take a tree and when it's a tree, it's a natural product.
We'll cut that tree down, cut it up into planks.
Those planks can then be used to make a table.
So the planks are called materials?
Yes, that's right.
So when we take raw mineral out of the ground, what we really want is the metal.
Once we extract the metal, the metal becomes a material and we use that metal to make a car.
So the copper in the ground, is that the copper with all the rock that accompanies it?
The whole thing is called a mineral or just the copper portion?
So you can find natural copper, which is, you get these substances which are actually both a material and a natural form.
But a mineral is like the elements of something that have been assembled into a natural form that's stable.
And so you tend to have copper mixed in with sulfur, mixed in with silicon and they're all assembled in a crystalline form.
And so you can have natural copper, a copper nugget found in a stream, but it's generally associated and pinned in a mineral crystalline lattice.
So to make it useful, generally we've got to take a raw material and do something to it to make it suitable for some sort of engineering purpose.
So a material is actually an engineering term.
What is your favorite mineral trick question?
Okay, this might sound a little odd. Sheets, silicate, clays.
That does sound odd.
Now, clays are interesting. They're very complex to understand, right?
And they cause me a lot of grief professionally. They're terrible for flotation and leaching, so we're always trying to remove clays.
Right, but clays are also the crossover point between life systems and mineral systems because they're in soil, right?
And they actually allow the support of the food web in soil.
So you get the crossover between life systems and mineral systems, but they also either retain water or they prevent water from happening.
And so it's a combination of life systems meet mineral systems meet water systems, and it's all in one mineral, clays.
So here's a naive question.
I think most listeners, if not the general public, understand that fossil energy is finite.
But minerals also are finite.
Okay, can you just speak to that a little bit?
Okay, so minerals are formed ranging from a couple of seconds over to tens of years to, in some cases, thousands of years in the case of, say, a cooling magma to become a granite, right?
So they're formed in geological processes.
Generally, you've got like a rock and a fluid has been pushed through the rock, has lots of elements in it,
and a change in temperature or change in pressure will change the chemistry of the fluid and something will deposit out of that fluid.
And that's how we get copper and gold deposits.
So a mineral is a natural assemblage of elements that was created some time ago, usually millions of years, driven by geological events which don't happen all the time.
Right, so it's not like a regular thing unless you get down to the seabed floor where you've actually got the parting of the tectonic plates.
But we can't get there with our current technology in what we needed.
So we have these minerals and metals in the ground in deposits, which are finite.
And once we consume those resources, they don't grow back.
On human timescales.
Not on human timescales.
Or rather, if we do have them grow back, it means some large volcanic event has happened on a worldwide scale, which means we're not going to bother extracting minerals anymore anyway.
But in that case, they wouldn't be growing back.
They would be unearthed from where they were before, or would they literally be growing back?
Some will be unearthed, some will be chemically transformed.
So you've got like an existing geological system and fluids will be pushed through and they chemically transform some of the rocks in place through a process called metamorphosis.
So that would be one of the be careful what you wish for scenarios.
Exactly.
What could possibly go wrong?
No, don't want that.
So today we're going to be talking generally about how humanity can move from our current society into something more sustainable, more livable, perhaps more desirable.
And that's going to effectively be a revolution from where we are today.
And you've written about it being a fourth industrial revolution.
What is the fourth industrial revolution?
And maybe you could briefly define what the first three industrial revolutions were.
So, okay, the first industrial revolution, there's a couple of different definitions around it.
It depends on what speaks to you.
One school of thought says it's the moment when we start using metals and stones for tools, but that to me is not industry.
To me, IR1, the first industrial revolution starts when machinery is used to supplant human labor on a wide scale.
The machinery that is powered, technology that is powered by something, in this case coal and sometimes wood.
So IR2, as I see it, and again, there are several definitions around and opinions.
IR2 is when internal combustion engines took off, powered by petroleum.
So we had the idea that we could take petroleum, which is an amazing energy source,
and turn it into an internal combustion engine which can power all sorts of industrial things.
So that's IR2.
And also, at the same time, petrochemicals were invented, later became the plastics industry.
So IR3 is when they started using electrical technology and electricity started taking over.
And in IR3, not only do we have the electric motor, but we've also got the transistor and the microchip.
So IR3 has had several stages of evolution.
So IR4, now things are getting complicated.
Now IR4 is seen as like an information revolution where what they're trying to promote is the merging of everything about us at a biological level with information and with technology.
So we as a species will change and we as a community will change in all aspects.
So is the industrial revolution, is the fourth industrial revolution like the great reset?
So the great reset is the people who are promoting the fourth industrial revolution is a concept that was actually released, I think it was by the World Economic Forum.
And so they want to actually evolve and revolutionize society at the moment.
And they want to essentially instrument everything.
They talk about like the internet of things where everything in your house, for example, harvests information like your toaster and your fridge and then uploads it to the internet web to a central server.
And so it's literally surveillance inside the home.
But they're also talking about biometrically merging human activity with technology as well.
Now I think this concept is flawed.
I understand what they're trying to achieve and what they do, but it's setting us up for a world of unintended consequences.
Well, not to mention it's energy blind and materials blind.
It's not going to work.
It's going to require such an unprecedented amount of complex materials and energy.
And then to maintain all this, what will end up happening, I think, let's say they go down this road, the fourth industrial revolution will happen for very rich people in a functional way.
And everyone else, because it's not going to arrive in time and work.
You're going to have this dysfunctional system that doesn't work and everyone has to make do with what they have.
And so you will end up with society like the movie Elysium.
Not in a good way.
So the subtitle of the fourth industrial revolution is giga famine.
Well, yeah.
So the stuff we talk about is there.
You can't undo that and ignoring it won't help.
So how much of our materials and minerals that we use in today's industrial economy are recycled and put that in the context of what we're going to have to do in the future.
Okay.
So at the moment, our technology for the past couple of centuries has been based on metals like steel, iron, copper, aluminium.
What have you?
What is steel, Simon?
Steel is iron.
So the element of iron and steel is where they actually smelt it and they refine it by mixing in carbon and they make it.
It's a fundamentally stronger material.
And where does the carbon come from?
They use cocaine coal.
They use cocaine coal or there's actually several methods where they can actually get the carbon from other sources.
But cocaine coal is the preferred way to do things at the moment.
Sorry to digress, but there's so much of what you work on and talk about that no one talks about.
It's like you're in the dungeon working on this stuff and it doesn't see the light of day.
And yet it's super important because it powers everything.
So are there ways, I mean, we take iron and coal and energy and we make steel.
Are there ways to make it in low carbon way and is that vastly more expensive?
So you can, for example, make steel with just an electric arc furnace.
So instead of using coal for heat, you use an electric arc furnace.
And that's what I use in my scenarios already.
There's a new product project coming up in Sweden where they make steel with just a hydrogen atmosphere.
And they're patting themselves in the back on that, but they have not considered what it will cost to produce the hydrogen.
Because at the moment, hydrogen is produced with gas.
And so if you were to make hydrogen with electrolysis, now you need electricity and it's very expensive.
With all of these things, it's done in isolation.
Yeah, I mean, this speed round is kind of morphing into some of the other questions I want to ask you.
And it's so hard to separate them.
But the way that I see it, and I'd like your opinion on this, is people often get confused about
does this technology exist?
And they conflate that with is this technology scalable and affordable?
Because the benefits that we get from scaling the processes from the first and second industrial revolution,
where we add little bits of human labor and massive amounts of fossil energy to a process,
the gargantuan magical benefits we get from that transformation
are underappreciated and they are also scaled to 8 billion people.
So if all of a sudden we have a new technology that absolutely is viable,
it doesn't give us the same benefits because we have to spend two or three times the energy,
which massively reduces the benefits that humans get.
Any thoughts on that?
So lots of people have lots of good ideas.
There's plenty of solutions out there, but they all operate in a small scale,
in a system that's supported by fossil fuels around it.
The clarity ensues when you want to scale it up to make it accessible to everyone.
And the bottlenecks tend to be very practical in things that people took for granted.
And so it takes like five years to build a industrial coal-fired power station
and about 15 to 20 to build a nuclear power plant.
And that's when we know what we're doing.
If we came up with a new technology tomorrow on how to actually build a new power plant
of a new technology, let's say, the number of plants that we would have to make
and our ability to make as many of them would have to be strung out over many decades.
But we would need that capacity online in a couple of years.
And so it takes time to scale things up.
And then from a technology point of view, when you're actually on a small scale,
to a small scale metrics, but when you need to apply it many times,
a lot of the things that the business model would take for granted at the small scale
is actually not possible at a larger scale.
Okay, so there's a few things here that I'd like to unpack.
First of all, it's not just the technology.
It's also the scalability, the affordability, and the timeline.
So you mentioned that if we need, for instance,
this interview is being recorded on March 29th, 2022,
in the middle of the, well, we don't know if it's the middle of the Ukraine-Russia situation.
And Europe is rethinking some of their energy for plans and forecasts.
And nuclear is all of a sudden being thrust to the forefront again.
But you just said if we wanted to build new nuclear capacity, it takes 10 to 15 years.
So in the incubation cycle, you've got permitting,
you've got to get people to agree where to put it.
Then you need the industrial infrastructure to support the nuclear fuel cycle.
And then when they spent nuclear fuel rods come out the other end,
you need somewhere to put them.
And so there's a lot of things that is actually quite complicated
that need to actually be talked through.
At the moment, we're taking about 15 to 20 years to build a single nuclear power plant.
Right, but if we actually sort of got behind it all,
let's say we boil it down to five years, does that help?
The answer is no.
Why?
Because the nuclear fleet at the moment, when 2018 it represented,
I think it was about five or six percent of electrical power produced.
It was producing 2,474 terawatt hours.
Now, a watt is a unit of energy.
A watt hour is energy delivered over one hour.
A terawatt is a trillion such watts delivered over an hour.
And right now we have a 19 terawatt continuous power society, more or less.
Yeah, so that's a lot of energy.
So, but let's say the nuclear system is at the end of 2018 was 440 nuclear power plants.
And we were producing 2,400 odd terawatt hours a year.
So, to expand that, let's say at the moment we're producing,
a lot of those nuclear power plants have to be decommissioned very carefully.
And as they go offline, new ones have to come online.
And so we're getting, say, one or two a year extra over time.
And that's a lot of work.
That's really straining our current industrial capability.
And very few operations are actually able to make nuclear power plants,
and a lot of them are Russian.
So, wait a minute.
We have 440 nuclear power plants in the world,
and we're on average adding one to two per year globally.
The US repair is where nothing is added at all,
and sometimes it reduces because they're decommissioned.
And so it's a graph that undulates.
But in general, we are adding one or two a year over time.
So, yeah.
So you've added another constraint.
There's affordability, there's scalability, there's time,
and then there's also complexity.
Because to add dozens or a hundred nuclear power plants
would have to change the governance and economic structure
for such a thing to happen as well.
Yes.
From a government's point of view, it's all fun to someone bleeds.
This is a very complicated problem that would require change.
Right.
So, let's say, in my scenario for this,
let's say if we added 25 new nuclear power plants
that are Generation 3+, like the best we can at the moment,
every year.
So we're talking about a massive expansion,
and we did that every year from the year 2025 onwards.
Right.
So we're expanding as fast as we humanly can.
That is an aggressive expansion,
but frankly, it's not practical.
Right.
That's 10 to 20 times faster than we're doing today.
Right.
So will that work?
And so at the moment, for example,
if we left the nuclear power plant fleet as it is,
and we just let it go,
our current uranium reserves would last about 300 years
before we needed to go and find more.
And that's quite safe and simple.
But before we expand at this rate, like 25 a year,
those reserves will last 76 years,
and they'll be exhausted in the year 2101.
In 2101, we'll only get 68% of the way to generate
enough electrical power to phase out fossil fuels.
So what that means is nuclear cannot scale up fast enough
to be useful,
and even if it could, our reserves won't last long enough.
And once those reserves are exhausted,
we've then got to deal with a massive stockpile of nuclear,
spent nuclear fuel,
which requires power to manage it
when it first comes out of the reactors,
free hot and barrier radioactive,
and you've got to have it in powers cooling.
But how much of our current minerals and materials are recycled?
And when we talk about a circular economy,
how would that be different?
Okay, so currently we're all the base metals
like aluminium and steel and copper.
We're recycling about 30 to 50% or 60%.
That's fairly mature.
All the technology metals that go into our iPhones,
things like gallium and indium,
we don't recycle those at all.
Or if we do, it's very little.
The way those metals are used,
it's very difficult to recycle them.
Once this iPhone goes in the landfill one day,
the energy required to get the tiny amount of gold
or gallium or whatever out of there
would be prohibitive relative to its economic value, yes?
That's correct.
It's worse than that.
If you were to collect all iPhones together
and try and recycle them,
would you do something?
And so for the last couple of generations of iPhone,
like going back to say 2015,
the degree of micronisation
and the degree of integration is so high,
there's no recycling solution possible.
And so for many years now,
the solution's just been put them in the furnace
and just kiss all that goodbye.
So, okay, Apple is making a robot
that can disassemble an iPhone.
But whether it works or it's good enough
or fast enough, I don't know.
But the way we do things at the moment,
it's not designed to be recycled, therefore it's not.
When people talk about a circular economy,
how do they envision iPhones?
Or what do they mean by that?
The answer is they don't.
So the circular economy's talked about in vague terms
to make people feel good about themselves.
The idea is that all materials from consumption
are collected and recycled.
And then we use the material from that for manufacture.
And that's when the thinking stops,
because what they mean is the material
gotten from recycling equals the material
needed for manufacture.
But manufacturing, each generation of technology
is different, and so there's different requirements needed.
And we can't even collect or lay waste to recycle it.
And when we do, there's an efficiency rate
where most of what we need isn't recycled anyway.
And so you have these imbalanced streams
where the only way out of it is to mine more materials
and then put stuff in landfill.
So, just conceptually, divorced from our current reality,
given what you know, what is the best case
100 years from now, 500 years from now,
sometime in the future, on how we could recycle?
Like, how much of our economy could we get to recycle?
So, we change our relationship with materials,
but also with manufactured goods.
We manufacture things where they can be recycled.
We also manufacture things in terms of not performance,
but long-term sustainability goals,
which means we accept a lesser performance.
So, this is the resource balanced economy
where we recognize that some material is taken from the ground
and some material is then lost to the environment
because it's just not possible in any of the worlds.
But in between, we do our level best
to get the maximum amount of use out of each material stream,
whether it be recycling waste or valorizing waste streams, right?
And so, it's a system that instead of valuing things with money,
we're valuing things with that actually honors
the value of the material stream.
And this is like the new energy return.
We need culture change before material recycling change.
So, social contract change first.
Second, we change our relationship with materials.
At the same time, we change our relationship
with the planetary environment.
Then we develop a new system
of actually managing our materials in our societies.
That's a new society.
And then, we develop a new way of managing
what we call the replacement for money.
So, instead of money being used as a decision-making system
of who gets what and why, we need something else.
And so, that's the evolution.
So, it's going to look completely different to what it is now.
So, if I was to repeat the limits to growth study
and extend it to 2019 with all that new data,
and we're asking the express question,
what was the influence of quantitative easing
and the printing of money on the rest of society?
Where we had like a dynamic interaction
between industrial production and pollution and food production.
What was the true influence of quantitative easing?
I think the answer to that is power,
is energy access per unit time.
And I think credit, writ large,
credit in the commercial banking system
from the 70s until 2008,
and then credit in the commercial banks,
or the central banks, taking over the credit mechanism
since 2008 and going into turbo charge since COVID
will act as like a magic wand
that accelerated the scale of the enterprise
at a cost of a steeper decline in the future
is what I think the ultimate role of quantitative easing will be.
It grew our system faster and higher
than it otherwise would have been,
and that means that the deceleration
would also have to be steeper.
But maybe it also uncovered other resource pools
and technologies that we wouldn't have had.
So, trying to make a system will capture that,
which will tell us if we have to do this sometime in the future,
should we do it again or not?
That's the outcome.
Well, should we do it or not,
will be a far less potent question
than will we do it or not,
because as a biological cultural system,
we will continue to print money
and do quantitative easing four, five, and six,
because the alternative is a different system,
and a different system will be too threatening
to the people calling the shots
and too painful to populations.
I wish that we could construct some sort of a freeze frame,
let's go this path instead, people,
but I'm so far pretty skeptical that will happen.
Okay, let me understand this.
A nuclear scale-up would be technically feasible.
There would be a time lag and a complexity problem,
but the reserves would only last 70 years
or something like that,
which to people in power, they wouldn't care
because 70 years is three generations,
so it would help the intermediate power situation
for humans until we found something different.
But let me ask you a couple questions on that.
Number one, couldn't we find more uranium or thorium
or whatever over time with new extraction methods
or digging deeper or whatever?
So yes, we could find more.
There's obviously more to be found.
I looked at thorium as well.
Thorium has a different spent nuclear fuel profile,
it's not as radioactive.
The fuel cycle is a bit more complicated,
so it's a bit more complex to deal with,
but it's not as energy effective as uranium.
So if uranium can't scale up,
thorium won't be able to do it either.
But if it's half as effective and we found twice as much,
then it would be scalable, yes?
Well, you've got the problem of,
let's say, for example, at the end of that 76 years,
you've got this massive stockpile of spent nuclear fuel
that requires power in powered storage to keep it cool
for a period of time before you can store it underground,
and the nuclear fuel cycle requires quite a lot
of very sensitive and complex industrialization to keep it going.
You've got a complexity problem here.
So yes, you could say, oh, we'll just scale up nuclear.
But to do that, we would have to have an industrialization
forced much, much the same way that World War II,
in World War II, the United States
and Great Britain industrialized their economy
to meet the war effort.
It would have to change everything,
it would dominate everything,
and there wouldn't be any room for anything else.
So at the end of that time, nothing else would be done,
and now you've got this massive problem.
Because the more you do it,
the bigger the pile of spent nuclear fuel.
Right.
So finding more doesn't necessarily fix the problem.
So we've got affordability, scalability, time, complexity,
depletion, and I'll add another to the mix,
which is energy properties or energy fungibility.
We have much of our global economy now is dependent
on six continent supply chains and liquid fuels.
And when people say, oh, nuclear, we need to go more nuclear,
that's for electricity,
and we can't overnight switch our supply chains
to being powered by nuclear.
So there's an energy quality aspect of all this as well.
Our current civilization is not set up
on nuclear, and that too would take a lot of time
and massive change, yes?
Yes, it would.
And when you get to the end of that change, right,
are you in a net position that is better, right,
or what will probably happen when nuclear comes to the point
where we need to start thinking about what to do next,
we have saddled ourselves with an enormous legacy problem
that will go for a very, very long time,
that if we don't meet with energy, right,
we've got a very serious environmental problem on our hands.
What is the, I don't know the answer to this,
which is why I'm asking, what is the implicit plan
for those that advocate nuclear power
for 50 years from now, 100 years from now, 200 years from now?
Is it the standard macroeconomic cob-douglas function
that human societies will grow forever?
It'll just look differently, and we will mitigate
these environmental risks at that time as part of our economy.
Is that just kind of implied?
That's implied, right, so it's the first they believe
that these problems can just be absorbed, right,
as we get bigger, right?
There's also the belief that, for example,
generation four nuclear power will come online,
and that was one of my scenarios.
So let's say we have a traveling wave reactor
where 75% of its fuel can be spent nuclear fuel
from somewhere else, so we can start chewing through
the spent nuclear fuel pile stockpile.
The problem there is we have to expand the reactor so much
that we're actually having to mine fuel as well.
And so what it does is it extends the life
of the nuclear fuel cycle out.
I think that cycle, it goes out for 180 years instead of 76,
but at the end of that time, you're in exactly the same position.
We've got this massive stockpile.
You've got several thousand nuclear power plants
that need decommissioning,
because now you're out of uranium.
So there's the belief, for example,
when you talk to the supporters of nuclear technology,
that human society will be always as stable as it is now,
which is what's required to mine uranium,
enrich uranium, make fuel rods,
do the nuclear power without doing a Chernobyl,
and then managing the spent nuclear waste
coming out the other end.
And it's quite a complex industrial system,
and it's implied that that will never end
and we'll just get better as we go along.
It's also implied that somewhere
someone will think of something better.
Because they always have.
Yeah.
So this is the curse of us
wearing the Cassandra hat, Simon,
is that people don't understand
the ubiquity and cheapness
of the energy ocean that we swim in right now
is a one-time thing in our culture.
And we are alive during the decades
of plentiful, abundant energy
and cheap goods and stuff.
This is not permanent.
And as oil and other things decline,
in the river mirror,
we will see this as a fantastically unique
period in human history.
And we are squandering now
the time needed to cross the bridge,
cross the chasm into maybe from a 19 terawatt system
down to something your research suggests
maybe 10 terawatts is maybe feasible
or sustainable down the road.
But how do we get there is the question.
And so let's dive into that a little bit.
Lots of people are somewhat aware
that oil is finite.
I still believe the end of 2018
will prove to have been peak oil probably
unless there's some central bank orgy of credit
that allows us to get the next lower tranche.
But it's soon anyway.
It doesn't mean we're out of oil.
It just means that we're not going to be able
to grow the amount as we have the last 100 years
for much longer and we'll be having to deal with less
and it'll be more costly.
And that's starting to be seen with what's happening
with Russia.
We've got $100 oil.
What's not often talked about is the mineral implications
both of energy depletion and of mineral depletion.
So let's look at some of the just the generic
100% renewable forecast where we need to either
for depletion reasons or for carbon climate reasons
get off of fossil fuels and move to something renewable.
You think that the amount of minerals and materials
that we're going to need to do that will preclude
that from happening.
Can you just give us a big picture overview
of that situation?
Okay.
The story behind this, I was having a cup of coffee
with my management a couple of years ago
and they asked me the very basic question,
what minerals and how much will be needed to feed
the gigafactories of Europe?
Go away and find that out.
This was the mineral intelligence requirements.
What I quickly found was the very basics behind that
question simply had not been done.
What's a gigafactory first of all?
So you've got a plan to actually make lots of
electric vehicle batteries in Europe.
And they've got this term called gigafactories.
And so they want like 50 of these humongous factories
to produce batteries in Europe.
Right.
And so they haven't thought about where they're going to
get the minerals for that from.
They just assume they can just buy it off the market.
And they also haven't assumed, for example,
the industrial ecosystem around each factory.
Is it even possible?
They just like plant one on the map.
Quick interjection there.
If they say, oh, we're going to need these gigafactories
to develop batteries and related equipment for electric cars.
So we don't need oil or gasoline fraction of oil
for the cars anymore.
Let's just look at the prices of copper and lithium, et cetera.
And do they just extrapolate those prices forward
or do they include like a 500% increase in their forecast?
Not even.
It's just vague.
They just have this vague assumption that it will work out OK.
And they'll talk in terms of market share
and they'll do price predictions.
And yes, they'll extrapolate from the past.
And they'll look at this through rose-tinted glasses
in a very simplistic fashion.
And they don't consider, for example, where,
like copper, for example, is we've already got structural
supply problems with copper now.
Because the entire Andes mountain range
is a copper deposit that's low grade.
We're not going to run out of copper deposits.
What we are going to run out is the ability
to extract that copper viably.
Smaller energy, it's more water.
It's going to see that the cost involves.
And so then we're not putting the money
into develop the necessary mines.
So the structural supply problems on the books now
are both copper, lithium, nickel, and cobalt.
And there's no visible supply stuff for the last three
coming online before 2025.
And this is a money problem.
So when we have the problem with the mining industry,
the way it is at the moment versus about this idea
that we're going to suddenly bring on to the market
a 300% increase of copper.
The people making these predictions
have no engineering behind them.
They just make numbers.
They just invent and say, oh, the market will come.
We make the market and they will come.
That seems to be the thinking.
So when we talk about a transition away from fossil fuels,
we want to use the flows of the sun and the wind
and technology, which I refer to as rebuildable,
because we have to rebuild the solar and wind
every 20, 30 years or so, which is another issue
which we can unpack in a bit.
But when we talk about this, we're talking about a new
infrastructure, basically, that not only do you need to build
the solar panels and the wind turbines,
but you need to have the batteries for when the solar
and wind, the sun's not shining, the wind's not blowing,
and the transmission lines that interconnect everything.
And all three of those things require minerals and materials.
So there are some popular, one might always say,
religious forecasts out there that the entire society,
the world society, can shift to 100% renewables.
And obviously that can happen because not too long ago
we were 100% renewable.
We just had far fewer people and lower per capita consumption.
So I am in favor of moving towards largely renewables.
The question is, I don't think the current thinking on that,
I wrote an essay called Renewables,
Right Answer to the Wrong Question.
The question is, what is our society going to look like?
How many people, what sort of living standards do we have?
But my question to you is, and you've spent a lot of time
working on this, under those scenarios, the optimistic
let's just transition to a 19 terawatt or higher global society
using mostly renewables.
I've debunked that from an energy standpoint,
but you have insights onto the minerals required for such a thing.
Can you talk about that a bit?
Right, so for example, once we've actually worked out the size
of the problem, like if we were to take the entire transport fleet,
and a combination of electric and hydrogen,
we will need a certain amount of electrical power on top of what we need now
to charge those batteries and to make that hydrogen.
So now we have an idea of how much electricity we will need.
We know how much batteries we need based on the number of vehicles we have.
So once you've actually got the split of what's a hydrogen vehicle
and what's an electric vehicle, we have a rough idea of that.
Now, each of those batteries, the vast majority of them
haven't been built yet.
So we're talking about extracting it from mining.
It can't be recycled.
It can't recycle something that's not constructed.
So we know we have a volume of batteries,
and we have an idea of, because the power grid size,
we know we have an estimate of stationary power storage.
And so the number that come up with it,
it's roughly 2.8 billion tons of batteries
if we were to look at lithium ion battery chemistry like NMC811.
Now, there are other chemistries,
and so I do have a study that show the different chemistries
of what it will likely be in 2040.
So I've actually assembled the number of batteries
and assembled the different chemistries of what the IEA thinks it will be in 2040.
And then I've estimated, well, given the chemistries,
what mass of metals will be needed
once you actually sum the aggregate together?
Wind turbines were included.
For example, in each wind turbine,
you've got a two-ton neodymium magnet.
Now, these things only last 20 years.
There's 4,000 pounds of neodymium in one wind turbine?
There's 4,000 pounds of neodymium magnet.
How much neodymium is in there?
I'll get to actually establish.
It's not all neodymium.
It's an alloyed with something else, but it's a lot.
We're talking about more than a couple of kilos.
So once we actually sum all those numbers up together
and then compare that against, say, 2019 production,
if we were to produce metals at the same rate,
how many years would we need to mix those targets?
The answer is we need several decades to several hundred years
to several thousand years, depending on the metal,
to produce enough of that metal
to replace the existing system as it is now.
Now, that's important because the current thinking
is one-third of the existing system
will be electrified by 2030,
or so say the European Commission.
So we have an idea of how much we think we're going to be by 2030.
And so we simply don't have the time.
I think it's like 16,000 years of lithium production
to produce enough lithium in all the batteries needed by 2040,
in the 2040 split to replace the existing system as it is now.
What that suggests is existing mines are not enough,
and they say, oh, we'll just open more mines then.
So I put that up against global reserves.
And then I found, like across the board,
about between 10% and 15% of global reserves as stated in 2021
are about 10% to 15% of the amount of metal needed
to produce one generation of batteries
and one generation of wind turbines
to replace the existing system,
where 20 years later we do it all again.
And so it's not enough is the answer.
So my fear all along is that as we get closer to limits,
we're going to focus on growing the gross and ignoring the net.
And the default human trajectory is that in 2030 or 2040,
we're allocating not really, but close to.
Metaphorically, half of our economy is mining,
and the other half is remediating the environmental damage from mining.
But under such, it's like a Mordor economy,
under such a scenario, where is the energy for hospitals
and shopping centers and museums and schools
and food production, et cetera?
The more that we allocate towards finding the energy and materials needed
for our system, the less energy and materials are available
for the rest of functioning society, yes?
So that's where the math takes us.
You're absolutely right, but complexity will break at first.
Before we get there, before we get to the Mordor economy,
which is a brilliant term, by the way, you've come up with a few corkers.
So before we get to the Mordor economy or even close,
other forms of complexity will come in and destroy our path
and force us to go down a different path.
And it won't necessarily be very polite,
but our plans to maintain the existing system,
our demand into the equation is what will simply,
the oxygen will simply be turned off.
Well, here's the thing.
You see every day articles about the 100% renewable economy
in various countries around the world.
Brandenburg, Germany, just stated that they're going to be
100% renewable by 2030.
They might be able to do it for their electricity,
but only if no one around them does that,
because there's a system there with inputs and outputs
from other sections.
The whole world doing that, first of all,
right now we're at like 4% renewable.
And so this carrot of going to 100% renewables,
I wonder how much is that needs to be stated as a optimistic endpoint
so that people have hope for the future
and how much of it is really technically possible,
because the things you're telling me,
many of which I've known already,
it's just absolutely impossible to get to that outcome.
I'm just curious why, I mean,
I want to ask you some deeper questions on this,
but just out of philosophical social science standpoint,
and you work for a government and you're talking to a lot of
government people, where is the disconnect?
Why is what you and I and our colleagues see as so clear,
not discussed with the elites in Europe
who are planning for a net zero, 100% renewable economy?
Question of the people you come in contact with
who in charge, how many of them have an understanding
of ecology or biology or even physics?
You mean in the policy discussions that I'm having?
Our leaders, our leaders, the people you actually...
Very, very few.
I mean, they've had the high school biology or college biology,
but ecology and physics, very few.
So I'm a physicist first, a geologist second,
and a mining engineer third.
That's my qualification set.
So what I've come across, I've been talking to...
I used to work in the corporate world,
the corporate mining industry in Australia,
both in research and in the private sector.
So what I've come across is the dominant paradigm
for how things are done at the moment
is based around the idea of the economic model
that doesn't actually include energy at all,
all minerals, all raw materials.
It is the idea that there are no limits.
We're going to just expand all questions
that are economic in nature.
If the price goes up, we'll go and find more natural resources.
They're there, we just got to find them.
And if it becomes too difficult,
someone will come up with something
as an innovative solution.
But even those solutions are technology-based.
They're not considering where the raw materials
for that technology comes from.
So not only are we energy blind,
but we are materials or minerals blind as well.
So every single one of the dominant paradigm,
every single one of the people I talk to
who are in charge of things,
have not even asked the basic question
along the lines of where do these raw materials come from.
They're starting to ask the question
of what is our environment and why do we care, right?
And that's only a fairly recent thing,
but they have yet to ask
where do our raw materials come from
and can we innovate our way out of that?
So we've financialized the human experience
and the political elite discussions
are also financialized.
And we've started to become aware
that we're on this orbiting the sun
and it's our spaceship and the environment
is pretty fricking important.
And that's good that we're talking about that.
But as to what powers our economy
and where do the things come from
and how rapidly are they depleting
is not yet in the halls of power.
And maybe it's not because these people
are ignorant or dumb.
It may be because it's just too difficult
a question to be voiced publicly.
I actually have been voicing a few things publicly
and I have a few insights to share with you.
I stood up in the middle of a European commission meeting
in Brussels once in one of these think tanks
and I said, look guys,
if you think you're going to have all these new solar panels
and wind turbines, great, magnificent plan, magnificent.
How many solar panels are produced in Europe?
There are some small manufacturing
but all the components are manufactured in China
and most solar panels are manufactured in China.
Where do wind turbines come from? China.
Where do electric vehicles come from?
Mostly China, but the ones that are manufactured in Europe
all the components are manufactured in China.
And so I pointed this out
and then there is a question of where do the minerals
and the metals come from? That's also China.
So hang on, so if we don't control
the manufacture or the sourcing of the raw materials
and we no longer have much money compared to everyone else,
how are we going to guarantee supply of this stuff
if it does turn out that there's actually not enough to go around?
And when I promote that, it was just silence.
A room full of 200 people.
Because there are no politically acceptable answers to that.
So let's go down that path a little bit.
Let's ignore for the moment
the 100% renewable scenarios that are floating around.
Let's just look at the present day.
What's happening with Ukraine and Russia
in the best of outcomes?
Ukraine is going to be partitioned like Germany was
to the east, Donetsk and Crimea will be part of Russia
and the west of Ukraine will be linked with Europe somehow.
But then we start this new multipolar order
where the energy and materials blinders come off a little bit
because we see the centrality of energy and commodities
that have been underpinning the paper
over financial representations of our true wealth.
And a lot of those come from Russia and China.
So let's just look at forgetting about the renewable energy scenarios.
What is our material and mineral situation in the coming years
just under business as usual?
Are we going to face issues on the material side?
So yes, the elephant in the room that is flashing red at the moment is gas.
We need a lot of gas to heat our building.
Natural gas.
Natural gas for survival.
And quite a lot of it comes from Russia.
A lot.
The majority of European gas, natural gas, comes from Russia.
We're about a third to about 40% of it comes through Ukraine.
Now, if our leaders have allowed ourselves to let a conflict happen
in the first place, like conflicts don't happen in a vacuum.
So the conflict itself is terrible.
I have a few Ukrainian friends in the situation.
There is not good.
And we've allowed ourselves a situation where we are dependent
on a particular nation for most of our gas.
Now, if the American system was able to come in and deliver gas,
they couldn't because it's something like...
I saw the numbers the other day.
It's something like 130 billion cubic meters,
a large portion of gas that was coming through a pipeline
now has to come over in large ships.
We don't have the capacity in Europe to receive large ships like that
of that capacity and then distribute the gas across Europe.
We just don't have the infrastructure in place
and it would take years to build if we did.
And then there's the question is can the American system deliver that gas
and if it did, you've got a long supply chain
where it's got to travel from one side of the planet to the other.
When you liquefy gas and then unliquify it,
you lose like 30% plus of the energy content.
Right.
So it's a losing game.
And so we've allowed the situation to happen
where basically gases is one way or another going to go offline
and we don't have any viable alternative.
How do we heat our buildings through winter without gas?
That's going to make life difficult for the population.
Yeah.
And just to tie in earlier discussion,
even nuclear isn't an answer for that.
First of all, because of the issues you raised on complexity and timeline,
but there's another aspect which is nuclear is flat.
You turn a nuclear plant on and it's flat throughout the day
and our demand structure is variable.
So what ends up coupling nuclear and solar and wind to demand is gas,
which is the thing that we're going to be running short of.
Everything has to be completely re-engineered to a completely new metric.
So everything, all of the electrical equipment around us
has to be re-engineered into something else.
So here's the problem with that is, well, not,
and there's a momentum to our current system.
We have self-organized as families, small businesses, corporations,
nation-states towards maximizing monetary representations of surplus.
That is our goal.
So when we're faced with a technical anthropological,
culture-wide challenge like this,
we can't just freeze everyone and figure out a plan
because everyone's day jobs are already doing what they're doing
to continue this process.
So how, I mean, okay, so let me put a pin in this
because this is the ultimate question I want to ask you,
but I want you to answer the question I asked earlier.
In addition to gas, what are other material thresholds
that we're going to face regardless in coming years?
Do we have a problem with commodities and inflation
and depletion not of energy but of minerals?
Is that in the next decade or is that an issue?
Could you give a few minute overview of that?
So we already have difficulties for the mining industry
to expand production now.
It's hitting difficulties now.
The idea that the future is going to be metals based in renewables
and a lot of those metals are quite exotic,
like that are not mined in very large quantities at the moment.
We just don't have the infrastructure to supply a lot of those metals,
so they're just not going to arrive in time.
And so anything to make solar panels, wind turbines,
electric vehicles, and then a lot of the electronics in general
that we need for the fourth industrial revolution,
all are going to have multiple supply shortages
and supply bottlenecks right across the value chain,
right across the planet.
And so this idea where things just magically happen so smoothly,
you click on Amazon and say, I'll buy that book
and the book just appears two days later.
And it all happens in the background just magically and smoothly.
It won't be smooth anymore.
And so it's in its material shortage
and what I haven't spoken to about at the moment
is what will happen with industrial agriculture,
what I believe.
And so that's actually the next macro scale problem
behind the mineral shortage.
And that's probably 10 years away from its pain threshold.
But the mineral shortage,
that's four or five years away from its pain threshold.
Minerals like phosphorus or what are you thinking?
Okay, so you've got copper.
A vast amount of copper is needed for electronics,
but also every electrical device requires copper.
And from every wind turbine,
there's a copper cable as thick as your leg,
connecting that copper wind turbine to the grid.
So if it's out to sea, like offshore, it's a longer cable.
Right, so we have copper, we have nickel,
we have lithium, cobalt, graphite, silver.
I think they're the ones I sort of picked so far.
But they're the ones, this is just to actually make the existing grid.
But the existing system is also struggling to deliver
because everything it depends upon is related to energy
and fossil fuels became unreliable around 2018.
I do believe that will later prove to be peak oil.
We won't really know 2024 or 2025 or something like that,
but it's around now.
So oil, gas and coal, peak coal was around 2013.
That's related to Chinese manufacture.
Gas peaked around 2019,
but that could be an artifact of the COVID-19 pandemics.
Yeah, I think we have a couple of decades.
If we have complexity hold together,
I mean Qatar and Russia and Iran, keep going.
But supply of that gas.
If you turn energy as the master resource,
if our current systems are energy based in fossil fuels,
but that fossil fuels becomes unreliable in the open market,
then everything it attaches to will become unreliable.
So the entire value chain to actually deliver raw materials
to things like manufacture will become unreliable.
And then there comes a problem of,
well, we won't be able to source a lot of these minerals at all.
So a lot of products that we take for granted
are just simply going to go offline.
We're seeing it now, for example,
microchips in cars in the United States.
Now that's an above ground limitation.
What happens when we can't say supply a particular
rare earth element?
And so yeah, we will see mineral shortages of all kinds.
And there's structural shortages there now.
So as we actually want more electric vehicles on the road,
and we actually want more of the grid to be renewable,
we will see more of these problems.
And that's now.
It's that nursery rhyme or fable for want of a nail,
the horse lost a shoe, the shoe lost the horse,
the horse and the soldier and the soldier and the kingdom.
We don't know what the nail is going to be,
but it's incredibly complex,
and everything is predicated on complex supply chains,
and it's predicated on energy being the master resource.
So it's hard to predict where the shortages will be,
but it's relatively easy to predict that there will be shortages.
So 500 years ago, everything you needed to do to survive,
you controlled directly, like you grew your own food,
or you personally, the person who did,
in your village was everything you ever needed.
And if you did need metals,
they came from a relatively local source.
And so it was relatively easy and flexible
just to respond to external emergencies.
Since we've had this really, really cool energy source
for such a long time, we've now developed a system
where a six-continent supply chain
of a just-in-time supply grid of such complexity,
we can't even describe it.
Remove the oxygen from that system, that's energy.
What happens to that supply system,
and what is our ability to make a more resilient version of that?
Is this where the difficulty becomes?
So I think we can agree, though we're still in the minority globally,
that humans will not be able to maintain, let alone grow,
a 19-terawatt global society for much longer.
Not even close.
So that leaves us with two questions, really.
Can we create a more or less sustainable,
lower-throughput society technically?
Can we do that technically?
And then how to get from here to there socially and politically?
So in your research, if it's not going to be 19 terawatts,
forgetting about politicians and finance
and geopolitics for the moment,
technically, what do you think is achievable
given our energy and mineral situation,
19 terawatts might technically move to what?
If we're lucky, 10 terawatts.
The smart money is five terawatts.
So we have to do a few things.
I know it's ugly, it's ugly.
We have to do a few things.
From a technical point of view, never mind socially,
our food production is going to be the biggest task first
in the Maslow hierarchy of needs,
where at the moment it's industrial agriculture
and it happens on your sixth continent supply chain fashion.
That will have to phase back into small-scale organic,
where most people are going to have to become involved
with growing their own food again.
Of course, they can't just do that
and the land available to do that is simply not suitable.
So let's say that happens.
Well, hold on, I want to push back on that a little bit.
So global agriculture is incredibly dependent on fossil fuels,
both the gasoline and diesel for the tractors,
but also the natural gas that makes ammonia,
fertilizers and pesticides and everything else.
So only a small amount of our current fossil fuels
are being directed to agriculture.
If we shifted things away from NASCAR and Disneyland
towards tractors and ammonia,
we could better use our depleting stocks of fossil hydrocarbons,
direct them towards the highest use, which would be food.
So I did a job a couple of years ago,
where I looked at the phosphate rock problem.
And I actually developed a work that I called Paul Was Right.
Paul Ehrlich, if you listen to this, you were right.
So what I was looking at was where does fertilizer come from?
So you've got NPK fertilizer.
The phosphorus fertilizer is made from gas, which makes ammonia.
And yes, you can get it another way,
but they also use phosphate rock.
And so phosphate rocks are finite resource, blah, blah, blah.
Before we get to the problem of depletion,
we've got the problem of arable land being depleted
by how we're doing our industrial agriculture.
We've lost about 40% of our arable land net since 1960 on.
So we're shrinking.
So our population is growing,
but our arable land to grow food is shrinking
and we're increasingly dependent on chemicals to make it happen.
The soil that exists on the smaller amount of arable land
is also much depleted of nutrients.
Yes, correct.
So the net position, when the Green Revolution took off
in the 60s, they had a certain amount of people
and they had a certain amount of arable land.
Now we've got more people, but less arable land.
But the system that we grow agriculture on
is now attached to non-renewable natural resources,
which are a problem.
So Paul was absolutely right.
He was just 40 years late.
Well, I don't know that you know,
but I had Paul on as a guest and he told me stories
about, he knew Norman Borlaug
and Borlaug, the father of the Green Revolution,
told Paul 50 years ago,
Paul, I've bought you a generation.
Borlaug agreed with Paul's conclusions
and said, use your time wisely
because this bought us a generation.
But the, the, the paragons of economic growth
did not agree with him
because it actually made life easier for them.
The solution, I used to work,
I used to be a labor on an organic farm, right?
And I was learning to grow organic fruit and vegetables
and I learned how food was grown.
And in fact, I'm going to use that professionally later
to rehabilitate.
And so we were, we were learning about,
what does glyphosate round up actually do and why?
We were able to unpack a lot of this stuff.
So the solution to those problems is to,
to go organic, where we do small scale organic food,
wherever it grows their own food and all that.
But if we have say medium scale production
of things like fertilizers using organic methods,
if we applied our industrialization
to making manure naturally, what would happen?
And so it's an entirely different architecture
to how we do it now.
Whatever that looks like, it's going to be quite messy
because it's going to be unplanned.
But it's going to be something like Cuba.
What Cuba did when, when in the late 90s
when they were hit by the oil embargo.
So first of all, food has to go.
Food has to go.
So food, food has to be transformed
from what we do to what we do now.
Second thing of order is how do we maintain
our fresh drinking water and our sewerage, right?
And then it's energy for heating
in the Maslow hierarchy of needs.
That's, we have to think in those terms.
It's not about maintaining the latest iPhone.
If we have technology, the technology we're required
to meet sustainable targets in a Maslow hierarchy
needs kind of way.
So it'll have to be re-engineered.
The question, well, one of the many questions is,
can we envision that or something like that
and be working on it in parallel to this
Disneyland smorgasbord, Amazon 24 seven
stimulation convenience supply chain world
because it cognitively and emotionally,
cognitively we can envision what you're saying, Simon,
but emotionally that doesn't feel like our reality.
So can there be parallel paths
of serious people working on this
while the Disneyland band marches on?
Yes.
So when I was working on that organic farm
on Mount Tambourine in Australia,
I learned this very simple thing that
if you were trying to manage a problem,
like you're trying to manage, for example,
all the fruit trees had a fungus on them,
like a mold and fungus.
And so you could either go around cleaning
the fungus off with a scrubbing brush
and applying pesticides to try and prevent a problem,
or you could put some fertilizers into the soil
to give the tree the food to flourish
and then create this solution.
You either fund the solution
or you try and prevent the problem.
Where do you put your effort?
So instead of trying to stop the Disney,
to tell the Disney people that, guys,
you're mistaken.
Leave them be.
You can't do anything with them.
I see the future breaking into three paradigms.
The first paradigm was defense of the status quo.
The way things now is how things will always be,
and a certain group of people will believe that
and nothing else.
You can't actually do anything with them.
You can't actually talk to them.
You can't reason with them.
We've all seen that.
Leave them be.
The second paradigm, people who will recognize
and realize that our existing system
is now hitting practical difficulties
and will now have to actually start making arrangements
to actually look after the needs of society themselves.
All the stuff you talk about,
the growing of food,
the forming of communities,
we all come together in a different social unit
called the community now or the village.
And where our needs are scaled right back,
what we do and what we need
and what we want all become the same thing.
We're at the moment, most of the time,
what we do has nothing to do with what we need or want.
So we will come into alignment.
And so this is the evolution of the social contract
that we were talking about.
So that's paradigm two.
Paradigm three, paradigm two is all about
what's here and now
and how do we manage things
for the next couple of seasons.
It's a relatively medium term thing,
short to medium term.
Whereas paradigm three is okay.
The fossil fuel system is in trouble,
but it's not gone yet.
Right?
How do we actually create long-term for my children
and for my children's children
a system where we can maintain our levels of education
and some sort of level of technological understanding
that we have now?
How do we do that?
And so that's paradigm three,
but paradigm three will have to be interfaced
with paradigm two to meet the needs
in the short and medium term.
So paradigms two and three
will be able to talk to each other.
Paradigm one won't talk to anyone.
What percentage of our current population
are in thinking in those three paradigms right now?
Just rough guess.
So there is the public position and the private position.
The public position, people are terrified
of saying something out loud
that might be seen as controversial.
No, I can't possibly say that out loud.
But privately, I think maybe a third
of the people around me understand paradigm two.
Maybe 5% of the people around me understand paradigm three.
Everyone else is paradigm one.
So given everything that we've discussed
both on this call and in our past correspondence,
I'm curious what kind of advice would you give to young people
who today discover and understand these energy
and environmental risks and the general human predicament?
What kind of advice would you give to young humans?
So I've got the most important thing
that motivates me to do what I do with my three daughters.
I think of them a lot about what's required of them.
And I say, how do I talk to them?
It's more important for me to know how to talk to them
than to anyone else really.
What I would tell them is the world that's coming in
is changing in ways that we simply don't understand
in a historical fashion.
We've not seen anything like this before.
We've never been in a position where so much of our population
is so unskilled with regard to understand
what's coming little and do anything about it.
So my advice to them is learners will carry the day.
People who can learn and adapt in the face of change.
The learned educated people, for example,
will just merely be educated.
It is much more effective to be able to do something useful
in a changing environment
compared to being able to recite how things used to be.
Someone like myself could stand up on stage
and look at the for as a worry on my forehead.
I've got this PhD and there's this physics degree.
Isn't it wonderful? You should feed me.
A lot of the things that we take for granted
will simply be removed from us.
So if you could be flexible,
understand that what you think and you feel is flexible
and it comes down to an emotional confidence
of knowing what needs to happen
with regard to the problems in front of us
and then taking on a positive attitude
as opposed to a negative attitude.
Have you noticed most of the environmental movement
at the moment is all about punishing the existing system
and punishing the people who support that system.
They're not presenting a solution.
Present a positive solution
and then the old solution can just die a natural death,
but the positive solution can grow.
Be one of the people that can flourish in that system.
So try not to think in fear and be flexible.
Learn.
I like that a lot,
but I'm going to add another question for you
because you're both intelligent and wise.
If you were running the global education system,
knowing what you know about our energy
and mineral and social and environmental situation,
if you were the education czar for H sapiens,
what sort of educational university
broader system for young humans
would you advocate in like a minute?
I would change the paradigm of how we educate
and at least have a stream within the education
that involves problem solving and critical thinking,
the ability to debate with people you don't agree with
and the understanding of situation awareness
and have embed that intrinsically into the education from day one.
Yeah, we don't really do that.
A lot of our education is teaching trivia
of what mattered in the last 50 years
and the next 50 years are going to require
an entirely different set of skills.
So, I love your learning, problem solving,
and positive idea.
So, Simon, you and I have had a lot of laughs
and we're Facebook friends
and you put up some of the funniest damn cartoons
and memes,
but I don't know that I've ever actually asked you this.
I just feel that we're aligned,
but what do you care most about in the world?
So, the simple answer,
the short answer is my three daughters,
the longer answer is my three daughters
and what they might have to do
to live a happy and enriched life.
Like, your work, my work, where are we going?
How do we make a better world?
That's what I care about.
You're here.
I agree with that.
So, speaking about the world,
and these are questions I ask all my podcast guests,
what specific issue are you most worried about
in the coming decade or so?
Okay.
This is a long-term one,
but I'm worried that the people who control
the ecosystem in all its forms across the planet,
but also in each nation state,
will do something flamboyantly stupid
just to remain in power.
Now, you could say that they will just do something
in a knee-jerk reaction to maintain power,
but the worst answer is they understand
the genuine consequences of what they're doing
to humanity, but they do it anyway.
We've got psychopaths in charge of things.
I don't like that.
I'm most worried about what they might do,
which will complicate things for the rest of us.
Yeah.
And in contrast, what gives you hope?
What are you most hopeful about in the coming decade or so?
This is going to say in a little odd
that society is in a place at the moment
where we can face certain problems
that perhaps at the first time,
500 years ago, we didn't consider, for example,
that we had a relationship with the planet environment.
We didn't have education in the way we have it now.
Most people around us believe in the law, right and wrong.
They believe in human rights.
So we're actually in the best net position
to face these problems.
Now, these problems were always going to be so.
Humanity is like any other animal.
We're going to go after the easy resources first,
and we're not going to do any tasks that's hard or complicated
if it doesn't give us a dopamine fix on the spot.
So it was always going to be the case
of we're going to do this the hard way.
So we have a narrow window of when action is possible
and when action is irrelevant.
And that's the next 10 to 20 years.
It's actually started in 2008,
and I think it will finish around 2030.
So around that.
It's a window around that.
So it was always going to be this way,
but humanity is actually in the best place possible
to meet these challenges.
So it's possible that humanity
could actually genuinely grow up
and take its place as a sustainable species
with an industrial civil or a technology civilization
that has a genuine relationship with the planet.
That is only possible in the current set of circumstances,
because the majority of humanity would not look at it any other way.
So I am hopeful we actually now have the opportunity to do it,
and it's a very nice time to be alive.
So I am actually not afraid for the future.
I'm actually, it's going to be tough.
Someone's got to do it, right?
But it was always going to be this way.
It's a natural progression, and the time is now.
So that's what I'm most hopeful for.
I kind of feel the same way, Simon.
It's as perilous as our situation is.
We kind of had to arrive here to recognize it and respond to it.
And this is the calling of our time.
So I agree with you.
Thank you so much for your time today
and your continued yeoman's work on these issues.
Do you have any other words of wisdom, advice,
or closing thoughts for our listeners?
So I feel this humanity has actually been presented with a choice.
Both as a species, as a group, but also as an individual.
This is back to the three paradigms, right?
You can be part of the solution,
you can be part of the precipitate, right?
You can be part of the way forward,
or you can sort of dig your heels in and then hope for the best
and complain when things don't go so well.
The difference is what we do and also our perception,
choose to think positively.
But what we do is defined by what's in our hearts,
what's between our ears, and what's in our hands, right?
So it is, and it's a knowing.
So we've got to evolve first our relationship with our self,
and then we're going to evolve the relationship with natural resources
and the environment around us, right?
These are the terms that we need to be thinking in at the moment.
Don't be frightened of it.
Don't be scared of it if you can.
Thank you, Simon.
I will talk to you soon, and I hope to see you in person in Finland this summer
to be continued, my friend.
Keep up the good work.
You too, mate.
It's Nate.
Nate, you're a mate as well.
All right, Simon, be well.
Thank you.
